UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Back to the Fodor-modules: The Modularity of Mind Revisited

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4tp3f36k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Beaulac, Guillaume

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Back to the Fodor-modules
The Modularity of Mind Revisited
Abstract:
I revisit Fodor’s (1983) notion of “module” and defend it against views weakening the criteria
to consider a process modular. Many approaches to modularity (e.g., Barrett & Kurzban’s,
Carruthers’, Cosmides & Tooby’s, and others) are unsatisfying because the notion put forward
is uninformative. I will explain why we should understand Fodor’s notion of module as
identifying a homeostatic property cluster (cf. Boyd, 1991). This account should be integrated
within a broader view of cognition.
4159 words
I.

II.

Introduction

Fodor-modules

Fodor insists that modularity can only explain
peripheral cognition, viz. it cannot explain any
aspect of central cognition. In other words, for
Fodor (1983, 2000), central cognition is not
modular to any extent. By saying that modularity
explains peripheral cognition, Fodor means that
modularity applies to various input systems (e.g.,
perceptual systems) and that is not fit to explain
other parts of cognition. He does this by
distinguishing, in functional terms, between
transducers (the retina and optical nerve, the ear
drum and auditory nerve, the skin’s sensory
nerves, etc.), input systems (or compilers: they
mediate between the transducer and central
cognition; they transform the information into a
format that the central system can process) and
central processors.

In this paper, I discuss the notion of “module”,
widely used in cognitive science. This discussion
is not a central in the field despite the enormous
influence of Fodor’s (1983) book, especially in
philosophy and in psychology where the
discussion has been the liveliest. Although mostly
peripheral, I believe the discussion should be put
to the forefront again since it is especially
important in a context where various accounts of
the architecture of mind are suggested. One
family of accounts of the architecture of mind,
dual-process theories (Evans, 2008; Kahneman,
2011; Stanovich, 2011), also seems to build upon
a lot of Fodor’s assumption but do so in a
relatively uncritical way. The goal of this paper is
to start a new discussion of some of these issues.
I first explain Fodor’s (1983) modularity of
mind thesis and how it is a way, although far from
unproblematic, to approach the architecture of
mind where modules account for peripheral
cognition and where central cognition is not (at
all) modular. I then explore how this notion of
“module” has been used by evolutionary
psychologists to explain parts of central cognition
as well as peripheral cognition. Next, I present a
different, philosophically informed, take on
modularity, where all of the mind’s processes are
seen as being modular. This view is defended
mostly by Carruthers (2006, 2013). I finally
suggest that the notion of “module” understood
along the lines developed by Fodor should be
reintroduced in the literature, but seen as
identifying a natural kind following Boyd’s (1991)
account of natural kinds as homeostatic property
clusters (HPC).

In this paper, a “Fodor-module” will be a
module as Fodor defines it in his book: they
should possess nine characteristics that I will
cover shortly. I will also discuss them critically as
I recognize some problems and tensions within
this account. It would be a loss to hide the
potential for interesting discussions regarding
each characteristic. These characteristics are as
follows: their operation is (1) domain specific, (2)
mandatory once activated (and proceeds
automatically), (3) fast and (4) informationally
encapsulated; the processes of modules are (5)
not centrally accessible (only their output is), they
have (6) shallow outputs, (7) exhibit specific
“breakdown patterns” and (8) characteristic pace
and sequencing (they have an ontogenetic
timetable,
viz.
specific
developmental
characteristics), and they are (9) associated with

1
1904

a fixed neural architecture. However, it is crucial
to remember that Fodor states explicitly that
modules may miss some of these characteristics: I
will say more on this last point in Section V, where
I will go into some details of my proposed
modifications of his view.

determining how to find the proper way and the
correct level of analysis is largely up to empirical
research.
Modules are automatic and mandatory: visual
or auditory illusions provide a good example of
this characteristic. If the appropriate stimulus is
presented and seen or heard, the illusion will be
seen or heard. Fodor presents three examples to
illustrate his idea: first, if someone hears a given
utterance in a known language, she will hear a
sentence and give it meaning; second, any object
perceived is perceived in a three-dimensional
space; third, touching a surface entails feeling it.
The first example he gives is certainly not without
its problems, but this characteristic is otherwise
fairly straightforward: it is not possible for a
subject who has no disabilities not to see when his
eyes are opened, not to feel when he touches an
object, not to hear when a noise or not to taste or
smell when certain molecules come in contact
with the appropriate receptors, and the same goes
for other types of higher level modules such as
speech recognition (if I hear an utterance of
English, I will attribute meaning to the utterance).

The idea I want to emphasize below is simple:
Fodor’s account is interesting to explain some
cognitive processes and we should keep it (or
some version of it). Even if this account offers no
explanation for other cognitive processes, those
processes that are explained by Fodor-modules
are explained in interesting ways. Of course,
Fodor limits his account to peripheral cognition,
mostly input systems, yet even those input
systems might be more diverse than his account
of modularity allows for, viz. some input systems
exhibit some non-modular traits (and many
central processes or systems have modular
traits): these differences between different kinds
of modular processes are worthy of exploration,
something that is harder to do within frameworks
that do not use Fodor-modules.
One of the best known and most discussed
characteristic of modules is their domain
specificity. Modules, according to Fodor, are
specialized to respond to certain inputs, and
usually have their own sensory transducers. They
are limited to a particular type of inputs, and this
would be why they are as efficient as they are.
Understood in this way, domain specificity is
problematic on a number of levels.

Modules are fast: once activated, a module
usually produces its output well under a quarter
of a second. The two important aspects this
reveals according to Fodor (1983, p. 63) are the
contrast between the speed of the modules’
processes as opposed to how slow central
processes can be, and the strong link between
speed and their mandatory operation.

The way to determine how many modules
there are in the mind depends mostly on what is
considered to be a domain, viz., it depends on the
grain used to analyze, and it also depends on what
modules are considered to be. And, once the
proper grain is found (if there is a way to do so; cf.
Prinz (2006, pp. 27–30) for a sceptical
perspective), the jury might still be out to find the
proper description of a given process (Atkinson &
Wheeler, 2004). Vision, for example, likely
involves many modules, but should horizontal
line detectors and vertical line detectors be
counted as two types of modules, or is it more
interesting to use the more general class of edge
detectors? The description of the visual system
will likely change in important ways depending of
the answer we give here. The general idea still
remains important: a module answers to (or is
activated by) certain classes of inputs, and

As Fodor explains, some of the computational
problems we solve automatically, such as being
able to identify an object against its background,
are not necessarily easier or harder
computational problems per se than solving a long
mathematical equation. He even goes further by
suggesting that “[t]his dissimilarity between
perception and thought is surely so adequately
robust that it is unlikely to be an artefact of the
way that we individuate cognitive achievements”
(Fodor, 1983, p. 63), something Carruthers
disagrees with (cf. Section IV). The second idea,
that “processes of input analysis are fast because
they are mandatory” (Fodor, 1983, p. 64), is
related to the fact that an automatic process does

2
1905

not involve any decision making process1.
Reflexes are faster than deciding to do a given
action because, simply put, “making your mind up
takes time” (Fodor, 1983, p. 64).

reconceptualization is the reason the outputs of
module do not require much processing.
Modular processes are not centrally accessible,
viz. we do not have introspective knowledge of
their workings. Only their outputs are accessible
to other modules or to central cognition. This
latter characteristic is analogous to informational
encapsulation: the inaccessibility characteristic
specifies that the representations within a
module are not accessible to central processes,
while informational encapsulation tells us that
modules cannot have (direct) access to the
content of central cognition (or that of other
modules). For example, visual modules do not
have access to our knowledge that a given picture
is an optical illusion (and we cannot consciously
affect the inner workings of the module), hence
the illusion persists and there is no direct way of
affecting it.

The outputs of Fodor-modules are shallow.
The notion of shallowness, as applied to modules,
is ambiguous, both in Fodor (1983, pp. 86–97)
and in the literature more generally. He sees it as
the difference between “observation and
inference” (1983, p. 86), shallow outputs being
those directly observable whereas non-shallow
outputs being those that can be inferred (e.g., we
can directly observe that a traffic signal is red but
can only infer that it is meant to signal the
obligation of stopping). However, he remains
vague as to exactly what he means by this, and
Fodor’s vagueness has given rise to a number of
distinct interpretations.
Prinz, for instance, rejects the idea that
“[s]hallow outputs are outputs that do not require
a lot of processing” (2006, p. 25) because it is not
precise enough to create any meaningful
categorization (what is “a lot” is not clear).
Carruthers prefers to understand the idea that
outputs of modules are shallow as meaning that
they are nonconceptual (2006, p. 4), and this is
certainly a strange interpretation of shallowness
(e.g., Fodor would probably not agree with this
idea, as even the most basic categories, the
primitives, are “concepts” for him; cf. Fodor
(1998, Chapter 2)). Faucher and Poirier (2009)
prefer to explain shallowness in terms of “basic
categories”, viz. categories that do not use
background knowledge, categories that are
simpler representations (Faucher & Poirier, 2009,
p. 287). This view is less controversial, and more
in line with Fodor’s project generally. This means
that we should understand shallowness as
meaning that the modules’ outputs are not
theoretically charged which seems an interesting
way to understand modules’ shallowness in the
contemporary context. By combining aspects of
the three views discussed above, we obtain an
account of shallowness as the fact that the outputs
of modules involve no reconceptualization using
background knowledge because the processes are
strongly encapsulated, and this absence of

Fodor argues modules might be associated
with fixed neural architectures (Fodor, 1983, p.
98), and that these modules also exhibit specific
ontogenetic
sequencing.
Indeed:
during
development, some capacities appear at specific
moments and in characteristic ways. Language
acquisition is the best known case, but there
seems to be such developmental constancy in folk
physics, folk psychology, mathematics, etc.
Piaget’s work is the best known on some of these
questions and, even if his framework is opposed
to domain specificity, the neopiagetians’
framework is not (e.g., (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1998;
Karmiloff-Smith, 1992).
As I already mentioned, many processes have
these characteristics according to Fodor, but the
modularity of mind applies only to peripheral
cognition. He argues, and insists on this idea, that
central processes are not and could not be
modular. For example, central processes are
argued to be quinean, viz. processes of the central
system are taken to be potentially sensitive to the
whole set of beliefs held by the subject (holism),
making these processes unencapsulated. Fodor’s
account has been widely debated, and many
disagree with his view, stating it is too restrictive
to explain cognition (Carruthers, 2006; Samuels,
2006), sometimes going as far as rejecting the
very idea of modularity altogether (Prinz, 2006).

1 “Because these processes are automatic, you save
computation (hence time) that would otherwise have to be

devoted to deciding whether, and how, they ought to be
performed.” (Fodor, 1983, p. 64)

3
1906

Some of the discussion surrounding the notion of
“module” has even proceeded to ignore how
Fodor views module even while making explicit
references to it to justify the very use of the term.

instances, modules are seen by evolutionary
psychologists as “adaptations, specific to a
domain most of the time” (Faucher & Poirier,
2009, p. 296, my translation). They were selected,
through natural selection, for solving adaptive
problems such as detecting cheaters in social
exchange and recognize kin (these are some of the
most common and discussed examples).

This other account of modularity has risen
within evolutionary psychology: some authors
have argued for the massive modularity
hypothesis, in which even central cognition might
be, at least partially, modular, an idea against
which Fodor (2000) has argued since it is a radical
departure from his proposed model. What is often
not said in these debates is that they are
sometimes more about how to define “module”
rather than about modularity or the search for
modules, Fodorian or not.
III.

If the view of modules as merely adaptations
were generally agreed upon by evolutionary
psychologists, the notion of module, as defined in
this functional account, would lack the
explanatory power of a richer notion of module. A
very general characterization of module will
encompass many distinct processes but, once we
identify one such process as a module, we will
have very few details on the process in question.
A richer account however would provide us with
much more information once a module is
identified. The analogy I have in mind is the
following: in chemistry, if we identify a substance
as a non-metal, we will be able to know some of
its characteristics, but if we identify the same
substance as oxygen, which has a richer definition
(including that it is a non-metal, but also its
precise chemical structure), we will know a good
deal more about the substance in question.

Evolutionary psychology and the
functional approaches

Evolutionary psychologists have used the notion
of module in the context of the massive
modularity hypothesis. The idea, against Fodor’s
(1983), is that there is more to “the modularity of
mind” than just an explanation of the peripheral
systems. According to Barrett, the only essential
characteristic we should consider when defining
“module” is functional specificity (Barrett, 2009,
p. 779). If Barrett’s definition is accepted, any
process of the mind, if it has one (or more) specific
function, will be counted as a module, without
further consideration as to how it works. This, of
course, might be seen as problematic since the
notion of module would thereby lose its very
substance: “module” would then become an
uncontroversial notion that does not add
anything to traditional “boxology” in psychology
(Faucher & Poirier, 2009).

Of course, as Barrett and Kurzban indicate,
modularity in general can help “direc[t] the
search for specialization”, especially in a
framework where evolution has a role to play, as
it “constrains the hypothesis space regarding
plausible functions” (2006, p. 643). Yet, this
notion is far from the one we began this
discussion with and it has nothing left in common
with Fodor-modules (or even Fodor’s account
more generally). The original evolutionary
psychology research program put forward by
Tooby & Cosmides (1992) was ambiguous, to say
the least, about what modules are and this lead to
a series of discussions culminating in a complete
dissociation with Fodor’s (1983) notion in order
to adopt a notion closer to Barrett’s (2009):

The problem encountered here is the difficulty
of defining what a “module” is. It remains hard to
define this term as it is central to many theories,
and this difficulty appears clearly with Barrett’s
minimal characterization. This notion is used to
talk about a large number of cognitive
phenomenon and “not only have authors used the
term modular to refer to different concepts, but
even explicit definition of the term by some
researchers has been insufficient to avoid
subsequent misunderstandings by others”
(Barrett & Kurzban, 2006, p. 642). Moreover,
there seems to be “no agreement on a workable
characterization of modules for evolutionary
psychology” (Downes, 2010, sec. 3). Still, in all

[…] Fodor's (1983) concept of a module is neither
useful
nor
important
for
evolutionary
psychologists. For evolutionary psychologists, the
original sense of module – a program organized to
perform a particular function is the correct one,
but with an evolutionary twist on the concept of
function. (Ermer, Cosmides, & Tooby, 2007,
p. 153)

4
1907

In other words, on this account, “module” does
not mean much more than a process that has a
particular function. If it is the case, and evidence
suggests it is, Faucher and Poirier propose to
evolutionary psychologists that they should
“simply stop talking about massive modularity,
and rather talk in terms of a mind massively
constituted of adaptive structures” (2009, p. 307,
my translation and emphasis) because there
might still be some use to Fodor-modules or
similar structures (with less and / or modified
characteristics). Modules, as defined by Barrett
(2009) and by Ermer et al. (2007), have a lot less
explanatory power and this is an important loss if
we are to explain how the mind works.
IV.

However, his account is mostly liberal and allows
a lot of variability in each of the characteristics
attributed to modules.
Carruthers begins by rejecting some of the
characteristics of Fodor-modules, since they
would be incompatible with any account that
argues that some modules are part of central
processes. The shallowness of the output is the
first rejected by Carruthers, but he also discards
speed. Following these modifications, he takes as
plausible domain-specificity, the mandatory and
innate character of modules and the neural
specificity characteristics, before modifying what
is meant by encapsulation and, then, adding
frugality. I will not, here, discuss the reasons
motivating Carruthers’ choices: the main thrust of
his argument is that he wishes to allow for every
cognitive process, peripheral or central, to be
modular to at least a certain extent. For example,
the rejection of “speed” as a characteristic is clear:
modules are fast, according to Fodor, but this
characterization only makes sense when the
modules’ speed is compared to the speed of
central processes, viz. modules are faster than
central cognition. Without any such comparison,
since both peripheral and central cognition are
entirely modular for Carruthers, it makes little
sense of maintaining that modules are fast (or
slow) (2006, p. 9).

Carruthers’ take

Fodor is clear: we should not (and we could not)
understand the mind as being only modular.
Nonetheless, Carruthers (2006) suggests that,
with a weaker account of what a module is, we can
have a framework where the mind is only
composed of modules. Of course, he agrees that
peripheral cognition is modular, but he goes
further by arguing that central cognition also is
entirely modular. A major difference between
Carruthers’ approach and many of the accounts
previously discussed is that he argues for massive
modularity, without relying on a seemingly
insubstantial characterization such as Barrett’s,
clearly identifying many traits that modules
should possess. What is gained by calling every
cognitive process “a module” is, as I will suggest,
a strategy that lacks justification.

Interestingly, this particular characterization
of modules does not mean all modules only satisfy
the minimum to satisfy Carruthers’ idea of
module. Some modules may actually have all the
characteristics of Fodor-modules: this possibility
is not excluded. But, and this is a point Carruthers
emphasizes, in the context of the massive
modularity
hypothesis,
some
of
the
characteristics attributed to these “strong”
modules must be removed in order to include all
possible processes of the mind in the set of
modules, even when they do not fit perfectly in
Fodor’s take on modules.

In Carruthers’ massive modularity account, all
cognitive processes are either modular or emerge
from the interaction of modular processes. To do
so in a plausible way, he loosens the definition of
“modules” by removing some of its characteristics
and redefining others. As we will see shortly, the
notion he ends up with, even if richer than
Barrett’s (2009), ends up being so inclusive that it
might not be much more informative.

In the end, Carruthers proposes his weakened
notion of modules in order to integrate all
cognitive processes and assign to them some of
the characteristics of modules in a meaningful
way. He does not offer a reason to adopt this
position however: the goal is to have a complete
account of the architecture of mind in terms of
interactions between modules, of which there
could be many types. Fodor’s notion, however, is

Briefly, for Carruthers, modules are processing
systems, usually associated with a functional
domain, that are frugal in their operations and are
more or less strongly encapsulated (he introduces
a distinction between wide-scope and narrowscope encapsulation), and by and large, only the
outputs of a modular process will be available to
other processes (Carruthers, 2006, pp. 62–63).

5
1908

replaced without any suggestion to the effect that
it could be kept, e.g., as “Fodor-modules” or as
other subtypes of modules, to account for more
specific kinds of processing.

It might even be the case that some of the
characteristics are, in the end, optional or present
only in a handful of cases. We might even want, at
some point, to remove completely some
characteristics, or add new ones. This is
something that we can only discover and begin to
understand by taking “Fodor-module” as a
serious subject of empirical inquiry: even if the
notions of ontogenetic timetable or fixed neural
architecture are appealing and seem to be very
useful, they might end up being more misleading
than helpful (e.g., Stanovich, 2004 drops them). It
might also be the case, however, that they rather
provide insights to understand parts of cognition
that are still poorly explained, as well as parts of
central cognition—if Samuels’ (2006) argument
that central processes are modular to a certain
extent is right.

To use again the chemical analogy made
earlier, it is as we had a number of nonmetals
(cognitive processes), some of which we could
identify as oxygen (Fodor-modules), others as
arsenic (another type of modules), but we refused
to make the distinction between oxygen and
arsenic in order to only have the one notion, nonmetal, to explain all of non-metal chemistry.
V.

Back to the Fodor-modules

Let’s sum up: Fodor has suggested a very narrow
conception of what a module is supposed to be, a
notion that is not without problems but that has
proven to be useful in many areas of cognitive
science. In the 30 years since his proposal, many
philosophers and psychologists have suggested
that we should weaken the notion in order to
characterize more cognitive processes as being
modules. In this paper, so far, I have resisted this
move since I believe it will deprive us of an
important and useful tool: the notion “Fodormodule”. My argument does not address how we
should label things: perhaps Carruthers is right in
claiming that talking about modules for nearly
every cognitive process is useful (and has appeal).
I doubt this, but where I disagree with him is that
I believe we should keep the notion of Fodormodule because it is explanatory useful while he
seems to think that it should be thrown to the
dustbin of history. It does not have to be the only
kind of module we end up talking about in
cognitive science: it would just be crucial to be
precise enough and to use all available tools
correctly. The ambiguity of what the term refers
to or even the relative unclarity of what “massive
modularity” is supposed to mean helps no one.

As Buckner states: “[t]he HPC approach
provides a way to distinguish categories suitable
for empirical study from those that are not
without relying upon essences” (2013, p. 3), and
it can be used to modify the way we characterize
the cluster as we see fit when we make
discoveries about why it seems to be stable—
usually in terms of shared properties and
common underlying mechanisms. Within such an
approach, we can find “the maximal class of items
in which a signiﬁcant number of scientiﬁcally
interesting properties cluster due to the
operation of at least one shared causal
mechanism” (Buckner, 2013, p. 3) and, even if we
are yet to find such a shared causal mechanisms
in the case of Fodor-modules, this leads to a much
more plausible understanding of Fodormodularity.
Given this possibility, it seems that it might still
be too early to reject modularity as Fodor
understood it altogether. Even better: it might
provide us with exactly what we need to start
understanding better many of the complex
properties of the automatic, unreflective and loweffort class of cognitive processes identified in
dual-process frameworks as Type 1 or System 1
processes.

There remains one very important issue I want
to discuss: Fodor’s own discussion of modularity
is made in terms that could be made more
plausible and clearer by applying Boyd’s (1991)
notion of HPC to specify how modules can be
natural kinds. This approach offers very powerful
tools to adjust the initial notion and make sense of
some remarks Fodor made in the 1983 book: he
stated that some modules might miss some
characteristics he identified, and that some
characteristics could vary in strength and degree.

References
Atkinson, A. P., & Wheeler, M. (2004). The Grain of
Domains: The Evolutionary-Psychological Case
Against Domain-General Cognition. Mind and
Language, 19(2), 147–176. doi:10.1111/j.14680017.2004.00252.x

6
1909

Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. Toronto:
Doubleday Canada.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond modularity : a
developmental perspective on cognitive science.
Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.
Prinz, J. J. (2006). Is the Mind Really Modular? In R.
Stainton (Ed.), Contemporary Debates in Cognitive
Science (pp. 37–56). New York: Blackwell.
Samuels, R. (2006). Is the Human Mind Massively
Modular? In R. Stainton (Ed.), Contemporary
Debates in Cognitive Science (pp. 37–56). New York:
Blackwell.
Stanovich, K. E. (2004). The robot’s rebellion : finding
meaning in the age of Darwin. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Stanovich, K. E. (2011). Rationality and the reflective
mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological
foundations of culture. In J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, &
J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 19–
136). New York: Oxford University Press.

Barrett, H. C. (2009). Les modules “en chair et en os.”
In T. Heams, P. Huneman, G. Lecointre, & M.
Silberstein (Eds.), Les mondes darwiniens.
L’évolution de l’évolution (pp. 779–786). Paris:
Éditions Matériologiques.
Barrett, H. C., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modularity in
Cognition: Framing the Debate. Psychological
Review, 113(3), 628–647. doi:10.1037/0033295X.113.3.628
Boyd, R. (1991). Realism, Anti-Foundationism and the
Enthusiasm for Natural Kinds. Philosophical
Studies, 61, 127–148.
Buckner, C. (2013). A property cluster theory of
cognition.
Philosophical
Psychology,
1–30.
doi:10.1080/09515089.2013.843274
Carruthers, P. (2006). The architecture of the mind :
massive modularity and the flexibility of thought.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2013). The fragmentation of reasoning.
In P. Quintanilla (Ed.), La coevolución de mente y
lenguaje: Ontogénesis y filogénesis. Lima: Fondo
Editorial de la Pontificia Universidad Católica del
Perú.
Retrieved
from
http://faculty.philosophy.umd.edu/pcarruthers/T
he%20Fragmentation%20of%20Reasoning.pdf
Downes, S. M. (2010). Evolutionary Psychology. In E. N.
Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved
from
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2010/entri
es/evolutionary-psychology/
Ermer, E., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2007). Functional
specialization and the adaptationist program. In S.
Gangstead & J. Simpson (Eds.), The Evolution of
Mind: Fundamental Questions and Controversies
(pp. 153–160). New York: Guilford Press.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2008). Dual-Processing Accounts of
Reasoning, Judgment, and Social Cognition. Annual
Review
of
Psychology,
59(1),
255–278.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093629
Faucher, L., & Poirier, P. (2009). Philosophie:
Modularité et psychologie évolutionniste. In J.-B.
Van der Henst & H. Mercier (Eds.), Darwin en tête!
L’Évolution et les sciences cognitives (pp. 275–308).
Grenoble: Presses universitaires de Grenoble.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind : an essay on
faculty psychology. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1998). Concepts: where cognitive science
went wrong. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (2000). The mind doesn’t work that way: the
scope and limits of computational psychology.
Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1998). Words, thoughts,
and theories. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.

7
1910

