UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
'But' how do children judge it on a scale?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3dn0k75b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Janssens, Leen
Van den Broeck, Annelies
Schaeken, Walter

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

‘But’ how do Children judge it on a Scale?
Leen Janssens (Leen.Janssens@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, BELGIUM

Annelies Van den Broeck (Annelies.Vandenbroeck@student.kuleuven.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, BELGIUM

Abstract
This study examined children’s comprehension of the
conventional implicature induced by but, combined with so
and nevertheless, in ‘p but q’ sentences constructed as
distancing-contrastive connections. Based on the Pragmatic
Tolerance Hypothesis of Katsos and Bishop (2011), a threepoint scale was used as response format. Using a scale instead
of a binary judgment task can reveal more insight in which
factors are considered most important when processing ‘p but
q’ sentences. The results indicated that the content of the pand q-arguments plays a very important role when children
process ‘p but q’ sentences. However, their use of the threepoint scale also indicated that they are sensitive to the
pragmatic meaning of but, so and nevertheless. These results
must be interpreted cautiously since the children seemed to
use the middle value on the scale around 30% of the time in
each sentence category, which was not in line with our
predictions. This might indicate that children experience a
general incomprehension with this type of sentences and
answer with the middle value on the scale because they
simply don’t know the answer.
Keywords: conventional implicature; but; scale; content

Introduction
Over the past few decades, considerable experimental
research has been devoted to scalar implicatures. Grice
introduced the term implicature in the 1967 William James
lectures to offer an explanation for how it is possible that an
utterance can mean more than what is literally said. Scalar
implicatures are a subcategory of conversational
implicatures and are based on a scale of informativity. For
example, on the scale <all, most, many, some> the use of
the more informative all logically entails that some is also
true. However, in an utterance such as ‘Some Belgians like
to drink beer’, the pragmatic meaning of some causes the
hearer to interpret this utterance as ‘Some but not all
Belgians like to drink beer’ even though the logical meaning
of some is ‘some and perhaps all’. According to Grice
(1989), people follow a set of maxims in communication in
order to understand each other correctly. That’s why the
consensus applies that whenever a speaker uses a weak term
such as some, a stronger term such as all does not hold. The

speaker would not have been optimally informative if a
stronger term applied.
Developmental conversational implicature research has
shown that children are less pragmatic than adults. For
example, Noveck (2001) found that 89% of the 7-to-8-yearolds in his study agreed with statements such as ‘Some
giraffes have long necks’, compared to only 41% of the
adults. Similarly, with respect to propositional connectives,
Braine and Rumain (1981) presented evidence showing that
deductively competent 7- and 9-year-old children favor a
logical interpretation of or (‘p or q and perhaps both’) over
an implicit one (‘p or q but not both’). Adults on the same
task were equivocal, though they tended to favor exclusive
interpretations (Braine & Rumain, 1981). However, these
(and other) studies claiming that children lack pragmatic
competence have been criticized by Katsos and Bishop
(2011). In their implicature studies, Katsos and Bishop
(2011) argued that earlier studies mostly employed tasks
that cannot differentiate between actual implicature
derivation and mere sensitivity to violations of
informativeness. The majority of studies concluding that
children are more logical than adults used binary judgment
tasks in which participants were instructed to judge an
utterance as ‘true’ or ‘false’. Katsos and Bishop (2011)
argued that children might not reject underinformative
sentences because they are tolerant to violations of
informativeness. However, this doesn’t mean that they are
not sensitive to these violations. In order to test this
Pragmatic Tolerance Hypothesis, Katsos and Bishop (2011,
Experiment 2) instructed their participants to judge on a
ternary scale how well a fictional character described certain
situations. They found that children’s performance did not
differ from adults’. Underinformative utterances were
judged by both groups with the middle value on the scale.
This shows that children understand that using for example
some, when all would have been a more informative
description, is not optimal. However, in a binary judgment
task they would not penalize such a description as false
whereas adults would. In previous research (e.g. Noveck,
2001) this falsely led to the conclusion that children lack
pragmatic competence.

2417

Besides conversational implicatures, Grice (1989) also
distinguished the category of conventional implicatures.
This paper will deal with this far less investigated category
of conventional implicatures. Unlike conversational
implicatures conventional implicatures (a) are related to the
conventional meaning of words, (b) are immediate
conclusions from utterances, (c) cannot be cancelled and (d)
are related to the form of an utterance, not the content. In an
utterance such as ‘He’s old but he’s smart’, but
conventionally implies a contrast. The use of but elicits the
inference that ‘old’ and ‘smart’ contrast each other even
though this is not explicitly expressed.
The experiments in this paper focus on the conventional
implicature induced by the conjunction but. Our
experiments build further on Janssens and Schaeken (2013)
and Janssens, Drooghmans and Schaeken (in press).
However, because of the important findings of Katsos and
Bishop (2011) concerning conversational implicatures we
will apply a ternary scale instead of a binary judgment task.
This allows us to test certain predictions about children’s
understanding of this conventional implicature that cannot
be discovered by using a binary judgment task.
In Janssens and Schaeken (2013) ‘p but q’ utterances,
constructed as distancing-contrastive connections, were
examined. In a distancing contrast, but connects two parts of
a complex speech act (Van Belle & Devroy, 1992) and the
second part is disassociated from the first part, without
denying what is being expressed in the first part (Haeseryn
et al., 1997). For example:
(1) Hannah: “I really like these beautiful earrings, but
they are very expensive.”
In a ‘p but q’ construction, the speaker endorses that p is
true (Van Belle, 2003). However, because but is used, the
inference from the p-argument is cancelled in favor of the
inference from the q-argument. In (1), the p-argument elicits
the conclusion that Hannah will buy the earrings whereas
the q-argument elicits the opposite conclusion that she will
not buy the earrings. The conventional meaning of but
causes the q-argument to outweigh the p-argument so the
appropriate conclusion from a ‘p but q’ sentence is inferred
from the q-argument. Consequently, from (1) the conclusion
follows that Hannah will not buy the earrings. If the two
arguments trade places (“they are very expensive, but I
really like these beautiful earrings”) the opposite
conclusion will be drawn that Hannah will buy the earrings.
This shows that the conventional meaning of but provides
more weight to the q-argument irrespective of the content of
the arguments. According to Anscombre and Ducrot (1977),
every argument is determined by a certain positive or
negative value ascribed to its content, which they labelled
the ‘axiological value’. The axiological value we ascribe to
the arguments of an utterance is dependent on culturalspecific common sense views (Van Belle & Devroy, 1992).
In (1), the p-argument is oriented towards a positive
conclusion (Hannah will buy the earrings) and the qargument is oriented towards a negative conclusion (Hannah

will not buy the earrings). That’s why we label the pargument in (1) as the positive argument and the q-argument
as the negative argument.
The conclusion from a ‘p but q’ construction can be
introduced by words such as so or nevertheless. The
pragmatic meaning of these two words leads to opposite
conclusions. So elicits the conclusion from q and therefore
confirms the expected conclusion inferred from the
pragmatic meaning of but (I really like these beautiful
earrings, but they are very expensive. So I will not buy
them.). In contrast, according to Van Belle (2003),
whenever nevertheless -used as a conjunctive adverbfollows a ‘p but q’ sentence, it reverses the argumentative
orientation again. The expected conclusion from q is
overruled and the reader is redirected towards the
conclusion inferred from p (I really like these beautiful
earrings, but they are very expensive. Nevertheless I will
buy them). Note that nevertheless is used here as a
translation of Dutch toch.
The adult participants in Janssens and Schaeken (2013)
were presented with short stories that ended with a ‘p but q’
sentence. Both sensible (Se) and irrelevant (Ir) arguments
were administered. In (1), both arguments are sensible in a
context in which a woman is standing in a jewelry store. In
this same context, uttering “I really like these beautiful
earrings, but I have a brother” clearly contains an irrelevant
q-argument. The irrelevant arguments were unrelated to the
context of the stories and their purpose was to examine
whether the pragmatic meaning of but is understood
irrespective of the content of the arguments.
Each ‘p but q’ sentence was followed by two possible soconclusions (‘so conclusion from p’ and ‘so conclusion
from q’) or by two nevertheless-conclusions (‘nevertheless
conclusion from p’ and ‘nevertheless conclusion from q’).
The participants were instructed to indicate the appropriate
conclusion. Janssens and Schaeken (2013) expected the
appropriate pragmatic conclusion following so to be the
conclusion inferred from q and the appropriate conclusion
following nevertheless to be the inferred conclusion from p.
The general outline of the results showed that adults
understand the pragmatic meaning of but. However, the
content of the arguments plays a non-negligible role.
Whenever an irrelevant argument was combined with a
sensible argument, the participants practically always
inferred the conclusion from the sensible argument,
irrespective of the pragmatic inference from but, so and
nevertheless. The importance of the content was confirmed
in a second experiment in which participants were asked to
justify their answer. As expected, participants mostly
referred to the content of the arguments whenever they did
not provide the appropriate conclusion. More evidence
showing the importance of the content was found in the fact
that 82% appropriate so-conclusions were given when two
sensible arguments were presented. This means that 18% of
the answers was based on the inappropriate p-argument
which the participants probably judged as a better argument
than q. Another finding was that inferring the appropriate

2418

nevertheless-conclusion is a lot more difficult than inferring
the appropriate so-conclusion. Only 48% appropriate
nevertheless-conclusions were given when two sensible
arguments were presented. This could indicate that the
expected pragmatic meaning of nevertheless might not be
the right one. On the other hand, this finding can be
explained by the fact that the inference stemming from
nevertheless is opposite to the inference stemming from but.
In order to make the appropriate inference from
nevertheless, the inferred conclusion from but has to be
cancelled. It seems plausible that this would require effort
and therefore leads to a higher percentage of inappropriate
answers.
Janssens et al. (in press) performed the same experiment
as Janssens and Schaeken (2013) but with children aged 8 to
12. Additionally, they measured working memory (WM) in
order to see whether WM is involved in processing the
conventional implicature stemming from but. The children’s
results showed the same pattern as the adult-data but the
percentages of appropriate answers were lower. Moreover,
no significant effect of WM was found.
In this paper we apply the methodology of Katsos and
Bishop (2011) on children between the ages of 8 and 12. If
children understand the pragmatic meaning of but, so and
nevertheless but are also sensitive to the content of the
arguments, we expect them to choose the middle value on
the scale when they have to judge the appropriateness of a
conclusion from a ‘p but q’ construction in which there is a
conflict between the pragmatic answer and the answer based
on the content. Since both the content and the conventional
meaning of but can play a role in judging conclusions from
‘p but q’ sentences, different predictions can be made for
each of the categories. A schematic view is presented in
Table 1. This table depicts which of the two arguments (p or
q) gets most weight based on (1) the content, (2) but and (3)
the conclusion-word (so or nevertheless). We can see in
Table 1 that the content as well as but and the conclusionword guide the reader towards the conclusion from q in the
‘IrSe so’ sentences. That’s why we predict a lot of optimal
answers on the scale and no neutral (middle) answers. If the
content is very important for children and they are rather
tolerant with respect to but, then we also expect very few
neutral answers for the ‘SeIr nevertheless’ sentences. When
both arguments are sensible, the content should not play a
Table 1: Indication of which argument has more weight
for every sentence category.
Sentence-category

Content

SeSe_So
=
SeSe_Nevertheless
=
IrSe_So
q
IrSe_Nevertheless
q
SeIr_So
p
SeIr_Nevertheless
p
Se=sensible; Ir=irrelevant

But
q
q
q
q
q
q

Conclusionword
q
p
q
p
q
p

role. When these sentences are combined with nevertheless,
then but and nevertheless lead to opposite conclusions. This
might lead to doubt, but also to inappropriate answers,
depending on which of the two factors is more important. If
children are not at all sensitive to the pragmatic meaning of
but, so and nevertheless, we would expect many neutral
answers for both the so- and the nevertheless-conclusions.
Also, if children truly lack this sensitivity, we would expect
no neutral answers for the ‘IrSe nevertheless’- and the ‘SeIr
so’ sentences. In both cases, the content guides them
towards the inappropriate conclusion and this would not be
corrected by but, so or nevertheless.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Sixty-six Dutch speaking children (31 boys
and 35 girls) between the ages of 8 and 10 years with a
mean age of 9.1 participated in this study. They were
recruited from five classes of two different schools.
Implicature Task The implicature task was based on
Janssens and Schaeken (2013) but the design was adapted.
The children were presented with 24 context stories. Each of
the stories described a person in doubt about something. For
example:
Peter’s best friend is flying to Egypt to go on a
diving holiday. He asks if Peter wants to come
along. Peter is in doubt whether he will join his best
friend or not.
Each short story was followed by a ‘p but q’ sentence with
two contrastive arguments expressing doubt. For example:
Peter thinks: “I’m afraid of flying, but I would like
to learn how to dive.”
In the example above, both the p– and the q-argument are
sensible arguments. The p-argument in this example is the
negative argument (leading towards the negative conclusion
‘I will not join my best friend on his trip’) and the qargument is the positive argument (‘I will join my best
friend on his trip’). However, as in Janssens and Schaeken
(2013), we also included irrelevant arguments in this
experiment. The irrelevant arguments are not oriented
towards a certain positive or negative conclusion. If the
children understand the pragmatic meaning of but then these
irrelevant arguments acquire a certain axiological value
simply because they are contrasted with another (positive or
negative) argument. An example of a combination of an
irrelevant and a positive argument is:
Peter thinks: “I like to eat chicken, but I would like
to learn how to dive.”
After each ‘p but q’ sentence, a certain conclusion was
expressed by a fictional character, ‘Mr. Coleman’. This
conclusion was introduced by either so or nevertheless.

2419

Whenever so follows a ‘p but q’ sentence we expect the
conclusion from the q-argument but when nevertheless
follows, we expect the conclusion from p. The conclusions
that were presented could be of four different kinds: ‘so
conclusion from p’, ‘so conclusion from q’, ‘nevertheless
conclusion from p’ or ‘nevertheless conclusion from q’.
After a certain conclusion was expressed, the children had
to indicate on a scale how appropriate they judged the
conclusion. Based on Katsos and Bishop (2011), we used a
three-point scale with different sized strawberries. The
children were instructed to reward a good conclusion with
the biggest strawberry, a bad conclusion with the smallest
strawberry and a conclusion that was not completely bad
nor good with the medium-sized strawberry. E.g.:
Mr. Coleman says: “So Peter will join his best
friend on his trip to Egypt.”

The 24 stories represented an item from every combination
of our 3x2x4 design. There were three possible argumentcombinations (SeSe, SeIr, IrSe), two different axiological
value combinations (negative-positive, positive-negative)
and four conclusion types (‘so q’, ‘so p’, ‘nevertheless q’,
‘nevertheless p’).
Procedure The task was administered to the children as a
pen-and-paper task which they performed individually in
their classroom at school. The task was introduced by a
preliminary story about mister Coleman who comes from
America and wants to learn Dutch. The children were told
that Mr. Coleman would utter several conclusions based on
each story and that they had to reward Mr. Coleman with
different sized strawberries, dependent on how appropriate
the uttered conclusion was.

Results
In the analyses, we did not make a distinction between
positive and negative arguments. When analyzing them
separately, we did not find significant differences. That’s
why, in our analyses, we collapsed them. We recoded the
children’s answers into appropriate (three points), neutral
(two points) and inappropriate (one point) answers. First we
looked at the percentages of neutral answers for each of the
argument-conclusion combinations. These percentages are
displayed in Table 2, together with the percentages of
appropriate answers. There were no significant differences
in the number of neutral answers between the different
categories (Χ2=1.21; df=2, p=.55). This is not in line with
our expectations. We expected almost no neutral answers
for the ‘IrSe so’ sentences and the ‘SeIr nevertheless’
sentences. However, since the number of neutral answers
was evenly distributed over the different categories, this
allowed us to sum up the scores in every category.

Table 2: Percentages of neutral and appropriate (between
brackets) answers for each argument-conclusion
combination (Experiment 1)
Sentence
Sensible-Sensible
Sensible-Irrelevant
Irrelevant-Sensible

So
31(41)
29(25)
28(55)

Nevertheless
25(41)
30(47)
25(18)

When we look at the results of the so-conclusions, the
children scored highest on the appropriateness scale for the
‘IrSe’ sentences (79%). This differed significantly from
‘SeSe’ (71%; Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=55; Z=-3.66;
p<.001) and from ‘SeIr’ (59%; Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test,
n=66, Z=-5.28; p<.001). These last two categories also
differed significantly from each other (Wilcoxon Signed
Ranks test, n=56, Z=-4.18; p<.001). When we look at the
results of the nevertheless-conclusions, the children scored
highest on the appropriateness scale for the ‘SeIr’ sentences
(75%). This differed significantly from the ‘IrSe’ sentences
(54%; Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=58; Z=-5.32; p<.001)
and marginally significantly from the ‘SeSe’ sentences
(69%; Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=54; Z=-1.89; p=.059).
These last two categories also differed significantly from
each other (Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=53; Z=-5.18;
p<.001).
In order to compare so-conclusions with neverthelessconclusions, we have to look at the ‘SeSe’ sentences. We
found no significant difference in performance between
these two categories (Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=49;
Z=-.93; p=.35).

Discussion
The general outline of the results of the 8-to-10-year-olds
seems to be in line with previous findings in Janssens et al.
(in press). However, the introduction of a three-point scale
enabled us to examine children’s sensitivity to but in
another way. The fact that children provide an inappropriate
answer about half the time for the ‘SeIr so’- and the ‘IrSe
nevertheless’ sentences means that they provide an
appropriate or neutral answer the other half of the time. As a
consequence, this implies that, despite the importance of the
content of the arguments, children are clearly sensitive to
the pragmatic meaning of but and the conclusion-words.
However, Table 2 shows that the percentage of neutral
answers is around 30% in each category. This is contrary to
our expectations since we expected practically no neutral
answers for the ‘IrSe so’ sentences. Because in these
sentences not only the content, but also but and so guide the
reader towards the conclusion from q, it is surprising that so
many neutral answers were provided. This might point out
that children could experience a general feeling of
incomprehension and therefore prefer the middle value on
the scale. Therefore we investigated slightly older children,
aged 10 to 12, in Experiment 2. Perhaps a more clear answer
pattern might emerge in older children. After all, childhood

2420

can be seen as a time where major changes are present in the
development of different areas such as language, pragmaticand logical understanding (Berk, 2010). We wondered
whether there would be an age effect: will the older children
in this experiment be more pragmatic than the younger
children in Experiment 1 and will their use of the scale
provide a clearer image of their understanding of but, so and
nevertheless?

Experiment 2
Method
Participants, Materials and Procedure The 61 Dutchspeaking children who participated in this experiment were
aged 10 to 12 with a mean age of 11.3. Two participants
were excluded from the analyses due to missing data. The
remaining children were 36 boys and 23 girls. They were
students from the same schools as the children in
Experiment 1 and were recruited from four different classes.
All materials and the procedure were exactly the same as in
Experiment 1.

Results
The results of the older children are similar to those of the
younger children in Experiment 1. We inspected the
distribution of the neutral answers to see if it was permitted
to sum up the scores. The percentages of the number of
neutral answers are displayed in Table 3, together with the
percentages appropriate answers. As in Experiment 1 there
was no significant difference in the number of neutral
answers between the different categories (Χ2=.66; df=2,
p=.72). This allowed us to sum up the scores in Experiment
2 as well and perform the same analyses as in Experiment 1.
When we look at the results of the so-conclusions, the 10to-12-year olds scored highest on the appropriateness scale
of the ‘IrSe’ sentences (87%). This differed significantly
from the ‘SeSe’ sentences (79%; Wilcoxon Signed Ranks
test, n=45; Z=-3.83; p<.001) and from the ‘SeIr’ sentences
(57%; Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=56: Z=-6.13; p<.001).
These last two categories also differed significantly from
each other (Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=52; Z=-5.65;
p<.001).
When we look at the results of the nevertheless-conclusions,
the same pattern emerges as in Experiment 1. The children
scored highest on the appropriateness scale of the ‘SeIr’
sentences (78%). This differed significantly from the ‘SeSe’
Table 3: Percentages of neutral and appropriate (between
brackets) answers for each argument-conclusion
combination (Experiment 2)
Sentence
Sensible-Sensible
Sensible-Irrelevant
Irrelevant-Sensible

So
31(53)
23(24)
22(70)

Nevertheless
32(35)
21(57)
19(14)

Table 4: Results of Mann-Whitney U tests and percentages
for the comparison between the two age groups.
Sentence

U

SeSe_So
1365.5
IrSe_So
1329.5
SeIr_So
1778.5
SeSe_Nevertheless 1783.5
IrSe_Nevertheless 1616
SeIr_Nevertheless 1676.5
Se=sensible; Ir=irrelevant

p
.003
.002
.400
.410
.096
.180

8-10
years
71
79
59
69
54
75

10-12
years
79
87
57
67
49
78

sentences (67%; Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=59; Z=3.51; p<.001) and from the ‘IrSe’ sentences (49%;
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n=54; Z =-5.99; p <.001).
These last two categories also differed significantly from
each other (Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test, n =51; Z =-5.06; p
<.001).
In contrast to Experiment 1, we did find a significant
difference when we compared so with nevertheless for the
‘SeSe’ sentences (79% vs. 67% respectively; Wilcoxon
Signed Ranks test, n =55; Z =-3.78; p <.001).
We performed Mann-Whitney U tests in order to explore the
difference in performance between the two age groups.
Generally, the older children provided more appropriate
answers than the younger children but this difference was
only significant for the ‘SeSe so’– and the ‘IrSe so’
sentences. The results of these Mann-Whitney U tests are
displayed in Table 4.

General Discussion
This paper aimed to examine children’s understanding of
the conventional implicature stemming from but, so and
nevertheless in ‘p but q’ sentences constructed as
distancing-contrasts. Instead of using a binary judgment task
as in Janssens et al. (in press), a three-point scale was used.
The use of a ternary response format was inspired by Katsos
and Bishop (2011) who provided evidence that binary
judgment tasks can conceal children’s pragmatic
competence. In line with their Pragmatic Tolerance
Hypothesis they showed that children are equally aware of
pragmatic violations as adults but are more tolerant for these
violations. We expected a three-point scale to shed light on
children’s understanding of conventional implicatures as
well. The results of Janssens et al. (in press) had shown that
children seem to have a general understanding of the
pragmatic meaning of but, so and nevertheless but are very
sensitive to the content of the arguments. The use of a threepoint scale enables the children to answer with the middle
value on the scale whenever they experience a conflict
between the conclusion based on the content of the
arguments and the conclusion based on the pragmatic
meaning of the instruction-words. Two different age groups
were examined: a group of 8-to-10-year-olds (Experiment 1)
and a group of 10-to-12-year-olds (Experiment 2). The
results of both age groups were similar. The percentages

2421

appropriate answers seemed to be higher for the older
children in most cases but this difference was only
significant for the ‘SeSe so’– and the ‘IrSe so’ sentences.
More importantly, we made predictions based on Table 1
which allow us to gain insight into children’s sensitivity to
the conventional implicature from but on the one hand and
the content of the arguments on the other hand.
The scale-data included evidence that children are aware
of the pragmatic meaning of but, so and nevertheless. We
found that the children in both experiments provided the
neutral answer about one third of the time for the ‘IrSe
nevertheless’- and the ‘SeIr so’ sentences and even a
considerable amount of appropriate answers. This is
evidence that children are sensitive to the pragmatic
meaning of but, so and nevertheless. If they would have
been exclusively sensitive to the content then we would
have expected almost 100% inappropriate answers. The
answers on the ‘SeIr nevertheless’ sentences also indicate
that children are sensitive to the pragmatic meaning of but.
Both the content of the arguments and the use of
nevertheless elicit the conclusion from p. However, but
elicits the conclusion from q and this conclusion has to be
cancelled in order to reach the appropriate conclusion. The
fact that 30% (Experiment 1) and 21% (Experiment 2)
neutral answers were given, suggests that sensitivity to the
implicature from but causes doubt.
Apart from evidence showing that children are sensitive
to the pragmatic meaning of the instruction-words, the
scale-data also indicated that the content of the arguments
has a lot of influence on children’s answers. When both
arguments are sensible, none of the two arguments
outweighs the other. When these sentences are combined
with nevertheless, then but and nevertheless lead to opposite
conclusions. In both experiments, one third of the answers
were inappropriate which indicates that the pragmatic
meaning of nevertheless is not that easy to grasp. The
neutral answers (25% in Experiment 1 and 32% in
Experiment 2) are interpreted as evidence that the children
notice the conflict between the conclusion based on but and
the conclusion based on nevertheless. As a consequence, the
results from the ‘SeSe nevertheless’ sentences seem to
suggest that children generally understand the pragmatic
meaning of but and nevertheless but this understanding is
far from perfect. When two sensible arguments are
combined with so, both but and so elicit the conclusion from
q. This means that the neutral (31% in both experiments) as
well as the inappropriate answers (28% in Experiment 1 and
16% in Experiment 2) are evidence that the content of the
arguments is very important for children and sometimes
outweighs the answer based on the pragmatic meaning of
but and so.
In contrast to the results showing that children are
sensitive to the pragmatic meaning of but, so and
nevertheless as well as to the content of the arguments, the
results of the ‘IrSe so’ sentences pose a bigger problem to
interpret. Both the content and the instruction-words elicit
the conclusion from q so we would have expected almost

exclusively appropriate answers. The fact that ‘only’ 55%
(Experiment 1) and 70% (Experiment 2) appropriate
answers were provided suggest that children’s performance
on these ‘p but q’ sentences is far from optimal and the use
of the middle answer on the scale might rather express a
certain general incomprehension. So, this latter finding
causes us to interpret our scale-data cautiously. Further
research with the use of scales on conventional implicatures
seems necessary. It might be useful to apply this scaleformat on adults. This would allow us to compare their
responses with children’s responses. Consequently we could
get a clearer view on how to interpret these results.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all schools who participated for
allowing us to perform our experiments. Leen Janssens is a
research assistant from the Fund for Scientific Research
Flanders (FWO). This research was carried out with the
financial support of the National Council for Scientific
Research – Flanders, Belgium (FWO grant G.0634.09)

References
Anscombre, J., & Ducrot, O. (1977). Deux ‘mais’ en
français? Lingua, 43, 23–40.
Berk, L.E. (2010). Development through the lifespan (5th
ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Braine, M., & Rumain, B. (1981). Development of
comprehension of “or”: Evidence for a sequence of
competencies. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
31(1), 46-70.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Haeseryn, W., Romijn, K., Geerts, G., de Rooij, J., & van
den Toorn, M. C. (1997). Algemene Nederlandse
Spraakkunst. Groningen/Leuven: Wolters Noordhoff.
Janssens, L., & Schaeken, W. (2013). ‘But’ how do we
reason with it: An experimental investigation of the
implicature stemming from ‘but’. Journal of Pragmatics,
57, 194-209.
Janssens, L., Drooghmans, S., & Schaeken W. (in press).
But: do age and working memory influence conventional
implicature processing? Journal of Child Language.
Katsos, N. & Bishop, D.V. (2011). Pragmatic tolerance:
Implications for the acquisition of informativeness and
implicature. Cognition, 120, 67-81.
Noveck, I.A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78(2), 165-188.
Van Belle, W. (2003). Zwijgen is niet altijd toestemmen. De
rol van inferenties bij het interpreteren en argumenteren.
Leuven: Uitgeverij Acco.
Van Belle, W., & Devroy, G. (1992). Tegenstellende en
toegevende
connectoren.
Een
argumentatieve
beschrijving (Preprint 143, voorlopige publicatie).
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Faculteit Letteren,
Departement Linguïstiek.

2422

