UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s inferences based on figure and ground thematic roles

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30n9x2vc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Chestnut, Eleanor
Markman, Ellen

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s inferences based on figure and ground thematic roles
Eleanor K. Chestnut (ekc@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Ellen M. Markman (markman@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract

A compelling account of this preference is offered by the
cognitive reference point model. According to this model,
asymmetries arise because of an interaction between
syntactic thematic roles and the items being compared;
sentences with the structure “A [is similar to] B” require
that the item that serves as a more natural “reference point”
for other category members be placed in the ground (B)
position, and that the “variant” item be placed in the figure
(A) position. Adults prefer to say that North Korea is similar
to China because China, a more prominent country, serves
as a better “reference point” (Rosch, 1975; Talmy, 1975;
Bowdle & Medin, 2001). Gleitman et al. (1996) provide
support for this interaction by demonstrating that adults
make different inferences about non-words based on their
syntactic positions. After reading the sentence, “The zum is
similar to the gax,” for example, adults infer that the gax is
more important and famous than the zum.
Recent research in social psychology has expanded upon
the finding that comparison asymmetries have cognitive
consequences beyond explicit comparison judgments.
Bruckmüller and Abele (2010), for example, found that
attribution of status and power varied with the direction of a
comparison, even when the comparison was unrelated to
status or power. Adults in this study read paragraphs
containing sentences such as, “The total number of students
enrolled in Law is lower (higher) than the number of
students enrolled in Economics.” It was found that adults
attributed more power and status to the “referent” group (in
this case, Economics students) than to the “variant” group.
Surprisingly, no research to date has investigated these
asymmetries in children. Considering the power of such
directional syntax to shape assumptions in adults, it is
important that we determine whether children, who are
rapidly building their conceptual knowledge, are similarly
influenced by these linguistic subtleties. In many cases, this
inferential process is arguably useful for children, as it
allows them to learn about the world from minimal
linguistic input. Upon hearing that a tangerine is like an
orange, for example, a child appropriately may infer that
oranges are more typical and common than tangerines. As
the research in social psychology suggests, however, this
process can have unintended consequences in the social
domain, potentially suggesting to children that some social
groups are of higher status than others, despite the explicit
expression of similarity.

Logically symmetrical predicates are frequently interpreted,
by adults, asymmetrically. Adults prefer to say, for example,
“My brother met the President,” over, “The President met my
brother.” This is because directional syntax contains figure
and ground thematic roles, requiring the more important or
prominent item be placed in the ground (second) position. To
date, little is known about the development of this
asymmetric interpretation. To address this, in Experiments 1
and 2 we asked whether children prefer to relate figures to
grounds when expressing spatial relations (e.g., “The bicycle
is next to the building”) and similarity (e.g., “A zebra is like a
horse”). Children as young as 4 showed emergent preference
for this framing. In Experiment 3, we asked whether children
ages 4 to 8 infer grounds to have higher skill and status in
more specific comparisons (e.g., “The blicket cooks as well
as the toma”). We also asked whether including the modal
can (e.g., “The blicket can play soccer like the toma”) or the
comparative as well as (e.g., “The blicket plays soccer as well
as the toma”) would strengthen this inference. Children ages
four through eight tended to associate grounds with higher
status and skill in comparisons containing the modal can, but
only the older children seemed affected by the comparative as
well as. This work has implications for attempts to counter
stereotypes: saying that girls do science as well as boys, for
example, may imply that boys set the standard.
Keywords: language development; comparison; inference

Introduction
Language is a powerful and indispensable way of
transferring knowledge to children.
Through verbal
descriptions and explanations, adults routinely teach
children information that would otherwise not be accessible
to them (e.g., Harris & Koenig, 2006). In addition to
serving as a vehicle for explicit teaching, however, language
can also affect conceptual development, perception, and
beliefs in many subtle and implicit ways (e.g., Loftus &
Palmer, 1974; Fausey & Boroditsky, 2010; Cimpian &
Markman, 2011). The purpose of the present studies was to
test whether children are sensitive to implicit information
communicated via the linguistic framing of comparisons.
The literature on comparison processing, dating back to
Tversky’s seminal work in 1977, demonstrates that
utterances that are logically equivalent may not be
psychologically equivalent. One of Tversky’s classic
findings is that adults prefer statements such as, “North
Korea is similar to China,” rather than their reverse—in this
case, “China is similar to North Korea” (Tversky, 1977).

325

Experiment 1

pie / cake, grey / black, tricycle / bicycle, slipper / shoe,
pink / red, crib / bed, and stool / chair. For each of these
pairs of words, at least 80% of adults preferred forward
statements (M = 87.50%). A subset of these items was used
in the present study.

The purpose of Experiment 1 was to begin measuring
children’s sensitivity to the way comparisons are framed.
Specifically, we were interested in whether children prefer
sentences that frame the “referent” as the ground and the
“variant” as the figure when expressing spatial relations
(e.g., “The bike is next to the building”) and similarity (e.g.,
“A zebra is like a horse”). From now on, we will refer to
these sentence types as “forward statements”.
We measured children’s sensitivity by presenting them
with sentences containing non-words (e.g., “A blicket is like
a toma”) and then asking them to identify the referents of
those non-words in a picture (e.g., a picture of a zebra and a
horse). This way, rather than making difficult metalinguistic
judgments, children simply had to point to what they
thought each non-word meant, and from their responses, we
could infer whether they prefer to say, for example, that a
horse is like a zebra or that a zebra is like a horse.
We included a Spatial condition in addition to a Similarity
condition for two reasons. First, it has been shown that
adults have stronger preference for forward statements when
expressing spatial relations than when expressing similarity
(Gleitman et al., 1996, Experiments 2, 3, 5). This is likely
because a spatial relation involves a more literal reference
point than does similarity. If children do not show
sensitivity to linguistic framing for spatial relations, then it
is unlikely that they would show sensitivity to linguistic
framing for similarity. Second, if the same underlying
figure and ground roles drive adults’ preferences for
forward statements for both spatial relations and similarity,
then making judgments about spatial relations before
making judgments about similarity might prime preference
for forward statements when expressing similarity.

Measuring Children’s Sensitivity
Children completed trials measuring their sensitivity to
figure and ground thematic roles in expressions of both
spatial relations and similarity.

Methods
Participants. Participants were 45 children (24 boys) ages
5;0 to 6;11 (M = 5;10).
An additional 3 children
participated but were excluded because they failed to
complete the task. A total of 23 children completed the
Similarity trials first (M = 5;10, 5;0 – 6;10, 12 boys), and a
total of 22 children completed the Spatial trials first (M =
5;10, 5;0 – 6;11, 12 boys). Children were recruited from
local nursery schools and a children’s museum.
Materials. Pictures used for the Similarity condition
contained 6 pairs of images in horizontal alignment that
differed with respect to typicality: zebra / horse, stool /
chair, bush / tree, slipper / shoe, tent / house, and crib / bed.
These pictures were always paired with sentences produced
by an alien containing two non-words (e.g., “A blicket is
like a toma”). Non-words used for the Similarity condition
were koba / rapple, blicket / toma, tibbit / zuni, modi /
feppet, tamble / gazzer, and tupa / fengle.
Pictures used for the Spatial condition included 6 scenes
with two objects that differed with respect to size and
mobility, oriented in different ways: a broom and a closet, a
cup and a tree, a bench and a river, a cat and a house, a
picture and a door, and a bicycle and a building. Again,
these pictures were always paired with sentences containing
two non-words (e.g., “The doppit is across from the
cloopa”). Predicates used were next to, close to, far from,
across from, near, and attached to. Non-words used for the
Spatial condition were gaffa / nopper, doppit / cloopa, timbu
/ gozi, plig / fem, mido / tima, and kubi / fappo.
The order of the images in each trial of each condition
was counterbalanced across both trials (i.e., the “variant”
was on the left side for half of the trials) and children (i.e.,
half of the children saw the “variant” on the left side).

Selection of Items
To identify pairs of items that could be used in the
Similarity condition of the present study, we asked adults on
Mechanical Turk to complete a fill-in-the-blank task that
would reflect preferences for forward statements. We
wanted to identify items that adults strongly prefer to
compare in a particular direction (based on differences in
typicality) and that children would also be familiar with.

Methods
Participants. Participants were 31 adults ages 18 – 66 (M =
35, 13 men) who participated on Mechanical Turk for $0.15.

Procedure. Children completed either the Similarity or the
Spatial trials first, and this was counterbalanced across
children. Two versions of each condition were constructed,
which varied the order in which items were presented. Item
order was also counterbalanced across children.
The experimenter began by introducing the child to Blue,
a puppet who was described as an alien from a different
planet who spoke an alien language. The experimenter told
the child that they were going to view a series of pictures,
and Blue would tell the child what he saw in each picture
using his alien language. The experimenter explained that

Materials. Twenty-four pairs of words judged by the
experimenters to differ in typicality and to be familiar to
children (e.g., wolf / dog, helicopter / airplane) were used.

Results
Adults demonstrated strong preferences for the following
pairs of words: bush / tree, shorts / pants, juice / water, tent /
house, vest / shirt, paws / hands, zebra / horse, tangerine /
orange, helicopter / airplane, skirt / dress, moth / butterfly,

326

she needed the child’s help to figure out what Blue’s words
meant. The experimenter then showed the child the pictures
one at a time, and Blue told the child what he saw (e.g.,
“Look! A blicket is like a toma!” in the Similarity
condition, and, “Look! The kubi is next to the fappo!” in
the Spatial condition), repeating each sentence twice for
each picture.
After Blue stated what he saw, the
experimenter asked the child what he or she thought the
non-words referred to, asking, e.g., “What do you think the
blicket is?” If the child did not state his or her response out
loud, the experimenter encouraged the child to indicate his
or her response by pointing to an image in the picture.

condition (F(1, 43) = 5.15, p = .03), but not in the Similarity
condition (F(1, 43) = .02, p = .89). Again, a possible
explanation is that the Similarity trials are much more
difficult than the Spatial trials, even for the oldest children.
Finally, as can be seen in Figure 1, while responses in the
two conditions did not differ when the Similarity trials were
completed first (t(22) = 0.13, ns.), responses in the two
conditions did differ when the Spatial trials were completed
first, in which case children showed stronger preference for
forward statements on the Spatial trials, t(21) = 2.37, p =
.03. It is possible that completing the subtle and difficult
Similarity trials first confused the children, leading to more
random responding on the Spatial trials.

Results

Discussion

The dependent measure was the proportion of responses that
reflected forward statements (e.g., “A zebra is like a horse”;
“The bench is near the river”). Chance in this task was 50%
for each condition, and we compared performance against
chance with two-tailed t-tests. Overall, children preferred
forward statements reliably above chance in both the
Similarity (M = .61, SE = .03, n = 45, p < .001) and the
Spatial condition (M = .68, SE = .04, n = 45, p < .001).

In Experiment 1, we sought to determine whether children,
like adults, prefer to frame “referents” as grounds and
“variants” as figures when expressing spatial relations and
similarity. All together, our results suggest that children as
young as 5 have an emergent sensitivity to these thematic
roles. Contrary to our prediction, however, we found no
evidence that reasoning about spatial relations first primed
sensitivity to figure and ground roles on Similarity trials.
Importantly, the present task also served as an indirect
measure of the kinds of inferences children make based on
figure-ground linguistic framing. Since children most often
mapped the first non-word in each sentence to the smaller,
less mobile objects in the Spatial condition and to the less
typical objects in the Similarity condition, they must have
been sensitive to the association of these features with the
figure and ground positions in the sentence.
It is worth emphasizing that the difference between, say,
“A zebra is like a horse,” and, “A horse is like a zebra,” or
the difference between, “The bench is near the river,” and,
“The river is near the bench,” is extremely subtle. These
statements are logically equivalent, they represent the same
symmetrical relation, and they differ only in word order.
Nevertheless, children seem to pick up on these subtle
differences and use figure and ground roles to constrain the
way that they frame relations between concepts.

Figure 1: Proportion of children’s responses in each
condition and task order that reflected forward statements.
Preliminary analyses showed no effect of gender on
responses, so gender was not included as a factor in further
analyses. A repeated-measures ANOVA with condition as a
within-subjects factor and task order and age as betweensubjects factors yielded a marginal main effect of condition
(F(1, 40) = 3.43, p = .07) on preference for forward
statements and marginal interactions between age and
condition (F(1, 40) = 3.48, p = .07) and between task order
and condition (F(1, 40) = 3.04, p = .09. No other main
effects or interactions were significant.
Children displayed marginally stronger preference for
forward statements in the Spatial condition than in the
Similarity condition, reflecting findings in the adult
literature. As discussed, reasoning about similarity is harder
and more abstract than reasoning about spatial relations.
Simple linear regressions showed that age significantly
predicted preference for forward statements in the Spatial

Experiment 2
Considering that 5- to 6-year-old children have an emerging
sensitivity to figure and ground roles in sentences, we
wanted to determine whether even younger preschoolers
might show sensitivity to this syntax, and ultimately be able
to use this syntax productively to make inferences about
concepts. In Experiment 2, we presented 4-year-old
children with similar Spatial and Similarity trials.

Methods
Participants. Participants were 40 children ages 3;10 to
4;11 (M = 4;5, 20 boys). An additional 2 children
participated but were excluded because of failure to
complete the task. A total of 20 children participated in the
Spatial condition (M = 4;6, 3;10 – 4;11, 10 boys), and a total
of 20 children participated in the Similarity condition (M =

327

4;4, 3;10 – 4;11, 10 boys). Children were recruited from a
university nursery school and a children’s museum.

figure and ground roles in more specific, ecologically valid
comparisons such as these.

Materials. The items used were identical to those used in
Experiment 1, with the addition of two items per condition.
The images added to the Similarity condition were vest /
shirt and helicopter / airplane, and the non-words were
clomi / freeba and minku / rizza. The images added to the
Spatial condition were shoe / couch and ball / frence, and
the non-words were gerpa / bippit and harple / fova. The
predicates used were against and touching.

Experiment 3
To assess children’s sensitivity to figure and ground
thematic roles in more specific comparisons, we first
identified the kinds of comparisons that children may often
hear in everyday conversation. Google searches suggested
that comparisons among social groups are often specific
(e.g., “Girls are as good at math as boys”) rather than
general (e.g., “Girls are like boys”). They also suggested
that comparisons among groups frequently contain
comparatives that presuppose some kind of skill in addition
to expressing equivalence (e.g., as good as, as well as).
Finally, they identified the modal can as a common part of
these comparisons (e.g., “Girls can be scientists, too”).
We therefore presented children with comparisons that
had these characteristics. In one condition, children heard
comparisons containing predicates that specified the
dimension of the comparison (e.g., “The blicket plays
soccer like the toma”). In a second condition, children
heard comparisons that contained the comparative as well as
(e.g., “The blicket plays soccer as well as the toma”). We
predicted that the comparative as well as would result in
stronger sensitivity to figure and ground roles because it
explicitly introduces the notion of skillfulness and suggests
that the ground is a standard of being skilled. In a third
condition, children heard comparisons containing the modal
can (e.g., “The blicket can play soccer like the toma”).
There appears to be a meaningful difference between the
phrases “girls play soccer” and “girls can play soccer”, for
example. While the generic phrase “girls play soccer”
implies that playing soccer is something that girls routinely
do (Gelman, 2004), the phrase “girls can play soccer” seems
to suggest that girls have some ability to play soccer without
implying that they actually do play. The modal can, in
short, tempers the relation between the subject and the
predicate. So, upon hearing, “Girls can play soccer,” one
may infer that girls actually do not routinely play soccer—if
they did, the speaker should have said, “Girls play
soccer”—and that there are important reasons for this (e.g.,
perhaps girls lack the relevant skills; Horn, 2008). In this
way, the modal can strengthens the asymmetry in skill or
status established by figure-ground framing.
To measure children’s sensitivity to figure and ground
roles in these sentences, we used the same non-word
paradigm used in Experiments 1 and 2, except that the
pictures contained two people rather than two objects. Both
people in the pictures were always dressed in similar attire
associated with a specific skill (e.g., in a soccer uniform),
but one person was always an adult while the other was
always a child. We predicted that in all conditions, the adult
should be identified as the ground and the child should be
identified as the figure, because adults are generally more
skilled and of higher status than children.
To determine the development of this sensitivity, we
tested children ages 4 to 8, and we divided the children into

Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment
1, except for two aspects: 1) children participated in only
one condition, since we found no evidence of priming in
Experiment 1, and 2) the number of trials was increased to 8
to strengthen the sensitivity of the task. Trials were
presented in random order.

Results
As in Experiment 1, the dependent measure was the
proportion of responses that reflected forward statements.
Chance in this task was 50% for each condition, and we
compared performance against chance with two-tailed ttests. Four-year-olds preferred forward statements reliably
above chance in both the Similarity (M = .58, SE = .04, p =
.04) and the Spatial condition (M = .71, SE = .04, p < .001).
Since preliminary analyses showed no effect of gender on
responses, gender was not included as a factor in further
analyses. Four-year-olds showed stronger preference for
forward statements in the Spatial condition (M = .71) than in
the Similarity condition (M = .58), t(38) = 2.51, p = .02.
The 4-year-olds in this experiment were therefore similar
to the older children in Experiment 1 in their sensitivity to
figure and ground thematic roles.

Discussion
Like the older children, 4-year-olds displayed sensitivity to
directional syntax when expressing both spatial relations
and similarity, suggesting that they, too, make inferences
about size, mobility, and typicality based on syntax. Their
weaker preference for forward statements in the Similarity
condition suggests again that sensitivity to figure and
ground thematic roles depends on the predicate used and the
abstractness of the relation between the two items.
It is important to note, however, that the phrase is like in
the Similarity conditions of Experiments 1 and 2 was a
general and unconstrained expression of similarity, and
arguably not a particularly common one. When we compare
two groups or individuals, we tend to specify how they are
similar, stating, for example, that Sarah plays soccer as well
as Molly rather than that Sarah is generally like Molly. This
specification likely makes it easier to identify the
appropriate figure and ground, because the ground should
be the better exemplar of the skill expressed by the
predicate—in this case, soccer-playing. In Experiment 3,
we asked whether children show stronger sensitivity to

328

Results

two groups: younger (ages 4 to 5), who had shown weak
sensitivity to figure and ground roles in the Similarity
conditions of Experiments 1 and 2, and older (ages 6 to 8).

The dependent measure was the proportion of responses that
identified the adult as the ground. Preliminary analyses
showed no effect of gender on responses, so gender was not
included as a factor in further analyses. A two-way
ANOVA with age group and condition as between-subjects
factors yielded a marginal main effect of age group on
responses (F(1, 92) = 3.09, p = .08). Overall, older children
(6 to 8) displayed stronger preference for identifying the
adult as the ground than did younger children (4 to 5). No
other main effects or interactions were significant,
suggesting that the three conditions did not differ in
difficulty, and that older children did not show a selective
advantage for any one or two conditions in particular.
Comparisons against chance, however, create a somewhat
different picture. Chance in this task was 50% for each
condition, and we compared performance against chance
with two-tailed t-tests. Overall, children in the Like
condition were marginally above chance in identifying the
adult as the ground (M = .58, SE = .05, p = .06), and
children in the Can and As well as conditions were
significantly above chance (M = .67, SE = .05, p < .001 in
the Can condition; M = .63, SE = .05, p < .01 in the As well
as condition). When age groups (4 to 5 and 6 to 8) were
analyzed separately, both younger and older children were
above chance in the Can condition (M = .61, SE = .07, p =
.06 for younger children; M = .73, SE = .07, p = .001 for
older children), but only older children were above chance
in the As well as condition (M = .70, SE = .07, p = .004).

Methods
Participants. Participants were 96 children (48 boys) ages
4;0 to 8;8 (M = 6;1). An additional 3 children participated
but were excluded for not completing the task. Children
participated in one of the three conditions that differed in
sentence type, and 16 children ages 4 to 5, and 16 children
ages 6 to 8 participated in each condition (M = 6;1, 4;2 –
8;2, 16 boys in the Like condition; M = 6;0, 4;0 – 8;8, 16
boys in the Can condition; M = 6;1, 4;4 – 8;7, 16 boys in the
As well as condition). Children were recruited from a
university nursery school and a children’s museum.
Materials. Eight pictures were used, each of which
contained an adult and a child dressed in similar attire.
Child and adult pairs were dressed as soccer players, chefs,
cowboys, construction workers, dancers, baseball players,
swimmers, or karate students. Children and adults in each
pair were always of the same gender. Five pairs were male,
and 3 were female. Children and adults in each picture were
arranged diagonally from each other, and their positioning
was counterbalanced across both trials and participants.
In the Like condition, children heard sentences comparing
two non-words along specific dimensions (e.g., “The mido
cooks like the tima”). Predicates used were plays soccer,
cooks, rides horses, builds things, dances, plays baseball,
swims, and does karate. Non-words used were mido / tima,
gubi / fappo, wug / plom, timbu / gozi, doppit / cloopa, gaffa
/ nopper, kolva / bippit, and harple / fova. The Can and As
well as conditions were the same, except that the modal can
was added to each sentence (e.g., “The mido can play soccer
like the tima”) and the word like in each sentence was
replaced with as well as (e.g., “The mido plays soccer as
well as the tima”), respectively.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiments
1 and 2, except the experimenter began by stating that Blue
was going to say something about the people in the pictures.
The experimenter then showed the child the first picture,
and Blue produced a sentence (e.g., “Hey! The mido cooks
like the tima!” in the Like condition, “Hey! The mido cooks
as well as the tima!” in the As well as condition, and, “Hey!
The mido can cook like the tima!” in the Can condition).
Additionally, to ensure that the child understood the task,
the experimenter said to the child after this first trial, “So
now we need to figure out which one is the [mido] and
which one is the [tima].” Blue then repeated his utterance
(e.g., “The mido cooks like the tima!”), and the
experimenter asked the child what he or she thought the
non-words referred to. For the rest of the trials, the
experimenter did not continue say, “So now we need to
figure out which one is the [mido] and which one is the
[tima].” Instead, Blue simply stated each sentence twice for
each picture. Trials were presented in random order.

Figure 2: Proportion of children’s responses in each age
group and condition identifying the adult as the ground.

Discussion
While children ages 6 to 8 were reliably above chance in
identifying the adult as the ground in both the Can and As
well as conditions, children ages 4 to 5 benefited only from
the modal can. Thus, modals such as can and comparatives
that presuppose skill such as as well as may play an
important role in biasing children towards associating the
ground with higher skill and status.
One reason why we did not see stronger sensitivity to
figure and ground roles in younger children could be that

329

the task was too difficult for them. The task required
children to process sentences that were more complex than
those used in Experiments 1 and 2, and this increased
complexity likely made an already difficult task involving
inference and word-referent mappings even harder.
Older children might not have identified the adult as the
ground in the Like condition because the predicates used
were still somewhat vague with respect to skill and status.
Stating that Sarah plays soccer like Molly, for example,
does not entail that Molly is good at soccer; rather, it could
be that Sarah and Molly simply play in some eccentric way.

signal to the child that airplanes are more common and
typical than helicopters—it may also result in the
differential attribution of status and ability to social groups
and lead to social biases. Attempts to counter stereotypes
by saying, “Girls can do science as well as boys,” in short,
may actually suggest to the child that boys set the standard.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the staff and families at the Bing Nursery
School, the Montclaire Child Development Center, and the
Bay Area Discovery Museum.

General Discussion

References

The results of these studies suggest that children are
becoming sensitive to figure and ground roles in sentences
during the preschool years. In Experiments 1 and 2, we
found that children ages 4 to 6 prefer to relate figures to
grounds when expressing both spatial relations and
similarity. While preference for this linguistic framing was
robust for spatial relations, it was weak for similarity,
suggesting that sensitivity to figure and ground roles may
take longer to develop for more abstract relations. Our
results also suggested that children make inferences about
size, mobility, and typicality of referents based on syntactic
position: children identified the larger, less mobile objects
as the grounds in the Spatial conditions and the more typical
objects as the grounds in the Similarity conditions. In
Experiment 3, we found that using comparisons that
contained more specific predicates along with the
comparative as well as (e.g., “The blicket cooks as well as
the toma”) and the modal can (e.g., “The blicket can cook as
well as the toma”) revealed strong sensitivity to figure and
ground thematic roles in children aged 6 to 8, but not
younger children, suggesting that at least by early
elementary school, these linguistic elements strengthen the
association of the ground with higher skill and status.
Considering children’s emerging sensitivity to figure and
ground roles in sentences, it may be important for adults to
carefully consider how they frame comparisons, particularly
when trying to express equivalence among social groups.
Statements such as, “Girls can do science as well as boys,”
for example, may backfire on a number of levels, despite
being well-intentioned and egalitarian on the surface.
Importantly, not only might directional comparisons like
these perpetuate stereotypes and social rankings, but such
comparisons might also themselves introduce contrasts
between category members.
Critically, as previously
mentioned, children are in the process of constructing their
knowledge of the world. If children do not already know
how two category members differ on a particular dimension,
then, directional comparisons may, in fact, plant the idea in
the child’s mind that differences exist. Although this
process of associating certain features with items framed as
either figures or grounds is useful to the extent that it allows
children to learn characteristics of category members
without the speaker having to state them explicitly—saying
that a helicopter is like an airplane, for example, could

Bowdle, B., & Medin, D. (2001). Reference-point reasoning
and comparison point asymmetries. In J. Moore & K.
Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 116121). Earlbaum: Hillsdale, NJ.
Bruckmüller, S., & Abele, A. (2010). Comparison focus in
intergroup comparisons: Who we compare to whom
influences who we see as powerful and agentic.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(10),
1424-1435.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2011). The generic /
nongeneric distinction influences how children interpret
new information about social others. Child Development,
82(2), 471-492.
Fausey, C. & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Subtle linguistic cues
influence perceived blame and financial liability.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(5), 644-650.
Gelman, S. A. (2004). Learning words for kinds: Generic
noun phrases in acquisition. In D. G. Hall & S. R.
Waxman (Eds.), Weaving a lexicon. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gleitman, L., Gleitman, H., Miller, C., & Ostrin, R. (1996).
Similar, and similar concepts, Cognition, 58(3), 321-376.
Harris, P. L., & Koenig, M. (2006). Trust in testimony: How
children learn about science and religion. Child
Development, 77, 505-524.
Horn, L. R. (2008). Implicature. In L. R. Horn & G. Ward
(Eds.), The Handbook of Pragmatics. Oxford, UK:
Blackwell Publishing.
Loftus, E., & Palmer, J. (1974). Reconstruction of
Automobile Destruction: An Example of the Interaction
Between Language and Memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 585-589.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive Reference Points. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 532-547.
Talmy, L. (1975). Figure and Ground in Complex
Sentences. Proceedings of the First Annual Meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society (pp. 419-430). Berkeley, CA:
Berkeley Linguistics Society.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84(4), 327-352.

330

