UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children consider prior knowledge and the cost of information both in learning from and
teaching others

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/28671150

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gweon, Hyowon
Shafto, Patrick
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children consider prior knowledge and the cost of information
both in learning from and teaching others
Hyowon Gweon (hyora@mit.edu)

Patrick Shafto (p.shafto@louisville.edu)

Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT

Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville

Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Abstract

toy (Gweon, Pelton, & Schulz, 2011; Gweon, Pelton,
Konopka, & Schulz, in press). These results suggest that
children’s understanding of informant reliability goes
beyond simple detection of inaccuracy; what matters is
whether the information supports accurate learning.
Children’s expectation that teachers should provide true
and sufficient information is closely related to Grice’s
Maxim of Quantity, which states that a speaker should be as
informative as required in communicative contexts (Grice,
1975; see also Horn, 1984). Recent studies on
conversational pragmatics (Barner, Brooks, & Bale, 2011;
Katsos & Bishop, 2011) and social evaluation in
pedagogical contexts (Gweon et al., 2011; in press) suggest
that by age five, children appropriately detect and evaluate
under-informative informants.
However, the Maxim of Quantity not only states that a
speaker should provide sufficient information; it also states
that a speaker should provide no more than what is required.
One important reason why more information is not always
better is that human learners are good at generalizing. Once
a child learns what a cup is, she no longer needs others to
point out every cup in the world; she can use her existing
knowledge to reliably identify cups. Additionally,
inferences can be drawn not only from the presence of data,
but also from the absence of data. Especially in pedagogical
contexts where the informant selects the data for the learner,
omission can be surprisingly informative in itself. For
instance, when preschoolers are shown just one function of
a toy in pedagogical contexts, they not only learn that
function, but also infer that the toy does not have additional
functions; if there were more functions, the teacher would
have demonstrated them (Bonawitz et al., 2011).
It is in fact beneficial that learners can draw inferences
from sparse data, because information transfer is often
costly. Even just to show how a toy works, an informant
incurs a cost for the time and effort involved in generating
the evidence, and the learner incurs a cost for processing the
evidence. Therefore, we may need to trade the cost of
information for the precision and certainty of our beliefs
about the world. A rational agent sensitive to such costs
should actively resist communicating irrelevant or
unnecessary information even when that information
conveys something true about the world.
Imagine, for example, that someone shows you a novel
toy that has 20 identical-looking buttons. He presses one of
the buttons, and the toy plays a musical note. Given your

Children are sensitive to whether informants provide
sufficient information for accurate learning (Gweon et al.,
2011). Do children think that informants should always
provide as much information as possible? Here we show that
children consider other’s prior knowledge and the cost of
information to decide how much information is appropriate.
We showed children toys that had 20 identical buttons, three
of which played music. Given a choice between an informant
who demonstrated all 20 buttons (exhaustive informant) or
just the three that played music (selective informant), children
preferred the exhaustive informant only when the learner was
naïve about how many buttons worked and could be mislead
by a selective demonstration (Experiment 1). Given an
opportunity to teach themselves, children were more likely to
provide exhaustive information when the learner did not
know how many buttons worked on the toy (Experiment 2).
These results suggest that young children consider others’
prior knowledge to balance the cost and the benefit of
information in learning from others and in teaching others.
Keywords: cognitive development, inductive inference,
pedagogy, social learning, pragmatics

Introduction
Much of what we know about the world comes from other
people. By communicating with others, we easily acquire
information that would be difficult, time-consuming, or
perhaps even impossible to obtain on our own. However,
learning from others is not guaranteed to be effective; we
sometimes encounter people who tell us something false,
fail to mention something important, or burden us with too
much information. Therefore, identifying effective teachers
is an important part of learning.
Previous research shows that even young children are
sensitive to whether a teacher has provided helpful, reliable
information. Children as young as four years of age
distinguish informants who provide true and false
information and preferentially learn from informants who
were previously accurate (Koenig, Clément, & Harris, 2004;
Birch, Vautier, & Bloom, 2008). More recent research
suggests that children are also sensitive to more subtle
forms of misinformation: they evaluate teachers poorly
when they provide true but insufficient information.
Furthermore, if a teacher previously provided insufficient
information (e.g., showing a naïve learner a single function
of a toy when the child knew the toy had many functions)
children themselves engaged in compensatory exploration
when the same teacher showed then one function of a novel

565

prior knowledge about buttons (i.e., buttons usually do
something), and that all button on the toy look identical, you
might guess that the rest of the buttons also play a sound.
Suppose however, unbeknownst to you, these toys always
have only three buttons that play music and the rest are
inert. In order for you to learn this the first time, the
informant might show every single button on the toy: both
those that work and those that don’t. However, once you
learn that these toys have just a few working buttons, you no
longer need to see every single button on a new toy of this
kind; observing three buttons that play music is enough for
you to reliably infer that the remaining 17 buttons don’t do
anything. In fact, demonstrating (and observing) 3 buttons is
substantially easier and quicker than demonstrating and
observing 20 buttons, especially when 17 of them don’t do
anything exciting. Thus it is not only enough but also more
desirable for you as the learner and for the informant. This
example illustrates that the consequence of omitting
information depends on the learner’s prior knowledge. A
good teacher should consider both the learner’s prior
knowledge and the cost of information to decide how much
information to provide.
Do young children simply expect that more information is
always better? Or do children understand that the amount of
“sufficient information” can vary with respect to the
learner’s prior knowledge? In this paper, we ask whether
children rationally weigh the cost and benefits of
information both in their choice of informants (as learners),
and in transmitting information themselves (as teachers).
We hypothesize that children consider learners’ prior
knowledge in deciding how much information is appropriate
both when evaluating informants (Experiment 1), and when
teaching others (Experiment 2).

Bert & Ernie!

Toymaker A & B!

Figure 1. Toys and puppets used in Experiments 1 and 2.

as the inert ones, and the positions of the active buttons
varied across toys; thus there was no way to tell which
buttons would play music without pressing the buttons.
Two puppets were used as Toymaker A and Toymaker B.
The two Toymaker puppets looked identical except that “A”
or “B” was written on their ties. Finally, two more puppets
(Bert and Ernie) were used as learners who wanted to learn
about the toys.
Procedure All participants were tested in a quiet room
inside the museum. The experiment consisted of four
distinct phases: Introduction, Exploration, Observation, &
Choice. The phases appeared in different orders across
conditions.
The Common Ground condition started with the
Introduction phase, in which the experimenter introduced
the Toymakers and the learners (Bert and Ernie) to the
participant. The participants were told that the Toymakers
knew all about the toys because they made these toys, and
that Bert and Ernie were naïve learners who had never seen
the toys before but wanted to learn about them.
Then the Exploration phase began. The experimenter
pointed to the four toys and said, “When you press the
buttons on these toys, they play music. But importantly, not
all the buttons work – only some of them play music. Why
don’t you go ahead and play with this blue toy first?”
During the exploration phase, almost all children pressed all
the buttons on the toy; if a child missed a button, the
experimenter encouraged the child to push it. After the child
tried all the buttons, the experimenter asked the child to tell
Bert, Ernie, and the Toymaker how many buttons played
music on the blue toy. The same Exploration phase was
repeated with the green toy.

Experiment 1
Methods
Subjects
108 children were recruited from a local
children’s museum (mean age(SD) = 6.45 (0.85), range:
5.06 – 7.98, 59 girls) and were randomly assigned to one of
two conditions: Common Ground (N=54, 30 girls) and No
Common Ground conditions (N=54, 29 girls). 13 children
were dropped and replaced due to parental interference
(N=2), experimental error (N=1), or because they were
unable to report the difference between the two Toymakers
(N=10; see Procedure).
Materials
We made four toys from foam board,
electrical push-button switches, and simple circuits that
played musical tunes. Each toy was a long rectangular tube
(32(L) x 3(H) x 3(W) inches, see Figure 1) with 20 pushbutton switches (henceforth buttons) placed along the top
panel. The four toys looked the same except their colors;
each toy was colored in red, green, blue, and yellow,
respectively. Of the 20 identical buttons on each toy, only 3
were connected to small electrical circuits such that pressing
each button played different musical tunes, and the rest of
the buttons were inert. The active buttons looked the same

566

In the Observation phase, the experimenter said,
“Toymaker A and Toymaker B want to show Bert and Ernie
how these toys work, but they don’t speak English; they
only speak Jabberwocky. Bert and Ernie don’t speak
Jabberwocky, so the Toymakers will have to show Bert and
Ernie how the toys work” First, children watched as
Toymaker A showed Bert the yellow toy, and then
Toymaker B showed Ernie the same toy. Importantly, one of
the two Toymakers pressed just three buttons on the toy, all
of which played music (selective evidence). By contrast, the
other Toymaker pressed all the buttons on the toy
sequentially regardless of whether they played music or not
(exhaustive evidence). Half of the children saw Toymaker A
demonstrate selective evidence and Toymaker B
demonstrate exhaustive evidence; the other half saw the
reverse. After both Toymakers finished demonstrating the
yellow toy, children were asked, “What was different about
how Toymaker A showed how the toy works and how
Toymaker B showed how the toy works?” To pass this
question, children had to mention that one pressed all the
buttons and the other did not. The same procedure was
repeated with the red toy. If a child failed to notice the
difference between the two Toymakers even after watching
their demonstrations on the red toy, the child was dropped
from the analysis.
In the Choice phase, children were told, “See the cabinet
over there? It’s full of toys just like these, and you need to
learn about them. Which Toymaker would you rather learn
from: Toymaker A, or Toymaker B?” The experimenter
then held each Toymaker puppet in each hand and kept
them equidistant from the child, and did not look at either
Toymaker until the child made a choice.
In the No Common Ground condition, the order of the
Introduction and Exploration phases were flipped, so that
children explored the blue and green toys first and only then
were introduced to Bert, Ernie, and the Toymakers. This
allowed us to manipulate whether the child, Bert, Ernie, and
the Toymakers shared “common ground” about how many
buttons work on the toys. In the Common Ground condition,
everyone had a strong prior belief that just three buttons
worked on these toys; the Toymakers had made these toys
(and thus knew everything about them), children had
explored some of the toys themselves, and Bert and Ernie
watched the child play with them and were explicitly told
how many buttons worked. Furthermore, the Toymakers
were present during exploration such that they knew what
Bert and Ernie learned. By contrast, in the No Common
Ground condition, Bert and Ernie never saw the child play
with the toys; thus only the child and the Toymakers knew
that just a few buttons worked on these toys.

Exhaustive Toymaker!
Selective Toymaker!

100%#
80%#
60%#

*"
**"

40%#

*"

20%#
0%#

Common%Ground%

No%Common%Ground%

Figure 2. Results from Experiment 1.

learners might infer that all buttons play music from seeing
3 buttons that play music. Therefore, even if it takes a long
time and considerable effort to demonstrate all 20 buttons, it
makes sense for Bert and Ernie to see all of them. By
contrast, in the Common Ground condition, Bert and Ernie
had already watched the participant explore the toys, and
were explicitly told how many buttons worked on the toys
in the presence of the Toymakers. Given that everyone
already knew that just a few buttons worked on each toy,
observing many inert buttons is not only tedious for the
learners but also fails to add much information. Thus we
predicted that children in the Common Ground condition
would be more likely to choose the selective Toymaker than
the children in the Common Ground condition.
As expected, children’s choices of Toymakers differed
across conditions; more children in the Common Ground
condition chose the Toymaker who pressed just the active
buttons than children in the No Common Ground condition
(Common Ground vs. No Common Ground: 65% vs. 38%,
p = 0.01, Fisher’s Exact). Children in the Common Ground
condition chose the selective Toymaker over the exhaustive
Toymaker significantly above chance (p = 0.01, one-sided
binomial) whereas the reverse was true in the No Common
Ground condition (p = 0.05, one-sided binomial).
Although we had no a priori predictions about
developmental change, given our wide age range (5 – 7 yrs)
we looked at the results after median-splitting the groups by
age (N=27 in each condition in each age group; median age:
6.6 in Common Ground, 6.5 in No Common Ground). We
observed similar effects in both the older and younger
groups. In the older group, 70% of children in the Common
Ground condition chose the selective teacher compared to
33% of children in the No Common Ground condition (p =
0.01, Fisher’s Exact). In the younger group, 59% and 44%
of the children chose the selective Toymaker in the
Common Ground and the No Common Ground conditions,
respectively (p = 0.04, Fisher’s Exact).
These results suggest that children don’t simply prefer
informants who provide more information; instead, children
consider what others know and how costly the information
is. When learners already knew that just a few buttons
worked, children preferred the informant who was faster and
more efficient; when learners knew nothing about the toys,

Results & Discussion
Our main measure of interest was whether children chose
the selective informant or the exhaustive informant. In the
No Common Ground condition, observing the selective
evidence might mislead Bert and Ernie who had never seen
the toys; buttons usually make something happen, and the

567

children preferred the informant who went through the
trouble to demonstrate all the buttons. These results were
observed even in the youngest participants, suggesting that
by six years of age, children consider others’ knowledge as
well as cost of information to decide whom to learn from.
One interesting question is whether children also consider
these factors when they themselves are the informants.
There has been some previous work on children’s ability to
teach others (e.g., Ashley & Tomasello, 1996; Strauss, Ziv,
& Stein, 2002). In particular, by age three, children expect a
teacher to teach a certain skill (e.g., how to sing) to those
who lack the skill rather than to those who already possess
the skill (Strauss et al., 2002). If the cognitive capacities that
allow us to be smart learners also make us smart teachers,
five-year-olds might not only be able to consider what
others know, but also flexibly trade-off the costs and
benefits of information transmission. Thus in Experiment 2,
we manipulated the learners’ prior knowledge across
conditions and asked children to demonstrate the toys to the
learners. Because the results from Experiment 1 suggested
that the results hold even in the younger half of the
participants, in Experiment 2 we restricted our age range to
5- and 6-year-olds.

20"

Number of Buttons Pressed!

100"
80"

15"

60"

*

10"

% Children Who Provided!
Exhaustive Evidence!
*

40"
5"
0"

20"
Common"Ground"

No"Common"Ground"

0"

Common"Ground"

No"Common"Ground"

Figure 3. Results from Experiment 2. Left: average number of
buttons shown on the toy. Right: proportion of children who
provided exhaustive evidence.

child, “Elmo doesn’t speak English, he only speaks
Jabberwocky. So instead of telling Elmo how the toy works,
you will have to show Elmo how the toy works.” Then she
placed the green toy between Elmo and the child so that
only the child could see where the magnets were. She then
walked out of the child’s line of sight.

Results & Discussion
In the No Common Ground condition, it made sense to
demonstrate all the buttons because Elmo had no prior
experience with the toys. By contrast, in the Common
Ground condition, it was much less important to show all
the inert buttons; since Elmo had already seen three toys
where only a few buttons worked, showing just the active
buttons would be sufficient for Elmo to infer that these, and
only these, buttons played music. Thus if children are
sensitive both to the learner’s prior knowledge and the costs
of teaching, they should demonstrate more inert buttons in
the No Common Ground condition than Common Ground
condition.
We compared the average number of buttons
demonstrated, as well as the proportion of children who
provided exhaustive evidence across the two conditions. As
predicted, children in the No Common Ground condition
demonstrated more inert buttons than children in the
Common Ground condition (No Common Ground vs.
Common Ground: 13.7 vs. 7.5, t(30) = 2.45, p = 0.02). This
difference was not present in the number of active buttons
taught; all children pressed all three active buttons
regardless of condition (except for one child in the Common
Ground condition who pressed only two). Furthermore, 11
of 16 children in the No Common Ground pressed all 17
inert buttons, while only 5 of 16 children in the Common
Ground condition did so (69% vs. 31%, p = 0.038, onesided Fisher’s Exact). These results suggest that five and
six-year-old children can flexibly decide how much
information to provide to a learner by considering what he
already knows.

Experiment 2
Methods
Subjects 32 children were recruited from a local children’s
museum (mean age (SD) = 5.82 (0.49), range: 5.0 – 6.9, 13
girls) and were randomly assigned to one of two conditions:
Common Ground (N=16, 5 girls) and No Common Ground
(N=16, 8 girls).
Materials The same toys used in Experiment 1 were used.
Magnetic stripes were attached on the side of each toy so
that small magnets could be placed to indicate which
buttons worked. An Elmo puppet was used as the learner.
Procedure In both conditions, children were first given the
green toy to explore. The experimenter provided minimal
guidance during exploration to make sure that children
pressed all buttons on the toy. She also provided magnets
that could attach to the buttons so children could mark and
remember the buttons that played music. In the Common
Ground condition, Elmo was introduced immediately after
the child explored the green toy, and then the child was
allowed to explore the rest of the toys (blue, red, and
yellow) while Elmo sat on the table. The child was asked to
show Elmo how many buttons worked on each toy after she
finished exploring it. In the No Common Ground condition,
Elmo was introduced only after the child was done
exploring all four toys, and the child was asked to tell the
experimenter how many buttons worked on each toy. In
both conditions, the experimenter then asked the children to
show Elmo how the green toy worked. Thus in both
conditions, children had explored all four toys exhaustively,
and Elmo had never seen the green toy; the only difference
across conditions was whether Elmo had observed the child
exploring the three other toys. The experimenter told the

General Discussion
Across two experiments, we showed that children consider
both the cost of information and other’s prior knowledge
both in learning from others and in teaching others. When
selective information could mislead the learners, children

568

not only preferred informants who spent the time and effort
to demonstrate every button, but they also incurred costs
themselves by pressing more buttons to teach the learners.
By contrast, when selective information was enough to
support accurate learning, children preferred the informant
who quickly showed just the buttons that worked, and they
themselves were more likely to press just these buttons to
teach the learners.
These results suggest that five and six-year-old children
understand
principles
that
underlie
cooperative
communication. Grice’s Maxim of Quantity (Grice, 1975;
see also Horn, 1984) posits that an informative utterance is
one that provides no less than, and no more than, what is
required by the listener. Consistent with this, children in our
study understood how much information would be
inferentially sufficient, but not superfluous, given the prior
knowledge of the learner. In the absence of explicit
instruction about the learners’ epistemic states, children
spontaneously considered the shared (and unshared)
experience with others to infer what the learners knew, and
what the teachers knew the learners knew, about the toys.
Thus, consistent with other work on cooperative
communication, children seem to be sensitive to contexts
that support mutual belief and common ground, (Clark,
Schreuder, & Buttrick, 1983) and aware of whether
information is relevant to a learner given his prior
knowledge (Wilson & Sperber, 2005).
Abundant prior work suggests that children have an earlyemerging sensitivity to shared intentionality and mutual
knowledge in simple communicative interactions, such as
gaze-following and pointing behaviors (see Tomasello,
Carpenter, Call, Behne, & Mall, 2005 for a review). More
recent work suggests that preschoolers readily use culturally
shared knowledge (e.g., word label) to resolve referential
ambiguity (Liebal, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2013). Our
results complement this prior work by showing the
sophistication of children’s understanding of cooperative
communication. Going beyond simple heuristics such as
more is always better; they understand that good teachers
are those who provide as much information as necessary for
accurate learning.
Previous studies also suggest that pedagogically
demonstrated evidence can place strong constraints on
children’s inferences; when a teacher shows one of four
functions of a novel toy, they infer that the toy has just one
function (Bonawitz et al., 2011). In light of this finding, one
might wonder why children didn’t simply expect learners to
always infer that just three buttons work after observing the
selective evidence. The key differences in our study were
that the affordances were familiar buttons (rather than nonobvious affordances, as in Bonawitz et al., 2011) and the
demonstrated parts (3 active buttons) and the rest of the
parts (17 inert buttons) were perceptually indistinguishable.
Thus evidence that some buttons worked supported strong
inductive generalization to the rest of the buttons. Indeed,
previous research shows that given pedagogical
demonstration of an object property, children readily

generalize the property to exemplars of the same category
(Butler & Markman, 2012). Collectively these results reveal
the sophistication of children’s inferences from socially
transmitted information; the scope of inductive
generalization depends not just on the face value of
information per se, but also on the learner’s prior knowledge
and the communicative context (see also Gweon,
Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2010). Such seamless orchestration
of cognitive capacities – the ability to generalize from
observable features of evidence, to draw inferences that are
sensitive to how evidence is sampled, sensitivity to the costs
of actions for other agents, and understanding of others’
unobservable mental states – is a significant challenge, and
future studies should further investigate the complex
interplay of these capacities in early childhood.
Children in the current study considered both the costs
and benefits of information. However, understanding
exactly how much information is worth incurring a certain
cost is not a trivial problem. In real-world communicative
contexts, there are many different ways to deliver
information (e.g., goal-directed actions, unintentional
nonverbal cues, language, etc.,) and some can be more
efficient than others. For instance, by using language, we
can compress many actions into just a few words; rather
than pressing all 20 buttons on the toy, we could provide
exhaustive information by pressing just the active buttons
and saying, “and the rest don’t work!” In this case, the cost
difference between the selective and exhaustive information
becomes negligible, and learners should prefer the one who
provides exhaustive information regardless of prior
knowledge. We are currently testing this prediction.
Recent computational work has begun to formally
characterize the value of information and their inferential
consequences in communicative contexts (Frank &
Goodman, 2012; Smith, Goodman, & Frank, 2013; Shafto,
Goodman, & Griffiths, 2014). The current study suggests
that similar analyses can be applied to nonverbal
communication (e.g., demonstrations), and we hope that
these results will inspire and inform future computational
work.
So far we have considered cost as a negative – a learner
incurs the cost of processing information (and a teacher of
transmitting it) for the precision and certainty of the
resulting belief. However, incurring a cost can sometimes
have a positive effect on our social evaluations. We tend to
be more forgiving towards others’ incompetence or
ignorance when we know he tried very, very hard.
Furthermore, the consequence of costs is also affected by
various situational constraints. In our prior work with adults,
we found that human adults do not necessarily penalize
informants for providing more than required when judging
their helpfulness (Shafto, Gweon, Fargen, & Schulz, 2012).
In the current study, we emphasized the potentially tedious
consequences of getting too much information by making
children believe that they were about to learn about many
similar toys. Without such instruction, children might have
been less concerned about costs.

569

Even early in life, we consider not just the external,
objective costs for actions (e.g., the time and effort involved
in pressing buttons) but also subjective costs (e.g., how easy
or difficult it is for someone to press buttons) as well as
situational factors that amplify or decrease the importance
of costs (e.g., whether the agent is in a rush). Future work
on this capacity to understand others’ actions in terms of
their costs and reward will shed more light on how exactly
human learners evaluate the benefits and costs of
information (see Jara-Ettinger, Gweon, Tenenbaum, &
Schulz, in press).
Future work might also consider children’s understanding
of opportunity costs. It takes time and effort to act on the
world, and by performing these actions we also give up the
time and effort that could instead be spent on other actions.
Opportunity costs may be subtle, but they can have a
profound effect on our decisions and plans for future
actions. It would be interesting to know whether children
are sensitive to these kinds of costs as well. However, our
current results provide some of the first steps in showing
children’s ability to evaluate the costs involved in
communicating information. Even early in life, children
rationally balance the costs of actions and their informative
value, in deciding whom to learn from and how to teach
others.

Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 22(2),
245–258.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting
Pragmatic Reasoning in Language Games. Science,
336(6084), 998–998.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics: Vol. 3, Speech
Acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Gweon, H., Pelton, H., & Schulz, L.E. (2011). Adults and
school-aged children accurately evaluate sins of omission
in pedagogical contexts. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 1242-1247.
Gweon, H., Pelton, H., Konopka, J. A., & Schulz, L. E. (in
press). Sins of omission: Children selectively explore
when teachers are under-informative. Cognition.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (2010).
Infants consider both the sample and the sampling process
in inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(20), 9066-9071.
Horn, L. R., & Bayer, S. (1984). Short-circuited
implicature: A negative contribution. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 7(4), 397–414.
Jara-Ettinger, Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz (in press). I’d
do anything for a cookie (but I won’t do that): Children’s
understanding of the costs and rewards underlying
rational action. Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Katsos, N., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2011). Pragmatic
tolerance: Implications for the acquisition of
informativeness and implicature. Cognition, 120(1), 67–
81.
Koenig, M., Clément, F., & Harris, P. (2004). Trust in
Testimony. Psychological Science, 15(10), 694-698.
Liebal, K., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2013). Young
children's
understanding
of
cultural
common
ground. British
Journal
of
Developmental
Psychology, 31(1), 88-96.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N.D., & Griffiths, T.L. (2014). A
rational account of pedagogical reasoning: Teaching by,
and learning from, examples. Cognitive Psychology, 71,
55-89
Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Fargen, C. & Schulz, L. (2012).
Enough is enough: Inductive sufficiency guides learners’
ratings of informant helpfulness. Proceedings of the 34th
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Smith, N. J., Goodman, N., & Frank, M. (2013). Learning
and using language via recursive pragmatic reasoning
about other agents. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Strauss, S., Ziv, M., & Stein, A. (2002). Teaching as a
natural cognition and its relations to preschoolers’
developing theory of mind. Cognitive Development,
17(3), 1473–1487.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll,
H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: the
origins of cultural cognition. The Behavioral and brain
sciences, 28(5), 691–735.

Acknowledgments
We thank Hannah Pelton, Nathaniel Kim, and Veronica Chu
for their help with data collection, and Josh Tenenbaum and
Rebecca Saxe for fun, helpful discussions about this work.
The authors also thank Sidney Strauss for thoughtful
comments on an earlier version of this paper. This work was
supported by an NSF grant DRL-1149116 to P.S. and the
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), funded
by NSF STC awards CCF-1231216.

References
Ashley, J., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Cooperative problemsolving and teaching in preschoolers. Social Development,
7, 143–163.
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the
unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children's
pragmatic inference. Cognition, 118(1), 84–93.
Birch, S. A. J., Vauthier, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2008). Threeand four-year-olds spontaneously use others’ past
performance to guide their learning. Cognition, 107(3),
1018–1034.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D.,
Spelke, E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword
of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration
and discovery. Cognition, 120(3), 322–330.
Butler, L. P., & Markman, E. M. (2012). Preschoolers Use
Intentional and Pedagogical Cues to Guide Inductive
Inferences and Exploration. Child Development, 83(4),
1416–1428.
Clark, H. H., Schreuder, R., & Buttrick, S. (1983). Common
ground at the understanding of demonstrative reference.

570

