UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Model of Generic Skill: Cognitive Processes in Search and Editing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gh4j0k5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Fujita, Akira
Suzuki, Masayuki
Arai, Noriko H.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Model of Generic Skill: Cognitive Processes in Search and Editing
Akira Fujita (a-fujita@nii.ac.jp)
Masayuki Suzuki (m-suzuki@nii.ac.jp)
Noriko H. Arai (arai@nii.ac.jp)
National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2, Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, JAPAN

restrictions imposed on the task. In addition, we investigated
the factors affecting the problem solving skills.

Abstract
In the today’s information society, where information access
is ubiquitous and data is abundantly available, the importance
of memorization is giving way to information gathering skills
(search, filtering, summarization), and this focus should also
be reflected in the educational process. In this study, we focus
on the problem-solving skills of information searching and
editing (search-editing task) and investigate a cognitive model
of the problem-solving process. According to the model in
this study, we examine the cognitive processes of participants
solving an essay problem in an environment where they can
find the required information in a document using an
electronic search interface. In addition, we analyze how the
participants behaved while working on the task, based on
their action-log and level of achievement, and investigate the
factors affecting the problem solving skills of search-editing.

Definition of Search and Editing

Keywords: generic skills; cognitive model; problem-solving;
information retrieval; text editing.

Introduction
This paper elucidates the cognitive processes required in
generic skills for problem-solving by searching required
information and editing the information. We model the
cognitive activity of these skills.
The concept of knowledge acquisition in education is
changing due to the rapid progress of information and
communication technology (ICT). Digital abundance
decreases the significance of simple memorization skills,
while it increases that of skills to access to information
effectively and to use the obtained information accurately
for problem solving. These skills are sometimes referred as
a part of information literacy (AASL/AECT, 1998) and as a
part of key competency (Rychen & Salganik, 2003).
However, the cognitive process behind actual problem
solving has not yet been revealed.
Among the various kinds of complex cognitive activities,
we focus on so called “search-editing activity” in this study.
We analyze the cognitive processes of high school students
solving an essay question in an environment where he/she
can find the required information in a document using an
electronic search interface (search-editing task). While the
participants worked on solving the search-editing tasks, we
recorded their actions in a log (action-log). We analyzed
how the participants behaved while working on the task,
based on their action-log and level of achievement. In the
analysis, we focused on three points: 1) What did they
search? 2) How did they select sentences from a document
page in which they could instantly read all of it? and 3)
Whether they chose the correct sentences and summarized
them sufficiently to answer the question under the

We use the term “search” as the action of finding
information by using the most appropriate search terms to
obtain necessary and sufficient information to accomplish
the goal. Inference is a validating process for search term(s),
in which a person decides that the search term has to be
included in a target document, but does not appear in
documents unrelated to the goal. For example, the following
inferences are validation of a search term: “Function words
in contrast with content words appearing in all documents,
so that it is not unique to the document,” “A proper noun is
easily used as a term to characterize the document more
than a common noun.”
Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer et al., 2007) explains
the appropriate choice of search terms and successful
behavior to what/when/where factoid-type questions
(Ferrucci et al., 2010). Unfortunately, LSA has not yet
explained even the mechanism of textual entailment, which
is true-false recognition of one text fragment following from
another.
The similarly well-known Pirolli’s Information Foraging
Theory (Pirolli, 2007) explains the human behavior of the
information seeking. However, the theory is not intended to
focus on a way of combining the information to construct an
argument.
We use the term “editing” as the action of optimizing a
text in such a way as to maintain the necessary and
sufficient statement towards a theme under fixed set of
restrictions (the limit on the number of characters, keywords
which should be included, the theme, the entailment
conditions etc.).
Van Dijk and Kintsch (1983) explained the process of
summarization in their situation model. In addition,
Takamura and Okumura (2009) modeled the process of
summarization as a maximum coverage problem, which is
an optimization problem, and devised a method to
automatically summarize a text. However, there seems to be
no research that models a series of search and editing
actions.

Cognitive Model
In Figure 1, we propose a model of cognitive processes for
search-editing. In this model, we assume five types of
actions to reflect three types of cognitive activities. In the
phase of “goal setting,” ways of collecting the information

2234

Figure 1: Cognitive model of search-editing task
required to solve a problem and the search terms to be used
are determined. Next, in the “encoding phase,” the searcher
interprets the information that has been obtained. A page
that seems to be appropriate is chosen from the search
results and the information on the chosen page is read in this
phase. Goal setting and encoding are cognitive processes of
the search action. In the “unification” phase, the collected
information is reconfigured under considerable restrictions,
such as a limitation on the number of words. This would be
expressed as an action of extraction of specific information
from the statements read on the page and summarization of
the extracted information. Unification is a cognitive process
of the editing action.
These cognitive activities are supported by metacognitive
regulation. Each cognitive activity is monitored to test if the
activity is inappropriate to achieve the goal. If the activity is
evaluated as inappropriate, it would be controlled. For
example, in the encoding the goal is reset if not enough
information is found to solve the problem. Similarly, in
unification if the edited text is appropriate to solve the
problem, re-unification of information or reset of the goal is
conducted.
These cognitive activities and metacognitive regulations
are thought to be affected by domain knowledge and
metacognitive knowledge. Domain knowledge is knowledge
of the realm concerned with the problem. Flavell (1979)
divided metacognitive knowledge into three categories:
knowledge of person, task and strategy. For example, those
who have rich domain knowledge can easily determine
correct search terms because they can comprehend the
relevance of information. The search path, which prefers a
proper noun rather than a common noun, can be affected by
knowledge of search strategies. Not limited to how to
determine search terms, prior knowledge (domain
knowledge and metacognitive knowledge) affects the
efficiency or accuracy of encoding and the appropriateness
of weighting of information in the unification process.

Methodology of Analyzing Cognitive Process

examine the cognitive process of search-editing tasks.
Specifically, search terms, selected pages, and the answer
text in the editing were recorded within a fixed amount of
time. We regarded the actions recorded on the timeline
(action-log) as explanatory variables of their cognitive
activity. Based on this action-log, we can analyze how and
when a participant works his cognition during the task. The
protocol analysis is well-known as the method to directly
access cognitive processes and to record and analyze them
when participants think aloud expressing their thoughts and
feelings in the process of problem-solving (Ericsson &
Simon, 1993). However, in the search-editing task, it is hard
for participants to think aloud the internal processes
(unconscious activities) of solving a problem that lead to
choosing a page. It is unlikely that the protocol reflected an
actual cognitive process. Accordingly, we conducted an
experiment to validate cognitive processes based on
objective data, such as action-logs, but without protocols.
In previous research, the function of commercially
available search engines such as Google or Yahoo! was used.
These search engines include optional default functions that
consider user preferences or the likelihood of a document
fitting the search terms. For example, the function based on
a vector space model (Salton et al., 1975) or on the Rocchio
method of relevance feedback (Rocchio, 1971) optimizes
the relevance between search terms and search results, and
are applied in general commercial search engine. The users
of these search engines can obtain satisfying search results,
without their thinking to try to efficiently find appropriate
query information. We discuss cognitive search processes
excluding these functions because we make a biased
estimation of the search skill if we provide the participants
with them in the search editing task.
We provided an interface for searching information to
regulate the time taken to find the page that included
specified terms and to regulate the element of luck in
reaching an appropriate page. We provided a document to
participants, which had never been referred by the
participants, to regulate their experience of reading the
document, which affects the efficiency of determining a
search term and page selection.

Method
Participants
The participants were 70 high school students, 36 males and
34 females. The boys were in the same class in one school,
and the girls were together in the same class in another
school. To enter the schools, the students had to pass the
entrance examination, and the both schools are considered
to be among top 7% in the prefecture. All the participants
were motivated to go on to high ranking universities in
Japan.

Materials
We automatically recorded participants’ action of finding
information and optimizing a text with a time code to

We used the expository document as the reading material,
and asked the objective questions. It is known that the

2235

evaluation of essays tend to vary widely when the subjective
or controversial themes are chosen. Among many
expository documents, we picked a high school history
textbook. In Japan, learning materials used in school
education are regulated by the government. Furthermore, the
descriptive problems provided along with the learning
materials have general evaluation criteria. Accordingly, the
task in this experiment aimed for the participants to search
information from the learning materials and edit the text
based on facts.
Problems The study had two problems about Japanese
history. The content of both problems was supervised by
experts in Japanese history education. Both problems had to
be answered within 15 minutes. The content of the problems
(here translated into English) are as follows.
Problem 1 (P1).
In the regency politics of the Heian period, an
important role was played not only by officials, such as
the sesshō/kampaku regent, but also by women such as
Fujiwara no Senshi and Fujiwara no Shōshi. Summarize
the reasons for this in 100–150 characters (in English,
about 50 words).
Problem 2 (P2).
During the Kamakura shogunate, estate stewards were
appointed to manage and control manors and provinces.
Using the three key terms “lord of the manor,”
“contracted estate steward,” and “estate division,”
summarize in 150–200 characters (in English, about 70
words) the nominal purpose of establishing such estate
stewards and how they subsequently changed following
the Jōkyū War.
In P1, if a participant selected a certain page (correct page)
from the document and extracted a certain set of consecutive
sentences (correct part), he/she could completely answer the
problem. In P2, if a participant selected a particular two
pages, extracted certain consecutive statements from each
page, and summarized the statements, he/she could
complete a necessary and sufficient answer within the word
count limitation. In P2, if the participant only used the exact
extracted text from the correct pages as answer text, they
would exceed the word count limitation.
Experts in Japanese history education formulated the
evaluation criteria for each problem based on the course of
study and criteria from the National Center Test for
University Admissions, which is the standardized test of
Japan. The criteria for P1 consisted of two items, and for P2
there were seven items. One point was awarded when a
participant’s answered text implied one of the criteria items.
The answer texts were evaluated by experts who daily
evaluate answer texts for descriptive problems. Each answer
text was evaluated by two different experts. If the two
experts disagreed in their judgment of criteria items in the
answer texts, they came to a mutual agreement for a final
judgment.

Questionnaire Participants completed a questionnaire
before the experiment. The format for all items was a 5point scale.
Perceived Japanese history competence. Six items were
used to assess participants’ perceived competence in
Japanese history (α = .86).
Japanese reading interest. Four items were used to assess
participants’ interest in reading (α = .63).
Perceived reading competence. Three items were used to
assess participants’ perceived reading competence (α = .67).
Frequency of PC use. One item was used to assess
participants’ usage frequency of a PC.
Frequency of search. One item was used to assess the
frequency of searching for information on a PC or cell
phone.

Procedure
The participants were provided with an interface where they
could edit answer sentences after searching the document.
The document referred to by the participants was a
Japanese history textbook (Tokyo-Shoseki, 2010). The
textbook was approved by the Japanese Ministry of
Education and contains only historical facts without the
author’s opinion about the facts. In addition, it consisted of
Japanese historical events and matters from the Old Stone
Age to the contemporary age in about 400 pages. The article
in the textbook consisted of various chapter units (topics)
about specific historical events and social backgrounds. On
an average, each page contained about 180 words, and each
topic was composed of about 400–500 words in English.
We divided the textbook according to topic (topic page) and
provided these topic pages to the participants as the search
resources in the interface.
The interface had the search form and the answer form.
The participants’ actions in this interface while working on
the task were recorded in the action-logs. The participants
could copy and paste statements derived in the search form
to the answer form and edit it in the answer form. We
instructed participants in the usage of the interface through a
demonstration prior to the task.
The partial matching retrieval method in which AND was
used as a search term was available in the interface search
function. At first, the list of the topic pages, which
contained the search terms, was shown in the search form
(topic hit list). The sets of “the topic title,” “the beginning
part (about 50 words) of topic” and “the hyperlink to the
topic page” were displayed as the topic hit list in the order
that the topics appeared in the textbook. For example, if
participants entered the search term “politics” in the search
term form, topic pages that contained the character string
“politics” would be shown in the topic hit list. When AND
was used to search with the words “politics woman,” topic
pages containing both “politics” and “woman” would be
displayed in no particular order in the topic hit list. If there
was no topic page to hit, a message displayed on the search
form to inform the participant. At the head of the topic page,
there were hyperlinks for returning to the page, which was

2236

Table 1: Descriptive statistics and correlation matrix

1. Number of search_P1
2. Number of search_P2
3. Number of correct pages_P2
4. Test score_P1
5. Test score_P2
6. History competence
7. Reading interest
8. Reading competence
9. Frequency_PC
10. Frequency_Search
**
p < .01, * p < .05

Mean
2.93
3.30
1.43
1.39
3.36
1.93
2.83
2.67
2.49
4.47

SD
2.27
1.80
0.53
0.60
1.55
1.09
0.78
0.87
1.42
0.90

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

.29 *
.21
-.21
-.16
.09
.16
-.03
-.12
-.04

.44 **
-.28 *
-.17
.17
.23
.11
.00
-.09

.23
.33 **
.32 **
.18
-.06
-.14
-.14

.22
-.05
.08
-.10
-.04
.05

.05
-.02
-.11
-.22
.14

-.01
.10
.12
-.05

.56 **
.20
.05

.12
.02

.13

being displayed immediately before, and for checking
before and after topics on the time-axis of Japanese history.
“The execution of a search with input of search terms”
and “the transition of topic pages as displayed on the search
form by participants” was recorded in the action-logs with
the time stamp of their occurrence. Moreover, the character
strings in the answer form (answer text) during editing were
recorded for every second.

Results and Discussion
The Tendencies of Search and Editing
We used the numbers of search terms and correct pages
participants chose as behavioral indicators about searching.
We also used test scores as an indicator about editing. For
search terms, we calculated one term if participants searched
information using the same term. In addition, we counted
AND searches as one term.
The descriptive statistics are provided in Table 1. The
average number of search terms in P1 and P2 are 2.93 terms
(SD = 2.27, range: 0–10) and 3.30 terms (SD = 1.80, range:
1–8), respectively. The proportion of the terms that included
the information required to answer the problems was about
70% in each problem. In addition, the proportion of
participants whose first log was searched was about 93%.
Therefore, most participants did not answer the problems
with prior knowledge, but searched information and edited
information to get the right answers. Furthermore, the
number of participants who did not choose the correct page
was only one in P1. In P2, 31 participants chose two correct
pages and 38 participants chose any one of those pages.
These results suggest that almost all participants were
capable of searching for the required information.
With regard to editing, the percentage of criteria
participants met was about 70% in P1 (average score was
1.39, SD = 0.60) and about 48 % in P2 (average score was
3.36, SD = 1.55). Most participants found the correct pages,
but they could not meet nearly half of the criteria. This
indicated that participants had trouble unifying and editing

Table 2: The first action after choosing correct pages
Problem1
Relative
frequency

Frequency
Extraction of
appropriate sentence
Extraction of
inappropriate sentence
Access other pages
Search by another
term
Back to snippet
Editing without
extraction
Failure to choose
correct pages
other

Problem2
Relative
frequency

Frequency

35

50%

35

50%

11

16%

9

13%

5

7%

6

9%

5

7%

4

6%

7

10%

10

14%

5

7%

3

4%

1

1%

2

3%

1

1%

1

1%

information. We selected the first action after choosing the
correct pages to examine as the feature for unifying and
editing (Table 2). Table 2 indicates that only half of the
participants extracted information required to answer the
problems. These results imply that participants were able to
determine appropriate search terms and choose correct
pages, but unable to select, unify, and edit the information
correctly.
However, it is assumed that participants completed the
tasks through a trial and error process. For example,
participants could refer to correct pages repeatedly and
select appropriate information after accessing another page
or searching another term. So we examined cognitive
processes by conducting qualitative analysis on the actionlogs as discussed in the next section.

Qualitative Analysis of Cognitive Process
Table 3 shows the action-log of a participant who searched
for information and chose topic pages many times. He/she
repeated the same action after 10:14 (m:s). The number of
transitions of topic page was over 20 times. Since he/she

2237

used limited search terms (“woman in Heian period” →
“sesshō/kampaku regent AND woman”→“sesshō/kampaku
regent”), he/she seems to have had a certain level of
metacognitive knowledge about searching strategies. We
speculate that a lack of encoding skill caused the repetitive
search and transition of topic pages.
Table 4 shows the action-log of a participant who
performed well. He/she searched information using
appropriate terms and chose correct pages. Although he/she
chose an incorrect page once at 0:37 (m:s), he/she decided
that the page did not contain the required information and
renewed his choice of topic pages. Following this, he/she
selected the correct description and edited appropriately.
Since he/she did not search information using another term
but chose another page in the topic hit list, he/she decided
his goal setting was appropriate. But he/she seemed to lack
a full metacognitive skill because the number of characters
in his answer exceeded the limitation.
Table 5 shows the action-log monitoring a participant who
was not successful in problem solving and modified the
editing process after starting the editing. He/she started to
edit after displaying the correct topic page, but he/she could
not answer “why did woman play an important role.”
He/she monitored this by himself and controlled his
unification. Finally, he/she succeeded in extracting the
description and appropriately editing his description for the
answer to the problem, “Why did woman play an important
role?”

Investigation of Factors Affecting Behavioral
Indicators

Table 3: The example of an action log with much a
higher number of searches and page changes at P1
Time (m:s)
1:04
-3:56

4:43
5:37
6:42
-10:14
…
15:00

Table 4: The example of an action log that performed
exact search and extraction for P2
Time (m:s)
0:25
0:37
1:07
2:18
3:45

We examined the relationship between individual
characteristics assessed by self-reported scales and
behavioral indicators. Correlation coefficients among these
variables are provided in Table 1. We excluded the number
of correct pages in P1, because almost all participants (n =
69) chose that page. The results showed that those who
perceived having a higher competence in Japanese history
chose more correct pages appropriately. On the other hand,
perceived competence had no relation to behavioral
indicators, such as test scores. This result contradicts the
findings of Marsh and Graven (2006). However, the present
study did not assess perceived competence in searching and
editing. Therefore, we could not obtain a significant
relationship between perceived competence and behavioral
indicators.
Of the 70 participants, 43 took a class on Japanese history
in their second year of senior high school, while 37 did not.
Those who did attended two classes per a week. All of them
learned the content regulated by the “Japanese government
guidelines for teaching” and passed regular examinations,
which were conducted six times per a year. Hence, we
examined the influence of academic history on search and
editing abilities. We conducted a Mann–Whitney U test and
the results showed that academic history had a significant
effect on the number of search terms in P2 (z = 2.33, p
< .05). However, academic history had no significant effects

2238

Action
Search:
“Query: woman in Heian period” (not hit)
“Query: regency politics woman” (not hit)
“Query: regency politics” (9 topic hits,
including correct topic)
plus 10 times. All trials had a large number of
hits whether or not the correct topic was hit.
Displaying topic page: incorrect topic
Extraction of description: not implying criteria
item
Displaying topic pages: go and return to the
adjacent 15 topic pages (each page was shown
in 2–3 seconds)
…
Completion: The answer text consisted of 137
characters (about 60 words in English).
No criteria item is implied.

3:50
4:24
5:34
…
14:17

Action
Search: ”Query: estate stewards” (17 topics hit,
including first and second correct topics)
Displaying topic page: incorrect topic
Displaying topic page: first correct topic
Extraction of description: implying 2 criteria
items
Search: ”Query: estate stewards Jōkyū war” (2
topics hit, including second correct topic)
Displaying topic page: incorrect topic
Displaying topic page: second correct topic
Extraction of description: implying 5 criteria
items
…
Completion: The answer text consists of 397
characters (about 160 words in English).
All criteria items are implied.

Table 5: The example of an action log for a controlled
unification process for P1
Time (m:s)
0:38
0:53
2:16
2:16
-4:17
4:59
4:59
-13:25
13:25

Action
Search: ”Query: Fujiwara no Shōshi” (2 topics
hit, including correct topic)
Displaying topic page: correct topic
Extraction of description: not implying criteria
item
Editing answer text
Deletion of all answer text and Extraction of
description: implying 1 criteria item
Editing answer text
Completion: The answer text consisted of 152
characters (about 60 words in English).
1 criteria item are implied.

on the number of correct pages selected or the test scores for
each problem. These findings indicate that learning about
Japanese history in senior high school does not contribute to
search and editing abilities in the present study. In the
traditional Japanese instruction style, teachers tend to
transmit only a mere statement of facts about events and do
not teach the reason and consequences of an event and ask
essay problems in the exam. The senior high school
attended by the participants had very few essay problems in
regular exams. Most students tend to use superficial and rote
learning when they take a close test or a multiple-choice test
(Murayama, 2003). In other words, most students may not
refer to causal connections such as, “What caused the
event?” We speculate that most of the participants who took
Japanese history classes could not acquire domain
knowledge which facilitates metacognitive and cognitive
activities in this instruction style. However, we only used
two problems in the experiment and need to be careful about
drawing conclusions.

General Discussion
In this study, we focused on the problem-solving skills of
searching and editing information as generic skills and
investigated a cognitive model of the problem-solving
process. As a result, we confirmed the validity of the
cognitive model. However, since the skills of metacognitive
activity, metacognitive knowledge, and domain knowledge
were not assessed directly in the present study, we did not
examine the effects of these factors on search and editing.
We would need to assess these factors and perform
additional analyses of complex patterns in the logged data in
order to examine the effects. In addition, the topics for
search and editing tasks were restricted to Japanese history
and the sample size was not very large. Therefore, in future
studies, we would need to address other topics and broaden
our population sample size and variety.
Search skills have been considered to be operational ones,
and they depend mainly on the experience on information
devices (Järvelin & Kekäläinen, 2000; Miura et al., 2006).
However, it does not answer the following deeper question:
why the search skills differ among the students equally
skilled on the given information devices. In future studies,
we need to examine this problem.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our gratitude to Saitama
Prefectural Education Center, Tokyo-Shoseki Co Ltd and
Yoyogi Seminar for their support. Miwa Inuzuka and Ryu
Iida gave us many constructive comments.

References

Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge. MA: MIT Press.
Ferrucci, D.A., Brown, E.W., Chu-Carroll, J., Fan, J.,
Gondek, D., Kalyanpur, A., Lally, A., Murdock, J.W.,
Nyberg, E., Prager, J.M., Schlaefer, N., & Welty, C.A.
(2010). Building watson: An overview of the deepqa
project. AI Magazine, 31(3), 59–79.
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive
monitoring: A new area of cognitive-developmental
inquiry. American Psychologist, 34 (10), 906–911.
Järvelin, K., & Kekäläinen, J. (2000). IR evaluation
methods for retrieving highly relevant documents.
Proceeding SIGIR ‘00 Proceedings of the 23rd annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and
development in information retrieval (pp.41-48).
Landauer, T. K., McNamara, D., Dennis, S., & Kintsch, W.
(Eds.). (2007). Latent semantic analysis. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Marsh, H. W., & Craven, R. (2006). Reciprocal effects of
self-concept and performance from a multidimensional
perspective:
Beyond
seductive
pleasure
and
unidimensional
perspectives.
Perspectives
on
Psychological Science, 1 (2), 133-163.
Miura, A., Fujihara, N., & Yamashita, K. (2006). Retrieving
information on the World Wide Web: Effects of domain
specific knowledge. Journal of AI & Society, 20(2), 221231.
Murayama, K. (2003). Test format and learning strategy use.
Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 51 (1), 1-12.
Pirolli, P. (2007). Information Foraging Theory: Adaptive
Interaction with Information. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Rocchio, J. J. (1971). Relevance Feedback in Information
Retrieval. In the SMART Retrieval System: Experiments in
Automatic Document Processing, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Rychen, D., & Salganik, L. (Eds.). (2003). Key
competencies for a successful life and a well-functioning
society. Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe and Huber.
Salton, G., Wong, A., & Yang, C. S. (1975). A vector space
model for automatic indexing. Communications of the
ACM, 18(11), 613-620.
Takamura, H., & Okumura, M. (2009). Text summarization
model based on maximum coverage problem and its
variant, EACL’09 Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (pp.781-789).
Tokyo-Shoseki Co., Ltd. (2010). Nihonshi-B. Tokyo, Japan:
Tokyo-Shoseki.
Van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of
discourse comprehension. New York: Academic Press.

American Association of School Librarians and Association
for Educational Communications and Technology. (1998).
Information Literacy Standards for Student Learning.
Chicago: American Library Association.

2239

