UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Biology: Surprising Model Organisms for Cognitive Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z82f8s6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Bechtel, William

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Biology: Surprising Model Organisms for Cognitive Science
William Bechtel (bechtel@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy and Center for Chronobiology, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA, 92093-0119 USA
Abstract

per, I provide examples of what has been learned about cognitive mechanisms from bacteria and invertebrates. There is
not space to examine research on plants here, but for illuminating discussion illustrating the potential of plant research
to inform cognitive science, see Garzon and Keijzer (2011).

Cognitive biology refers to investigations of cognitive processes in a wide range of model organisms from bacteria to
plants and animals. Although this research has generally been
beyond the scope of mainstream cognitive science, I argue
that cognitive science would benefit from integrating investigations into model organisms and focus on what can be
learned from surprising model organisms—bacteria and invertebrates. Evolution is a highly conserved process, and the
mechanisms developed in our common ancestors with these
species provide the foundation for many of our cognitive activities. Since these organisms lack some of the complications
that have evolved in us, research on them can help reveal key
features of our cognitive mechanisms.

The Advantages of Using Model Organisms
There are a number of reasons biologists choose to investigate model organisms (Ankeny & Leonelli, 2011). For most
model organisms there are well developed breeding programs that have generated stable lineages with greatly reduced genetic variability, enabling researchers to perform
replicable investigations on the mechanisms that generate
the phenomenon of interest. Moreover, the research community that has coalesced around model organisms has often developed and calibrated a host of investigative tools
that researchers can employ. But the reason that is most
relevant to the investigation of cognitive traits is that mechanisms in model organisms typically are simpler variants of
ones found in the target organisms, allowing researchers to
discover the basic components of the mechanism. Evolution
often proceeds through duplication of genes and the subsequent specialization of the duplicates. This can result in a
more complex mechanism in subsequent organisms in
which it is difficult to make interventions that reveal the key
components of the mechanism underlying the phenomena.
While the advantages of using model organisms may
seem most obvious in the study of the genes and neural systems, my focus is on how it can contribute to understanding
the mechanisms of cognition. The investigation of genes
and neural circuits can itself contribute to understanding
cognitive mechanisms, as these serve as their components.
In understanding cognition, though, the focus is on the information processing operations these components perform.
And in fact neurobiologists studying individual cells and
small circuits are increasingly employing cognitive vocabulary to describe these information-processing mechanisms.
In turning to model organisms to study cognition, there
are two divergent strategies—focus on organisms phylogenetically closest to humans or on the simplest organisms in
which versions or components of the cognitive operations
can be found. Each has its advantages. Close phylogenetic
neighbors (primates or mammals) perform cognitive activities that are in many cases very similar to those of humans,
reducing the number of modifications or additions of operations needed to realize the human cognitive capacities. Investigating organisms more reflective of our more ancient
ancestors, on the other hand, provides insights into the basic
cognitive operations that evolution made available for building other cognitive systems.

Keywords: Cognitive biology; model organisms; perception;
decision making; memory and learning; sleep

Introduction
Biologists routinely conduct research on other species chosen to facilitate particularly productive investigation of the
mechanisms operative in the species of primary interest,
often humans. Often research focuses on organisms for
which the last common ancestor occurred very early in phylogeny but that nonetheless exhibit a version of the phenomenon of interest. In contrast, most research in mainstream cognitive science investigates the target organism,
humans. Comparative psychologists have extended cognitive approaches to other organisms, especially primates and
other vertebrates. While there are important exceptions, this
research has tended to draw upon cognitive science to inform studies of these other organisms, and has had limited
impact on cognitive science itself. I follow the lead of Lyon
(2006) in highlighting the potential for influence in the other
direction—invoking research on other organisms to inform
cognitive science. Instead of focusing on our phylogenetically closer relatives, as valuable as that is, I turn to organisms for which the last common ancestor is much more ancient—bacteria and invertebrates. My contention is that
cognitive science has much to gain by following the lead of
biologists in incorporating research on cognitive processes
in our most distant relatives into mainstream research and
theorizing. In particular, understanding the mechanisms
from which our more elaborate cognitive mechanisms
evolved can provide distinctive insight into the core principles employed in the mechanisms operative in us.
In the next section I explore what cognitive science can
hope to gain from incorporating research on model organisms, emphasizing that the goal is not to show that the models exhibit exactly the same cognitive traits as the targets,
but that they are informative about the mechanisms operative in the target system. Then, in the remainder of the pa-

158

Perceiving and Acting

One concern about construing more distantly related organisms, including bacteria and invertebrates, as models for
cognitive science is that the activities in which these organisms engage may not be properly construed as cognitive.
One can debate the scope of the term, but my strategy is to
focus on activities, such as perceiving and acting, decisionmaking, learning and memory, which fall within the domain
of cognitive science when performed by humans. The human version of these activities is clearly much more complex, but the goal is to understand the basic principles employed in the responsible mechanisms, and a focus on simpler mechanisms employed in species reflective of early
ancestors can provide a basis for understanding the more
complex mechanisms underlying human activities regarded
as cognitive.
Underlying model organism research in general, and the
extension to cognitive science, is the recognition that evolution is a process of descent with modification such that the
most sophisticated mechanisms result from modification of
simpler designs. Although no living organism is the predecessor of organisms in other extant species, if two extant
species share a common ancestry (hence, are homologous)
and one has undergone less modification in its descent, then
by studying it researchers can hope to have access to a less
complicated version of the responsible mechanism in the
more heavily modified species.
There is compelling evidence that many of the mechanisms in invertebrates on which I focus are homologous
either at the anatomical level or the molecular level to those
in humans. The case is less clear with bacteria, which lack a
nervous system, often viewed as the physical foundation for
any cognitive activities. In some cases the proteins and
chemical reactions they deploy in regulating their behavior
have been conserved, but even when that is not the case, it is
becoming clear that bacteria need to engage in many cognitive activities to regulate their behavior. The mechanisms
that underlie these activities provide insight into the sorts of
information-processing operations all organisms must perform in order to survive. In these cases, descent with modification may have preserved the basic capacities of the cognitive mechanisms while substituting different components.
Insofar as the demands on the mechanism are related, examination of the models can still be informative.

I begin with perceiving and acting, which are arguably the
prerequisite capacities for all other (“higher”) cognitive activities. These were the abilities Aristotle thought distinguished animals from plants (De Anima I.5) and were long
thought to be easy to explain. Reasoning, the distinctively
human capacity for Aristotle, was what was thought to pose
the explanatory challenge. However, as research in cognitive science has proceeded, perceiving and moving have
turned out to be among the more challenging capacities to
explain, in part because sensory processing already integrates a great deal of information and in part because of the
reciprocity of perception and action. These complexities,
moreover, are already exhibited in bacteria. Different species of bacteria employ different sensors and different
modes of locomotion, but in all cases information about
stimuli and internal conditions is used to control the mode
of locomotion as well as other activities.
Escherichia coli, rod-shaped bacteria approximately 2 µm
in length, employ chemical sensors to gather information
about a variety of chemicals in their environment and a single locomotor mechanism, a flagellum, to move through
their environment. The flagellum consists of four filaments
that extend several body lengths into the external medium
and a relatively elaborate motor that can turn either clockwise or counterclockwise at speeds of approximately 100
Hz (Berg, 2004). When all four motors spin counterclockwise the filaments form a bundle that propels the bacteria
forward. When one or more motors convert to clockwise
movement, the corresponding filament leaves the bundle,
resulting in the bacterium tumbling. Typically E. coli alternate between forward motion and tumbling, but activity at
the sensors alters the frequency of performing the two actions. E. coli has five transmembrane methylated chemotaxis proteins (MCPs) located at the poles that serve as sensors.
These proteins can each bind to different chemicals in the
environment and when they do so the part of the protein on
the cytoplasmic side phosphorylates or dephosphorylates the
sensor kinase CheA. CheA in turn phosphorylates the response regulator CheY, which diffuses through the cytoplasm; if it reaches the switch on the flagellum motor it
binds, causing the motor to rotate counterclockwise and the
bacterium to move forward (Bourret & Stock, 2002).
What I have sketched so far may seem to be a fairly simple feedforward mechanism or “reflex”, but there are at least
three features of this mechanism that make it a more sophisticated information-processing mechanism. First, there is a
slowly functioning feedback loop from CheA that serves to
demethylate the MCPs, reducing their responsiveness. This
has the effect that the mechanism only continues to send a
signal to the motor when the stimulus is increasing (e.g., the
bacterium is moving up a chemical gradient). As a result of
non-linearities in the CheA response, the system responds
not to the absolute value of the stimulus but to the ratio of
the current stimulus to that received in the recent past (Yi,
Andrews, & Iglesias, 2007), implementing a form of the
Weber-Fechner psychophysical law (an effect still in search

Model Organisms for Cognitive Capacities
In this section I present results of research on mechanisms
in bacteria and invertebrates that perform versions of information-processing activities that count as cognitive in humans. With each capacity my goal is not only to show that
the model organisms exhibit a version of the capacity, but
also to illustrate what has been learned from research on the
model organisms to illustrate how such organisms can serve
as informative model organisms for cognitive science. A
common feature of many of these exemplars is that they
reveal mechanisms that operate in ways different than cognitive scientists have proposed when trying to hypothesize
how human cognition must work.

159

of a mechanism in human psychophysics). Second, the response regulator CheY integrates inputs from all five types
of MCPs (complicated by the fact that there are different
numbers of individual MCPs of each type and that each of
the 10,000 MCPs can be in one of 16 methylation states).
Thus, CheY release is not a dumb “reflex” triggered from
outside but depends on state of the information-processing
mechanism. Third, although CheY is the only response regulator for a motor response, there are other response regulators regulating gene expression and metabolic activities. As
Yamamoto, Hirao, Oshima et al. (2005) demonstrated, there
is a good deal of crosstalk whereby outputs of individual
sensory kinases affect other response regulators. Hence, the
pathway from stimulation to locomotion is not insulated
from activities elsewhere in the cell (nor vice versa).
The perception-action system of bacteria is, altogether, far
from a simple feedforward system but involves a complex,
integrated network. The ability of bacteria to process information so as to register changing levels of stimuli over
many order of magnitude, to integrate different sources of
information, and to use feedback from other mechanisms to
modulate the response of the sensors makes it clear why
bacterial researchers have adopted a cognitive framework
(Ben Jacob, Shapira, & Tauber, 2006; Shapiro, 2007). The
success of researchers in deciphering that mechanism,
though, makes it a useful exemplar for researchers studying
more complex mechanisms in multi-celled organisms.
In bacteria the information-processing operations are often diffused throughout the cell, making functional localization difficult. An advantage in turning to animals with nervous systems to study information processing is that distinct
neurons perform different information processing operations, allowing researchers to more readily characterize these operations. Here again there are more model organisms
available than cognitive scientists have taken advantage of.
Olfaction is the animal variant of chemoreception, and fruit
flies have provided a productive model in which to investigate it. Processing of olfactory stimuli begins with specialized olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) that express protein
receptors. The relatively small number of these receptors
(62) in fruit flies makes it possible to identify the neurons in
which they are expressed, the ligands they bind, and the
coding system in which individual receptors contribute to
the detection of many odors (Hallem & Carlson, 2006). The
ORNs expressing a given receptor all converge on a small
number of glomeruli where they have synapses with excitatory and inhibitory interneurons and neurons projecting to
higher processing centers. While the gross anatomy of the
brain is very different in flies and mammals, much of the
cognitive architecture is conserved.
By investigating the fly’s innate attraction to cider vinegar, Semmelhack and Wang (2009) were able to decipher
the roles of individual glomeruli in generating behavioral
responses. They found the coding for vinegar to be sparse—
only 6 glomeruli responded. By selectively silencing the
neurons innervating a given glomeruli, they showed that
only two (DM1 and VA2), when silenced, affected the out-

put response. Semmelhack and Wang were particularly interested in understanding why increasing concentrations of
vinegar (as well as other odorants) results in reduced attraction or even repulsion. Their discovery of another glomeruli,
DM5, that became activated with higher concentrations revealed a mechanism whereby one glomerulus opposes the
signal from the other. Subsequently Root, Ko, Jafari et al.
(2011) have shown that the outputs of sensory neurons
reaching specific glomeruli are modulated by internal conditions such as starvation, which thus has the effect of altering
the odor map. Other researchers have shown inter-glomeruli
circuitry that provides gain control, quickly enhancing responses to weak inputs but preventing responses from saturating (Yaksi & Wilson, 2010).
Findings such as these reveal that sensory processing in
bacteria and fruit flies is not simply stimulus driven but involves complex filtering and integration of information.
These early-evolved mechanisms for processing sensory
information in complex and sensitive ways were resources
for evolution in developing the mechanisms that figure in
our own perceptual processing and studying them can provide insight into the more complex mechanisms in us.

Decision making
In all organisms, perceptual and motor processes must be
coordinated to enable decisions as to the actions to be performed given specific internal conditions and stimulation.
Bacteria allow us to decipher the mechanism our earliest
ancestors evolved to cope with the demands of their environment. Kuchina, Espinar, Çağatay et al. (2011) studied the
decision process in Bacillus subtilis, a bacterial species in
which, under stress conditions, some organisms form spores
and others enter competency and take up extracellular DNA.
Cognitive scientists often assume such decision-making will
employ an interactive network with inhibitory connections
implementing a winner-take-all competition between the
regulators for the two activities. Kuchina et al., however,
revealed that in B. subtilis decisions result from a molecular
race in which the programs for the two behaviors proceed
independently and whichever reaches the decision point first
determines the behavior.
Briggman, Abarbanel, and Kristan’s (2005) research on
the medicinal leech likewise pointed to an alternative to
winner-take-all computation in animals. Leeches need to
make choices between various possible actions such as
swimming, crawling, or feeding. The swimming-crawling
decision is made in the 21 segmental ganglia in the nerve
cord and these can be exposed so as to record selectively
from the approximately 400 neurons in each ganglion.
Briggman et al. examined responses to stimuli equally likely
to elicit either swimming or crawling by recording from 144
neurons in a single ganglion. A plausible assumption is that
the neurons that first exhibit the activity pattern predictive
of one behavior or the other would be the decision neurons.
If that is the case, hyperpolarizing or depolarizing these neurons should bias the decisions. But none of the neurons that

160

first exhibit differential responses could be biased, indicating none of them were responsible for the decision.
Turning to analytic techniques such as principal component analysis and linear discrimination, Briggman et al.
found that before the decision could be detected in any individual neurons that first show differential responses, it is
reflected in the collective activity of a different subpopulation of neurons. Among this population, they found
one neuron, 208, whose manipulation could bias the production of swimming versus crawling behavior, leading researchers to conclude “this neuron plays a role in decision
making.” What is important is that 208 is not one of the
neurons whose individual activity corresponded to the decision but rather a member of a population whose joint activity first revealed the decision, leading the researchers to interpret the behavior in terms of attractor dynamics. Like the
research in Bacillus, the leech studies reveal an alternative
to winner-take all competition that might be conserved in
higher organisms including humans.

tween blocks) with the same number of taps failed to generate long-term memory (Ebrahimi & Rankin, 2007). By noting that worms with mutations in a glutamate receptor did
not show long-term memory and that massed training resulted in a decrease in the receptor protein, the researchers
localized the responsible mechanism to protein synthesis
within the cell. As glutamate receptors are also implicated in
mammalian long-term memory, this mechanism seems to be
conserved and may explain the importance of spaced training in developing human long-term memories. Worms also
exhibit another feature of human long-term memory—better
recall when tested in the same conditions as learning occurred (Rankin, 2000). Determining the responsible mechanism in worms could help in identifying the mechanism
responsible for the phenomenon in humans.
Using fruit flies as model organisms provides researchers
a rich set of mutants whose specific impairments facilitate
differentiating the mechanisms involved in the encoding,
storage, and retrieval of long-term memories. In Dunce and
rutabaga, two of the first memory mutants to be identified,
the mutation affected the conserved cAMP pathway that had
been implicated in Kandel’s aplysia research. Finding
cAMP expressed at elevated levels in Kenyon cells in mushroom bodies (MB), paired neuropils sometimes regarded as
analogous to the vertebrate hypothalamus, initially pointed
to these cells as the locus of memory storage and consolidation (Tully & Quinn, 1985). Subsequent research has led to
revision of this model by revealing a wealth of additional
mechanisms whose operations are involved in previously
unrecognized phases in the development of long-lasting
memories (Margulies, Tully, & Dubnau, 2005). One phase
involves what has been called anesthesia resistant memory
(ARM); unlike long-term memory (LTM), ARM is not affected by blocking protein synthesis or genetic manipulations of CREB in the cAMP mechanism. Whereas LTM
requires spaced training over several hours, ARM appears
quickly and is strengthened by subsequent training, whether
massed or spaced. ARM was revealed by its absence in a
different mutant, radish, which implicated a deficit in protein kinase C signaling as responsible (Folkers, Waddell, &
Quinn, 2006). Research employing classical conditioning
has revealed yet other phases in memory acquisition. Another mutant, amnesiac, has revealed amnesiac-dependent,
anesthesia sensitive, middle-term memory (MTM). The time
frame for MTM corresponds to the time frame in which flies
can learn to reverse the stimulus associated with the aversive stimulus (Margulies et al., 2005). Fly research is here
proving useful in expanding the taxonomy of types of longterm memory beyond that developed in the human literature.
Other research on flies has revealed the importance of
looking beyond the initially identified locus in Kenyon
cells. Silencing neurotransmission from Kenyon cells impairs memory retrieval but not acquisition (Dubnau, Grady,
Kitamoto et al., 2001). On the other hand, silencing projection neurons from the Antennal Lobes (the locus of the glomeruli involved in odor perception) to the mushroom bodies
and to the lateral horn, blocks acquisition, implicating them

Learning and Memory
Part of what makes investigating information processing
mechanisms challenging is that the mechanisms themselves
change as a result of learning and memory. One objective of
memory research is to determine what changes. As a result
of their relative simplicity, invertebrates have proven a valuable model in which to seek specific loci of change. Although much of the research has focused on relatively simple
learning tasks, such as habituation or classical conditioning,
invertebrate learning exhibits many of the features that researchers have sought to explain in humans, such as the
spacing effect identified by Ebbinghaus and the context sensitivity of memory and research on invertebrates is providing clues as to the mechanisms that can explain these features.
Kandel’s (1976) pioneering research on habituation of the
gill withdraw response in Aplysia revealed the signaling
pathway involving cAMP, PKA, and CREB is involved in
synaptic changes. This pathway is conserved across species.
However, an even simpler organism, the nematode worm C.
elegans, provides a basis for identifying the neural circuits
in which changes occur. White, Southgate, Thomson et al.
(1986) showed that each nematode contains 302 neurons
and produced detailed maps of the chemical and gap junction connections between them. This provides a reference
point for identifying the cells that are changed in learning. A
productive line of research has taken advantage of the fact
that when the petri dish in which worms are swimming is
tapped, worms swim backwards for a brief distance, but
quickly habituate if the tapping continues. Wicks and
Rankin (1995) identified a circuit of five mechanosensory
neurons and four pairs of interneurons that generated the
behavior.
What is perhaps most interesting is that worms exhibit
long-term memory (extending up to five days in worms that
only live 15-20 days) for tap habituation, but only when the
training is spaced. Massed training (lacking intervals be-

161

in the encoding process. This differentiation of memory
mechanisms provides a probative model to investigate in
vertebrates, where it may well be conserved and expanded
upon, although testing this remains difficult. In some cases,
though, fly research has already helped elucidate the mechanism response for known human disorders. For example, a
gene whose expression is altered in Down’s Syndrome,
Down’s Syndrome Critical Region 1, is a homolog of the fly
gene, nebula. Both under expression and overexpression of
nebula in mushroom bodies impairs LTM (Chang, Shi, &
Min, 2003).

Second, research on fruit flies has helped elucidate the
connection between circadian rhythms and sleep. Much of
our understanding of the mechanisms underlying circadian
rhythms in animals was developed through investigations of
flies and then identifying conserved and altered components
in the mammalian mechanism (Bechtel, 2009). In relating
the core circadian mechanism to sleep, mammalian research
had proposed that transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α), an
output from the circadian clock, regulates sleep by binding
to an ErbB receptor. But demonstrating this was difficult as
there are four members of the ErbB family in mammals.
Since there is only one ErbB in flies, Foltenyi, Andretic,
Newport et al. (2007) were able to demonstrate its role in
regulating sleep and especially sleep consolidation, thereby
confirming the role of TGF-α as part of the informationprocessing link between the circadian clock and sleep.
Third, research on flies may provide insight into how
sleep affects memory encoding. Joiner, Crocker, White et al.
(2006) localized the mechanisms controlling sleep in flies to
the MB, which we noted above were also implicated in
learning and memory. Not only is the locus shared, but
Hendricks, Williams, Panckeri et al. (2001) demonstrated a
role of cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway in sleep homeostasis
(increased cAMP associated with increased quiescence and
increased CREB bound during restoration from sleep deprivation) as well as in the generation of circadian rhythms.
This is the same pathway discussed earlier as involved in
memory encoding and these results suggest a possible link
between sleep homeostasis and the neural reorganization
involved in the transition from intermediate to long-term
memories (Bushey & Cirelli, 2011). Although these results
are all at the molecular level, the linkages at this level point
to how sleep affects information-processing mechanisms.

Sleep
As a final example, I turn to a phenomenon that has not
been much discussed in cognitive science to date, but that
has significant import for cognition—sleep. Sleep has long
been a puzzling phenomenon. Our abilities to perform cognitive tasks, including taking actions to avoid danger, are
interrupted during sleep, but appropriate sleep episodes are
required to perform wakeful cognitive activities effectively
and to consolidate memories. Finding appropriate model
organisms in which to investigate sleep can facilitate acquiring an understanding both of the function of sleep and the
mechanisms that govern it.
Electrophysiological measures such as EEG have become
the standard measures of human sleep. However, Hendricks,
Finn, Panckeri et al. (2000) and Shaw, Cirelli, Greenspan et
al. (2000) showed that fruit flies satisfy the very behavioral
measures that were used to validate EEG measures of sleep:
rapidly reversible sustained periods of quiescence in a preferred location with stereotyped posture while exhibiting
increased arousal threshold. They also demonstrated that
flies exhibit other characteristics of sleep found in mammals, including responses to caffeine and changes with aging. Moreover, in both flies and mammals, sleep is governed
by two mechanisms: a homeostatic mechanism that registers
sleep need and the circadian clock that regulates timing of
sleep. As a result, flies like mammals will increase their
sleep in response to periods of sleep deprivation but consolidate their sleep at night.
There are three major motivations to investigate sleep in
flies. First, such research may help elucidate the underlying
mechanisms. For example, having identified a mutant fly,
minisleep, that sleeps only 4-5 hours, Cirelli, Bushey, Hill et
al. (2005) localized the deficit in Shaker (a gene first identified by the leg shaking it induced in mutants). Shaker encodes for a part of a K+ channel involved in repolarizing
membranes after action potentials. Cirelli et al. suggested
that this process “may be close to the core mechanism” of
sleep (p. 1090). Koh, Joiner, Wu et al. (2008) provided further support for this claim when they discovered the sleep
promoting factor SLEEPLESS, which enhanced K+ channel
activity. Wu, Joiner, Dean et al. (2010) showed that it acts
by forming a complex with Shaker. These investigations
point to modulation of K+ channels as a likely conserved
factor in controlling sleep.

Conclusions
I have only been able to introduce a small sample of the
investigations of cognitive abilities in bacteria and invertebrates. Researchers have pursued inquiries both into a much
broader range of species (for additional examples, see North
& Greenspan, 2007) and additional cognitive activities, including those involved in distributed cognition (exhibited in
both bacteria and insects). The examples provided, though,
suggest the value of conducting cognitive research on model
organisms—such research can help in identifying the information processing operations involved in our own more
complex cognitive abilities. The key to the strategy is to
identify simpler variants of the responsible mechanism in
which the effects of manipulations of components of the
mechanism can be more easily identified. The insights
gained can help human researchers identify the conserved or
analogous operations operative in the cognitive mechanisms
found in humans.

References
Ankeny, R. A., & Leonelli, S. (2011). What’s so special about
model organisms? Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part A, 42, 313-323.

162

Bechtel, W. (2009). Generalization and discovery by assuming
conserved mechanisms: Cross species research on circadian
oscillators. Philosophy of Science, 76, 762-773.
Ben Jacob, E., Shapira, Y., & Tauber, A. I. (2006). Seeking the
foundations of cognition in bacteria: From Schrodinger's
negative entropy to latent information. Physica A-Statistical
Mechanics and Its Applications, 359, 495-524.
Berg, H. C. (2004). E. coli in motion. New York: Springer.
Bourret, R. B., & Stock, A. M. (2002). Molecular information
processing: lessons from bacterial chemotaxis. The Journal
of Biological Chemistry, 277, 9625-9628.
Briggman, K. L., Abarbanel, H. D. I., & Kristan, W. B. (2005).
Optical imaging of neuronal populations during decisionmaking. Science, 307, 896-901.
Bushey, D., & Cirelli, C. (2011). From genetics to structure to
function: exploring sleep in Drosophila. International
Review of Neurobiology, 99, 213-244.
Chang, K. T., Shi, Y. J., & Min, K. T. (2003). The Drosophila
homolog of Down's syndrome critical region 1 gene
regulates learning: implications for mental retardation. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 100, 15794-15799.
Cirelli, C., Bushey, D., Hill, S., Huber, R., Kreber, R.,
Ganetzky, B., & Tononi, G. (2005). Reduced sleep in
Drosophila Shaker mutants. Nature, 434, 1087-1092.
Dubnau, J., Grady, L., Kitamoto, T., & Tully, T. (2001).
Disruption of neurotransmission in Drosophila mushroom
body blocks retrieval but not acquisition of memory.
Nature, 411, 476-480.
Ebrahimi, C. M., & Rankin, C. H. (2007). Early patterned
stimulation leads to changes in adult behavior and gene
expression in C. elegans. Genes, Brain and Behavior, 6,
517-528.
Folkers, E., Waddell, S., & Quinn, W. G. (2006). The
Drosophila radish gene encodes a protein required for
anesthesia-resistant memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A,
103, 17496-17500.
Foltenyi, K., Andretic, R., Newport, J. W., & Greenspan, R. J.
(2007). Neurohormonal and neuromodulatory control of
sleep in Drosophila. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology, 72, 565-571.
Garzon, P. C., & Keijzer, F. (2011). Plants: Adaptive behavior,
root-brains, and minimal cognition. Adaptive Behavior, 19,
155-171.
Hallem, E. A., & Carlson, J. R. (2006). Coding of odors by a
receptor repertoire. Cell, 125, 143-160.
Hendricks, J. C., Finn, S. M., Panckeri, K. A., Chavkin, J.,
Williams, J. A., Sehgal, A., & Pack, A. I. (2000). Rest in
Drosophila Is a Sleep-like State. Neuron, 25, 129-138.
Hendricks, J. C., Williams, J. A., Panckeri, K., Kirk, D., Tello,
M., Yin, J. C. P., & Sehgal, A. (2001). A non-circadian role
for cAMP signaling and CREB activity in Drosophila rest
homeostasis. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 1108-1115.
Joiner, W. J., Crocker, A., White, B. H., & Sehgal, A. (2006).
Sleep in Drosophila is regulated by adult mushroom bodies.
Nature, 441, 757-760.
Kandel, E. R. (1976). Cellular basis of behavior: An
introduction to behavioral neurobiology. San Francisco: W.
H. Freeman.

Koh, K., Joiner, W. J., Wu, M. N., Yue, Z., Smith, C. J., &
Sehgal, A. (2008). Identification of SLEEPLESS, a SleepPromoting Factor. Science, 321, 372-376.
Kuchina, A., Espinar, L., Çağatay, T., Balbin, A. O., Zhang, F.,
Alvarado, A., Garcia-Ojalvo, J., & Süel, G. M. (2011).
Temporal competition between differentiation programs
determines cell fate choice. Molecular Systems Biology, 7.
Lyon, P. (2006). The biogenic approach to cognition. Cognitive
Processing, 7, 11-29.
Margulies, C., Tully, T., & Dubnau, J. (2005). Deconstructing
memory in Drosophila. Current Biology, 15, R700-R713.
North, G., & Greenspan, R. J. (2007). Invertebrate
neurobiology. Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press.
Rankin, C. H. (2000). Context conditioning in habituation in
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Behavioral
Neuroscience, 114, 496-505.
Root, C. M., Ko, K. I., Jafari, A., & Wang, J. W. (2011).
Presynaptic facilitation by neuropeptide signaling mediates
odor-driven food search. Cell, 145, 133-144.
Semmelhack, J. L., & Wang, J. W. (2009). Select Drosophila
glomeruli mediate innate olfactory attraction and aversion.
Nature, 459, 218-223.
Shapiro, J. A. (2007). Bacteria are small but not stupid:
cognition, natural genetic engineering and sociobacteriology. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, 38, 807-819.
Shaw, P. J., Cirelli, C., Greenspan, R. J., & Tononi, G. (2000).
Correlates of sleep and waking in Drosophila
melanogaster. Science, 287, 1834-1837.
Tully, T., & Quinn, W. G. (1985). Classical conditioning and
retention in normal and mutant Drosophila melanogaster. J
Comp Physiol A, 157, 263-277.
White, J. G., Southgate, E., Thomson, J. N., & Brenner, S.
(1986). The structure of the nervous system of the
nematode
Caenorhabditis
elegans.
Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological
Sciences, 314, 1-340.
Wicks, S. R., & Rankin, C. H. (1995). Integration of
mechanosensory stimuli in Caenorhabditis elegans. Journal
of Neuroscience, 15, 2434-2444.
Wu, M. N., Joiner, W. J., Dean, T., Yue, Z., Smith, C. J., Chen,
D., Hoshi, T., Sehgal, A., & Koh, K. (2010). SLEEPLESS,
a Ly-6/neurotoxin family member, regulates the levels,
localization and activity of Shaker. Nature Neuroscience,
13, 69-75.
Yaksi, E., & Wilson, R. I. (2010). Electrical coupling between
olfactory glomeruli. Neuron, 67, 1034-1047.
Yamamoto, K., Hirao, K., Oshima, T., Aiba, H., Utsumi, R., &
Ishihama, A. (2005). Functional characterization in vitro of
all two-component signal transduction systems from
Escherichia coli. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 280,
1448-1456.
Yi, T. Ä., Andrews, B. W., & Iglesias, P. A. (2007). Control
analysis of bacterial chemotaxis signaling. In B. R. C.
Melvin I. Simon & C. Alexandrine (Eds.), Methods in
Enzymology (Vol. Volume 422, pp. 123-140): Academic
Press.

163

