UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coherence and argument structure: An empirical comparison between plausible reasoning
and the Bayesian approach to argumentation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wc3d10b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gaviria, Christian
Jimenez-Leal, William

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Coherence and argument structure: An empirical comparison between
plausible reasoning and the Bayesian approach to argumentation
Christian Gaviria (cgaviria@uniandes.edu.co)
William Jiménez-Leal (w.jimenezleal@uniandes.edu.co)
Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de los Andes. Cr 1 # 18a-12, Ed. Franco, Bogotá, 17111. Colombia.
Abstract
Plausible reasoning has been proposed as an alternative to
deductive and inductive norms of argument evaluation in
informal logic. In this paper, we present the first systematic
empirical contrast between the Bayesian account of
argumentation and a plausible reasoning model. Results
suggest that the Bayesian approach to argumentation provides
a more precise picture of how people evaluate the strength of
appeals to witness testimony when considering coherence and
argument structure as relevant factors.
Keywords: Bayesian
argument evaluation.

argumentation,

plausible

reasoning,

Introduction
Imagine this situation: as part of a trial, someone reports
having seen the defendant committing the crime he has been
charged with. However, the eyewitness presence at the
crime scene can only be corroborated by the testimony of a
second witness. How should this fact influence the jury’s
decision? Now, consider another situation: two
eyewitnesses, who do not know each other, declare they saw
the person at the crime scene. How should the jury weigh up
the testimonies in this case to decide whether the defendant
is guilty? Is it possible to systematically describe the
differences between these two cases and also determine the
best way of combining the evidence to reach the best
possible decision?
During the last decade, a research program has been
proposed in the context of cognitive science in order to
develop both a descriptive and normative model of
argument evaluation, based on the concepts of subjective
probability and Bayesian belief updating (Hahn & Oaksford,
2007; Oaksford, Chater & Hahn, 2008; Hahn & Oaksford,
2012). In parallel, some philosophers and AI researchers
have questioned the normative status of the basic principles
of Bayesian epistemology. In general, these critics describe
a set of inference schemes as intuitively reasonable and then
remark that these schemas cannot be reduced or properly
understood from a probabilistic point of view. For example,
Walton (2009) asserts that “defeasible arguments such as
appeal to witness testimony are judged contextually in trials
in a way that does not seem to conform to either deductive
or inductive models of argument.” (p. 33).In this vein,
alternative models of inference have been proposed, such as
defeasible reasoning(Pollock, 2006, 2008) or plausible
reasoning (Rescher, 1976; Walton, 2008; Walton, Tindale &
Gordon, in press).While plausible reasoning is a notion
whose normative status is hotly debated (Hahn, Oaksford &

Harris, 2013; Walton et al, in press), it is also a notion that
is sufficiently formalised so as to afford testing of its
descriptive adequacy (Rescher, 1976). Furthermore,
plausibility is also a concept that has been invoked in the
explanation of the origin of argumentation skills
(Nussbaum, 2011). As far as we know, no empirical studies
have been undertaken to contrast Bayesian and Plausibilist
ideas as competing descriptive models of how people
evaluate arguments. Argumentative scenarios as described
in the first paragraph will provide the opportunity to make
this comparison.
The main purpose of this paper is to undertake such a
comparison between the Bayesian and the Plausibilist
account in the context of an argument evaluation task. In
what follows, the key features of each model are presented.
We then offer a description of the situation that serves as the
arena for the comparison between the models.

The Bayesian approach to argumentation
The basic principle of the Bayesian model of argument
evaluation is that arguments can be understood as
arrangements of premises and conclusions that have their
respective subjective probabilities associated. These values
express the agent’s degree of belief in each premise and
conclusion at a given time (Hahn & Oaksford,
2007).According to this account, the degree of belief in the
conclusion is updated as a function of the degree of belief in
the premises as prescribed by Bayes Theorem. Thus, the
perceived argument strength,𝑷(𝑯|𝑬), depends on the prior
belief in the conclusion, 𝑷(𝑯)and the probabilities of the
premises being true both in the case in which the conclusion
is true𝑷(𝑬|𝑯), and in the case in which it is
not𝑷(𝑬|¬𝑯).The ratio between these values (likelihood
ratio)provides an index of the degree of change of
conclusion probability in light of the evidence (Hahn&
Oaksford, 2012).
There are several characteristics that make the Bayesian
approach a solid candidate to provide a good descriptive
model of argument evaluation (Hahn et al, 2013). Inter alia,
Bayesian models include specific parameters to represent
different aspects of the quality and quantity of an
argument’s content. In fact, model parameterization makes
it possible to derive both ordinal (e.g. Argument X will be
better/worst evaluated than argument Y) and point
predictions(e.g. Given the set of premises’ probabilities, the
degree of posterior belief in the conclusion C in light of the
premises P1 and P2 will be x). This flexibility has allowed
researchers to offer successful explanations of how people

2435

assess arguments from ignorance (ad ignorantiam), begging
the question arguments (petitioprincipii) (Hahn & Oaksford,
2007), slippery slope situations (Corner, Hahn & Oaksford,
2011), and arguments against the person (ad hominem)
(Harris, Hsu & Madsen, 2012). The evidence suggests that
when people face an argumentation situation, they update
their belief in the conclusion consistently with Bayesian
standards.

What is plausible reasoning?
Pollock (2008) points out that there are several
argumentation situations where the use of a probabilistic
framework is, at least, misleading. For example, Pollock
argues that it is counterintuitive that having an argument
with several high probability independent premises might
result in a low probability conclusion: the probability of the
conclusion becomes weaker as ‘stronger’ evidence premises
are added conjunctively. This kind of criticism has led some
theorists to doubt the suitability of probability theory as the
foundational ground for a theory of argumentation, and look
to ideas like plausibility. In his seminal work, Rescher
(1976) presents plausible reasoning as an inference
framework that has been fashioned after a twofold purpose:
1) To analyse inferences made on the basis of information
only supported by the ‘trustworthiness’, ‘believability’ or
‘soundness’ of the sources who offer the information; and 2)
To provide a formal tool to make inferences in scenarios
with informative inconsistency (i.e. when reports from
different sources contradict each other), given that,
according to Rescher, both deductive logic and probability
calculus proscribe inference from contradictory premises.
Thus, “the whole point of plausibility theory is to furnish a
means for operating with the relative degrees of
acceptability or presumptions in favor of diverse data”
(Rescher, 1976, p.10).
In plausible reasoning, the concept of source refers not
only to cognitive agents (witnesses, authorities, institutions)
and concrete objects (records, documents, databases) but
also to products of inference processes (theories,
conjectures, suppositions, principles, rules, traditions, etc.).
Other things equal, in the context of plausible reasoning,
source reliability and the plausibility of a claim can be
represented by the same index.
The plausibility of a set of premises, stated by a given
source, can be expressed as a value in a scale ranging from 0
to 1 (where 1 is equal to absolute plausibility). Considering
that plausibility is defined as an ordinal scale, Rescher
clarifies that the purpose of his formalisation is not to create
a quantitative device similar to probability calculus, but
rather to provide a less restrictive “qualitative” calculus that
enables direct comparison between plausibility values of
different, and even contradictory, sets of propositions. In
this spirit, taking a set of axioms as a starting point, Rescher
(1976) derives a set of inference rules for plausible
reasoning (see below rules MAX and MIN) which are not
completely consistent with probability calculus, as it is
shown below.

The case of appeal to witness testimony
In many argumentative contexts, people make use of
testimonies as premises to support particular conclusions.
Walton (2008) asserts that appeal to witness testimonies is
an instance of a certain argumentative scheme called
argument from position to know. In general, this kind of
argument takes the following form:
Source X is in a position to know about a certain
domain S containing proposition A.
X claims that A (in domain S) is true/false
Therefore, A is true/false.
In the context of appeals to witness testimony in legal
scenarios, Walton distinguishes two kinds of argumentative
structures: convergent and corroborative (Walton, 2008). In
convergent structures, two or more independent reports
support the same conclusion. In corroboration arguments
one or more testimonies support another testimony, in turn,
giving support to a certain conclusion. According to
plausible reasoning, in corroboration arguments, the
conclusion must be as strong as the weakest premise (MIN
rule), while in convergent structures, conclusion
believability is at least as great as the strength of the most
credible premise (MAX rule) (Walton; 2008).
From a probabilistic point of view, these structures can be
represented by two different Bayesian networks (Figures 1
and 2). Each network conveys different dependence
relationships between conclusion and premises. Thus, in a
convergent structure such as the one represented in Figure 1,
the argument strength can be expressed as the probability of
a
conclusion
given
the
truth
of
the
premises 𝐴2 and 𝐵2 ,𝑃(𝐶|𝐴2 , 𝐵2 ). By virtue of Bayes
Theorem, this value can be calculated from 𝑃(𝐴2 |𝐶) and
the
corroborative
structure
(Figure
𝑃( 𝐵2 |𝐶). In
2),interpreted as a causal Bayes net, the probability of the
conclusion derives from𝑃(𝐸2 |𝐶)by virtue of the causal
Markov condition(the value of the variable is independent
of other variables in the network, when conditioned on its
parent values —direct causes (Pearl, 2000).

Figure1.Bayesian net of a convergent structure

Figure2.Bayesian net of a corroborative structure.
One of the alleged features distinguishing the Bayesian
account from plausible reasoning is the way inference from

2436

contradictions is addressed (Rescher, 1976). Therefore,
coherence among testimonies is a key factor that must be
considered in order to derive distinctive predictions, both for
convergent and corroboration structures. In the remainder of
this section, we show how coherence is incorporated in each
model and its impact on the evaluation of appeal to
witnesses.

Coherence and appeal to witness testimony
Harris and Hahn (2009) provide empirical evidence that
people are sensitive to coherence among reports from
different sources. They propose that people are able to
weigh coherent information by the data about source
reliability, following Bayesian prescriptions formulated by
Bovens and Hartmann (2003). Specifically, in the
experiments undertaken by Harris and Hahn (2009), people
rated an argument based on multiple testimonies as better
when more witnesses agreed on their reports, even though
their individual reliability was the same. However, Harris
and Hahn did not experimentally manipulate the argument
structure, which prevented them from demonstrating
whether the coherence effect disappears when reports rely
on each other. In addition, their experimental design did not
include a condition in which participants were faced with a
total disagreement between sources, with equal or different
reliability indexes. It is precisely for this particular scenario
that Rescher (1976) and Walton (2008) suggested that the
rules of plausible reasoning seem to be more appropriate
than probabilistic ones.
In plausible reasoning, the strength of any appeal to
witness testimony must be evaluated, taking into account
independence among sources. If reports from each source do
not rely on each other, they will form a convergent
argument where the plausibility value of the conclusion will
be at least as great as the most plausible report (MAX rule),
regardless of whether all reports agree with each other. In
contrast, if testimonies do rely on each other (as in
corroborative arguments), they will connect together in a
linked argument where the conclusion will be as plausible as
the least plausible premise (MIN rule). If witnesses’ reports
are contradictory in a corroboration structure, premises will
fail to support the conclusion.
To summarize, the predictions derived both from the
Bayesian and the plausible reasoning models, only agree
when arguments are linked and their premises are coherent.
In these cases, both models predict that argument
assessments might be stronger than the most reliable
testimony. In the case of convergent and contradictory
arguments, as well as corroboration arguments, plausible
reasoning predictions tend to be higher, since Bayesian
model penalizes further incoherence between premises.
In this experiment, participants assessed two appeals to
witness testimony in which the following variables were
directly manipulated: 1) argument structure (convergent vs.
corroborative), 2) coherence among reports and 3) source
reliability: This design allowed comparison between the
descriptive fit of each model.

Method
Participants
289 undergraduate students (170 women), from four
Colombian universities, with ages ranging from 16 to 30
(M= 20.06, sd.= 2.04). Some of them received extra credit
in a class for participation in this study.

Design
A
2(convergent/corroboration
structure)
x
2(coherent/incoherent testimonies) x 2 (high/low reliability)
factorial between-subjects design was used. The dependent
variable was the numerical evaluation made by each
participant of two appeals to witness testimony presented in
two scenarios (car accident/burglary).

Materials and Procedure
The factors of interest (structure x coherence x reliability)
gave place to eight conditions. Since each participant
received two arguments, there were 64 possible
combinations. As it was not possible to collect the
dependent measure for all of them, 16 combinations of two
arguments were randomly selected. In no case did the two
arguments evaluated by one participant belong to the same
experimental condition or to the same scenario. For
example, if the hit and run argument was corroborative,
coherent and had a low reliability, the second argument was
a different condition. Scenarios were counterbalanced, so
half of the participants had the burglary scenario first.
Each participant was provided with a booklet containing a
set of general instructions, followed by the two cover
stories, with the following general structure: first, a possible
criminal
incident
was
presented
(hit-and-run
accident/burglary) and the relevant authorities suspected
two people of being responsible. Then, participants were
told that the authorities had found either two witnesses who
did not know each other (convergent structure) or someone
asserting having witnessed the crime plus another witness
confirming, or not, the presence of the former witness near
the crime scene (corroboration structure). On the next page,
the statement of each witness was presented, and it could be
either coherent (coherent condition) or contradictory
(incoherent condition). Immediately after this, participants
were provided with results of a test performed to determine
the visual acuity of each witness. This information was
provided to define a reliability parameter for each report: in
the low reliability condition both witnesses were just
reliable: (positive hit rate = 0.6 and 0.65) (low reliability); in
the high reliability condition, they are reliable enough (0.75
and 0.8) (high reliability). Variations in reliability were
introduced to examine whether interactions between
coherence and structure depended on reliability.
As an example, below is a reproduction of the hit and
run cover story, with a convergent structure and based on
reliable and contradictory testimonies (adapted from
Kahneman & Tversky,1972):

2437

Structure

Corroboration

Table 1.Evaluation means of appeals to witness testimony in each condition.
Coherence
Reliability
Predictions

Coherent
Contradictory

Convergent

Coherent
Contradictory

Mean (S.D.)

Bayesian
Model

Plausible
Reasoning

High

.65 (.16)

.73

.75

Low

.55 (.16)

.59

.60

High

.58 (.20)

.57

.25

Low

.55 (.16)

.56

.40

High

.74 (.14)

.92

.8 – 1

Low

.65 (.14)

.73

.65 – 1

High

.63 (.18)

.57

.8 – 1

Low

.54 (.16)

.55

.65 – 1

In a town there are two bus companies, the Green and the
Red. One night very late, a bus is involved in an accident
and drives away before the police arrive at the scene. The
police find two people who had witnessed what had just
happened. Witness A states that the bus was from the
Green Company, while witness B says the opposite, that
the bus was from the Red Company. Witnesses A and B
did not know each other before the accident
To determine how reliable the witnesses are, the attorney
who is dealing with the case, requests a visual acuity test
for each of them, to be performed separately. The results
show that witness A is able to correctly identify the color
red and green 16 out of 20 times, in conditions similar to
those present during the accident (lightning and
distance). Results for witness B show that he is able to
identify the colors correctly 15 out of 20 times in the same
conditions.
To conclude, participants were asked to report, on a scale
of 0 to 100, how confident they were that the suspect
reported by the most reliable witness was guilty. That is,
participants were asked to evaluate the conclusion of the
stronger argument:
Based on this information, how confident would you be
that the bus involved in the accident was Green? Please
indicate your answer with a number between 0 and 100
where 0 means “I am completely sure the bus was NOT
green” and 100 means “I am completely sure the bus was
green”
Participants were tested in their classrooms in groups of
20 to 30 people. At the end of the task, demographic data
was collected and participants were thanked and debriefed.

Results
Argument assessments for both scenarios were collapsed
into a single score, since their means did not differ
significantly. For ease of analysis, the original scale (0 to
100) was transformed into a 0 to 1 scale. Point predictions
for both models were examined first, followed by ordinal
predictions.

Point predictions for the Bayesian model were derived
from eight Bayesian networks (one per condition)
representing different combinations between convergent
(Figure 1) and corroboration (Figure 2) structures as well as
the coherence and reliability parameters specified in the
design. Networks were implemented using GeNie 1
software. An example is depicted in Figure 3, where the
conditional probability distributions have been set up
according to the provided information on coherence and
reliability.

Figure 3.Bayesian network representing the convergent
and contradictory argument with reliable testimonies.
Plausible reasoning predictions were calculated based on
argument structure and reliability parameters. For instance,
in the case of corroboration arguments with coherent and
highly reliable witness testimonies, the predicted value is
equal to the weaker testimony reliability (that from the
witness accurately identifying the suspect 15 out of 20
times). In the case of convergent arguments with
contradictory and less reliable testimonies, plausible
reasoning predicts the judged strength of the conclusion
will be equal or greater than that of the most reliable
testimony (in this case, the testimony coming from the
witness who identifies the suspect 13 out of 20 times).
Table 1 shows the predictions from each model along
with the argument evaluation means. It should be noted that
the values predicted by the Bayesian account fall within the
confidence intervals predicted by the Plausibilist approach
in 4 out of 8 experimental conditions.

1

Available from http://genie.sis.pitt.edu/

2438

Argument evaluation means

.80

Post hoc analyses revealed that: 1) Coherence effect:
arguments with coherent testimonies were better evaluated
than those with incoherent ones in convergent structures,
t(287) = 5.58, p< .001, but not in corroborative arguments
t(287) = 1.72, p>.05, as predicted by the Bayesian model,.
2) On average, convergent and coherent arguments were
judged to be stronger than corroboration and coherent
arguments, t(281,34) = 5.04, p< .001. 3) Effect of structure
on inconsistent arguments: Evaluations of arguments with
contradictory testimonies were very similar, regardless of
their structure, just as the Bayesian model predicts, t(286) =
1.06, p> .05. These findings are depicted in Figures 4 and
5.
.80

Argument evaluation means

The argument evaluation average was inferior to Bayesian
predictions for coherent arguments with highly reliable
testimonies as premises both in the case of convergent and
of corroboration structure. In contrast, evaluations of
convergent arguments with coherent and highly reliable
witness reports were slightly greater than those prescribed
by the Bayesian approach. Besides, plausible reasoning
predictions only fall within the confidence interval of
convergent and coherent argument evaluation means,
showing a poorer descriptive fit of plausible reasoning
compared to Bayesian predictions.
The second part of the analysis focused on comparing
ordinal predictions both from plausible reasoning and the
Bayesian model for each experimental condition. For this
purpose, two different predictions were derived:
Coherence effect: Whereas the Bayesian approach
predicts the perceived strength of the argument to be higher
than the strongest testimony only in convergent structures
with coherent premises, the plausible reasoning model does
not predict a specific increase in the argument believability
associated to coherence among testimonies.
Effect of structure on inconsistent arguments: According
to the Bayesian model, both convergent and corroboration
arguments will be evaluated in very similar ways when they
have inconsistent premises (see Table 1). Plausible
reasoning predicts that evaluation of convergent arguments
with contradictory testimonies will be higher than that of
the corroboration arguments with inconsistent testimonies,
ceteris paribus. A three-way ANOVA was carried out
where the dependent variable was the collapsed assessment
rating for both scenarios. Main effects of every manipulated
factor were found: structure, F (1, 570) = 18.21, p<.001,
partial η2 = .03, coherence, F (1, 570) = 27.02, p<.001,
partial η2 = .04, and reliability, F (1, 570) = 31.21, p<.001,
partial η2= .05. In particular, convergent and coherent
arguments or arguments with highly reliable testimonies
were consistently judged as stronger by our participants.
More importantly, there was a significant interaction
between structure and coherence, F (1, 570) = 6.92, p<.01,
partial η2 = .01. There was not any other significant
interaction between factors.

.75
.70

.60
.55
.50

Low Reliability High

Figure 5.Convergent arguments’ evaluation mean ratings
for each condition.(CI 95%).
In conclusion, the results reported suggest that the
Bayesian Model is superior to the Plausibilist approach,
insofar as it describes more adequately participants’
performance in tasks of assessment of testimony appeal. In
this kind of situation, the perceived strength of the
argument was lower than the most reliable testimony, both
in convergent and corroboration structures contra the
Plausibility hypothesis: people are not using anything like
the MAX or MIN rules, as claimed by the Plausibilist
approach. Additionally, only the Bayesian model can
account for the combined effects of coherence and structure
in the testimony appeals examined.

.75
.70
.65
.60

Coherent
Convergent
Incoherent
Convergent

.65

Discussion
Coherent
Corroborative
Incoherent
Corroborative

.55
.50

Low Reliability High
Figure 4.Corroboration argument evaluation mean ratings
in each condition (CI 95%).

Overall, results suggest that predictions derived from the
Bayes nets, both point and ordinal, exhibit a better fit than
predictions derived from the plausibility model. This trend
is consistent even in the case of convergent arguments,
where the Plausibilist model had an a priori advantage
insofar as its predictions took the form of wide intervals,
while the Bayesian model always generated discrete point
predictions. However, participants consistently rated the
strength of the argument conclusion (both for convergent
and corroboration arguments) below what was predicted by
the Bayesian model. This finding is consistent with
Bayesian conservatism, a robust phenomenon reported in

2439

the literature on judgment and decision-making (Edwards,
1982). Generally, people tend to underestimate a hypothesis
posterior probability, when compared to the prediction of
the Bayes theorem. However, this systematic deviation
from point predictions is also accompanied with superior
ordinal fits. This highlights the need to further specifying
the computational model that is required for the Bayesian
approach to serve as a full psychological theory (though
some advances have been made in this direction: see
Corner, Harris & Hahn, 2010).
Recently, Fenton, Neil and Lagnado (2013) showed that
the way people assess legal arguments, including alibi
appeals, are well described by the prescriptions of a Bayes
net. The findings reported in this paper add support to the
Bayes model of legal argumentation, since it shows that
people are sensitive to the interaction between structure of a
testimony appeal and coherence between witnesses’ reports.
Bowers and Davis (2012) have recently criticised
Bayesian models of cognition, among other things, because
they are seldom compared with simpler non-Bayesian
models. This study can be considered a sample of one of
those comparisons, as long as argumentation goes. There
are, of course, other models proposed in informal logic
(conductive reasoning, other forms of defeasible reasoning)
that have not been contrasted with the Bayesian approach to
argumentation. Our strategy in this paper, however, also
reveals why these comparisons are rare. In the case of
argumentation, pitting plausibility against a Bayesian
model, involved a transition from an underspecified model
to a set of concrete numerical predictions. By doing so, the
theorist could always claim that the numerical version of
the underspecified model is a caricature that does not
represent the ‘real’ theory. This situation shows us that
there is not much leeway when levelling the field in order
to enable the comparison of alternative models of
argumentation.

Acknowledgments
WJL was funded by the FAPA grant at Universidad de los
Andes.

References
Bovens, L. & Hartmann, S. (2003) Bayesian Epistemology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bowers, J. S., & Davis, C. J. (2012).Bayesian just-so stories
in psychology and neuroscience.Psychological
Bulletin, 138, 3, 389-414.
Corner, A., Hahn, U. & Oaksford, M. (2011).The
psychological mechanism of the slippery slope
argument.Journal of Memory & Language, 64, (2),
133-152.
Corner, A., Harris, A. J. L., & Hahn, U.
(2010).Conservatism in belief revision and participant
skepticism.
In
Ohlsson
&
Catrambone
(Ed), Proceedings of the 32 Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1625-1630). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.

Edwards, W. (1982).Conservatism in human information
processing. En D. Kahneman, P. Slovic& A. Tversky
(Eds.) Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases (pp. 359-369). New York: CUP.
Fenton, N. Neil, M. & Lagnado, D. (2013). A general
structure for legal arguments about evidence using
Bayesian networks.Cognitive Science, 37 (1), 61-102.
Hahn, U. & Oaksford, M. (2007). The rationality of
informal argumentation: A Bayesian approach to
reasoning fallacies. Psyc Review, 114, 704-732.
Hahn, U. & Oaksford, M. (2012).Rational Argument. In K.
J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.) The Oxford
handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 277–300).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hahn, U., Oaksford, M. & Harris, A. J. L. (2013).
Testimony and argument: A Bayesian perspective. En
F. Zenker (Ed). Bayesian argumentation (pp. 13-38).
Dordrecht: Springer.
Harris, A. J. L. & Hahn, U. (2009). Bayesian rationality in
evaluating multiple testimonies: Incorporating the role
of coherence. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition,35,1366-1372.
Harris, A. J. L., Hsu, A. S., & Madsen, J. K. (2012).
Because Hitler did it! Quantitative tests of Bayesian
argumentation using 'ad hominem'. Thinking and
Reasoning, 18, 311-343.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A.(1972)."Subjective
probability: A judgment of representativeness". In
Kahneman, Slovic, Tversky. Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N. & Hahn, U. (2008). Human
reasoning and argumentation: The probabilistic
approach. En L. J. Rips, & J. Adler. (Eds.) Reasoning:
Studies in human inference and its foundations (pp.
383-412). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nussbaum, E. M. (2011). Argumentation, dialogue theory,
and probability modelling: Alternative frameworks for
argumentation research. Educational Psychologist,46
(2),84–106.
Pearl, J. (2000) Causality: Models, reasoning and
inference. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pollock, J. L. (2006). Thinking about acting:
Epistemological foundations for rational decision
making. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, J. L. (2008). Defeasible reasoning. In L. J. Rips.&
J. Adler (Eds.): Reasoning: Studies in human inference
and its foundations (pp. 451-470). Cambridge: CUP.
Rescher, N. (1976). Plausible reasoning: An introduction to
the theory and practice of plausibilistic inference.
Assen: Van Gorcum.
Walton,
D.
(2008).Witness
testimony
evidence:
Argumentation, artificial intelligence and law.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Walton, D., Tindale, C., & Gordon, T. (in press).Applying
recent argumentation methods to some ancient
examples of plausible reasoning. Argumentation.

2440

