UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communicative signals promote abstract rule learning by 7-month-old infants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5rm3801z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Ferguson, Brock
Lew-Williams, Casey

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Communicative signals promote abstract rule learning
by 7-month-old infants
Brock Ferguson (brock@u.northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, 2029 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Casey Lew-Williams (clewwilliams@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Peretsman-Scully Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Abstract
Infants’ ability to detect patterns in speech input is central to
their acquisition of language, and recent evidence suggests
that their cognitive faculties may be specifically tailored to
this task: Seven-month-olds reliably abstract rule-like
structures (e.g., ABB vs. ABA) from speech, but not other
stimuli. Here we ask what drives this speech advantage.
Specifically, we propose that infants’ learning from speech is
driven by their representation of speech as a communicative
signal. As evidence for this claim, we report an experiment in
which 7-month-old infants (N=28) learned rules from a novel
sound (sine-wave tones) introduced as a communicative
signal, but failed to learn the same rules from tones presented
in non-communicative contexts. These findings highlight the
powerful influence of social-communicative contexts on
infants’ learning.
Keywords: language development; abstract rule learning;
statistical learning; social cognition; grammar; infants

Introduction
The human capacity to learn language is unparalleled in the
animal kingdom. Typically developing human infants
efficiently learn the complexities of sounds, syllables, words,
and sentences, but non-human animals – even those raised
in rich linguistic environments – seem incapable of doing so
(Pinker, 1994). What might explain this striking divide
between humans and even our closest evolutionary cousins?
One longstanding hypothesis is that humans have cognitive
machinery dedicated to language acquisition (e.g., Chomsky,
1965; Pinker, 1994); however, identifying languagededicated machinery has proven difficult. Several previous
candidate language learning mechanisms – fast mapping of
novel words, tracking transitional probabilities between
syllables, and categorically perceiving speech – are now
known to be engaged equally well by non-linguistic stimuli.
In this paper, we assess the extent to which another
candidate mechanism – abstract rule learning – is uniquely
engaged by human speech. Specifically, we ask whether the
well-documented “speech advantage” in rule learning might
result from infants’ processing of speech per se, or whether
it might result from infants’ attention to communicative
signals including, but not limited to, speech.

Abstract rule learning is the ability to extract
generalizable regularities from a stream of input (Aslin &
Newport, 2012). For example, given several sequences of
syllables such as go-la-la, mu-fi-fi, and be-da-da, one might
detect that all sequences follow an ABB rule (in which the
latter two elements are identical and distinct from the
former). This abstract rule contrasts with stimulus-specific
rules (e.g., transitional probabilities, such as that la follows
go 100% of the time, or that all sequences end with /a/)
because one could recognize the instantiation of the abstract
rule in an entirely novel sequence such as ci-ru-ru. Such
generalizations are crucial to learning in many domains, but
particularly in language acquisition. A hallmark of language
proficiency is the ability to comprehend and produce novel
utterances, and it seems that humans do so by generalizing
rules (e.g., grammatical relations) and categories (e.g.,
semantic and syntactic groupings) from the linguistic input.
Abstract rule learning in infancy appears to be
specifically enhanced by speech. From seven months of age,
infants reliably abstract simple ABB, AAB, and ABA rules
from streams of spoken syllables (Gómez & Gerken, 1999;
Marcus, Vijayan, Rao, & Vishton, 1999). In contrast, infants
do not reliably abstract rules from non-speech auditory or
visual stimuli (e.g., tones, animal sounds, geometric shapes;
Johnson et al., 2009; Marcus, Fernandes, & Johnson, 2007).
Even infants exposed to language in another modality (i.e.,
sign language) do not robustly uncover underlying rules
(Rabagliati, Senghas, Johnson, & Marcus, 2012). These
observations support the proposal that abstract rule learning
may be a speech-tuned mechanism, and may help explain
why human infants rapidly learn language while other
species do not (Marcus & Rabagliati, 2008).
Others have attempted to explain the “speech advantage”
vis-à-vis abstract rule learning without appealing to
cognitive adaptations for language. For example, speech
may contain phonetic redundancies that guide infants
towards an abstract rule (e.g., ABB) in ways that less
redundant stimuli do not (Frank, Slemmer, Marcus, &
Johnson, 2009a; Thiessen, 2012). Or, being a highly
familiar signal, speech may be more efficiently processed
relative to other stimuli and thus leave infants’ relatively
limited cognitive resources free to uncover abstract rules

2192

(Saffran, Pollak, Seibel, & Shkolnik, 2007). Although some
empirical evidence supports both of these proposals, they
appear limited in explaining the phenomena. Removing
phonetic redundancies from speech stimuli does not entirely
eliminate rule learning (Thiessen, 2012), and even in cases
where stimuli are familiar to infants (e.g., animal sounds),
infants fail to abstract rules (Marcus et al., 2007). Thus a
satisfying explanation of the speech advantage in abstract
rule learning is still outstanding.
Here we propose one such explanation. Unlike previous
proposals, our account does not appeal exclusively to infants’
perceptual faculties. Instead, we propose that infants may
best acquire abstract rules from speech because of its status
as a communicative signal.
This hypothesis has its roots in two basic developmental
observations. First, several findings lend support to the
claim that infants might represent the broad communicative
function of speech. Socially-relevant stimuli (e.g., faces,
voices) draw infants’ attention from very early in life
(Valenza, Simion, & Cassia, 1996; Vouloumanos & Werker,
2007). And infants’ abilities to reason about agents,
intentions, relationships, and psychological states suggest
that they may not be limited to recognizing speech by its
acoustic properties but by its status as a communicative and
socially-relevant signal (see Baillargeon et al., 2013 for
review). Second, communicative signals (including, but not
limited to speech) have been shown to engage infants’
cognitive capacities in ways that non-communicative signals
do not. For example, communicative signals appear to
modulate infants’ encoding of category-relevant information
(e.g., of objects; Csibra & Gergely, 2009; Ferguson &
Waxman, 2013; Yoon, Johnson, & Csibra, 2008). Likewise,
and perhaps most relevant to the present study, infants’
acquisition of unfamiliar speech sounds is more successful
in communicative than non-communicative contexts (Hoff,
2006; Kuhl, 2007; Kuhl, Tsao, & Liu, 2003). These findings
broadly suggest that infants’ learning may be enhanced by
social-communicative contexts. Collectively, this work
offers explanatory power for why speech – being a
communicative signal embedded in social contexts – would
support infants’ abstract rule learning in ways that noncommunicative stimuli do not.
This hypothesis also aligns with evidence of tuning
effects in infancy. Several studies document that infants
tune in to relevant social and communicative signals across
the first year of life – for example, to their native language
or to human faces (Frank, Vul, & Johnson, 2009b; Pascalis,
de Haan, & Nelson, 2002; Vouloumanos, Hauser, Werker,
& Martin, 2010; Werker & Tees, 1984). Critically, a similar
tuning can be seen in infants’ abstract rule learning.
Although 7-month-olds reliably fail to acquire abstract rules
from tones, one study showed that 4-month-olds can
succeed (Dawson & Gerken, 2009). If infants’ success in
rule learning from speech were due to its communicative
status, one might predict tuning of rule learning abilities as
infants tease apart the communicative (e.g., speech) from
non-communicative sounds (e.g., tones).

In the present study, we predicted that, if communicative
signals promote infants’ rule learning, then infants should
succeed in learning rules from non-speech signals that they
believe serve a communicative function. To test this, we
asked whether 7-month-olds would abstract rules from sinewave tones (which have consistently failed to facilitate rule
learning in previous studies) if tones were first introduced as
a communicative signal. This method was successfully used
in a related line of work demonstrating that both speech and
non-speech communicative signals facilitate infants’ object
categorization (Ferguson & Waxman, 2013). Here, we
briefly exposed infants to tones in one of two brief vignettes
before they were exposed to tones in the rule-learning task
of Marcus and colleagues (2007). In one condition, infants
were led to believe that tones were communicative: the
tones were embedded as a communicative signal in a short
video dialogue between two women. In a control condition,
the same tones and speech sounds were uncoupled from the
communicative dialogue and played in the background of a
social – though non-communicative – interchange between
the same two women. If a signal’s communicative status
influences the ability to learn abstract rules, these two
vignettes should have different effects on subsequent rule
learning: Only infants exposed to communicative tones
should show evidence of rule learning. In contrast, if infants’
abstract rule learning is not influenced by a signal’s
communicative status, then infants should fail to abstract
rules from sine-wave tones, as in previous studies at this age
(Dawson & Gerken, 2009; Marcus et al., 2007).

Methods
Participants
Twenty-eight 7-month-old infants (10 F; M = 7.54 months,
SD = .27), recruited from Evanston, IL, USA and the
surrounding area, were included in the final analyses. Each
participant was assigned to either the Communicative (N =
16) or Non-communicative (N = 12) condition. An
additional 12 infants (5 Communicative, 7 Noncommunicative) were excluded due to fussing out (N = 8),
technical failure (N = 2), lack of disengagement from visual
stimuli on a majority of test trials (N = 1), or as a statistical
outlier1 (looking preference > 2.5 SD from the condition
mean; N = 1).

Procedure
In an adaptation of the Headturn Preference Procedure used
in previous studies on infant rule learning (e.g. Marcus et al.,
1999, 2007), participants engaged in three experimental
1

Including this outlier in the final analysis does not
influence the results of the main analysis (learning by
condition) at α = .05. However, inclusion does affect the
interpretation of a secondary analysis in which we look at
infants’ learning by the particular rules contrasted in
Familiarization and Test.

2193

phases: an Exposure phase, a Familiarization phase, and a
Test phase. For the duration of the experiment, infants sat
on their caregiver’s lap. Visual stimuli were presented on a
centre monitor and two side monitors, and auditory stimuli
were presented from speakers beneath each side monitor.
Caregivers listened to unrelated music on headphones, and
were asked to avoid pointing or speaking with the infant.
The Exposure phase (58 sec) introduced infants to sinewave tones in a communicative context. Infants watched a
brief videotaped vignette that varied by condition. In the
Communicative condition, two female actors engaged in a
brief conversation. One actor, the ‘Speaker,’ spoke in
English. The other actor, the ‘Beeper,’ communicated by
producing sine-wave tones (dubbed over her mouth
movements, notes A3-G3). The scene was designed to be
engaging for infants: During their conversation, both actors
looked, smiled, and waved at the infant and each other. By
embedding the tones within this socially rich, contingent
exchange, we reasoned that infants might imbue the
otherwise inert sine-wave tone sound with communicative
status. In the Non-communicative condition, infants saw a
different vignette in which the same two actors engaged in a
social, cooperative interchange (baking). Both actors
engaged the baby with eye contact, waving, and smiling, but
crucially, they did not verbally communicate with each
other. Instead, infants heard the same dialogue from the
Communicative condition (at the same volume) as if it were
playing on the radio in the “background” of the scene. In
this way, the familiarity of the tones – and their alternation
with the Speaker’s utterances – was identical across both
conditions. However, only in the Communicative condition
was it made clear that these tones served a communicative
purpose.
In the Familiarization phase (2 min 34 sec), infants heard
four repetitions of 16 tone sequences that followed a
common rule (either AAB, ABB, or ABA).
In the Test phase, infants participated in (up to) 12 trials.
Each trial began when a visual stimulus appeared on the
centre monitor. After infants fixated on this stimulus, it
disappeared and re-appeared on either the left or right
monitor (counterbalanced). When infants fixated on this
side monitor, infants heard one of two pairs of test
sequences. In Familiar trials, infants heard two new tone
sequences that followed the same rule as in Familiarization.
In Novel test trials, infants heard two new tone sequences
that followed a different rule. For example, an infant who
heard ABB sequences during Familiarization would hear an
ABB pattern during Familiar trials and either AAB or ABA
sequences during Novel trials. Each test trial sequence pair
repeated until the infant looked away for 2 consecutive
seconds or until a maximum of 16 seconds had elapsed.
Trials with less than 2 seconds of looking time were
excluded and attempted again at the end of the Test phase.
Infants were assigned to one of two rule contrasts (ABBAAB, ABB-ABA) in one of four orders across
Familiarization-Test: ABB-AAB, AAB-ABB, ABB-ABA,
and ABA-ABB. By counterbalancing infants across

contrasts and orders, we ensured that any overall
preferences at Test could not be explained by an intrinsic
preference for any particular rule. This permitted us to ask
whether infants’ learning was robust across all rules, or
whether certain rules were easier to learn than others (e.g.,
Gervain et al., 2008).

Stimuli
Auditory All tone sequences contained three 300-ms tones
separated by a 250-ms silent pause. A 1000-ms pause
occurred between sequences. During Familiarization, the
sequences were constructed from the same categories of A
tones (C, C#, F#, and G) and B tones (F, D#, E, and D).
During Test, to assess whether infants would generalize an
abstract rule, the sequences were constructed from novel A
tones (G#, B) and B tones (A#, A).
Visual We used an image of the Beeper’s face looming
pseudorandomly (extracted from the vignette) as the visual
stimulus in both conditions. This image varied slightly
between Familiarization and Test, to help keep infants
interested in the task. A pilot study revealed that visual
stimuli used in previous Headturn Preference studies (e.g., a
flashing light or a coloured spinning wheel) were unable to
keep infants interested in the task, likely due to the extended
length of our experiment relative to previous studies (Frank,
Slemmer, Marcus, & Johnson, 2009a; Marcus et al., 1999;
2007).

Coding
Using custom MATLAB software, each infant’s looking
time to the side monitors on each test trial was coded online
by a trained observer.

Analyses
The dependent measure was each infant’s mean looking
time to the side monitor during Novel and Familiar trials.
On average, infants contributed an equal number of trials of
each type (MFamiliar = 5.43, MNovel = 5.25), paired t(27) = 1.10,
p = .28. Based on previous studies on abstract rule learning,
we expected that infants who reliably generalized the
abstract rule from Familiarization to Test would look longer
during Novel trials than Familiar trials.
A preliminary ANOVA did not find any effect of sex and
familiarized rule (between-subjects) or monitor side (withinsubjects) on looking time (all p’s > .3), therefore subsequent
analyses collapsed across these factors.
To assess whether infants generalized the abstract rules to
the test trials, and whether this ability varied by condition,
we entered the data into a mixed 2x2 ANOVA with Trial
type (Familiar vs. Novel, within-subjects), Condition
(Communicative vs. Non-Communicative, betweensubjects), and their interaction as model parameters
predicting looking times during test trials.
If infants are capable of abstracting rules from novel,
non-speech communicative signals, we predicted that

2194

infants would show a novelty preference in the
Communicative condition but not the Non-communicative
condition.

Results
In accord with our predictions, the results revealed that
infants in the Communicative condition learned the abstract
rules, but infants in the Non-communicative condition did
not. Overall, infants showed evidence of rule learning,
preferring Novel (M = 5.90 s [5.15, 6.65], SD = 1.94) over
Familiar (M = 5.37 s [4.70, 6.05], SD = 1.74) trials, F(1,26)
= 4.35, p = .047. However, this preference was qualified by
a reliable Rule by Condition interaction, F(1,26) = 7.81, p
= .01. Planned simple-effects tests revealed that only infants
in the Communicative condition looked more during Novel
(M = 6.75 s [5.69, 7.82], SD = 2.01) than Familiar trials (M
= 5.72 s [4.74, 6.71], SD = 1.84), paired t(15) = 4.30, p
< .001 (14/16 preferred the novel rule). Infants in the Noncommunicative condition had no preference for Novel (M =
4.75 s [4.05, 5.46], SD = 1.11) over Familiar trials (M = 4.90
s [3.92, 5.89], SD = 1.55), paired t(11) = -.41, p = .69 (4/12
preferred the novel rule).
Our analysis also identified a main effect of Condition on
overall looking during test. Infants in the Communicative
condition looked significantly longer overall (M = 6.24 s
[5.24, 7.23], SD = 1.87) than in the Non-communicative
condition (M = 5.90 s [5.15, 6.65], SD = 1.94), F(1,26) =
5.24, p = .030. This suggests that infants in the
Communicative condition may have stayed more engaged in
the task than those in the Non-communicative condition.
However, there was no reliable difference between total
looking during the familiarization phase, t(26) = -1.26, p
= .22, suggesting that the overall looking time difference
may be the result of infants in the Communicative condition
being particularly interested by the Novel sequences at test.
Finally, in the Communicative condition, infants
discriminated both rule contrasts (ABB-AAB or ABBABA) equally well, t(14) = -.21, p = .84.

Figure 1: Infants’ looking at test by condition. Only infants
in the Communicative condition showed a reliable
preference for Novel trials.

Figure 2: Infants’ mean preference for the novel trials by
rule and condition. Infants in the Communicative condition
discriminated both rule contrasts. Infants in the Noncommunicative condition did not.

Discussion
These findings reveal the powerful influence of a signal’s
communicative status on infants’ capacities to learn abstract
rules. Infants who were introduced to sine-wave tones as a
communicative signal successfully abstracted rules from
tones, and their learning was robust across a variety of rules.
In contrast, infants who were introduced to tones in the
context of a social – though non-communicative – exchange
did not subsequently abstract rules from tones.
This experiment complements previous work looking at
perceptual influences on infants’ rule learning (e.g., Frank,
Slemmer, Marcus, & Johnson, 2009a; Saffran et al., 2007;
Thiessen, 2012) by documenting that a signal’s
communicative status bears on infants’ abilities to detect its
rule-based structures. It also provides the first evidence that

7-month-old infants can learn abstract rules from a nonspeech auditory signal (cf. Dawson & Gerken, 2009;
Marcus et al., 2007). In light of these new data, we propose
that infants’ representations of speech as a communicative
signal underlie the speech advantage observed in previous
rule learning studies (e.g., Marcus et al., 2007; Marcus &
Rabagliati, 2008).
We turn now to two open questions regarding infants’
identification of relevant communicative signals and their
links to abstract rule learning.
How do infants identify communicative signals?
Our interpretation assumes that infants in the
Communicative condition listened to the tones in the
exposure phase as a potentially relevant communicative

2195

signal. However, it remains unclear what elements of the
exposure video would be crucial to this inference.
Combining the present data with previous studies on infants’
communicative development, we argue that the overt ‘turntaking’-like contingency between tones and other familiar
communicative signals is a likely candidate (Csibra, 2010).
Infants have been shown to discriminate high-contingency
social interactions (e.g., between mother and child) from
low-contingency interactions by just two months of age
(Nadel, Carchon, Kervella, Marcelli, & Reserbat-Plantey,
1999). Infants also use social contingency to infer that
objects are communicative agents (Beier & Carey, 2013;
Johnson, 2000). From this perspective, the Communicative
dialogue in the present experiment was highly supportive of
the inference that tones were communicative: Tones were
highly contingent with the English speaker’s speech, and
they were used simultaneously with other communicative
signals, such as smiling, laughing, and waving.
How might communicative signals promote rule
learning?
After infants identify a stimulus as communicative, how
might it then facilitate learning? Here we consider three
possible explanations.
First, learning could result from the well-documented
finding that communicative and social input engages infants’
attention in ways that other stimuli do not (Frank, Vul, &
Johnson, 2009b; Valenza et al., 1996; Vouloumanos &
Werker, 2007). In concert with this idea, Marcus et al.
(2007) hypothesized that it may be infants’ profound and
early interest in speech that drives the speech advantage in
rule learning (see Kuhl et al., 2003 and Kuhl, 2007 for
similar arguments regarding infants’ phonological
development). This attentional account provides a clear
explanation for the present data: Although all infants were
exposed to identical tone sequences during familiarization,
infants’ encoding and processing of these sequences may
have been most effective in the Communicative condition
because they attended more to the tones. Importantly, our
data indicate that the attentional boost afforded by
communicative signals is covert (i.e., beyond the measure of
looking time), because infants’ gaze to the visual stimulus
during familiarization did not differ across conditions.
A second possibility is that communicative signals do
more than broadly attract infants’ attention – they may
engage and target a particular kind of cognitive processing.
It has recently been claimed that communicative signals
serve a “naturally pedagogical” function for human infants
and engage the cognitive processes that underlie
generalization (Csibra & Gergely, 2009; Ferguson &
Waxman, 2013; Yoon et al., 2008). This cognitive bias in
the context of conspecifics’ communicative signals is said to
be one of several adaptations that support humans’ capacity
to learn socially from others (Csibra & Gergely, 2011; see
also Tomasello, 2008). On this account, abstract rule
learning, being one kind of cognitive capacity supporting

generalization, may be directly enhanced by communicative
contexts.
A third possibility is that infants have domain-specific
expectations about structure, which privilege learning of
repetition-based rules from speech-like stimuli. Dawson and
Gerken (2009) proposed this hypothesis after observing that
4- but not 7-month-olds learn rules from tones. In the
intervening months, they posit that infants learn that
repetitions in tonal stimuli (i.e., music) are too common to
be structurally informative. However, because repetitions
are relatively rare in speech, they remain an informative
structural cue in this domain. Applying this logic to the
current data, the communicative exposure may have made
tones more speech-like, leading infants to detect repetitions.
This explanation is promising, but requires further
examination for two reasons. First, if infants can initially
learn repetition-based rules from any stimuli, why then do
5-month-olds fail to detect these rules in speech (Frank et al.,
2009a)? Second, in order to infer that infants are developing
structural expectations for tones (and are not just tuning
them out), one would need to demonstrate that infants can
learn rules from tones when cues to structure are
informative and domain-relevant.
At present, we favour the simple explanation offered by
the attentional account. However, future research will better
assess the latter two possibilities.
Conclusion
Does infants’ prodigious learning from speech result from a
speech-specific adaptation for language acquisition or, more
generally, from an interest in communicative signals? Given
the present data on the detection of abstract rules, we favour
the latter hypothesis and suggest that infants’ interest in
communication is an underlying catalyst for language
learning.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a SSHRC Doctoral
Fellowship to B.F., an ASHFoundation New Investigator
Research Grant and American Hearing Research Foundation
Grant to C.L.W., and an NSF grant to Sandra R. Waxman
(BCS-0950376). Thanks to Sheena Desai and Tracy Smith
for acting in the videos, and Hillary Snyder for her
assistance collecting data.

References
Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (2012). Statistical Learning:
From Acquiring Specific Items to Forming General
Rules. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
21(3), 170–176.
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., He, Z., Sloane, S., Setoh, P.,
Jin, K.-S., et al. (2013). Psychological and Sociomoral
Reasoning in Infancy. In P. Shaver, M. Mikulincer, E.
Borgida, & J. Bargh (Eds.), APA Handbook of
Personality and Social Psychology: Vol. 1. Attitudes
and Social Cognition (pp. 1–165). Washington, DC:

2196

APA.
Beier, J. S., & Carey, S. (2013). Contingency is not enough:
Social context guides third-party attributions of
intentional agency. Developmental Psychology, 1–45.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing communicative intentions in
infancy. Mind & Language, 25(2), 141–168.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2011). Natural pedagogy as
evolutionary adaptation. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 366(1567),
1149–1157.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 148–153.
Dawson, C., & Gerken, L. (2009). From domain-generality
to domain-sensitivity: 4-Month-olds learn an abstract
repetition rule in music that 7-month-olds do not.
Cognition, 111(3), 378–382.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2009.02.010
Ferguson, B., & Waxman, S. R. (2013). Communication and
Categorization: New Insights into the Relation
Between Speech, Labels and Concepts for Infants. In
M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Frank, M. C., Slemmer, J. A., Marcus, G. F., & Johnson, S.
P. (2009a). Information from multiple modalities helps
5-month-olds learn abstract rules. Developmental
Science, 12(4), 504–509.
Frank, M. C., Vul, E., & Johnson, S. P. (2009b).
Development of infants’ attention to faces during the
first year. Cognition, 110(2), 160–170.
Gervain, J., Macagno, F., Cogoi, S., Peña, M., & Mehler, J.
(2008). The neonate brain detects speech structure.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 105(37), 14222–14227.
Gómez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (1999). Artificial grammar
learning by 1-year-olds leads to specific and abstract
knowledge. Cognition, 70, 109–135.
Hoff, E. (2006). How social contexts support and shape
language development. Developmental Review, 26(1),
55–88.
Johnson, S. C. (2000). The recognition of mentalistic agents
in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(1), 1–7.
Johnson, S. P., Fernandes, K. J., Frank, M. C., Kirkham, N.
Z., Marcus, G. F., Rabagliati, H., & Slemmer, J. A.
(2009). Abstract Rule Learning for Visual Sequences
in 8- and 11-Month-Olds. Infancy, 14(1), 2–18.
doi:10.1080/15250000802569611
Kuhl, P. K. (2007). Is speech learning “gated” by the social
brain? Developmental Science, 10(1), 11-120.
Kuhl, P. K., Tsao, F. M., & Liu, H. M. (2003). Foreignlanguage experience in infancy: Effects of short-term
exposure and social interaction on phonetic learning.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 100(15), 9096–9101.

Marcus, G. F., & Rabagliati, H. (2008). Language
acquisition, domain specificity and descent with
modification. In J. Colombo, P. McCardle, & L.
Freund (Eds.), Infant Pathways to Language:, Methods,
Models and Research Directions. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Marcus, G. F., Fernandes, K. J., & Johnson, S. P. (2007).
Infant Rule Learning Facilitated by Speech.
Psychological Science, 18(5), 387–391.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S. B., & Vishton, P. M.
(1999). Rule Learning by Seven-Month-Old Infants.
Science, New Series, 283(5398), 77–80.
Nadel, J., Carchon, I., Kervella, C., Marcelli, D., &
Reserbat-Plantey, D. (1999). Expectancies for social
contingency in 2-month-olds. Developmental Science,
2(2), 164–173.
Pascalis, O., de Haan, M., & Nelson, C. A. (2002). Is face
processing species-specific during the first year of life?
Science, 296(5571), 1321–1323.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. William Morrow
and Company.
Powell, L. J., & Spelke, E. S. (2013). Preverbal infants
expect members of social groups to act alike.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 1–8.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1304326110/-/DCSupplemental
Rabagliati, H., Senghas, A., Johnson, S. P., & Marcus, G. F.
(2012). Infant Rule Learning: Advantage Language, or
Advantage Speech? PLoS ONE, 7(7), e40517.
Saffran, J. R., Pollak, S. D., Seibel, R. L., & Shkolnik, A.
(2007). Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule learning is not
specific to language. Cognition, 105(3), 669–680.
Thiessen, E. D. (2012). Effects of inter-and intra-modal
redundancy on infants' rule learning. Language
Learning and Development, 8(3), 197-214.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of Human Communication.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Valenza, E., Simion, F., & Cassia, V. M. (1996). Face
preference at birth. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
22(4), 892-903.
Vouloumanos, A., & Werker, J. F. (2007). Listening to
language at birth: evidence for a bias for speech in
neonates. Developmental Science, 10(2), 159–164.
Vouloumanos, A., Hauser, M. D., Werker, J. F., & Martin,
A. (2010). The tuning of human neonates’ preference
for speech. Child Development, 81(2), 517–527.
Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. (1984). Cross-language speech
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization
during the first year of life. Infant Behavior and
Development, 7(1), 49–63.
Yoon, J. M. D., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).
Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal
infants, 105(36), 13690–13695.

2197

