UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Construction and Revision of Spatial Mental Models under High Task Demand

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84f7h3b3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Nejasmic, Jelica
Bucher, Leandra
Thorn, Paul D.
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Construction and Revision of Spatial Mental Models under High Task Demand
Jelica Nejasmic (jelica.nejasmic@psychol.uni-giessen.de)*
Leandra Bucher (leandra.bucher@psychol.uni-giessen.de)*
Paul D. Thorn (thorn@phil-fak.uni-duesseldorf.de)**
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)*
*Justus Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany
**Heinrich Heine University, Institute for Philosophy, Universitaetsstr. 1,
40204 Duesseldorf, Germany

Abstract
Individuals often revise their beliefs when confronted with
contradicting evidence. Belief revision in the spatial domain
can be regarded as variation of initially constructed spatial
mental models. Construction and revision usually follow
distinct cognitive principles. The present study examines
whether principles of revisions which follow constructions
under high task demands differ from principles applied after
less demanding constructions. We manipulated the task
demands for model constructions by means of the continuity
with which a spatial model was constructed. We administered
tasks with continuous, semi-continuous, and discontinuous
conditions as between-subject factor (experiment 1) and as
within-subject factor (experiment 2). Construction and
revision followed distinct cognitive principles in the
changeless conditions of experiment 1. With increased task
demands due to switches between different continuity
conditions (experiment 2), reasoners adapted the principles
they used for model revisions to the principles which they had
used during antecedent constructions.
Keywords: spatial reasoning, spatial mental models, belief
revision, episodic trace, memory effect

Construction of spatial mental models
To cope with every-day life, humans in almost all
situations have to make decisions on the basis of actual
given or mentally stored information. Sometimes we are
confronted with situations requiring different reasoning
abilities. Imagine the following situation: You are talking to
a friend who visited Paris and now tells you about his
vacations. He says:
(1)
(2)

“The book store is to the left of the Eiffel Tower”
“And the café is to the left of the Champ de Mars”

Given these information it is not possible to determine
how the buildings are related to each other. In particular, the
two statements do not yet allow you to continuously arrange
the named objects. It is assumed that humans process spatial
information of this kind by constructing an integrated
mental representation, called “mental model”. Mental
models represent what is true, given by the premises and in
a more restricted sense how reality could be (Craik, 1943;
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Goodwin & Johnson-Laird,
2005).

The common notion is that human reasoning relies on the
construction and inspection of mental models. We are
inclined to integrate related pieces of information into one
model and thus you would, most likely, start to think about
the arrangement of the buildings (Johnshon-Laird, 1983;
Knauff, Rauh, & Schlieder, 1995; Knauff, Rauh, Schlieder,
& Strube, 1998; Johnson-Laird et al., 2004; Goodwin &
Johnson-Laird, 2005; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, Nebel,
& Knauff, 2011; Nejasmic, Krumnack, Bucher, & Knauff,
2011). The construction of a mental model is influenced by
a number of factors, among them the number of arguments;
unambiguousness of the arguments, or the premise order
(Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982; Evans, Newstead, &
Byrne, 1993; Knauff et al., 1998; Nejasmic et al., 2011).
The premise order determines how information is integrated
into a spatial mental model. For instance, premises can be
presented in a continuous (Ar1B, Br2C, Cr3D), a semicontinuous (Br2C, Cr3D, Ar1B), or a discontinuous order
(Cr3D, Ar1B, Br2C), with A, B, C, and D representing
objects and rn the relation (e.g. right of) between them.
These different premise orders result into different
sequentially information integration and thus different
cognitive demand. It is easier (faster and less error-prone) to
construct models and draw inferences based on these
models, when premises are given in a continuous and semicontinuous as opposed to discontinuous orders, known as
the “continuity effect” (Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982;
Knauff et al., 1998; Nejasmic et al., 2011). The continuity
effect is usually explained as follows: humans process
discontinuous information by constructing one temporary
mental model which must be modified in order to match the
last piece of information provided by the final premise of
the discontinuous order. The construction of the temporary
model basically equals the construction of a model based on
continuous or semi-continuous information. However, the
modification of the temporary model is an additional step
which a) requires time and b) provides a source of errors.
With a view to our introductory example this means that
you construct a temporary model (M1) from the first two
statements, with a preferred working direction from left to
right (Nejasmic et al., 2011):
(M1) Book store – Eiffel Tower – Café – Champ de Mars

1066

The relation between the “Eiffel Tower” and the “Café”
remains unconfirmed and is represented in the model only
temporary. This temporary relation makes the difference
between a temporary mental model and a “regular” mental
model. Resuming the introductory example, imagine your
friend provides you with a third piece of information:
(3)
“The Champ de Mars is to the left of the book
store.”
In the light of the additional information you are able to
arrange the buildings in the correct order
(M2) Café – Champ de Mars – Book store – Eiffel Tower
The transition from the temporal – unconfirmed – model
(M1) to the confirmed final model (M2) involves the
relocation of objects. In our example, the objects “Café” and
“Champ de Mars” are relocated within the temporary model
to the model´s leftmost positions to come up with the final,
confirmed arrangement (M2) (Nejasmic et al., 2011).
Once a model is constructed, the verbatim information of
the premises gets lost to a great extent. What is stored in
memory is the model as the “end product” (Ehrlich &
Johnson-Laird, 1982). The retrieval of a model from the
depth of your memory is supported by recordings of the
vital steps that you had to accomplish while you constructed
the model (Payne, 1993; Baguley & Payne, 1999, 2000;
Payne & Bagueley, 2006). It means the sequence by which
the objects were integrated into the model and – most
important for our study – the relocation of objects within the
temporary mental model during the construction of the final
model is traced.

Revision of spatial mental models
Let´s extent our example by the component of belief
revision. Revision is required when new evidence (partly)
conflicts with information a reasoner received beforehand
and thus runs counter his beliefs. To take contradicting
information into account with the aim to re-establish
consistency within a certain belief set, it is a vital need to
perform a belief revision (Elio & Pelletier, 1994, 1997;
Wolf, Rieger, & Knauff, 2012). Imagine that after a few
minutes your friend’s wife joined the conversation and told
you:
(4)
“Excuse me, I have lived in Paris for a long time
and the Café is to the right of the Eiffel Tower.”
The new piece of information seems reliable. To achieve
consistency between the new fact and your previously held
believes, you must modify your initially constructed mental
model. Note, that there is more than one alternative for the
revision of the arrangement
(R1) Champ de Mars – Book store – Eiffel Tower – Café
(R2) Eiffel Tower – Café – Champ de Mars – Book store

Despite the fact that both alternatives for re-establishing
consistency are logically equivalent, there is evidence that
reasoners have clear preferences for one alternative over the
other (Bucher, Krumnack, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011;
Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011; Bucher &
Nejasmic, 2012; Bucher, Nejasmic, Bertleff, & Knauff,
2013; Knauff, Bucher, Krumnack, & Nejasmic, 2013;
Nejasmic, Bucher, & Knauff, 2013).
For spatial belief revision three main assumptions were
worked out: (1) The revision is deemed as a distinct phase,
following a construction and subsequent inspection
(implicating inconsistency detection as a prerequisite for a
belief revision) of a spatial mental model. (2) The revision
process has been suggested to rely on a variation of an
initially constructed spatial model. (3) Spatial belief revision
is sensitive to a functional asymmetry between two
arguments (located object – LO and reference object – RO)
of a binary spatial relation and the LO, as the more
“flexible” object of a verbatim spatial description is
relocated within the initially constructed model. More
precisely, applied to a spatial arrangement A – B – C and a
contradicting fact “C is to the left of A” the object C is the
located object and A is the reference object. Spatial belief
revision is based on the relocation of the inconsistent fact´s
LO, resulting in a preferred arrangement C – A – B (Bucher
et al., 2011; Krumnack et al., 2011; Bucher & Nejasmic,
2012; Bucher et al., 2013; Knauff et al., 2013). Recent
studies show that the LO-principle can be deemed as a
strong cognitive principle for spatial belief revision
processes that is modulate-able during reasoning about
objects with specific properties (Nejasmic et al., 2013).
Construction and revision occur as independent processes,
guided by distinct principles (e.g. Bucher et al., 2011). This
seems the case at least under conditions that do not require
much cognitive “effort” such as it is the case with tasks that
allow “easy” model construction in a continuous way. We
wondered whether reasoners still apply distinct principles
for distinct reasoning phases in cases where more cognitive
effort is needed for constructing one unified mental
representation. For construction processes cognitive demand
is increased with discontinuously presented information,
compared to more continuously presented information
(Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982; Knauff et al., 1998;
Nejasmic et al., 2011).
We conducted two experiments, in which we manipulated
the presentation order of premises. In experiment 1
reasoners were confronted with the premise orders as a
between subject factor. Three groups received construction
and revision problems of one kind: continuous, semicontinuous, or discontinuous. The question was whether
“difficult” discontinuous constructions compared to “easy”
continuous and semi-continuous constructions alter
revisions. In the second experiment we went a step further
and increased demand on cognitive resources during the
construction phase even more. Reasoners were confronted
with the problems of all three continuity conditions,
randomly. That procedure created the necessity for

1067

reasoners to switch between tasks with different premise
orders.
Our hypothesis is: with “difficult” constructions, spatial
belief revision is accomplished by a repetition of processes
already performed during the preceding construction phase.
In these cases, we should find a repetition of object
relocation to the leftmost side as it is performed during the
integration of discontinuously presented information. With
“easy” constructions, spatial belief revision remains based
on the LO-principle.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. Sixty-three students from the University of
Giessen (23 male; age: M = 23.3; SD = 2.7) were tested
individually. They gave written informed consent and were
paid at a rate of 8€/hour for their participation. Data from
four participants were excluded from the analysis due to
errors on more than 90% of the problems. The experiment
took approximately 30–45 min.
Materials, design, and procedure. Each participant solved
48 revision problems. Six practice trials (not analyzed)
preceded the experimental trials. Participants received all
instructions on the computer screen. The structure of the
problems was as follows: participants received in a
“construction phase” sequentially (in a self-paced manner)
three statements (1, 2, and 3) which described the spatial
relation of four small, equal-sized and disyllabic objects
(tools, fruits, and vegetables), for example:
Premise 1:
“Apple left of mango”
Premise 2:
“Mango left of kiwi”
Premise 3:
“Kiwi left of pear”
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the premiseorder condition: continuous (n=19), semi-continuous
(n=20), and discontinuous (n=20) and thus received
problems in only one premise order throughout the
experiment. They were instructed to imagine the
arrangement described by the three premises (in this case
apple–mango–kiwi–pear) and subsequently to choose one
out of two arrangements (correct arrangement / correct
arrangement mirrored), presented on the screen, by pressing
the corresponding button on the response pad.
In a subsequent “revision phase”, an additional statement
was presented that was introduced as an incontrovertible
“fact”. It was either consistent, in half of the problems
(“Apple left of pear”) or inconsistent in the other half (“Pear
left of apple”) with the information provided by the
premises. Participants were told that the fourth statement is
irrefutably true and that they have to take it into account.
They had to decide whether or not the presented fact is
consistent with the initial model, by pressing the respective
button (“yes” or “no”). In cases where participants decided
that the fact was inconsistent, they were asked to revise the
arrangement (resulting in either pear–apple–mango–kiwi
(“relocation of the LO to the left”) or alternative in mango–
kiwi–pear–apple (“relocation of the RO to the right”) and

subsequently to choose one out of the two revised
arrangements presented on the screen by pressing the
corresponding button. If participants decided that the fact is
consistent with the initial premises and the arrangement the
trial finished at this point and the next one was presented.
All statements were presented in black on a white
background (beside the fact which was presented in red to
highlight it). Premises were presented with the relation “left
of” only. However, the facts used the relations “left of” and
“right of”, indicating the direction in which the fact´s LO or
RO could be relocated. Thus the experiment was designed
in a way that in half of the revision problems a fact´s LO
could be relocated to the leftmost side of the initial
arrangement (with the alternative possibility to relocate a
RO to the right) and in the other half of the problems the
reverse was the case. Positions of the arrangements as well
as positions of decision buttons (“yes” and “no”) were
counterbalanced across the experiment.
All stimuli were generated and presented using Superlab
4.0 with an RB-530 response box (Cedrus Corporation, San
Pedro, CA, 1999-2006). The experiment was run on a
standard personal computer (Windows XP) with a standard
19’’monitor. Premise reading times (respective time from
text onset to button press calling up the next premise),
number of correct decisions in the “construction” and
“inconsistency detection phase”, type of revisions in the
“revision phase”, and corresponding revision times were
recorded.

Results and discussion
Construction. To ensure, that the manipulation of
different premise orders worked, an ANOVA with the
within factor premise number (first, second, third premise) ×
and the between factor premise order (continuous, semicontinuous, discontinuous) was conducted for reading times.
Level of significance was 5%.
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of premise
number, F(2, 112) = 6.01; p = .003; ƞ2 = .10, and a
significant interaction between the factors, F(4, 112) =
10.61; p < .001; ƞ2 = .28. Subsequent t-tests revealed that
reading times for first premises were significantly longer in
the discontinuous, compared to the continuous condition,
t(37) = -2.27; p = .030, d = 0.74. Participants needed more
time for reading second premises of semi-continuous, t(37)
= -2.21; p = .033, d = 0.73, and of discontinuous orders,
t(37) = -4.67; p < .001, d = 1.54, compared to the
continuous condition. For third premises reading times were
longer in the discontinuous condition compared to the
continuous, t(37) = -6.31; p < .001, d = 2.03, as well as
semi-continuous condition, t(38) = -4.46; p < .001, d = 1.45.
Equally, participants needed more time reading third
premises of semi-continuous than of continuous orders,
t(37) = -3.99; p < .001, d = 1.31.
All other analyses were non-significant (all ps > .06) (for
an overview see table 1).

1068

Table 1: Mean reading times for the three premises
depending on the premise orders continuous, semicontinuous, and discontinuous for experiment 1.
Premise 1
Premise 2
Premise 3
Premise order
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
Continuous
3.39 (1.50) 2.01 (1.38) 1.89 (0.95)
Semicontinuous 3.62 (1.47) 3.20 (1.93) 3.18 (1.06)
Discontinuous
4.56 (1.71) 4.29 (1.65) 6.39 (3.04)
Participants performed the construction part well,
choosing correct arrangements in 97% (SD = 3.8) of the
trials. Inconsistencies between the initial description and the
contradictory fact were correctly detected in 91% (SD = 9.0)
of the cases. Erroneous trials were excluded from further
analyses.
Revision. ANOVAs with the factors premise order
(continuous, semi-continuous, discontinuous) × LO
relocation direction (left vs. right) were conducted for
revision choices and respective revision times. Level of
significance was 5%.
ANOVA revealed no significant differences, neither for
relocation directions of a LO, nor for corresponding revision
times depending on different premise orders (all ps > .45).
However, results from an additional analysis revealed that
the LO was relocated preferably (M = 71%; SD = 19.5)
compared to the RO (M = 29%; SD = 19.5), Wilcoxon test, z
= -5.61, p < .001, (see figure 1).

Figure 1: Relative frequency (in %) of model choices
based on the relocation of a fact´s LO vs. RO in experiment
1. Error bars show standard errors.
The reading times show a continuity effect. Participants
needed not only more time to process discontinuous
problems in general, but they were also slower in processing
first premises compared to continuous problems. It seems
that a more difficult construction in combination with a
subsequent revision takes its toll on cognitive resources,
reflected by higher reading times. However, reasoners were
able to switch to their preferred revision strategy, the LO
relocation, which they applied even in the most complex
problems. We conducted a second experiment in which we
manipulated the difficulty of the task additionally by a
random presentation of premise orders resulting in the
necessity to switch between the premise orders.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants. Another sample of 32 students from the
University of Giessen (3 male; age: M = 23.1; SD = 2.4)
were tested individually. They gave written informed
consent and were paid at a rate of 8€/hour for their
participation. Data from seven participants were excluded
from the analysis due to errors on more than 90% (n = 2) of
the problems or extremely long reading times (n = 5). The
experiment took approximately 30–45 min.
Materials, procedure, and design. Instructions on the
computer screen and the procedure were the same as in
experiment 1 with the exception that premises were
presented randomly in the three premise orders (continuous,
semi-continuous, or discontinuous) to each participant. Thus
all participants were confronted with all three types of
premise orders throughout the experiment.

Results and discussion
Construction. Again, an ANOVA with the factors premise
number (first, second, third) × premise order (continuous,
semi-continuous, discontinuous) was conducted for reading
times. Level of significance was 5%.
ANOVA revealed significant main effects of premise
number, F(2, 48) = 12.06; p < .001; ƞ2 = .33, and premise
order, F(2, 48) = 34.35; p < .001; ƞ2 = .59, as well as a
significant interaction premise number × premise order, F(4,
96) = 7.47; p = .002; ƞ2 = .24. Based on results known from
previous studies describing the continuity effect, we are
mainly interested in the significant interaction. Premise
reading times depending on different premise orders were
compared separately using t-tests. Participants needed more
time for reading second premises of discontinuous than of
continuous orders, t(24) = -4.69; p < .001, dz = 0.90, as well
as of semi-continuous orders, t(24) = -4.63; p < .001, dz =
0.98. For third premises, reading times were longer in the
discontinuous condition than in the continuous, t(24) = 6.67; p < .001, dz = 1.23, as well as semi-continuous
condition, t(24) = -4.58; p < .001, dz = 0.82. Equally,
participants needed more time for processing third premises
of semi-continuous compared to continuous orders, t(24) = 5.09; p < .001, dz = 1.00. All other analyses were nonsignificant (all ps > .35) (see Table 2).
Table 2: Mean reading times for the three premises
depending on the premise orders continuous, semicontinuous, and discontinuous for experiment 2.
Premise 1 Premise 2 Premise 3
Premise order
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
Continuous
5.09(1.63) 4.10(2.17) 4.81(1.83)
Semicontinuous 5.14(1.89) 4.08(2.10) 6.25(2.05)
Discontinuous 5.77(3.81) 5.70(2.63) 9.19(4.07)

1069

Similar to experiment 1, participants performed the
construction part well, by choosing correct arrangements in
92% (SD = 11.5) of the trials. Inconsistencies between the
initial information and the contradictory fact were correctly
detected in 84% (SD = 20.22) of the cases. Erroneous trials
were excluded from further analysis.
Revision. ANOVAs with the factors premise order
(continuous, semi-continuous, discontinuous) × LO
relocation direction (left, right) were conducted for revision
choices and respective revision times. Level of significance
was 5%.
ANOVA for revision choices revealed a significant main
effect of LO relocation direction, F(1, 21) = 7.65; p = .012;
ƞ2 = .27. A subsequent t-test revealed that participants
relocated more often a LO to the leftmost side (M = 79%;
SD = 27.1) than to the rightmost side (M = 58%; SD = 32.3),
t(24) = 2.52; p = .019, dz = 0.51, (see figure 2). All other
analyses were non-significant (all ps >.15).

Figure 2: Relative frequency (in %) of model choices
based on the relocation of a fact´s LO to the leftmost side
vs. the rightmost side of a spatial mental model. Error bars
show standard errors.
Again, results for the construction phase suggest that the
manipulation worked and more cognitive effort was used in
semi-continuous or discontinuous conditions. By switching
between different premise orders we indented to force less
available capacities for the revision phase. Results show that
participants preferred a LO-principle that implies a
relocation direction to the left, compared to a LO-relocation
to the right. As mentioned before, participants had the
possibility to choose between two revised arrangements,
following either the LO-principle, or the RO-principle. In
previous studies participants almost ignore the logical
equivalent RO-principle but in the present study the
relocation direction modulates the revision strategy.
Participants chose more often the RO-relocation, in cases
where the relocation direction was to the left, compared to a
LO-relocation to the right.

General discussion
The revision of spatial beliefs has been suggested to be
based on a variation of an initially constructed spatial
model. Reasoning during the construction and the revision

phase can be described in two distinct phases with distinct
underlying cognitive processes involved in respective
reasoning processes. However, phases may also share
characteristic processes and preceding processes may also
affect subsequent processes.
The present work investigates whether increased
difficulty of the construction process affects revision and
whether cognitive principles which are distinct for
construction and revision under conditions which are
cognitively not demanding, change under high task
demands. In particular, we were interested whether
relocations already performed during the construction phase
were repeated for revisions when demands are high. In two
experiments, participants solved problems with varying
premise orders (continuous, semi-continuous, and
discontinuous order). In experiment 1, reasoners were
confronted with one kind (e.g. continuous), in experiment 2,
with all kinds of presentation orders in a random manner,
further increasing demands on cognitive resources during
the construction phase. In both experiments, we replicated
the continuity effect that occurs during the construction of a
spatial model, i.e. reading times as measured between
subjects (experiment 1) and across the problems within
subjects (experiment 2) - expectedly - differed depending on
premise orders. More time was needed for discontinuous
problems compared to continuous and semi-continuous
problems, reflecting higher cognitive demands on the
integration of premise information in a discontinuous
compared to a more continuous order.
While in experiment 1, reasoner´s revision processes were
guided by semantic cues yielded by inconsistent statements
(LO-principle) a different pattern emerged in experiment 2.
When discontinuous problems were randomly presented
together with continuous and semi-continuous problems,
revisions were overall preferably based on relocations of
objects contingent on the relocation direction performed
during the construction phase. This indicates an influence of
reasoning processes performed during the construction
phase on subsequent revision.
Interestingly, the effect did not occur in experiment 1,
when reasoners solved only one kind of problems and were
not required to switch flexibly between different premise
orders. The different pattern emerging during the revision
phase in experiment 1 compared to 2 can be interpreted in
the way that it is easier and more parsimonious to
manipulate mental models than storing/using initial
descriptions and vital steps of preceding phases.
Participants in experiment 1 adapted very well to the
particular task demand when confronted with only one type
of premise order, and they did so, even when confronted
with the most difficult – the discontinuous – premise order.
Cognitive resources in experiment 1 were presumably very
efficiently allocated to the subsequent revision phases.
However, the necessity of switching between different
premise orders in experiment 2, increased the difficulty of
construction processes, engaging more cognitive resources.
As a result, the subsequent revision processes were

1070

modulated and influenced by the construction processes
performed previously, using the episodic trace recorded
during construction to accomplish the revision. Constructing
a mental model on the basis of discontinuously presented
information requires mental operations, similar to a mental
relocation performed during revision. In this sense the
modification of a temporary mental model can be described
as a revision-like process that is repeated during spatial
belief revision in cases when less cognitive capacities
resources are available.
We conclude: increased difficulty of the construction of
spatial models leads to a higher demand of cognitive
resources which in turn modulates operations performed
during the subsequent reasoning phase of revision.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) to Markus Knauff and
Bernhard Nebel KN 465/6-1 and KN 465/6-2. We thank
Sabine Bertleff, Anja Gatzsche, and Isabell Tapia-Leon for
assistance with the experiments.

References
Baguley, T. S., & Payne, S. J. (1999). Recognition memory
for sentences from spatial descriptions: A test of the
episodic construction trace hypothesis. Memory &
Cognition, 27, 962-973.
Baguley, T. S., & Payne, S. J. (2000). Long-term memory
for spatial and temporal mental models includes
construction processes and model structure. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53A, 479-512.
Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 3477-3483). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Bucher, L., & Nejasmic, J. (2012). Relocating multiple
objects during belief revision. In C. Stachniss, K. Schill,
& D. Uttal (Eds.), Lecture notes in artiﬁcial intelligence:
Spatial cognition (pp. 476-491). Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., Bertleff, S., & Knauff, M. (2013).
Plausibility and visualizability in relational belief
revision. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I.
Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 19461951). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Craik, K. J. W. (1943). The Nature of Explanation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ehrlich, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982). Spatial
descriptions and referential continuity. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 296-306.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. J. (1994). On relevance in
nonmonotonic reasoning: Some empirical studies. In R.

Greiner, & D. Subramanian (Eds.), American Association
for Artificial Intelligence 1994 Fall Symposium Series
(pp. 64-67). Relevance.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21, 419-460.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(1993). Human reasoning. The psychology of deduction.
Hove (UK): Lawrence Erlbaum.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005). Reasoning
with relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468-493.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove,
UK: Erlbaum.
Knauff, M., Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., & Nejasmic, J.
(2013). Spatial belief revision. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 25(2), 147-156.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen's calculus. In Proceedings
of the 17th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Continuity Effect and Figural Bias in Spatial Relational
Inference. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 573-578). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2010). Spatial reasoning as verbal reasoning. In S.
Ohlsson, & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1002-1007). Austin, TX, US: Cognitive Science
Society.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., Nebel, B., &
Knauff, M. (2011). A model for relational reasoning as
verbal reasoning. Cognitive Systems Research, 11, 377392.
Nejasmic, J., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M. (2013). Grounded
Spatial Belief Revision. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N.
Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1067-1072). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Nejasmic, J., Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying the continuity
effect in spatial reasoning. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, &
T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 11271132). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Payne, S. J. (1993). Memory for mental models of spatial
descriptions: An episodic construction trace account.
Memory & Cognition, 21, 591-603.
Payne, S. J., & Baguley, T. (2006). Memory for the process
of constructing an integrated mental model. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 817-825.
Wolf, A. G., Rieger, S., & Knauff, M. (2012). The effects of
source trustworthiness and inference type on human belief
revision. Thinking and Reasoning, 18, 417-440.

1071

