UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constraints on Abstraction: Generalization Across Languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qv7c8db

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Finley, Sara

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constraints on Abstraction: Generalization Across Languages
Sara Finley (finleysr@plu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Pacific Lutheran University
Tacoma, WA, 98447, USA

Abstract
Recent research has suggested a division between lexical
representations and phonological patterns; lexical items are
stored with talker-specific information, while phonological
patterns are represented at a separate, abstract level of
representation (Finley, 2013; Smolensky & Legendre,
2006). The present paper provides further evidence for this
proposal, demonstrating that learners will extend a novel
phonological pattern (vowel harmony) to speakers of a
novel dialect when the words are familiar, but not when the
words are unfamiliar, further supporting a distinction
between the representations of lexical items and the
representations of phonological patterns.
Keywords: statistical learning, vowel harmony, phonological
representations, lexical representations.

Introduction
One of the major issues in the cognitive science of language
is how the phonological representations that make up words
are stored in the human mind. Specifically, there is a debate
between whether the phonological representations that
govern word formation are represented in the mind in terms
of abstract, rule-governed processes, or as exemplars of
specific instances, based on the phonetic forms of lexical
items. While classic phonological theory has proposed
highly abstract, symbolic representations for phonological
patterns (Chomsky & Halle, 1968), experimental research
has questioned the abstract nature of phonological
processes, and suggested that phonological rules are
epiphenomenal (Port & Leary, 2005). Because listeners
encode highly detailed information from the individual
speakers they encounter (Nygaard & Pisoni, 1998),
researchers have proposed that representations of lexical
items are not based on normalized or abstract
representations, but based on individual, stored exemplars
(Johnson, 1997). Because the generalizations that can be
made about phonological restrictions for word formation
(e.g., phonotactics and morphophonology) necessarily come
from examination of lexical items, it is reasonable to assume
that these phonological restrictions share the same
constraints on representations as lexical items (i.e., finegrained, talker-specific representations) (Pierrehumbert,
2001). However, it is also possible that language makes use
of multiple levels of representation, with fine-grained
exemplar-based representations at one level, and abstract
representations at another, higher level (Smolensky &
Legendre, 2006).

One of the difficulties in distinguishing between an
abstract model of phonological representations and an
exemplar model of phonological representations is in
teasing apart the representations of individual words and the
representations of phonological patterns, since phonological
patterns are instantiated through word formation. In order to
tease apart the distinction between lexical representations
and phonological representations, the researcher must look
to how the language handles phonological patterns in novel
words. While researchers have investigated questions of
phonological representations using a phonological version
of a wug test (Berko, 1958), these investigations typically
assume an abstract, generative view of phonological
representations (Becker, Ketrez, & Nevins, 2011; Becker,
Nevins, & Levine, 2012; Gouskova & Becker, 2013), and
therefore do not address the question of a distinction
between lexical representations and phonological rules.
Another approach to testing the differences between
lexical items and phonological patterns is by testing how
learners treat novel and familiar forms following a brief
exposure to a novel language. If there is a distinction
between lexical representations and abstract phonological
patterns, then learners should treat familiar, known words
differently than unfamiliar, unknown words.
Recent research used learning to test the hypothesis that
lexical representations and abstract phonological patterns
are stored under distinct representations (Finley, 2013).
Participants in an artificial grammar learning experiment
were exposed to a novel phonological pattern (vowel
harmony, where vowels in a word shared the same value of
a phonological feature, back and round), and then were
tested on their knowledge of that phonological pattern using
both familiar words and unfamiliar, novel words. In
addition, participants were tested on the same set of familiar
and novel items, but these items were spoken by an
unfamiliar talker of the opposite gender. Participants were
able to extend the newly learned vowel harmony pattern to
both novel and familiar items, for both novel and familiar
talkers. In addition, the analyses tested for a ‘transfer
deficit’ from familiar to novel talkers. The more speakers
make use of talker-specific representations in learning, the
larger the transfer deficit should be when accepting items
spoken in an unfamiliar voice. There was a clear transfer
deficit for familiar items, but not for novel items. This
difference suggests that learners store known items in terms
of talker-specific phonetic details, but make use of abstract
phonological patterns when making grammaticality
judgments for novel words. These abstract representations
are independent of the specific talker heard during training.
The ability generalize a newly learned phonological
pattern to unfamiliar talkers for both familiar and novel

2204

items raises an important question of whether participants in
an artificial language learning task generalize to novel
talkers more so than they would in a natural setting. In
addition, there is a question of whether learners
appropriately apply the phonological pattern to the language
in question, or whether they will assume that any novel
language would follow the constraints of the newly learned
phonological pattern, without any positive evidence. The
present study addresses this concern, and provides further
evidence for distinction between representations for
known/familiar words and abstract phonological patterns.
If learners represent the phonological components of
lexical items and phonological patterns separately, one
should expect this difference to manifest itself when
learners are asked to extend a novel pattern to a novel,
unfamiliar dialect. It is common for languages to share or
borrow lexical items (e.g., ‘computer’) without sharing
phonotactic restrictions (Ito & Mester, 1995). This means
that the phonological component of a lexical item can be
shared from language to language (so long as the
phonological restrictions of the borrowing language allow
for the phonological form found in the borrowed lexical
item), without affecting the grammar of the borrowing
language. However, in order to borrow a phonological
pattern that affects novel words, the grammar of the
borrowing language must be changed. If learners freely
borrow the phonological form of known words, but not the
phonological pattern that governs the formation, then we
should expect generalization of known (familiar) words to
an unfamiliar talker of a novel dialect, but not generalization
of novel (unfamiliar) words. This predicts that learners of a
novel phonological pattern will be able to extend a newly
learned phonological pattern to familiar items spoken in an
unfamiliar dialect, but not novel items spoken in an
unfamiliar dialect. This is essentially the opposite pattern of
results that Finley (2013) found. Because Finley (2013)
used the same dialect across talkers, speakers were able to
freely generalize to the novel talker.
By demonstrating that learners extend a phonological
pattern unfamiliar talkers differently depending on the
spoken dialect of the talker, it will shed light on the nature
of representations for phonological patterns. Specifically, if
learners extend the phonological pattern to both familiar and
unfamiliar words to novel talkers of an unfamiliar dialect, it
suggests that learners are biased to generalize phonological
patterns across languages. If learners extend the
phonological pattern to novel talkers of an unfamiliar dialect
for unfamiliar words but not familiar/known words, it
suggests that learners view the representation of the familiar
words as talker-specific, but are biased to generalize the
novel phonological pattern across languages. If learners
extend the phonological pattern to novel talkers of an
unfamiliar dialect for familiar words, but not unfamiliar
words, it suggests that learners are biased to extend the
phonological representation of known words to novel
languages, but are biased against applying phonological
patterns to a novel language.

Methods
In the present study, learners were trained on a novel
phonological pattern, specifically vowel harmony. Vowel
harmony is a phonological pattern in which adjacent vowels
(ignoring consonants) must share the same value of a
phonological feature (Clements, 1976). For example, in a
left-to-right back/round vowel harmony system, words that
begin with a back/round vowel (e.g., [o], [u]) must only
contain back/round vowels, and words that begin with a
vowel that is front/unround (e.g., [i], [e]) must only contain
front/unround vowels. Previous research has shown that
adult, English speaking participants can learn a back/round
harmony pattern with relatively minimal exposure to the
pattern, particularly if the pattern is presented as a pseudomorphophonological alternation (e.g., as pairs of words,
/bodo/-/bodomu/, /bede/-/bedemi, etc.) (Finley, 2013; Finley
& Badecker, 2009).
Participants were trained on a vowel harmony pattern
spoken by a single talker, and then tested on items spoken
by a familiar talker as well as an unfamiliar talker. The
unfamiliar talker spoke a distinctly different dialect from the
familiar talker (generalizing from Turkish to English or vice
versa).

Participants
All 36 participants were adult native English speakers
recruited from Waldorf College, a small liberal arts college
in Northern Iowa, USA. Each participant was given extra
credit in a psychology course for participating. Some
participants may have previously participated in an artificial
grammar learning experiment. No participant had any
previous experience with a vowel harmony system, natural
or artificial.

Design
Adult, English speaking participants were exposed to a
back/round vowel harmony pattern that was presented in
one of two distinct voices: a male native Turkish speaker
with an Istanbul accent, or a male native English speaker
with an American accent. All exposure items were identical
(except for the talker). The harmony pattern was presented
to learners in pairs of words that contained a ‘stem’
followed by its ‘suffixed’ form (though participants were
only told that they would hear words in pairs). Stems
triggered a suffix vowel that was either /-e/ or /-o/
depending on whether the vowels in the stems contained
front vowels (/i/ or /e/) or back vowels (/o/ or /u/). All stems
were of the form CVCVC (e.g., /betig/) with the vowels
following back/round harmony constraints (all stem vowels
were either both front or both back, and never disharmonic),
and the consonants drawn from the set (/p, t, k, b, d, g, m,
n/). There were 24 items, presented as pairs: stem followed
by stem+suffix (e.g., /betig, betige/). These 24 items were
presented eight times, each in a random order (with suffixed
items always following bare stem items). Examples of the
exposure stimuli can be found in Table 1.

2205

Table 1: Examples of Exposure Stimuli.
Stem Vowel
Back

Table 2: Examples of Test Stimuli

Stem

Stem+Suffix

Items
Old

Stem Vowel

budok
nopub
dupob

budoko
nopubo
dupobo

Back

tikep
gemit
degib

tikepe
gemite
degibe

Front

Front

Following exposure, participants were presented with a
two-alternative, forced-choice test in which participants
were asked to decide which was more likely to come from
the language they had just heard. Participants heard two
CVCVC-V words, each identical except for the final vowel
ending: either /-e/ or /-o/. Because the first two vowels
obeyed harmony, the choice of the final vowel (/-e/ or /-o/)
depended on the back/round features of the vowels in the
first two syllables. The test items were identical for all
participants, and included items spoken by the Turkish
talker and items spoken by the American talker, presented in
a random order. For each participant, half of the items were
presented in the voice of a familiar talker, and the other half
of the items were presented in the voice of an unfamiliar
talker. In addition to items that were heard during the
exposure phase, novel items were also presented to
participants. This created four types of test items, 10 of each
type, creating 40 total test items. Old Items-Familiar Talker
were items that were identical to the training set items, and
therefore were spoken by a familiar talker. New ItemsFamiliar Talker were items that were not in the training set,
but were spoken by the same talker that was heard during
training. Old Items-New Dialect, were items that were heard
in the training set, but the talker was unfamiliar, and spoke a
dialect that was not heard during the exposure session. New
Items-New Dialect items were not heard in the training set,
and the talker was unfamiliar, and spoke a dialect that was
not heard during the exposure session. Examples of these
test items can be found in Table 2.
All stimuli were recorded in a sound attenuated booth at
12,000 Hz. Stress was placed on the first syllable using
English or Turkish pronunciation, with the exception that no
vowels were reduced, meaning that some English syllables
contained partial stress (as English reduces unstressed
syllables). All stimuli items were normalized for intensity
(set at 70dB), though participants were allowed to adjust
headphones to a comfortable volume during the experiment.
All stimuli creation and modifications to sound files was
performed in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2005). All phases
of the experiment were run in Psyscope X (Cohen,
MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). Participants were
given both written and verbal instructions. The entire
experiment took approximately 20 minutes.

Harmonic

Disharmonic

budoko
nopubo
dupobo

budoke
nopube
dupobe

tikepe
gemite
degibe

tikepo
gemito
degibo

butoko
godomo
tokugo

butoke
godome
tokuge

bedite
bipide
tidipe

bedito
bipido
tidipo

New
Back

Front

Results
Proportion of correct responses for all test items are given in
Figure 1. We compared each test item to 50% chance via
three separate one-sample t-tests.
Figure 1: Results (Means and Standard Errors).

If participants represent individual known items
separately from the harmony pattern found in the exposure
language, learners will extend the harmony pattern to an
unfamiliar talker speaking a novel dialect when the items
are familiar, but not when the items are novel. Results
support this hypothesis, as represented in Figure 1.
Participants were able to extend the harmony pattern to Old
Items-Familiar Talker (mean = 0.64, SD = 0.15), t(35) =
5.67, p < 0.001, New Items-Familiar Talker (mean = 0.59,
SD = 0.17 ), t(35) = 3.05, p < 0.01, and Old Items-New
Dialect items (mean = 0.60, SD = 0.17 ), t(35) = 3.34, p <
0.01, but not to Old Items-New Dialect items (mean = 0.50,
SD = 0.16), t(35) = 0.00, p = 1.00. This suggests that
participants learned the vowel harmony pattern, but only
extended the vowel harmony pattern to a novel dialect when
the learner was familiar with the lexical item.

2206

In addition, we performed a 2x2 (Talker x Test Item)
generalized linear mixed model fit by the Laplace
approximation using the lme4 package in R. A single model
was created with random intercepts for both items and
subjects. There was a significant difference between both
the Old and the New items, ß = 0.41, z = 2.15, p = 0.032,
and the Familiar and New Talker items, ß = 0.36, z = 2.33,
p= 0.020. The interaction between the Talker and Test Item
was not significant, ß = -0.12, z = 0.56 p = 0.58. These
results suggest that participants performed better on Old
Items and Familiar Talker items, but the transfer deficit
between Familiar and New Dialect talkers was not
significantly different between Old and New items.
Overall, the results of the present study are distinct from
Finley (2013), who showed a transfer deficit for Old items
but not for New Items. In fact, the trend is in the reverse
direction reverse; there was no significant transfer deficit for
Old Items, t(35) = 1.33, p = 0.19, but there was a significant
transfer deficit for New Items, t(35) = 3.37, p < 0.01.
It is possible that the results were mediated by the
familiarity of the dialect. The participants were all American
English speakers, and were not familiar with Turkish.
Learners may have responded differently to Turkish talkers
simply because they were unfamiliar with Turkish. In order
to ensure that the results were not due to familiarity with
English and unfamiliarity with Turkish, we separated out
the Turkish and the English responses, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Results: Turkish and American Talker Training
Separated (Means and Standard Errors)

There was no significant difference between participants
who were trained on Turkish compared to participants who
were trained on English for Old Items with a Familiar
Talker, t(17) = 1.71, p = 0.10, Old Items with a New
Dialect, t(17) = 0.47, p = 0.64, New Items with a Familiar
Talker, t(17) = 0.49, p = 0.63, or New Items with an New
Dialect, t(17) = 0.00, p = 1.0. This suggests that the
response patterns were the same regardless of whether the
learner was trained using an English speaking talker or a
Turkish speaking talker.

Discussion
Finley (2013) demonstrated that learners can extend a novel
phonological pattern (vowel harmony) to a novel talker, for
both novel and familiar items. However, the present study

showed a different pattern of results. Participants extended
the novel vowel harmony pattern to a novel talker, only
when the item was familiar (Old) items. The major
difference between Finley (2013) and the present study is
that Finley (2013) tested for generalization to a speaker of a
different gender (male to female) of the same dialect
(Turkish or English). In the present study, the gender was
held constant (male in all cases), but the identity and the
dialect of the talker changed from Turkish to English and
vice versa. The change in results from Finley (2013) to the
present study suggests that the representations for
phonological patterns are different when extending across
genders than when extending across dialects or languages.
One puzzle of the present results is that the overall rate of
correct, harmonic responses were relatively low compared
to previous artificial grammar learning experiments with a
similar paradigm (including Finley, 2013). One possibility
for this difference is that the inclusion of the novel dialect
made the test more difficult. Because Turkish and English
show relatively different vowel acoustics, switching
between Turkish and English vowels may have been
difficult for participants. The test items varied randomly for
talker familiarity, meaning that on one trial, the participant
could respond to a Turkish talker, and the next, an English
speaking talker. Switching from language to language may
have made the task more difficult overall, leading to a
decrease in overall harmonic responses. Because the mean
for New-New Dialect responses was exactly 0.50 (chance)
for both the English talker training and the Turkish talker
training, it suggests that the learners were reluctant to
extend the vowel harmony pattern to novel talkers when the
words were unfamiliar. Of the 36 participants, only nine
(25%) showed scores above 50% in the New-New Dialect
test items.
Because it is possible that the increased difficulty of the
task skewed the results, we re-ran the statistics, excluding
all participants who scored at or below chance for New
Items from a familiar dialect (n=14, 39% of participants), as
these participants are least likely to have learned the general
vowel harmony pattern. These participants were able to
extend the harmony pattern to Old Items-Familiar Talker
(mean = 0.67, SD = 0.17), t(21) = 4.87, p < 0.001, New
Items-Familiar Talker (mean = 0.69, SD = 0.19), t(21) =
7.27, p < 0.001, and Old Items-New Dialect items (mean =
0.60, SD = 0.12), t(21) = 2.37, p < 0.05, but not to Old
Items-New Dialect items (mean = 0.56, SD = 0.18), t(21) =
1.57, p = 0.13. These are the same results as when all data
were included.
In addition, we performed a 2x2 (Talker x Test Item)
generalized linear mixed model fit by the Laplace
approximation using the lme4 package in R. A single model
was created with random intercepts for both items and
subjects. There was no significant difference between the
Old and the New items, ß = 0.15, z = 0.67, p = 0.50, but
there as a significant difference between the Familiar and
New Talker items, ß = 0.56, z = 2.78, p = 0.0055. There was
no significant interaction between Talker and Test Item,

2207

ß = -0.18, z = -0.62 p = 0.53. These results suggest that the
effect of Old vs. New test items was carried by the
participants who failed to generalize the harmony pattern to
New items, but that even participants who successfully
extended the harmony pattern to new items still showed a
transfer deficit for novel talkers.

A Theory of Phonological Representations
The present data, along with the data from Finley (2013)
support a theory of phonological representations in which
familiar words (or lexical items) are stored differently from
the abstract phonological patterns that govern lexical items.
The extension of a phonological pattern depends on whether
the pattern is extended to a novel talker of the same dialect,
or is a cross-linguistic extension, or borrowing.
When a phonological pattern is learned, the representation
of that pattern is stored in terms of the words that instantiate
the pattern, as well as the abstract phonological rule, or
constraint ranking (Prince & Smolensky, 1993/2004). The
abstract representation of the phonological pattern is talkerindependent, but language specific.
Transfer Across Speakers of the Same Dialect Because
the learner stores the phonological pattern in a languagespecific manner, the abstract representation of the
phonological pattern should apply to all speakers of the
language in question. This means that a learner will assume
that an unknown speaker of the known language will make
use of the phonological pattern in question. For this reason,
the phonological pattern is extended to all types of words,
Old and New, for both familiar and unfamiliar talkers, so
long as the talkers are speaking the same basic dialect.
However, because the familiar items are stored in terms of
the voice heard during exposure, there should be a transfer
deficit for familiar items. Because the novel words are
stored abstractly, with a talker independent representation,
there will be no transfer deficit. These, essentially, are the
results of Finley (2013).
Transfer Across Speakers of a Novel Dialect When the
learner is asked to make generalizations about a novel
language from speakers of different dialect, a different set of
assumptions must be made with respect to when the
phonological pattern will apply. If the abstract phonological
pattern is stored in a language-specific manner, then the
learner will only extend the phonological pattern to speakers
of the same dialect that was heard during exposure. For this
reason, the learner will not transfer the phonological pattern
to speakers of an unfamiliar dialect. However, the lack of
transfer should only apply to novel items, because novel
(New) items reflect the abstract, language-specific
representation of the phonological process, whereas the
familiar (Old) items reflect the beginnings of the formation
of a lexical item. Because lexical items can be borrowed
across languages and dialects, learners can be expected to
extend the phonological form of the familiar words to the
novel language. In this sense, the learner is extending the

phonological form of known words as if they were lexical
items, but is not extending the phonological pattern across
speakers of different dialects. This is essentially the result of
the present study.
This general proposal is visualized in Figure 3. Old items
are represented in terms of their phonological form. This
representation is subject to borrowing into a novel, or
unfamiliar language. The phonological representation
(vowel harmony) that is represented as the New items in the
experiment, cannot be borrowed as freely into the novel,
unfamiliar dialect.
Figure 3: Separate Representations for Phonological
Forms and Phonological Patterns Leads to Familiar Words
but not Unfamiliar Words Borrowed to a Novel Language
Phonological
Form!

Phonological
Pattern !
(Vowel
Harmony)!

Borrowing!

X"

Unfamiliar
Language!

Learners store both the phonological form of each
individual word, as well as the phonological pattern that
governs word formation. The phonological form of novel
words is governed by abstract rules or constraints that are
specific to the language in question.
The above model supports a view of phonological
processes in which abstract patterns explain learners’
variable generalizations to novel items. While exemplar
models of phonological representations have the capacity to
from generalizations over a training set (Kirchner, Moore, &
Chen, 2010), the generalization must be variable for
different types of items– novel items, novel talkers and
novel dialects, in order to capture the results found in the
present and previous studies. It is unclear whether this type
of exemplar model would be more or less complex than a
model that assumes abstract representations, or if such an
exemplar model would create representations that are
indistinguishable from the representations that form abstract
phonological patterns.
The artificial grammar learning paradigm used in the
present study does not provide semantic representations.
Further, with only eight repetitions of the exposure items, it
is unlikely that learners formed a fully functional lexicon of
the language presented during exposure. Despite this,
learners formed a familiarity with the words presented in the
training set, enough to show differential treatment of
familiar and novel items. This suggests that participants

2208

relied on different strategies for responding at test
depending on whether the test item was a familiar word or
an unfamiliar word. When the word was familiar, learners
could rely on the familiarity of the word (even if only
partially), as well as the phonological pattern (vowel
harmony) that governed the phonological representation.
Unfamiliar, novel words, can only be judged based on the
phonological pattern that produces them.
The present study supports a view of phonological
representations in which lexical items are represented
distinctly from the phonological patterns that govern word
formation. In this view, abstract phonological processes are
not epiphenomenal, but a separate level of representation
from lexical items. This separation can help explain why
lexical items are borrowed without close contact, while
phonological patterns (and other grammatical patterns)
require more intense contact to be borrowed. For a lexical
item to be borrowed, the speaker need not change the
grammar of the borrowing language, but for a phonological
(or other grammatical) process to be borrowed, the speaker
must apply the rules that govern word formation from the
host language to the borrowing language, a process that
would typically require greater contact and shared
representations between the two languages.

Conclusions
This study presented an artificial grammar learning
experiment in which learners were trained on a novel vowel
harmony pattern. Participants were tested on items spoken a
the familiar voice, and a novel voice, but with a different
dialect. Participants were only able to extend the vowel
harmony pattern to the novel dialect when the items were
familiar (present in the training set), suggesting distinct
representations for abstract phonological processes and
stored lexical items.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Nathan Fursa for his help creating the
stimuli. I am grateful to Ariel Goldberg and Ilker Yildirim
for lending me their voices. I am also indebted to Patricia
Reeder, Neil Bardhan, and additional members of the
ANLab at the University of Rochester for help in designing
and implementing this study. I would also like to thank the
four anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and
insights. I assume responsibility for any and all errors.

References
Becker, M., Ketrez, N., & Nevins, A. (2011). The surfeit of
the stimulus: Analytic biases filter lexical statistics in
Turkish laryngeal alternations. Language, 87(1), 84-125.
Becker, M., Nevins, A., & Levine, J. (2012). Asymmetries
in generalizing alternations to and from initial syllables.
Language, 88(2), 231-268.
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English
morphology. Word, 15, 150-177.

Boersma, P., & Weenink. (2005). Praat: Doing phonetics by
computer.
Chomsky, N., & Halle, M. (1968). The sound pattern of
English. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Clements, G. N. (1976). The autosegmental treatment of
vowel harmony. Phonologica, 111-119.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25, 257271.
Finley, S. (2013). Generalization to novel talkers in artificial
grammar learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
20(4), 780-789.
Finley, S., & Badecker, W. (2009). Artificial grammar
learning, and feature-based generalization. Journal of
Memory and Language, 61, 423-437.
Gouskova, M., & Becker, M. (2013). Nonce words show
that Russian yer alternations are governed by the
grammar. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory,
31(3), 735-765.
Ito, J., & Mester, A. (1995). The core-periphery structure of
the lexicon and constraints on reranking. In J. N.
Beckman, L. W. Dickey & S. Urbanczyk (Eds.), Papers
in Optimality Theory (Vol. 18, pp. 181-209). Amherst:
GLSA.
Johnson, K. (1997). Speech perception without speaker
normalization. In K. Johnson & J. W. Mullenix (Eds.),
Talker variability in speech processing (pp. 145-165). San
Diego: Academic Press.
Kirchner, R., Moore, R. K., & Chen, T. Y. (2010).
Computing phonological generalization over real speech
exemplars. Journal of Phonetics, 38(4), 540-547.
Nygaard, L. C., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Talker-specific
learning in speech perception. Perception &
Psychophysics, 60(3), 355-376.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2001). Exemplar dynamics: Word
frequency, lenition and contrast. In J. L. Bybee & P.
Hopper (Eds.), Frequency effects and emergent grammar
(pp. 137-157). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Port, R. F., & Leary, A. P. (2005). Against formal
phonology. Language, 81, 927-964.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1993/2004). Optimality
theory: Constraint interaction in generative grammar.
Cambridge: Blackwell.
Smolensky, P., & Legendre, G. (Eds.). (2006). The
harmonic mind, Volume 1: Cognitive architechture.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

2209

