UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contagion Effects in Intertemporal Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1hr5t3n0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bixter, Michael
Trimber, Elizabeth
Luhmann, Christian

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contagion Effects in Intertemporal Decision Making
Michael T. Bixter (michael.bixter@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA

Elizabeth M. Trimber (elizabeth.trimber@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA

Christian C. Luhmann (christian.luhmann@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA

Abstract
Prior research has provided substantial insight into individuals’
intertemporal preferences (i.e., preferences about delayed rewards).
The present study instead investigated the preferences of small
groups of individuals asked to express collective intertemporal
decisions. The paradigm consisted of three phases. During the PreCollaboration and Post-Collaboration phases participants
completed an intertemporal matching task individually. During the
Collaboration phase participants completed a similar task in small
groups, reaching mutually agreed-upon decisions. Results suggest
that group preferences were systematically related to group
members’ Pre-Collaboration preferences. In addition, collaborative
decision making altered group members’ intertemporal
preferences. Furthermore, it was found that individuals’ PostCollaboration preferences were independently related to both their
Pre-Collaboration preferences and the preferences of other group
members, suggesting that individuals’ Post-Collaboration
preferences represented a revision of their Pre-Collaboration
preferences based on the preferences observed in other group
members.
Keywords: collaboration; intertemporal preferences

People must often make choices between alternatives
which have outcomes at different times in the future. For
example, an individual may choose going to college instead
of getting a job after high school, believing that a college
degree will have greater benefits over the long-term. Such
tradeoffs between time and reward are referred to as
intertemporal choices. Within the literature on intertemporal
choice, particular attention has been paid to the finding that
decision makers tend to discount the value of delayed
rewards (e.g., Myerson, Green, Hanson, Holt, & Estle,
2003; Rachlin, Raineri, & Cross, 1991). That is, the
subjective value of a reward decreases as its delivery is
increasingly delayed. Prior research has found that
individual differences in intertemporal preferences are
associated with consequential real-world behaviors,
including scholastic achievement, credit-card debt,
substance abuse, and income (for reviews, see Frederick,
Loewenstein, & O’Donoghue, 2002; Luhmann, 2009).
The majority of the research on intertemporal choice has
focused on the preferences of individual decision makers.

This emphasis is potentially problematic because many realworld intertemporal decisions are made by groups of two or
more decision makers. For instance, a couple might jointly
determine what portion of their discretionary income they
want to allot for consumption and what portion they want to
set aside for saving. Similarly, individuals faced with
various short- and long-term investment options often
discuss the costs and benefits in consultation with a
financial advisor. Because past research has focused on the
intertemporal preferences of individuals, little is known
about how such collaborative decision making might
influence intertemporal decisions. The current study was
designed to provide insight into this important question.

Collaborative Decision Making
Though collaborative decision making has not been
studied in the context of intertemporal decisions, there is a
large literature on group decision making in other domains.
Much of this research stems from the study of group
polarization, which refers to the tendency of group
members’ attitudes (e.g., attitudes towards capital
punishment) to shift toward one extreme following group
interaction and discussion (see Isenberg, 1986).
The research done on group polarization has primarily
focused on how decisions made by groups are
systematically different from the decisions of the group’s
individual members. Less attention has been devoted to
exploring whether collaborative experiences carry over to
influence the post-collaborative behavior of individuals. As
others have noted (Schultze, Mojzisch, & Schulz-Hardt,
2012), this is problematic because the duration of many
real-world collaboration experiences is often relatively brief
when compared to the potential lifetime of decisions
individuals will make after a collaborative experience ends.
For instance, an individual may meet with a financial
advisor to discuss various investment options, but the
duration of this meeting will be much shorter compared to
the many investment decisions the individual will go on to
make following the meeting.

1929

The concerns of Schultze et al. (2012) are particularly
compelling because older work on group conformity has
shown that social contexts can exert strong influences on
individual behavior (Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004). For
example, in the classic experiments exploring the influence
of social norms on perceptual judgments, Sherif (1936)
found that observing the judgments of others led to group
members’ judgments to converge. That is, group members’
perceptual judgments were more related to each other postcollaboratively than they were initially (i.e., precollaboratively).
However, there are reasons to believe that economic
preferences, and intertemporal preferences in particular,
may not be susceptible to the collaborative influences
previously reported in the literature. First, past work on
conformity has frequently focused on decisions that entailed
a large degree of response uncertainty (e.g., the perceptual
judgments in Sherif’s autokinetic tasks). Intertemporal
preferences, in contrast, are conceptualized as an extremely
stable property of an individual, with an individual’s
intertemporal decisions being similar across different
contexts and goods (e.g., money, food; Odum, 2011) and
over time spans as long as a year (Kirby, 2009). Second,
other work in the collaborative decision making literature,
such as group polarization, has focused on behavior that is
known to be labile and/or susceptible to social pressure
(e.g., attitudes, opinions). Conversely, past work has
demonstrated that intertemporal preferences are extremely
resistant to even deliberate influence, requiring elaborate
instructions about normative behavior (Senecal, Wang,
Thompson, & Kable, 2012).
Recognition of these empirical gaps has led to a small
number of recent studies examining how collaboration
influences individual group members’ economic decision
making. Typically, such influence is detected by having a
pre-collaboration and post-collaboration phase during which
participants make decisions individually. These individual
decision making phases allow researchers to observe
whether and how the experience of collaboration shifts
individuals’ decisions between the pre-collaboration and
post-collaboration phases. These studies have explored
decision making across different domains, including
allotment decisions in the dictator game (Luhan, Kocher, &
Sutter, 2009), cooperative decisions in a prisoner’s dilemma
(Hopthrow & Abrams, 2010), and anchoring effects
(Rutledge, 1993). Despite these studies involving different
types of decisions and contexts, individuals’ postcollaborative decisions have generally been observed to be
altered as a result of the collaborative decision making
experience. For example, Hopthrow and Abrams (2010)
found that individuals became more cooperative in a
prisoner’s dilemma following collaboration. Furthermore,
these changes appear to be durable, including measurable
effects observed five weeks later on reasoning tasks such as
the Wason selection task (Maciejovsky, Sutter, Budescu, &
Bernau, 2013).

Social Influences on Intertemporal Choice
Though collaborative intertemporal decision making is a
relatively unexplored research topic, there has been recent
research demonstrating that intertemporal preferences are
sensitive to social context. Specifically, individuals make
different intertemporal choices when making choices for
themselves compared to when they are asked to make such
choices on behalf of others. For example, it has been found
that individuals are more patient when making choices for
someone else compared to when they are making choices
for themselves (Albrecht, Volz, Sutter, Laibson, & von
Cramon, 2011). Ziegler and Tunney (2012) went on to find
that this self/other asymmetry increases as the social
distance between the decision maker and the “other”
increases. That is, intertemporal choices were less patient
when the referent “other” was socially close (e.g., parent,
sibling) and more patient when the “other” was socially
distant (e.g., unrelated stranger). These results demonstrate
that intertemporal preferences depend, in part, on social
factors such as who is receiving the delayed rewards.
However, self/other intertemporal decisions and
collaborative intertemporal decisions differ in that an
individual in a group is often still a recipient of the chosen
reward.
The goal of the current study was to explore collaborative
intertemporal decision making. Specifically, we were
interested in exploring how the intertemporal preferences of
the collaborative group relate to the intertemporal
preferences of the individual group members. We also
sought to determine whether the experience of collaborative
decision making influences individuals’ post-collaborative
intertemporal preferences. In order to accomplish these
goals, participants completed three phases during the study:
a Pre-Collaboration individual phase, a Collaboration group
phase, and a Post-Collaboration individual phase. This
method allowed us to measure how the experience of
collaborative decision making influenced individuals’
intertemporal preferences.

Method
Participants
Participants were 61 Stony Brook University
undergraduates who participated in exchange for partial
course credit. Participants completed the study in 19 threeperson groups and one four-person group.

Materials
The study consisted of three phases: Pre-Collaboration,
Collaboration, and Post-Collaboration. In all three phases,
participants completed an intertemporal decision task. In the
Pre- and Post-Collaboration phases, this task was performed
individually. In the Collaboration phase, the task was
performed as a group.
On each trial of the intertemporal decision task, two
reward items were displayed on the computer screen. The

1930

reward items included a magnitude (in dollars) and a delay
until the reward would be received (in months). Importantly,
each trial omitted one of the two reward magnitudes.
Participants’ task was to supply this missing reward
magnitude with a value that would render them indifferent
between the two reward items.
The decision task included four trial types: Defer
Immediate, Defer Non-Immediate, Expedite Immediate, and
Expedite Non-Immediate. On Defer Immediate trials, there
was an immediate reward and a delayed reward, and
participants had to supply the delayed reward magnitude
that would lead them to be indifferent between the delayed
and immediate rewards. Defer Non-Immediate trials were
similar to Defer Immediate trials, except that both reward
items were delayed. On Expedite Immediate trials,
participants had to supply the immediate reward that would
lead them to be indifferent between the immediate and
delayed rewards. Expedite Non-Immediate trials were
similar to Expedite Immediate trials, with the only
difference being that both reward items were delayed.
Trials in the Pre-Collaboration and Post-Collaboration
phases were constructed using four reward magnitudes ($30,
$75, $150, $275) and three delays (3 months, 6 months, 12
months). With the four trial types described above, this
yielded 48 trials that were presented during the PreCollaboration and Post-Collaboration phases. Trials in the
Collaboration phase were constructed using three reward
magnitudes ($40, $125, $250) and three delays (3 months, 6
months, 12 months). With the four trial types described
above, this yielded 36 trials that were presented during the
Collaboration phase. Within each phase of the study, trials
were presented in a randomized order. Different reward
magnitudes were used during the Collaboration phase to
prevent individuals from simply reiterating the exact
responses their group made during the Collaboration phase.

Statistical Analyses
Participants’ responses on each trial were converted to
annual discount rates using Equation 1:

Procedure
After all group members arrived to the lab, participants
received instructions regarding the intertemporal decision
task in both verbal and written formats. Participants were
not alerted to the fact that they would be collaborating with
other participants. After receiving the instructions,
participants were then escorted to individual computer
workstations where they completed the Pre-Collaboration
phase of the study. Upon completion of the PreCollaboration phase, all participants were gathered together
and informed that they would be completing a similar task
but as a group. Participants were instructed to provide one
answer on each trial as a group. If there was a disagreement
about the amount on a given trial, participants were
instructed to reach consensus and provide an amount that
the group was satisfied with. Participants were also
instructed to imagine that the rewards during the
Collaboration phase would still be received individually.
After receiving these instructions, the group of
participants was escorted to a single computer workstation
where the Collaboration phase of the study was performed.
Upon completion, participants were instructed that they
would be completing a similar decision task but once again
individually. Participants were then escorted back to the
same individual computer workstations and completed the
Post-Collaboration phase of the study. The entire study took
less than one hour to complete.

Results
We first investigated whether we could predict the
discount rates of groups themselves. We did so by averaging
group members’ discount rates during the Pre-Collaboration
phase. These averages were strongly correlated with the
group discount rates derived from the Collaboration phase (r
= .77, p < .001). This means that individuals exhibiting high
[low] discount rates during the Pre-Collaboration phase
tended to produce groups that exhibited a high [low]
discount rate during the Collaboration phase.

Group Convergence
(1)
where Xt is the magnitude of the sooner reward item, Xt + k is
the magnitude of the later reward item, t is the delay
associated with the sooner reward item, and k is the
additional delay associated with the later reward item. In the
current task, participants provided Xt + k on trials that
involved deferring a reward, whereas participants provided
Xt on trials that involved expediting a reward. Overall
discount rates were calculated for each individual
participant and group by computing the discount rates
implied by each response and then averaging the resulting
set of discount rates.

The main goal of the current study was to determine
whether collaborative decision making would alter
individuals’ intertemporal preferences. In particular, we
wanted to explore whether individuals’ decisions would
come to resemble decisions made by their group during the
Collaboration phase. Figure 1 includes an illustrative group
exhibiting this pattern.
To evaluate this convergence effect statistically, we
computed the absolute differences between the group
discount rate during the Collaboration phase and group
members’ discount rates during the Pre-Collaboration/PostCollaboration phases. That is, for each participant we
calculated the absolute difference between her discount rate
during the Pre-Collaboration phase and her respective
group’s discount rate during the Collaboration phase.
Within each group, participants’ difference scores were then

1931

averaged together. We next calculated the absolute
differences between group members’ discount rate during
the Post-Collaboration phase and the group discount rate
during the Collaboration phase. If collaborative decision
making leads to convergence in group members’ subsequent
intertemporal preferences, then the average of these
difference scores should be smaller for the PostCollaboration phase compared to the Pre-Collaboration
phase.
The average absolute difference between PostCollaboration discount rates and Collaboration discount
rates (M = .46, SD = .27) was smaller than the average
absolute difference between Pre-Collaboration discount
rates and Collaboration discount rates (M = .74, SD = .27)
(t(19) = 5.56, p < .001). This means that group members’

Average Absolute Deviation

1

1.5

Change in Discount Rates

Figure 1 - An illustrative group’s discount rates during the
Pre-Collaboration phase, the Collaboration phase, and the
Post-Collaboration phase.

discount rates shifted between the Pre- and PostCollaboration phases. Specifically, group members’
discount rates during the Post-Collaboration phase
converged towards their respective group’s discount rate
during the Collaboration phase (Figure 2).
To investigate how collaborative decision making
produced these shifts in behavior, the relationship between
group discount rates during the Collaboration phase and the
change in discount rates among the group members from
Pre- to Post-Collaboration (i.e., Post-Collaboration discount
rates minus Pre-Collaboration discount rates) was explored.
The correlation between Collaboration discount rates and
Pre- to Post-Collaboration changes in discount rates was
significant (r = .53, p < .05). As Figure 3 illustrates,
members of groups exhibiting high discount rates during the
Collaboration phase tended to increase their discount rates
from Pre- to Post-Collaboration. In contrast, members of
groups exhibiting low discount rates during the
Collaboration phase tended to decrease their discount rates.

1
0.5
0
0

1

2

3

4

-0.5
-1
-1.5

Collaboration Discount Rate

Figure 3 - The relation between groups’ discount rates
during the Collaboration phase and group members’ average
Pre- to Post-Collaboration change in discount rates.
Members of groups exhibiting high [low] discount rates
during the Collaboration phase tended to increase [decrease]
their discount rates.

Predicting Post-Collaboration Discount Rates

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Pre-Collaboration

Post-Collaboration

Figure 2 - The average absolute deviation between discount
rates in the Pre-Collaboration/Post-Collaboration phase and
groups’ discount rates during the Collaboration phase. Error
bars indicate the standard errors of the means.

By the time individual participants reached the PostCollaboration phase of the study, they had made individual
intertemporal decisions during the Pre-Collaboration phase
and as part of a group during the Collaboration phase. To
more thoroughly understand the origin of the effects
reported above, we next explored how individuals’ PostCollaboration decisions were related to their PreCollaboration decisions and the decisions made by their
respective group. If these two factors exerted independent
influences, it would suggest that individuals’ PostCollaboration preferences represented a revision of their
Pre-Collaboration preferences based on the preferences
observed in the other group members.

1932

A multiple regression analysis was performed to evaluate
whether individual discount rates during the PreCollaboration phase and the discount rates of other group
members during the Pre-Collaboration phase predicted
individual discount rates during the Post-Collaboration
phase. The multiple regression analysis included
individuals’ Pre-Collaboration discount rates and the
average of other group members’ Pre-Collaboration
discount rates as predictor variables and Post-Collaboration
discount rates as the criterion variable. The overall model
accounted for a significant proportion of the variance in
Post-Collaboration discount rates, R2 = .53, F(2, 58) =
39.92, p < .001. Furthermore, both participant’s PreCollaboration discount rates and the Pre-Collaboration
discount rates of other group members accounted for a
unique proportion of the variance in Post-Collaboration
discount rates (see Table 1).
Table 1 - Post-Collaboration discount rates predicted by
each individual participant’s Pre-Collaboration discount rate
(Self) and the average of the other group members’ PreCollaboration discount rates (Other).
Variable

β

Intercept

t

p

.11

.915

Self

.71

7.85

< .001

Other

.24

2.64

.011

We note that one concern regarding the convergence
effects reported above is that individuals’ behavior may
simply be regressing to the mean. That is, individuals’
discount rates may become less extreme over time
(regardless of any collaborative experience). However, there
are aspects of the current data that argue against this
regression-to-the mean explanation. For example, the mean
discount rate during the Pre-Collaboration phase (M =
2.423) was roughly equal to the mean discount rate during
the Post-Collaboration phase (M = 2.475). Furthermore, the
standard deviation was actually lower during the PreCollaboration phase (SD = .55) compared to the PostCollaboration phase (SD = .73). So individuals’ behavior
during the Post-Collaboration phase was not simply
regressing toward a mean, but was instead converging
towards the respective group’s mean discount rate following
collaboration.

Discussion
How individuals resolve intertemporal tradeoffs has been
the focus of a long history of work, in large part, due to the
fact that such preferences inform a variety of critical, realworld behaviors. However, the focus on individual decision
makers ignores the fact that many real-world intertemporal
decisions involve a group of two or more individuals

making mutually-agreed upon decisions through a
collaborative process. The current study sought to shed light
on how the intertemporal preferences of the individual
group members shape the choices of the group, as well as
how the act of collaborative decision making influences
individuals’ subsequent intertemporal preferences. The
results demonstrate that group members’ pre-collaborative
intertemporal preferences were strongly related to the
preferences exhibited by the group during the Collaboration
phase; individuals exhibiting a high discount rate during the
Pre-Collaboration phase tended to produce groups that
exhibited a high discount rate during the Collaboration
phase. Furthermore, individuals’ intertemporal preferences
were altered as a result of the collaborative decision making
experience. Specifically, individuals’ preferences converged
towards the preferences exhibited by their fellow group
members.
Individuals’ Post-Collaboration preferences were
independently related to both their Pre-Collaboration
preferences and the preferences of their respective group
members. These results suggest that individuals’ ultimate
preferences represented a revision of their initial preferences
based on the preferences observed in other group members.
This pattern of results appears to provide evidence against
the idea that intertemporal preferences are a stable property
of individuals, which stands in contrast to the common
conception of decision-related preferences and intertemporal
preferences specifically. For example, it has been argued
(Odum, 2011) that intertemporal preferences meet the
criteria for traithood. Moreover, the test-retest reliability of
discount rates has been found to be high (Black & Rosen,
2011), even over intervals of one year (Kirby, 2009).
However, the current results suggest that individuals’
intertemporal preferences can be systematically influenced.
There has been previous research suggesting that discount
rates can be manipulated within an individual, however,
these prior reports employed rather forceful manipulations.
For example, one study (Black & Rosen, 2011) utilized a
36-week money-management intervention and another
(Senecal et al., 2012) utilized explicit instructions about
how a normative decision maker ought to make
intertemporal choices. In contrast, the shifts in intertemporal
preferences observed in the current study were derived from
the simple act of collaborative decision making and the
observation of others’ intertemporal preferences.
Why did collaborative decision making lead to
subsequent shifts in individuals’ intertemporal preferences?
We would suggest that our results may reflect a social
comparison process (e.g., Buunk & Gibbons, 2007;
Mussweiler, 2003). For example, participants may have
believed that their fellow group members’ behavior
provided information about normatively appropriate
behavioral patterns (Deutsch & Gerard, 1955). If individuals
became aware that their personal preferences were
consistently more or less patient than other group members,
they may have adjusted their preferences accordingly (cf.
Odum, 2011). This suggestion is consistent with the

1933

observation that the member in each group who exhibited
the highest [lowest] discount rate during the PreCollaboration phase tended to decrease [increase] her
discount rate during the Post-Collaboration phase (see
Figure 1).
The present results can also be seen as evidence that
individuals have a degree of uncertainty about their
preferences (Ariely, Loewenstein, & Prelec, 2003). Prior
research has demonstrated that uncertainty allows social
influences to have an increased effect on decisions (e.g.,
Walther, Bless, Strack, Rackstraw, Wagner, & Werth,
2002). The current study demonstrates that this type of
effect can be observed in even higher-order decisions, such
as economic preferences. In order to explore the
contribution of uncertainty about one’s preferences to the
current results, future research will be needed to see if
uncertain individuals are more likely to converge towards
their respective group’s preferences post-collaboratively
compared to more certain individuals. This could be
accomplished in many ways, either by probing uncertainty
through self-report and entering it as a covariate, or by
experimentally inducing uncertainty in participants prior to
the Collaboration phase. Future research that explores this
and related issues will help shed light on the psychological
and social processes that allow collaborative intertemporal
decision making to alter individuals’ preferences.

References
Albrecht, K., Volz, K.G., Sutter, M., Laibson, D.I., & von
Cramon, D.Y. (2011). What is for me is not for you:
Brain correlates of intertemporal choice for self and other.
SCAN, 6, 218-225.
Ariely, D., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2003). “Coherent
arbitrariness”: Stable demand curves without stable
preferences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1),
73-106.
Black, A.C., & Rosen, M.I. (2011). A money managementbased substance use treatment increases valuation of
future rewards. Addictive Behaviors, 36(1-2), 125-128.
Buunk, A.P., & Gibbons, F.X. (2007). Social comparison:
The end of a theory and the emergence of a field.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
102, 3-21.
Cialdini, R.B., & Goldstein, N.J. (2004). Social influence:
Compliance and conformity. Annual Review of
Psychology, 55, 591-621.
Deutsch, M., & Gerard, H.B. (1955). A study of normative
and informational social influences upon individual
judgment. The Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 51(3), 629-636.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O’Donoghue, T. (2002).
Time discounting and time preference: A critical review.
Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 351-401.
Hopthrow, T., & Abrams, D. (2010). Group transformation:
How demonstrability promotes intra-group cooperation in
social dilemmas. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 799-803.

Isenberg, D.J. (1986). Group polarization: A critical review
and meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 50(6), 1141-1151.
Kirby, K.N. (2009). One-year temporal stability of delaydiscount rates. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(3),
457-462.
Luhan, W.J., Kocher, M.G., & Sutter, M. (2009). Group
polarization in the team dictator game reconsidered.
Experimental Economics, 12, 26-41.
Luhmann, C.C. (2009). Temporal decision-making: Insights
from cognitive neuroscience. Frontiers in Behavioral
Neuroscience, 3.
Maciejovsky, B., Sutter, M., Budescu, D.V., & Bernau, P.
(2013). Teams make you smarter: How exposure to teams
improves individual decisions in probability and
reasoning tasks. Management Science, 59(6), 1255-1270.
Mussweiler, T. (2003). Comparison processes in social
judgment: Mechanisms and consequences. Psychological
Review, 110(3), 472-489.
Myerson, J., Green, L., Hanson, J.S., Holt, D.D., & Estle,
S.J. (2003). Discounting delayed and probabilistic
rewards: Processes and traits. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 24, 619-635.
Odum, A.L. (2011). Delay discounting: Trait variable?
Behavioural Processes, 87, 1-9.
Rachlin, H., Rainer, A., & Cross, D. (1991). Subjective
probability and delay. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 55, 233-244.
Rutledge, R.W. (1993). The effects of group decisions and
group-shifts on use of the anchoring and adjustment
heuristic. Social Behavior and Personality, 21(3), 215226.
Schultze, T., Mojzisch, A., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2012). Why
groups perform better than individuals at quantitative
judgment tasks: Group-to-individual transfer as an
alternative to differential weighting. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 118, 24-36.
Senecal, N., Wang, T., Thompson, E., & Kable, J.W.
(2012). Normative arguments from experts and peers
reduce delay discounting. Judgment and Decision
Making, 7(5), 566-589.
Sherif, M. (1936). The psychology of social norms. New
York, NY: Octagon Books.
Walther, E., Bless, H., Strack, F., Rackstraw, P., Wagner,
D., & Werth, L. (2002). Conformity effects in memory as
a function of group size, dissenters and uncertainty.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16, 793-810.
Ziegler, F.V., & Tunney, R.J. (2012). Decisions for others
become less impulsive the further away they are on the
family tree. PLoS ONE, 7(11): e49479.

1934

