UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Copying equations to assess mathematical competence: An evaluation of pause measures
using graphical protocol analysis.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9jw9347s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Cheng, Peter

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Copying equations to assess mathematical competence:
An evaluation of pause measures using graphical protocol analysis.
Peter C-H. Cheng (p.c.h.cheng@sussex.ac.uk)
Department of Informatics, University of Sussex
Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK
Abstract

abilities and for investigations of the organization of information structures in memory. The focus in this paper is on
pauses in simple copying tasks, in which a pause is the time
between the pen touching the paper to begin a new stroke
minus the time the pen was lifted from the paper at then end
of the previous stroke.
Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2007) used graphical protocol
analysis in a study with four people of quite different levels
of experience in mathematics, from elementary to expert,
whilst they simply copied mathematical formulae freehand.
To assess their competence a measure was devised – Long
Pause Duration (LPD). To calculate LPD participants first
write their names (given and family) several times and a
baseline value consisting of the mean of the all pauses between letters, within each part of their name, is calculated.
LPD equals the mean of a participant’s pauses on a target
stimulus minus that baseline, all divided by the baseline.
Thus, LPD attempts to normalize pause values both respect
to absolute and relative individual differences, by subtracting and dividing by the baseline, respectively. It was found
that LPD correctly rank ordered the four participants on
single test items, which is noteworthy as the participants
were being reliably differentiated without any aggregation
over trials or with repeated testing. However, there are
some limitations to this result. First, given the large differences between the participants’ abilities, it is an open question whether the overall approach can be used to differentiate people with finer grained differences in mathematical
competence, which is necessary if GPA is to be used as a
practical assessment technique. Second, LPD is just one of
several imaginable measures based on pauses, so others
should be investigated particularly as LPD’s dual use of the
same baseline for two forms of normalization lacks a good
theoretical justification.
Zulfilki’s (2013) PhD thesis studied various GPA techniques and measures for the assessment of English language
competence of students for whom it was not their first language. It was found that students with different levels of
language competence could be differentiated in the simple
task of copying sentences. More reliable differentiation
occurred when the students were not permitted any preparation time than when they briefly previewed the sentences.
Explorations of a number of measures of competence revealed that the third quartile of the pauses appear to correlate strongly with independent language competence scores.
A theoretical justification can be made for a measure
based on the third quartile of pauses by considering the differences in the shape of the distributions of pauses for experts versus novices. Experts possess chunks containing
more elements and so the overall hierarchical organization

Can mathematical competence be measured by analyzing the
patterns of pauses between written elements in the freehand
copying of mathematical equations? Twenty participants of
varying levels of mathematical competence copied sets of
equations and sequences of numbers on a graphics tablet. The
third quartile of pauses is an effective measure, because it reflects the greater number of chunks and the longer time spent
per chunk by novices as they processed the equations. To
compensate for individual differences in speeds of elementary
operations and skill in writing basic mathematical symbols,
variants on the measure were devised and tested.
Keywords: Chunks; pause analysis; freehand copying; mathematical competence; Graphical Protocol Analysis

Introduction
In Cognitive Science it has been well established for decades that the duration of pauses in overt behaviours often
reflects the amount of mental processing required for ongoing sub-tasks. Such pauses are found in behaviours such
as verbalizations, writing, drawing and interaction with
computer interfaces (e.g., Miller, 1956; Egan & Schwartz,
1979; Newell, 1990; Cowan, 2001; Cheng, McFadzean &
Copeland, 2001). The analysis of pauses provides a technique to study cognitive phenomenon by identifying how
cognitive demands vary during and between tasks. Further,
it may be feasible to use patterns of pauses to identify the
specific organization of chunks that an individual has in
working memory, including when those structures are multilayer hierarchies (van Genuchten & Cheng, 2010). All this
is possible as pauses reflect the amount of processing that is
required to produce an action, which is less for an element
within a chunk than the first element of a new chunk. For
example, writing the first letter of a new word requires some
processing of the word itself, whereas writing subsequent
letters just requires the processing of the letters alone. The
same is true for higher levels in the hierarchy of a stimulus;
e.g., beginning to write the first word of a new sentence
requires some processing of sentence level information that
is unnecessary for subsequent words in the sentence (van
Genuchten & Cheng, 2010).
This facility to directly access the amount of cognitive
processing required for certain tasks and, potentially, the
specific organization of information in memory raises the
interesting possibility that the analysis of pauses may be
used to quickly and efficiently measure levels of competence, or expertise, in knowledge-based tasks. We have
used graphical protocol analysis, GPA, as a term for methods developed to exploit the temporal signal in the distribution of pause durations for the measurement of cognitive

319

N1
N2
N3
N4
E1

#
#
#
#

Thus, the questions addressed by the experiment are:
1) Are measures of competence based on the 3rd quartile
of pauses appropriate for a mathematical domain? The third
quartile of pauses will be called PauseQ3 for short.
2) Does the interquartile range of pauses, PauseIQR, provide a means to compensate for individual differences in
processing speed at the level of elementary operations?
3) Can the accuracy of the pause measures be improved
by normalizing them with respect to baseline measures of
subordinate maths skills, in order to focus upon aspects of
performance more closely associated with higher maths
competence? Here the target skill is the copying of complex
equations, so the copying of the simple number sequences
and sums will be used as the subordinate skill to establish a
baseline measure for normalization. In other words, the
measure from these stimuli will be subtracted from
measures of the equation stimuli.
4) Are these measures an improvement on the LPD
measures used in the previous experiment?
5) This is a supplementary exploratory question: can the
pause measures be used to determine the relative difficulty
of different test items between and also within test item
types? This will be investigated by aggregating item scores
over participants and attempting to relate them to particular
characteristics of the test items.

193 826 745 931 584 726 247 315 896 915 438 589 462 731 762
56789 12345 34567 54321 98765 76543 56789 23456 45678
267 5193 833 4706 478 9621 582 6479 589 4627 314 5121
12=2×6=3×4 12=3+3+3+3 3+4+3+4=14 2+3+2+3+2+3=15

E2
E3
E4

Fig 1. Number (N) and Equation (E) stimuli.
of the chunks in memory will be less complex. In contrast
novices encode fewer elements per chunk with the consequence that their hierarchical organization will likely have a
greater span at each level and also will be deeper overall.
Thus, in tasks involving the processing of structures of
chunks, novices in contrast to experts will exhibit a greater
number of transitions across chunk boundaries, with their
associated longer pauses, but also their navigation of a larger tree of chunks will tend to mean those transitions will be
more demanding, so the durations of the pauses will be
longer than for experts. Therefore, the overall distribution
of pauses will be positively skewed, so a measure that recognizes this characteristic seems promising. Further, as the
number of elements per chunk in naturalistic tasks is often
about four (Cowan, 2001), this suggests that the third quartile of pauses will be appropriate; rather than, say, the median or the 95th percentile, which are likely to include too
many within chunk pauses, or too few between chunk pauses, respectively. See van Genuchten, & Cheng (2010) for a
fuller discussion of the relation between pause duration and
chunk structure.
The aim here is to extend the precision, rigour and scope
of the findings of Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2007). The experiment will test whether it is feasible to differentiate participants at a finer grained level of mathematical competence than the relatively gross levels of expertise in the previous experiment. In addition to comparing measures based
on the third quartile of pauses to the LPD measure, two
normalization methods to refine the measures will also be
examined that attempt to take into account individual differences. (a) As a measure of individuals’ baseline speed of
elementary processing of written symbols, the first quartile
of pauses will be used. This will be subtracted from thirdquartile measure for each individual, which in effect is an
attempt to align the main body of participants’ distributions
of pauses so that positive tails can be more precisely compared. The difference between the third and first quartile is
of course the interquartile range (IQR). (b) In the copying
of mathematical formulae there are basic things that will be
familiar to everyone, because they are fundamental pieces of
mathematical knowledge. One’s understanding of numbers
and simple numerical equations is one such subordinate
maths skill. The experiment will attempt to factor out, normalize for, such experience by measuring copying performance at this level and subtracting a measure for this subordinate skill from each individual’s performance on the more
sophisticated target equation items.

Method
The experiment was run as a course work assignment of the
Psychological methods for system evaluation module of the
HCI MSc at the University of Sussex, in 2013. Four students on the module received course credit for collecting
and collating the data.

Participants
Twenty participants were recruited by deliberately sampling
participants with various level of maths competence from
among the friends, family and colleagues of the four student
experimenters. All were adults without impairments. There
were approximately equal numbers of female and males.

Materials
Tests of mathematical competence were devised to measure
three aspects of participants’ competence. The first aspect
concerned their prior experience of maths which involved
nine graded questions about their level of education in
maths from exams taken at age 16 through to degree level,
and questions about whether participants used mathematics
for their work and leisure pursuits. The second aspect involved answering eight graded multiple-choice questions on
mathematical problems (e.g., ‘The perimeter of a square is
20 units. Find its area.’ ‘What is the number of solutions to
a quadratic equation?’). The third aspect involved the participants rating their confidence on their answers to each of
the questions in aspect 2, using a seven point Likert scale.
The tests were completed online using a commercial questionnaire delivery web site.

320

Fig 2. PauseQ3 and PauseIQR measures for participants who are rank ordered by competence score. Data for equation and number
stimuli are shown along with the normalized measure (Eq-Num) of equation pauses minus the number pauses.

There were eleven copying test items. Three practice
stimuli consisted of words familiar to the participants: specifically, their own given and family name (twice) and
‘University of Sussex’ (twice) and ‘Falmer Brighton’
(twice). The rest of the experimental stimuli consisted of
eight items divided into two sets, four number items and
four equation items as shown in Fig 1. The first set of numbers consisted of triplets of arbitrary digits. The second was
sets of five ascending or descending digits. The third has
sets of alternating three and four arbitrary digits. The final
set included four simple arithmetic equations. The equation
stimuli were algebraic equations drawn from various maths
topics that would be familiar to schools students who studied maths beyond the age of 16 in the UK.
The tasks were performed on a Wacom Graphics Tablet
(Intuos3) connected to personal computers. The copying
was done onto plain white A4 paper in landscape orientations using a Wacom inking pen. A Java program,
SMouseLog, specially written in our lab was used to capture
the pen movements, including the position and time of each
touch and lift of the pen from the paper. The temporal accuracy of the logging was better than 1 ms.

or findings depends on the specifics of the organization of
the test sequences or the manner of the assignments.
For each trial a response sheet was taped to the tablet.
When the participant was ready a card with the test item was
turned over and was placed 5 cm above the tablet and so
was ≈10 cm above the top edge of the paper. Participants
were told to start at the left and middle of the sheet and to
copy the stimuli as accurately and quickly as possible, and if
they made a mistake to carry on without going back and
correcting it. They were trained to start by writing the hash
(#) and to continue straight on, in order to ensure the pause
for the first symbol of the stimuli was legitimate.

Results
For a general competence score, it was decided to use an
equally weighted sum of normalized values of the experience, problems and confidence scores, because each reflects
an aspect of mathematical competence and because participants’ score were spread across the whole range of each of
the three tests. Pearson’s r correlations between this overall
competence score and the individual component scores are
.90 for the experience, .81 for the problems and .83 for confidence, which supports the decision to use an equally
weighted sum as each score makes a meaningful contribution to the overall competence score. The overall competence scores ranged from 8 to 99% in a uniform distribution.
Pause durations for each pen stroke by each participant on
all the test items were calculated from the computer logs.
The median PauseQ3 and PauseIQR values were calculated for
each test per participant. Means of these medians were calculated by aggregating over the practice, number and equation test items. Fig 2 shows the means of the medians
across the participants, who are rank ordered by their competence scores. The graph to the left shows PauseQ3 values

Procedure
Each participant completed the three components of the
mathematical competence questionnaire.
After familiarization with the experimental setup, the participants first completed the practice items in order. Sequences of alternating number and equation items where
devised, such that equal numbers of each type of item occurred first, and items occurred in most positions through
out the sequences. Sequences were allocated to participants
in a pseudo-random fashion. Given the design of the experiment and the nature of GPA data, none of the observations

321

Fig 3. Correlations of PauseQ3, PauseIQR and LPD measures against competence scores for levels of participants, across
stimuli types and normalization methods. Stimuli: Pr – practice; Num – number; Eq – equation. Normalization: Eq-Pr – equation
measure minus practice measure; Eq-Num – equation measure minus number measure; Eq-Num-Pr – equation minus both.

for equation, numbers and the normalized measure that is
difference between the two (Eq-Num). PauseQ3 for the
equation items ranges from nearly 800 ms for the least competent participant down to less than 200 ms for the most
competent. For all but the most competent participants,
PauseQ3 values for number items are less than the equation
values. The heavier line lower in the graph (Eq-Num) is the
equation PauseQ3 normalized by subtracting the number
PauseQ3 from it. This has a range of over 400 ms. The
graph to the right of Fig 2 shows the same information but
for PauseIQR. The overall pattern of the data is similar except that PauseIQR values for both equation and number
items are typically 125 ms lower than PauseQ3. For the
normalized Eq-Num measures the mean of the differences
between PauseIQR and PauseIQR is a mere 5 ms.
Graphs of the PauseQ3 and PauseIQR values for the practice
items show no overall patterns with respect to competence.
Clearly for both PauseQ3 and PauseIQR across equation
items, number items and the normalized measure (Eq-Num)
there is a strong relation to participant competence scores.
To examine these Pearson’s r correlations were calculated
between participant competence scores and PauseQ3 and
PauseIQR for (a) practice, (b) number and (c) equation items
and the (d) Eq-Num normalization. Further, correlations
were also calculated for (e) normalization with respect to
practice items, Eq-Pr, and (f) normalization for both number
and practice items, Eq-Num-Pr. These are shown in Fig 2,
with round data points for all participants together. Note
that the scale runs from -0.8 to 0.2. For one tail tests with
N=20 (df=18) significant correlations at p<.05 and P<.01
have critical values of 0.378 and 0.516, respectively. The
correlations for the practice items are not significant, as expected. However, for all the other measures they are significant in respect to PauseIQR and PauseIQR.
To further investigate the nature of the correlations a binary split was performed on the competence scores to create
two equal groups of participants, one low and one high
competence group. The correlations for these groups are

shown in Fig 2 as the cross and square data points, respectively. For one tail tests with N=10 (df=8) significant correlation at p<.05 have a critical value of 0.549. For both
PauseQ3 and PauseIQR the overall pattern of the data is similar. For the low competence group the number items, equation items and Eq-Pr normalization are significant for both
PauseQ3 and PauseIQR. For the high competence participants
none of the correlations are significant, but there are large
interesting differences among the values. The strongest
correlations are for the Eq-Num normalization, which are
greater than for equations alone. However, when normalizing using the practice values (Eq-Pr and Eq-Num-Pr) the
correlations drop substantially.
To the far right of Fig 3 LPD values are shown for both
number and equation items. For the baseline of the LPD
values the first quartile of each practice item was calculated
and the mean across them found. The LPD value was calculated for each participant by subtracting their baseline from
their median pause durations and dividing that by the baseline; as per the definition given above. For the participants
taken as a whole the LPD correlation is significant for the
equation items but not for the number items. For the subgroups only the low competence group on the equation
items had a significant degree of correlation.
To explore the different types of test items in more detail
Fig 4 shows mean PauseQ3 values for each of the test items,
aggregated over all participants and also separately for the
low and high competence groups. For the practice items all
three cases are indistinguishable. Considering all the participants there is a clear overall trend of increasing PauseQ3
values for practice, numbers and equations. The breakdown
into low and high competence reveals that it is the substantial increase from practice to number, and from number to
equations, of the low competence group that is responsible
for the overall trend. The mean across the four number
items for the low and high competence groups are 289 and
244 ms, respectively, which is a marginally significant difference at P=.08 (t = 1.83, one-tail, df=18). The mean

322

Fig 4. PauseQ3 values for each test item compared across the different competence levels of participants.
across the four equation items for the low and high competence groups are 454 and 250 ms, respectively, which is a
significant difference at P<.01 (t=2.91, one-tail, df=18).
Close inspection of the graph for the low competence group
shows that none of the PauseQ3 values for the three types of
items overlap. Perhaps the only noteworthy divergences of
the high competence group are for N1 and E4, which are
higher than the other values in the same test set (significantly so by one-tail matched t tests (with df=9) compared
against the mean of the other three test items in the set: N1
vs. N2-4, p=.002, t=4.23; E4 vs. E1-4, p=.004, t=3.78).

numbers and basic sums, there appears to be some difference between the groups (Fig 4). For the equation items
that difference is more substantial. It is this large difference
between the low competence group’s pause measures that is
the major contributor to the pattern found for the whole
group of all participants (Fig 4).
In Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2007) it was shown that participants with large differences in levels of mathematical competence, from minimal experience to expert, could be distinguished using the LPD pause-based measure. The findings here provide stronger evidence of the value of GPA in
simple copying tasks, because a larger number of participants were examined with finer differences in their levels of
competence. Further, the strong correlations of the low
competence group, who were spread uniformly across the
lower half of the range of competence scores, demonstrates
that the approach can be effective with a relatively narrow
range of competence. Thus, this approach may have some
potential utility as a tool for educational assessment.
A stronger claim could be made about the potential of
GPA and copying had similar strong correlations been
found for the high competence group, but they were not.
Why were the correlations not as strong? One explanation
is that test items were not sufficiently challenging to differentiate among the high competence participants. Evidence
for this can be found in two places. First, there is a relatively flat distribution of PauseQ3 and PauseIQR for Eq-Num values for participants 11 to 20 in Fig 2, which suggests that
these participants may be at ceiling in their performance.
Second, as seen in Fig 4, there is little difference between
the equation items and either the number or practice items
for the high competence group, which may mean that the
equation stimuli are as familiar to them and as easy to process as the other sets of items. An important implication
follows from this: measures of competence based on the
analysis of pauses may be sensitive to the difficulty of stimuli relative to individuals. This suggests that tests might be

Discussion
Overall, the experiment has demonstrated that it is feasible
to use Graphical Protocol Analysis with simple freehand
copying tasks as means to measure competence in an information rich domain. As such, the findings contribute to the
evidence from previous studies (e.g., Cheng & RojasAnaya, 2007; van Genuchten & Cheng, 2010) that there is a
rich temporal signal that reflects the level of cognitive demand that participants face when reading and reproducing
meaningful stimuli, which is a function of their level of
competence in the target domain. Low competence participants require more processing time in the copying tasks than
those with high competence.
The first question posed in the Introduction concerns
whether measures based on the third quartile of pauses can
be used to assess mathematical competence: the answer is
affirmative. For the participants taken as a whole, strong
correlations exist between the competence scores and the
particular measures of interest, specifically PauseQ3 and
PauseIQR, for equations considered alone and also for the
Eq-Num normalized measure (Fig 3). Further, the correlations for both PauseQ3 and PauseIQR were also relatively
strong for the number items but less so than for the equation
items. Although it might be expected that all participants
would have equal facility at copying a simple sequences of

323

designed which incorporate a set of items spanning a range
of difficulty and that measures could be devised to exploit
the differences in the levels of stimuli difficulty.
The second question is whether PauseIQR is a better measure than PauseQ3, because subtracting first quartile pauses
may provide a means to compensate for individual differences occurring at the level of elementary operations. Comparison of the two measures in Fig 3 shows little difference
in their correlations with the competence scores. One explanation for this lack of difference is that the magnitude of
first quartile pauses is small compared to PauseQ3, on average a third of the size, so differences between participants
first quartiles values will be small compared to the size of
PauseIQR and so will make little impact and may even act as
a source of noise in the data
The third question is whether subtracting PauseQ3 values
for number items from equations items may serve as a
means to factor out, normalize for, generic subordinate
skills related to the writing of numbers and basic mathematical symbols and so provide a focus on more sophisticated
aspects of equation copying. Fig 3 shows that Eq-Num
PauseQ3 and PauseIQR correlations are no greater than the
values for equation items alone, when all participants are
considered together. In the case of the lower competence
participants the correlations actually decline moderately,
whereas with the high competence participants the Eq-Num
measure increases the strength of the correlation, but only
slightly. Thus, there appears to be little general value in
attempting to normalize the measures using equations with
the measures for numbers, because for the more competent
group the improvement is small and for the low competent
group it appears to be making the signal nosier.
The potential to degrade the pause measures, and hence a
lesson to learn about this danger in general, can be seen by
examining values of the Eq-Pr and Eq-Num-Pr measures in
Fig 3, which presents an interested pattern of data. The subtraction of practice values from equation items alone or
from the Eq-Num measure degrades the high competence
group’s correlations substantially, but has relatively little
effect on the low competence group. This is probably due
to the similarity in the magnitude of the high competent
group’s equation, number and practice item values, so when
they are subtracted what is left is largely noise due to the
natural variability in those measures.
The fourth question is how the present third quartile pause
measures compare to the LPD measure proposed in Cheng
& Rojas-Anaya (2007). Fig 3 shows that LPP is broadly
similar to the present third quartile pause measures. As
LPD is more complex and its theoretical justification less
rigorous, it appears appropriate to favour PauseQ3 or
PauseIQR in general use.
The final question is whether by aggregating over participants it is possible to assess the relative difficulty of test
items, which may be useful for the purpose of designing
evaluations by combining items of different level of sophistication. As seen in Fig 4, the copying of the most complex
of the equation items, E4, is distinct from the other items,

with a significantly larger value of PauseQ3. However, E4
has more 2D structure than the rest, which might lead to
elevated pauses merely because of the spatial distribution of
symbols, which is in contrast to the linear arrangement of
the other items. Further, the simplest of the number items,
N1, has PauseQ3 values larger than the rest of the number
items. This may be because each of the three digits (see Fig
1) is processed as individual chunks and so the relative density of long pauses associated with new chunks is greater
than the other stimuli where the number of elements may be
nearer the typical value of four per chunk. The implication
of all this is that care must be taken in the analysis of pauses, because there are multiple factors that may contribute to
the shape of the distribution of pauses, including the relative
frequency of chunk boundaries and also aspects of stimuli
structure that elevate pause duration but that are not specifically related to mathematical difficulty. Nevertheless it has
been shown the Graphical Protocol Analysis can be used to
measure mathematical competence in tasks involving the
simple copying of equations.

Acknowledgments
My thanks go to Ewen Cluley, Rebekah Egli, Hayden
Saughter and Jo Rusecka for their thoroughness in the running the trails and their conscientiousness in the collation of
the data.

References
Cheng, P. C-H., McFadzean, J., & Copeland, L. (2001). Drawing
out the temporal structure of induced perceptual chunks. In J. D.
Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proc. of the 23rd Ann. Conf. of the
Coge Science Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cheng, P. C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2007). Measuring Mathematical Formula Writing Competence: An Application of Graphical
Protocol Analysis. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proc. of the 29th Ann. Conf. of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
869-874). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term memory:
A reconsideration of mental storage capacity. Behavioral and
Brain Science, 24(1), 87-114.
Egan, D. E., & Schwartz, B. J. (1979). Chunking in recall of symbolic drawings. Memory and Cognition, 7, 149-158.
McLean, R. S., & Gregg, L. W. (1967). Effects of induced chunking on temporal aspects of serial recitation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74, 455-459.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven plus or minus
two: Some limits on our capacity for information processing.
Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
van Genuchten, E., & Cheng, P. C.-H. (2010). Temporal chunk
signal reflecting five hierarchical levels in writing sentences. In
S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proc. of the 32nd Ann.
Conf. of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1922-1927). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Zulfliki, P. A. M. (2013). Applying pause analysis to explore cognitive processes in the copying of sentences by second language
users. Unpublished PhD thesis, Department of Informatics,
University of Sussex.

324

