UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Counting Practice with Pictures, but not Objects, Improves Children’s Understanding of
Cardinality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/22p5k110

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Peterson, Lori
McNeil, Nicole
Tollaksen, Alice
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Counting Practice with Pictures, but not Objects,
Improves Children’s Understanding of Cardinality
Lori A. Petersen (lpetersen@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Ave., Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Nicole M. McNeil (nmcneil@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
118 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Alice K. Tollaksen (atollaks@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
118 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Alexander G. Boehm (aboehm@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
118 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Casey J. Hall (chall7@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
118 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Cristina Carrazza (Cristina.Carrazza.1@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
118 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Brianna L. Devlin (Brianna.L.Devlin.13@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
118 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Abstract
When counting, the final word used to tag the final item in a
set represents the cardinality, or total number, of the set.
Understanding of this concept serves as a foundation for
children’s basic mathematical skills. However, little is known
about how the early learning environment can be structured to
help children understand this important concept. The current
study examined the effects of the representational status of tobe-counted items on preschoolers’ understanding of
cardinality. Children (M age = 3 years, 6 months) were
randomly assigned to receive counting practice with either
physical objects or pictures over five practice sessions.
Children’s counting skill and understanding of cardinality
were assessed at pretest and posttest. Results revealed that
only children in the picture condition increased their
understanding of cardinality from pretest to posttest. These
results suggest that picture books are better than physical
objects at supporting children’s understanding of cardinality.
Keywords: cognitive development; counting; learning;
mathematics

Counting is a foundational skill. It provides the basis for
learning to add and subtract, as well as for other basic
arithmetic skills (Aunio & Niemivirta, 2010; Fuson, 1988;

Stock et al., 2009). According to the NCTM (2000),
teaching young children to “count with understanding and
recognize ‘how many’ in sets of objects” is one of the
earliest ways to get them on the path toward developing a
good number sense.
Counting is also of theoretical interest because it is the
first formal math system that young children learn, and it
takes children a surprisingly long time to master it (Le
Corre, et al., 2006; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Wynn, 1990).
Research suggests that children go through a relatively
predictable developmental progression as they construct an
understanding of counting. First, they pass through the
“one-” knower level, where they can reliably identify and
give one object, but not more. Then several months later
they become “two-” knowers and then “three-” knowers,
and some studies have even found “four-” knowers (Le
Corre et al., 2006). Finally, children become “cardinal
principle” (or CP) knowers (Le Corre et al., 2006). Prior to
this development, children construct understanding of the
numbers “one,” “two,” and “three” quite slowly over the
course of several months. In contrast, CP-knowers,
seemingly all at once, develop understanding of any number

2633

in their count list (Le Corre et al., 2006; Sarnecka & Carey,
2008; Wynn, 1990).
Although this conceptual leap typically happens around 3
1⁄2 to 4 years of age (Sarnecka & Gelman, 2004; Wynn,
1990), there are large individual differences in the age at
which children become CP-knowers, with some children
demonstrating understanding at age three and some not until
age five (Gunderson & Levine, 2011; Sarnecka & Lee,
2009). These early individual differences matter for future
success. Indeed, research has shown that early math
knowledge prior to the start of kindergarten is one of the
strongest predictors of future academic achievement
(Duncan et al., 2007). Moreover, early difficulties in
mathematics are not easily overcome with schooling.
Instead, children who struggle early on tend to lag
increasingly behind their peers in the acquisition of more
complex math knowledge over time (Jordan et al., 2009).
Given the foundational role of understanding of
cardinality in children’s future achievement, it is surprising
that relatively few studies have investigated how the
learning environment shapes children’s understanding. The
assumption must be that the learning environment matters,
as preschool teachers, curricula, and Standards focus on
teaching cardinality (Common Core; NCTM, 2000; Greenes
et al., 2004; Sarama & Clements, 2009). A few pieces of
empirical evidence also support the idea that different types
of input lead to differences in understanding. For example,
Levine and colleagues (Gunderson & Levine, 2011) showed
that the quantity and quality of math talk used at home in
the toddler months predicts preschoolers’ understanding of
cardinality. Ramscar et al. (2011) found that the way
children are introduced to the to-be-counted sets affects
their understanding of cardinality. Children learn more
when the to-be-counted objects are labeled first and then
quantified (e.g., “Balls. There are two.”) than when they are
quantified first and then labeled (e.g., “There are two
balls.”). In another study, Mix et al. (2012) showed that
counting practice in which the cardinality of the set is
labeled first and then counted immediately after is more
effective than other types of counting practice at promoting
understanding of cardinality. These studies suggest that the
learning environment affects children’s understanding of
cardinality. However, to our knowledge, Ramscar et al. and
Mix et al. are the only to experimentally investigate how
variations in the learning environment affect understanding
of cardinality.
Given the lack of research on this topic, there are many
different types of variations in the learning environment ripe
for study. In the present study, we focused on whether the
entities used during counting practice matter. Specifically,
we considered whether it is better for children to practice
counting with pictures of objects versus using the actual
physical objects themselves. We focused on this feature of
the environment for several reasons. First, it is highly
controllable. Second, concreteness of instructional materials
is a hot topic in cognitive development and educational
research. And finally, it is not intuitively obvious which

materials teachers and parents should use when teaching
children to count. Mix et al. used picture books in their
study. At the same time, teachers tend to prefer to use
physical objects in their lessons on counting.
There are some theoretical reasons to expect objects to be
better than pictures. First, objects might simply be more
engaging and motivating than pictures, and they might help
children stay engaged in the task. They are also more
manipulatable, and being able to manipulate objects during
learning tasks may benefit children’s comprehension and
memory (Glenberg et al., 2004). Physical objects might also
encourage pointing, touching, and moving gestures, which
have been shown to facilitate counting accuracy. Alibali and
DiRusso (1999) suggested that pointing and touching
promote counting accuracy because they help children keep
track of the items they’ve counted and coordinate tagging
the objects and saying the number words in one-to-one
correspondence. Such gestures allow children to use the
external environment to help them segment the set into
individuals that have and have not been counted, so children
do not have to hold all of the information in working
memory. Objects may be particularly helpful in this sense
because children can physically move objects that have
already been counted away from objects that are still left to
count. Thus, we predicted that children might gain more
counting skill after practicing counting with objects than
after practicing counting with pictures.
There are also strong theoretical reasons to expect
pictures to be better than objects for promoting
understanding of cardinality in particular. Pictures have
greater representational status than objects. Representational
status refers to the ease with which something can represent
something else. According to DeLoache et al.’s (1998) dual
representation hypothesis, the more interesting an object is
in its own right, the more difficult it is for children to think
of it as a representation of something else. DeLoache (1991)
has shown that pictures are inherently less interesting as
objects in their own right than are other symbols and are
more easily understood as representations of something else.
The higher representational status of pictures compared to
objects comes with at least two benefits: first, it means that
pictures are less distracting than objects. They are not very
interesting as objects in their own right, so they do not
prompt a lot of actions or play. DeLoache et al. (1998) have
shown that pictures quickly become objects of
“contemplation and communication” by children as young
as 19 months old. Second, Gelman et al. (2005) have shown
that children tend to think about objects depicted in pictures
in terms of their group membership, rather than as
individuals. The research of Mix et al. (2012) and Ramscar
et al. (2011) indicates that children’s understanding of
cardinality benefits when their attention is drawn to the
group, or set, as a whole instead of to the individual objects.
This evidence suggests that pictures may be especially
useful for facilitating understanding of cardinality. Thus, we
predicted that children in the picture condition would

2634

construct a better understanding of cardinality than children
in the object condition.
In sum, the research literature pointed to somewhat
opposing predictions. On one hand, it suggested that objects
would be better than pictures for facilitating counting skill.
On the other hand, it suggested that pictures would be better
than objects for helping children construct an understanding
of cardinality. We tested these ideas in a training experiment
with three and four year olds.

Method
Participants
Participants were recruited from two childcare centers
located on two college campuses in the Midwestern United
States. Tuition at the childcare centers is based on a sliding
scale, and 30% of children receive some form of reduced
tuition. Fifty-seven children participated in this study. Five
children did not complete all of the practice sessions. One
child participated in all sessions but did not actually engage
in any of the tasks. Of the remaining 51 children who
completed the pretest and five practice sessions, an
additional 12 did not have complete data for one or more of
the pre-post measures because of refusal to participate,
uncodable performance, or experimenter error. Thus, the
final sample contained 39 children (25 girls, 14 boys; M age
= 3 years, 6 months; 81% White, 12% Asian, 4% Black or
African American, 4% Hispanic or Latino).

Design
The design was a pretest-intervention-posttest design.
Children were randomly assigned to one of two counting
interventions: the picture intervention or the object
intervention. They completed measures to assess their
counting skill and understanding of cardinality immediately
before and after receiving the intervention.

Measures
Count disks This task was used to assess children’s
counting skill. It was a modified version of the task used in
Mix et al. (2012). Children were shown 20 one-inch disks
affixed on poster board in a line and spaced one-inch apart.
The disks alternated in color to help children keep track of
their count. The experimenter pointed to the leftmost disk
and asked the children to count all the disks starting there.
The largest number children reached without error was
considered their highest count. The task ended once children
indicated they were finished counting.
Give-a-number This task was used to assess children’s
understanding of cardinality. It is a commonly used measure
(Le Corre et al., 2006; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Wynn,
1990). Children received a pile of 15 disks, and their goal
was to give a monkey puppet a specified number of objects.
After the child gave the puppet a number of objects, the
puppet said, “Thanks,” and the experimenter asked the

child: “Does Monkey have n?” If the child agreed that the
puppet had the correct number, then the next trial began. If
the child disagreed that the puppet had the correct number,
the experimenter prompted the child to give the correct
amount by saying: “But Monkey wanted n. Can you make it
so that he has n?”
Children always were asked to give one object on the first
trial. Subsequent trials were based on children’s
performance. If children gave the correct number of objects,
they were asked to give the next consecutive number (n +
1). If children gave the incorrect number of objects, they
were asked to give the preceding number (n - 1). Trials
continued in this manner until children failed on a given
number twice. If children succeeded on all numbers 1-6,
then the experimenter started again with one object and
repeated the sequence of trials as described. A child was
classified as a “knower” of the highest number of objects
(out of 6) he or she gave correctly twice.

Experimental Conditions
Picture Intervention All children in the picture
intervention used counting “books” during counting
practice. These books were three-ring binders with pictures
of one to nine objects on each page. These objects came
from three categories: animals, vehicles, and food. The three
types of animals were elephants, lions, and hippos. The
three types of vehicles were boats, planes, and buses. The
three types of foods were strawberries, carrots, and bananas.
During practice-only sessions, children viewed one entire
picture book that contained two different pages for each of
the quantities one through nine (18 pages total). During
practice-and-testing sessions, children viewed one entire
picture book that contained one page for each of the
quantities one through nine (9 pages total). Thus, counting
practice during practice-only sessions was twice as long as
the counting practice during practice-and-testing sessions.
The training procedure was based on the intervention that
Mix et al. (2012) found was most effective for promoting
children’s understanding of cardinality. On each page of the
picture books, the experimenter first labeled the set’s
quantity (e.g., “Look, this page has three cars. Can you say
it with me? Three cars.”). Next, the experimenter
immediately counted the same set (e.g., “Let’s count them 1,
2, 3!”). Children then were asked to count and label the
items. They were told: “Now it’s your turn. How many cars
are there?” They were asked to point to each object as they
labeled it with a number name. Children were given
feedback on both their counting and labeling of the set. For
example, if a child correctly labeled the set, but counted
incorrectly, the experimenter demonstrated the correct count
(e.g., “Right, there are three cars, but watch: 1, 2, 3.”). If a
child labeled the set without counting, the experimenter
requested the counting procedure (e.g., “Right! Three cars.
Can you count them?”). If a child counted the objects
without labeling the set, the experimenter requested a label
(e.g., “Right! 1, 2, 3. So, how many are there?”). If the child

2635

failed to point to the objects, the experimenter reminded
them to point to each object (e.g., “Right! 1, 2, 3. Can you
point to them like this: 1 [point], 2 [point], 3 [point]?”).
Object Intervention The object intervention was identical
to the picture intervention in all ways except the materials
used during the counting practice sessions. Children in the
object intervention used the physical, plastic versions of the
objects depicted in the books in the picture intervention.
Instead of counting two-dimensional pictures of objects in
books, children in the object intervention counted threedimensional plastic objects that were placed on a white
work mat. Special care was taken to ensure that the objects
were similar in size and layout to the picture counterparts.
As in the picture intervention, the to-be-counted items were
presented simultaneously. As the experimenter set up the
objects in the same orientation and position as they were
depicted in the picture books, she hid the objects with a
piece of cardboard. Once the objects were placed, she
moved the cardboard so the child could see all objects
presented simultaneously.

Procedure
Children were randomly assigned to one of two practice
interventions (picture or object), and they participated in
five sessions. The sessions were held one week apart in a
quiet room. Children were seated in a chair and looked
down at the to-be-counted entities in both conditions to
ensure that none of the objects would be blocking one
another or obscured from children’s view. In the first
session, children completed the pretest followed by their
first counting session with modeling and feedback provided
by the experimenter. The next three sessions (sessions 2, 3,
and 4) were purely counting practice sessions with modeling
and feedback provided by the experimenter. In the fifth
session, children first completed their final counting session
with modeling and feedback provided by the experimenter
and then completed the posttest. During the pretest and
posttest, children completed the measures to assess their
counting skill and understanding of cardinality (described
above). Children did not receive feedback on any of the
pretest or posttest measures.

p’s > .10), including the two-way interaction between
condition and test that we would expect to see if children’s
counting skill improved more in one condition than the
other, F(1, 35) = 0.74, p = .74, partial eta squared < .01.
To assess the effect of condition on pre-to-post change in
children’s understanding of cardinality, we conducted a
mixed ANOVA with condition (picture or object) and age (3
or 4) as the between-subjects variables, test (pre or post) as
the within-subjects variable, and knower level on the give-anumber task (out of 6) as the outcome. The main effects of
test and age were both significant. Children performed
better on the posttest (M = 3.95, SE = 0.29) than on the
pretest (M = 3.42, SE = 0.34), F(1, 35) = 5.46, p = .03,
partial eta squared = .14. Four year olds performed better (M
= 4.52, SE = 0.41) than three year olds (M = 2.86, SE =
0.43), F(1, 35) = 7.82, p = .01, partial eta squared = .18. As
hypothesized, the interaction between condition and test was
significant, F(1, 35) = 5.07, p = .03, partial eta squared =
.13. Figure 1 presents the average change in knower-level
from pre-to-post as a function of condition. As shown in the
figure, children in the picture condition improved their
knower-level from pretest (M = 3.12, SE = 0.47) to posttest
(M = 4.14, SE = 0.41), but children in the object condition
did not (pretest M = 3.74, SE = 0.49; posttest M = 3.76, SE =
0.42). None of the other main effects or interactions were
statistically significant (all p’s > .10).
Conclusions were the same when we used ANCOVA to
examine whether children in the picture condition had a
better understanding of cardinality than children in the
object condition did at posttest, adjusting for pretest
knowledge, F(1, 35) = 4.26, p = .047, partial eta squared =
.11. Conclusions were also the same when we categorized
children as cardinal principle knowers or not based on
Negen, Sarnecka, and Lee’s (2012) approximation of Lee
and Sarnecka’s (2010) model. The percentage of children
who were classified as CP-knowers increased from pretest
to posttest in the picture condition (from 33% to 57%), but
not in the object condition (from 33% to 33%), χ2(1, N =
39) = 4.92, p = .03.

Results
To assess the effect of condition on pre-to-post change in
counting skill, we conducted a mixed ANOVA with
condition (picture or object) and age (3 or 4) as the betweensubjects variables, test (pre or post) as the within-subjects
variable, and highest number correctly counted on the count
disk task (out of 20) as the outcome. The main effects of test
and age were both significant. Children performed better on
the posttest (M = 10.68, SE = 0.95) than on the pretest (M =
7.91, SE = 0.89), F(1, 35) = 5.25, p = .03, partial eta squared
= .13. Four year olds performed better (M = 10.86, SE =
0.96) than three year olds (M = 7.73, SE = 1.00), F(1, 35) =
5.10, p = .03, partial eta squared = .13. None of the other
main effects or interactions were statistically significant (all

2636

Figure 1: Pre-to-Post Change in Knower-Level on the
Give-a-number Task by Condition.

Discussion
We compared the effects of counting practice with picture
books versus physical objects on children’s counting skill
and understanding of cardinality. Contrary to our
hypothesis, we did not find evidence that the two conditions
differentially affected children’s counting skill. However, as
hypothesized, we did find that the two conditions
differentially affected children’s understanding of
cardinality. Children who practiced counting with picture
books improved their understanding of cardinality, but
children who practiced counting with objects did not.
Similar to Mix et al.’s (2012) study, children’s
performance on the give-a-number task increased by one
knower-level after participating in a picture book
intervention. This finding is impressive given that previous
research suggests that children slowly increase their
knower-level on this task with many months in between
acquisition of new knower-levels (Le Corre et al., 2006;
Wynn, 1990). Note that children in the object condition also
practiced counting in the same way that Mix et al.’s study
found was beneficial for understanding of cardinality, yet
they showed no gains in understanding by posttest. This
finding may suggest that simply linking counting and set
size during counting practice with objects was not enough to
improve children’s understanding of cardinality. However,
it is important to note that Mix et al. designed their
intervention for use with picture books, and that may be the
context in which it works best.
Despite receiving counting practice that was identical to
the object condition in all ways but the specific items
counted, only children in the picture condition improved
their understanding of cardinality. We have suggested that
the benefits of the picture books may be due to the higher
representational status of pictures versus objects. But why
should the representational status of the counted objects
affect the construction of children’s understanding of
cardinality? Previous studies have suggested that one major
benefit of learning math concepts with objects that have
high representational status is that they are less distracting
than objects with low representational status (DeLoache,
2000; Uttal et al., 1997). Preliminary analyses of the videos
from the current study are providing support for this idea.
The videos are also suggesting that children in the object
condition may have been generally more distracted than
children in the picture condition. They may have been likely
to exhibit behaviors that disrupted the counting session like
talking about things that were unrelated to the counting task.
They may also have been more likely than children in the
picture condition to carry out task-irrelevant behaviors on
the objects themselves (e.g., moving the toy animals on the
table, pretending to eat the toy strawberries, driving the toy
bus on the table). A consequence of disruptions such as
these is that it may make it more difficult for the instructor
to present a given trial in the highly structured way (i.e.,
labeling set and then immediately counting in close
temporal continuity with no interruptions) that is thought to
benefit children’s understanding of cardinality. It also may

have caused children to focus their attention on the objects
at the expense of noticing cardinality as an important
attribute of the sets. Indeed, children’s focus on playing
with the objects may be one reason why we did not find the
predicted difference between conditions in counting skill. If
children were focused on moving the objects in playrelevant ways during the counting practice, then they would
not have been focused on moving the objects in the
counting-relevant ways that might help them segment the
set and keep track of their count.
Because objects with higher representational status, like
pictures, have been shown to decrease children’s focus on
the individual objects as objects and increase children’s
focus on the objects as members of a group (Gelman et al.,
2005), we hypothesized that pictures would also be more
likely than objects to focus children’s attention on the set
during the counting practice sessions. We reasoned that this
attention to the set would help children improve their
understanding of cardinality, thus serving as another
potential benefit of using pictures for counting. A more
detailed analysis of the children’s speech and their use of
set-focused language (e.g., plural form) may provide
evidence to support this idea.
Results suggest that educators’ money may be better
spent on counting books than on physical counters.
Counting books have the advantages over physical counters
of teaching children the concept of cardinality while also
improving children’s counting skill as much as physical
counters. It is important to note, however, that the picture
books that were used in the current study were created for
this study and not simply selected from among popular
existing counting books. Existing counting books differ in
many respects that may make them more or less effective as
materials for counting practice. The picture books used in
the current study contained pages that featured only the set
with no other pictorial details, words, or Arabic numerals.
Thus, the effectiveness of these picture books may not
generalize to all counting books. Future studies should
analyze counting books for aspects that may differentially
benefit children’s understanding of cardinality.
Although we had to make our own picture books for the
picture condition, we were able to use objects for the object
condition that are widely available and sold as counters in
teaching supply stores. This means that our objects were
similar to objects used for counting in the real world. At the
same time, however, it also means that the objects were
brightly colored and toy-like. We have shown in a previous
study that objects that are toy-like hinder children’s
counting performance (Petersen & McNeil, 2012). Thus, it
is possible that children would have benefitted more from
practice with blander, less toy-like physical objects.
The benefits of counting book practice from this study
were impressive given that children only received five short
practice sessions. It is possible that gains in understanding
of cardinality would be even more impressive over
continued practice with counting books. A question for
future research is whether differences in actual counting

2637

practice in the home and preschool environments might
account for differences in children’s understanding of
cardinality.
Overall, the current study contributes to our
understanding of the malleable factors in the early learning
environment that affect children’s understanding of a
foundational mathematical concept, cardinality. More
generally, the current study adds to the growing evidence
that seemingly small variations in the materials children use
in learning situations affects the knowledge they construct.
These results can also provide information to educators who
must decide which materials they should bring into their
classrooms to best teach their students the concept of
cardinality.

Acknowledgments
This paper is based on a dissertation conducted by Petersen
under the direction of McNeil. Thanks to the Early
Childhood Development Center and to members of the
Cognition Learning and Development Lab at Notre Dame.

References
Alibali, M. W. & DiRusso, A. A. (1999). The function of
gesture in learning to count: More than keeping track.
Cognitive Development, 14, 37-56.
Aunio, P., & Niemivirta, M. (2010). Predicting children’s
mathematics performance in grade one by early
numeracy. Learning and Individual Differences, 20, 427435.
DeLoache, J. S. (1991). Symbolic functioning in very young
children: Understanding of pictures and models. Child
Development, 62(4), 736- 752.
DeLoache, J. S. (2000). Dual Representation and Young
Children’s Use of Scale Models. Child Development, 2,
329-338.
DeLoache, J. S., Uttal, D. H., & Pierroutsakos, S. L. (1998).
The development of early symbolization: Educational
implications. Learning and Instruction, 8(4), 325-339.
Duncan, G.J., Dowsett, C.J., Claessens, A., Magnusson, K.,
Huston, A.C., Klebanov, P., Pagani, L.S., Feinstein, L…
& Japel, C. (2007). School readiness and later
achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1428–1446.
Fuson, K. C. (1988). Children’s counting and concepts of
number. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Gelman, S. A., Chesnick, R. J., & Waxman, S. R. (2005).
Mother-child conversations about pictures and objects:
Referring to categories and individuals. Child
Development, 76, 1129-1143.
Glenberg, A. M., Gutierrez, T., Levin, J. R., Japuntich, S., &
Kaschak, M. P. (2004). Activity and imagined activity can
enhance young children’s reading comprehension.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 424-436.
Greenes, C., Ginsburg, H. P., & Balfanz, R. (2004). Big
math for little kids. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
19, 159-166.
Gunderson, E. A., & Levine, S. C. (2011). Some types of
parent number talk count more than others: Relations

between parents’ input and children’s cardinal-number
knowledge. Developmental Science, 14, 1021-1032.
Jordan, N. C., Kaplan, D., Ramineni, C., & Locuniak, M. N.
(2009). Early math matters: Kindergarten number
competence
and
later
mathematics
outcomes.
Developmental Psychology, 45, 850-867.
Le Corre, M., Van de Walle, G., Brannon, E. M., & Carey,
S. (2006). Re-visiting the competence/performance debate
in the acquisition of the counting principles. Cognitive
Psychology, 52, 130-169.
Lee, M. D., & Sarnecka, B. W. (2010). A model of knowerlevel behavior in number concept development. Cognitive
Science, 34, 51-67.
Mix, K. S., Sandhofer, C. M., Moore, J. A., & Russell, C.
(2012). Acquisition of the cardinal word principle: The
role of input. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 27,
Petersen, L.A., & McNeil, N. M. (2012). Effects of
perceptually rich manipulatives on preschoolers’ counting
performance: Established knowledge counts. Child
Development, 84(3), 1020-1033.
Ramscar, M., Dye, M., Popick, H. M., & O’DonnellMcCarthy, F. (2011). The enigma of number: Why
children find the meanings of even small number words
hard to learn and how we can help them do better. PLoS
ONE, 6(7), e22501.
NCTM (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics).
(2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics.
Reston, VA: NCTM.
Negen, J., Sarnecka, B. W., & Lee, M. D. (2012). An Excel
sheet for inferring children’s number-knower levels from
give-N data. Behavior Research Methods.
Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2009). “Concrete” computer
manipulatives in mathematics education. Child
Development Perspectives, 3(3), 145-150.
Sarnecka, B., & Carey, S. (2008). How counting represents
number: What children must learn and when they learn it.
Cognition, 108, 662-674.
Sarnecka, B., & Gelman, S. A. (2004). Six does not just
mean a lot: Preschoolers see number words as specific.
Cognition, 92, 329-352.
Sarnecka, B. W. & Lee, M. D. (2009). Levels of number
knowledge in early childhood. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 103, 325-337.
Stock, P., Desoete, A., & Roeyers, H. (2009). Mastery of
the counting principles in toddlers: A crucial step in the
development of budding arithmetic abilities. Learning
and Individual Differences, 19, 419-422.
Uttal, D. H., Scudder, K. V., & DeLoache, J. S. (1997).
Manipulatives as symbols: A new perspective on the use
of concrete objects to teach mathematics. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 18, 37-54.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36, 155-193.

2638

