UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Creating Visual Explanations Improves Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3gh2z11f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bobek, Eliza
Tversky, Barbara

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Creating Visual Explanations Improves Learning
Eliza Bobek (Eliza_Bobek@uml.edu)
University of Massachusetts Lowell
One University Avenue, Lowell, MA 01854 USA

Barbara Tversky (btversky@stanford.edu)
Columbia Teachers College
525 W. 125th Street, New York, NY 10027 USA
Abstract

Hegarty and Just, 1993; Glenberg and Langston, 1992).
Depicting the operations of a system, its causal mechanisms,
and how it changes over time is more challenging. Arrows
are widely produced and comprehended as representing a
range of kinds of changes over time, though which kind of
change can be ambiguous (e.g., Heiser and Tversky, 2006).
Visualizations not only represent structural and some
behavioral properties directly, they also serve as an
excellent platform for inferences, for example, spotting
trends in graphs, imagining traffic flow or seasonal changes
in light in architectural sketches (e. g., Tversky and Suwa,
2009), and determining the consequences of movements of
gears and pulleys in mechanical systems (e.g., Hegarty and
Just, 1993).

Diagrams and other visual explanations are widely used in
instruction, in media, in presentations, in public places, and
more because they communicate effectively and improve
learning and performance. They use space and elements in
space to represent meanings more directly than purely
symbolic words. Can creating visual explanations also
promote learning? In two studies, students were taught a
STEM phenomenon. Half created visual explanations and half
created verbal explanations; afterwards their knowledge was
tested. Those who had created visual explanations performed
better in a post-test than those who created verbal
explanations. Visual explanations provide a check for
completeness and coherence as well as a platform for
inference, notably from structure to process.
Keywords: learning; visual explanation, diagrams, external
representation; structure; function; process; complex system;
STEM; spatial ability.

Generating Visual Explanations
Learning is improved when students are active learners, for
example, while generating their own explanations (e.g.,
Johnson & Mayer, 2010; Van Lehn, Jones, & Chi, 2009;
Wittrock, 1990). Mayer and colleagues have conducted
several experiments that have shown a learning benefit of
generative activities in domains involving invisible
components, including electric circuits (Johnson & Mayer,
2010), lightning formation (Johnson & Mayer, 2009), and
the chemistry of detergents (Schwamborn et al., 2010).
Although studies have not directly compared the effects of
generating visual vs. verbal explanations, the results of
several studies with partial comparisons suggest that
generating visual explanations could be more effective than
generating verbal ones (e. g., Ainsworth, Prain, & Tytler,
2011; Gobert & Clement, 1999; Schneider, Rode, and Stern,
2010). Creating visual explanations confers extra benefits
over and above the benefits of using them for
comprehension. Creating a visual explanation provides a
check for completeness; are all the parts there? Creating a
visual explanation provides a check for coherence; do the
relations among the parts make sense? Finally, as for
learning, visual explanations provide intuitive platforms for
inference, especially inferences from structure to function.
The benefits of creating visual explanations, completeness,
coherence, and inference, are the benefits that accrue from
constructing formal models of phenomena, with the extra
advantages that come from the visuospatial mapping of
parts, structure, and function.

Introduction
Dynamic systems such as those in science and engineering
are notoriously difficult to learn. Mechanisms, processes,
and behavior of complex systems present particular
challenges. Learners must master not only the components
and structure of the system but also the behavior, process,
and causality of the system (function), which may be
complex and frequently invisible. Although the teaching of
STEM phenomena typically relies on visualizations,
learning is typically revealed in language. Visualizations
have many advantages over verbal explanations for
teaching; can creating visual explanations promote learning?

Benefits of Visualizations
The power of visualizations comes from representing
meaning more directly and naturally than purely symbolic
words. Visualizations map elements and relations of
systems that are inherently spatial to elements and relations
on a page, as in maps and architectural plans. They also map
elements and relations of systems that are metaphorically or
conceptually spatial to a page, as in diagrams, charts, and
graphs (e. g., Tversky, 2011). Visualizations can readily
depict the parts, shapes, and configurations of a system.
Language can describe spatial properties and arrays but
because the correspondences of meaning to language are
purely symbolic, constructing mental models from
descriptions is far more effortful and error prone (e. g.,

206

Present Experiments
Two experiments directly compared student learning after
creating visual or verbal explanations of STEM phenomena,
a bicycle pump or chemical bonding, conducted in the
course of regular activities in science classes. In both cases,
students created explanations after the lessons were
completed. Spatial ability was assessed; previous research
has revealed that those high in spatial or mechanical ability
perform better on learning STEM concepts (e. g., Hegarty &
Just, 1993; Leutner, Leopold, & Sumfleth, 2009; Tversky,
Heiser, and Morrison, 2013).

Explaining the Workings of a Bicycle Pump
Method
Participants Participants were 127 (59 female) 7th and 8th
grade students, ages 12-14, enrolled in an independent
school in New York City.
Materials Each participant was given the Vandenberg-Kuse
Mental Rotation Test (MRT) (1978), a 12-inch Spalding
bicycle pump, a blank 8.5 x 11 sheet of paper, a 16 question
post-test.
Procedure On the first of two non-consecutive school days,
participants completed the MRT as a whole-class activity.
On the second day, participants were given the pump with
instructions to try to understand how it worked. This
segment was untimed. Participants were allowed to
manipulate and take apart the pump. Next, students were
asked to explain the workings of the bicycle pump, either
verbally on paper or visually. After completing the
explanation, participants were given a post-test that had 8
structural and 8 functional true/false questions.
Coding Explanations
Coding for Structure and Function. A maximum score of
twelve points was awarded for the inclusion and labeling of
six structural components: chamber, piston, inlet valve,
outlet valve, handle, and hose. Information was coded as
functional if it depicted or described the function/movement
of an individual part, or the way multiple parts interact.
There was no maximum imposed on the number of
functional units.
Coding of Essential Features. Both kinds of explanations
were coded for the inclusion of information essential to its
function according to a four-point scale (adapted from Hall,
Bailey, & Tillman, 1997). One point was given if both the
inlet and the outlet valve were clearly present in the drawing
or described in writing, one point was given if the piston
inserted into the chamber was shown or described to be
airtight, and one point was given for each valve if they were
shown or described to be opening/closing in the correct
direction.
Coding Arrows and Multiple Steps. For the visual
explanations, three uses of arrows were coded and tallied:
labeling a part or action, showing motion, or indicating
sequence. For both visual and verbal explanations, the
number of discrete steps was coded.

Figure 1: Examples of visual and verbal explanations.

207

Results

investigates the role of visual explanations for a more
difficult set of concepts.
The quality of the explanations predicted overall learning.
Specifically, including more of the essential features and
showing multiple steps correlated with good performance.
These findings have clear implications for teaching.
Creating visual explanations should be an effective way to
improve performance, especially of low spatial students.
Creating visual explanations can be guided toward the
features that augment learning, for example, encouraging
students to focus on the essential information and
suggesting that they show every step. The coding system
shows that visual explanations can be objectively evaluated
for feedback to students or grading. In addition, visual
explanations provide valuable feedback to instructors as to
what students do and do not comprehend.

Spatial ability. The mean score on the MRT was 10.56, with
a median of 11. Males scored significantly higher (M =
13.5, SD = 4.4) than females (M = 8.8, SD = 4.5), F(1, 126)
= 19.07, p<.01, a typical finding (Voyer, Voyer, and
Bryden, 1995). Participants were split into high or low
spatial ability by the median.
Explanations: Structure and Function. Both visual and
verbal explanations contained from two to ten structural
components. Visual explanations contained significantly
more structural components (M= 6.05, SD = 2.76) than
verbal explanations (M = 4.27, SD = 1.54), F(1, 126) =
20.53, p<.05. The number of functional components did not
differ between visual and verbal explanations. Interestingly,
67% of the visual explanations contained some verbal
information.
Essential Features. Visual explanations contained
significantly more essential information (M = 1.78, SD =
1.0) than verbal explanations (M = 1.20, SD = 1.21), F(1,
126) = 7.63, p<.05. Inclusion of essential features correlated
positively with post-test scores, r = .197, p<.05).
Multiple Steps. The number of steps used by participants
ranged from one to six. Participants whose explanations,
whether verbal or visual, contained multiple steps scored
significantly higher (M = .76, SD = .18) on the post-test
than participants whose explanations consisted of a single
step (M = .67, SD = .19), F(1, 126) = 5.02, p<.05.
Post-test Scores. Creating a visual explanation selectively
helped low spatial participants. The interaction between
spatial ability and explanation type was significant F(1, 124)
= 4.094, p<.01. Low spatial participants who created visual
explanations had significantly higher scores (M = .716, SD
= .121) than low spatial participants who generated verbal
explanations (M = .609, SD = .145). (Scores are reported as
proportion correct). The facilitation of visual explanations
for low spatial students was especially pronounced in the
subset of questions that assessed knowledge of function;
scores for visual explanations (M = .678, SD = .122) were
significantly higher than those for visual explanations (M =
.502, SD = .194), F(1,126) = 9.498, p<.05, see Figure 2.

Figure 2: Post-test scores by explanation type and spatial
ability.

Explaining Chemical Bonding
The first experiment showed that creating a visual
explanation of STEM mechanics improves learning for
students with low spatial ability more than creating a verbal
explanation. However, understanding the workings of a
bicycle pump is relatively easy. The next study investigates
learning chemical bonding, a more challenging set of
phenomena. For this, creating a visual rather than verbal
explanation is expected to aid students of low as well as
high ability. The next study also asks whether creating an
explanation per se can increase learning in the absence of
additional teaching by administering two post-tests of
knowledge, one after learning but before creating an
explanation and one after creating an explanation. Does the
act of integrating and consolidating knowledge serve
learning even in the absence of study or teaching?

Discussion
In the first experiment, students learned the workings of a
bike pump from interacting with it. Half then produced
verbal explanations and half visual explanations, followed
by a test of knowledge. The visual explanations contained
more information than the verbal ones, both more structural
information and more of the core, essential information.
Even though creating explanations occurred after learning,
creating a visual explanation improved scores for low
spatial participants more than creating a verbal explanation,
especially for the functional knowledge that is more difficult
(e. g., Tversky, et al., 2013). This finding mirrors many
studies in which diagrams in teaching selectively help low
spatial students. The bike pump was a relatively simple
system, and overall performance was high, perhaps not
allowing more subtle findings to appear. The second study

208

Method

significantly higher than females (M = 8.0, SD = 4.0), F(1,
125) = 24.49, p<.01. Participants were split into low and
high spatial ability based on the median.
Structure and Function. The maximum score for structural
and functional information was five points. Visual
explanations contained a significantly greater number of
structural components (M = 2.81, SD = 1.56) than verbal
explanations (M = 1.30, SD = 1.54), F(1, 125) = 13.69,
p<.05. There were no differences between verbal and visual
explanations in the number of functional components. In the
visual explanations, structural information was more likely
to be depicted (M = 3.38, SD = 1.49) than described (M =
.429, SD = 1.03), F(1, 62) = 21.49, p<.05, but functional
information was equally likely to be depicted (M = 1.86, SD
= 1.10) or described (M = 1.71, SD = 1.87). Functional
information expressed verbally in the visual explanations
significantly predicted scores on the post-test, F(1, 62) =
21.603, p<.01, while functional information in verbal
explanations did not. Explanations created by high spatial
participants contained significantly more functional
components, F(1, 125) = 7.13, p<.05, but there were no
ability differences in the amount of structural information
created by high spatial participants in either visual or verbal
explanations.
Arrows. 83% of visual explanations contained arrows. The
use of arrows was positively correlated with scores on the
post-test, r = .293, p<.05.
Specific examples. High spatial participants (M = 1.6, SD =
.69) used specific examples in their verbal and visual
explanations more often than low spatial participants (M =
1.07, SD = .79), a marginally significant effect F(1, 125) =
3.65, p=.06. Visual and verbal explanations did not differ in
the presence of specific examples. The inclusion of a
specific example was positively correlated with scores on
the delayed post-test, r =.56, p<.05.
Learning outcomes. The maximum score (reported as
proportion correct) for the immediate post-test was ten
points. The mean score was .46, SD= .469. Scores for the
subsequent visual (M= .486, SD = .308) and verbal groups
(M = .443, SD = .260), F(1, 125) = .740, p>.05 did not
differ, nor did scores of high (M= .532, SD - .421) and low
spatial students (M= .402, SD = .390) F(1, 125) = 2.72,
p>.05. As presented in Figure 4, the mean score on the
delayed post-test, after participants generated explanations,
was .704, SD = .299. Both groups improved significantly;
those who created visual explanations (M = .822, SD =
.208), F(1, 125) = 51.24, p<.01, Cohen’s d = 1.27 as well as
those who created verbal explanations (M = .631, SD =
.273), F(1,125) = 15.796, p<.05, Cohen’s d =.71.
Importantly, as evident in Figure 4, participants who
generated visual explanations (M = .822, SD = .208) scored
considerably higher on the delayed post-test than
participants who generated verbal explanations (M = .631,
SD = .273), F(1, 125) = 19.707, p<.01, Cohen’s d=.88. In
addition, as shown in Figure 5, high spatial participants (M
= .824, SD = .273) scored significantly higher than low
spatial participants (M= .636, SD = .207), F(1, 125) = 19.94,

th

Participants Participants were 126 (58 female) 8 grade
students, ages 13-14, enrolled in an independent school in
New York City.
Materials The class lesson on chemical bonding consisted
of a video that was 13 min, 22 sec. The video began with a
brief review of atoms and their structure, and introduced the
idea that atoms combine to form molecules. Next, the lesson
showed that location in the periodic table reveals the
behavior and reactivity of atoms, in particular, the gain, loss,
or sharing of electrons. Examples of atoms, their valence
shell structure, stability, charges, transfer and sharing of
electrons, and the formation of ionic, covalent, and polar
covalent bonds were discussed.
Participants were given a blank 8.5 x 11 sheet of paper.
Both immediate and delayed post-tests consisted of seven
multiple-choice items and three free-response items.
Procedure On the first of three non-consecutive school
days, participants completed the MRT as a whole-class
activity. On the second day, participants viewed the
recorded lesson on chemical bonding. They were instructed
to pay close attention to the material but were not allowed to
take notes. Immediately following the video, participants
had 20 min. to complete the immediate post-test; all finished
within this time frame. On the third day, the participants
were randomly assigned to either the visual or verbal
explanation condition. They were told to either visually or
verbally explain how atoms bond and how ionic and
covalent bonds differ. See Figure 3 for examples. After
completing the explanations, students were given the second
post-test, different from the first.
Coding Explanations
As evident from Figure 3, the visual explanations were
individual inventions; they neither resembled each other nor
those used in teaching. Most contained language, especially
labels and symbolic language such as NaCl.
Structure and Function. Visual and verbal explanations
were coded for depicting or describing structural and
functional components. The structural components included
information on the correct number of valence electrons, the
correct charges of atoms, the bonds between non-metals for
covalent molecules and between a metal and non-metal for
ionic molecules, the crystalline structure of ionic molecules,
and that covalent bonds were individual molecules. The
functional components included transfer of electrons in
ionic bonds, sharing of electrons in covalent bonds,
attraction between ions of opposite charge, bonding
resulting in atoms with neutral charge and stable electron
shell configurations.
Arrows. The presence and uses of arrows was coded.
Specific Examples. Explanations were coded for the use of
specific examples, such as NaCl, to illustrate ionic bonding.

Results
Spatial ability. The mean score on the MRT was 10.39, with
a median of 11. Males (M = 12.5, SD = 4.8) scored

209

p<.01, Cohen’s d=.87. The interaction between explanation
type and spatial ability was not significant.

Figure 4: Immediate and delayed post-test scores by
explanation type.

Figure 5: Delayed post-test scores by spatial ability.

Discussion
In the second experiment, students were taught chemical
bonding, a more difficult, abstract, and complex
phenomenon than the bicycle pump used in the first
experiment. Students were tested immediately after
learning. The following day, half the students created visual
explanations and half created verbal explanations. Students
were tested again, with different questions. Performance
was considerably higher as a consequence of creating either
explanation despite the absence of new teaching. Generating
an explanation can be regarded as a test of learning. Seen
this way, the results echo and amplify previous research
showing the advantages of testing over study (Roediger et
al., 2011). Importantly, creating a visual explanation gave
an extra boost to learning outcomes over and above the
boost provided by a verbal explanation. For this more
abstract and complex material, generating a visual
explanation benefited both low spatial and high spatial
participants.
High spatials not only scored better, they also generated
better explanations, including more of the information that
predicted learning. Their explanations contained more

Figure 3: Examples of visual and verbal explanations.

210

functional information and more specific examples. Their
visual explanations also contained more functional
information.
As before, qualities of the explanations predicted learning
outcomes, specifically including arrows in visual
explanations and more specific examples in both types of
explanation.

on conceptual understanding of causal and dynamic
knowledge in plate tectonics. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 36, 39-53.
Glenberg, A. M. & Langston, W. E. (1992). Comprehension
of illustrated text: Pictures help to build mental models.
Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 129-151.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing mental
models of machines from text and diagrams. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 717-742.
Heiser, J., & Tversky, B. (2006). Arrows in comprehending
and producing mechanical diagrams. Cognitive Science,
30, 581-592.
Johnson, C. I., & Mayer, R. E. (2010). Applying the selfexplanation principle to multimedia learning in a
computer-based game-like environment. Computers in
Human Behavior, 26, 1246-1252.
Leutner, D., Leopold, C., & Sumfleth, E. (2009). Cognitive
load and science text comprehension: Effects of drawing
and mentally imagining text content. Computers in
Human Behavior, 25, 284-289.
Roediger, H. L., Putnam, A. L. and Smith, M. A. (2011).
Ten benefits of testing and their applications to
educational practice. In. B. H. Ross (Editor), The
psychology of learning and motivation. Pp. 1-36. NY:
Elsevier.
Schneider, M., Rode, C., & Stern, E. (2010). Secondary
school students’ availability and activation of
diagrammatic strategies for learning from texts. In L.
Verschaffel, E. De Corte, T. de Jong & J. Elen (Eds.),
Use of representations in reasoning and problem
solving, analysis and improvement. Pp. 112-130. New
York: Routledge.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizing thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 499–535.
Tversky, B. Heiser, J. and Morrison, J. (2013). Space, time,
and story. In. B. H. Ross (Editor), The psychology of
learning and motivation. Pp. 47-76. NY: Elsevier.
Tversky, B. and Suwa, M. (2009). Thinking with sketches.
In A. B. Markman and K. L. Wood (Editors), Tools for
innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Pp. 75-84.
Uttal, D. H. Meadow, N. G. Tipton, E, Hand, L. L., Alden,
A. R.; Warren, C., Newcombe, N. S. (2013). The
malleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of training
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 352-402.
Vandenberg, S.G. and Kuse, A.R. (1978). Mental rotations:
A group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
Perceptual Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.
VanLehn, K. Jones, R. M., and Chi, M. T. H. (2009). A
model of the self-explanation effect. Journal of the
learning Sciences, 2, 1-59.
Voyer, D., Voyer, S., & Bryden, M. P. (1995). Magnitude of
sex differences in spatial abilities: A meta-analysis and
consideration of critical variables. Psychological
Bulletin, 117, 250-270.
Wittrock, M.C. (1990). Generative processes of
comprehension. Educational Psychologist, 24, 345-376.

Conclusion
Two experiments have shown that creating an explanation
of a STEM phenomenon benefits learning, even when the
explanations are created considerably after learning.
Explaining a complex system requires selecting the critical
information and integrating it, a set of processes that
apparently serves to consolidate memory and learning.
Notably, creating a visual explanation conferred much
larger benefits to learning than creating a verbal
explanation.
As in previous research, students with high spatial ability
both produced better explanations and performed better on
tests of learning (e. g., Uttal, Meadow, Tipton, Hand, Alden,
Warren, and Newcombe, 2013). The visual explanations of
high spatial students contained more information and more
of the information that predicts learning outcomes.
Surely some of the effectiveness of visual explanations is
because they represent and communicate more directly than
language. They also allow, indeed, encourage, the use of
well-honed spatial inferences to substitute for and support
abstract inferences (e. g., Tversky, 2011). Visual
explanations use space and elements in space to represent
the parts and configurations of complex systems. As noted,
visual explanations provide checks for completeness and
coherence, checks that the necessary elements of the system
are represented and work together properly to produce the
outcomes of the processes. Visual explanations also provide
a concrete reference for making and checking inferences
about the behavior, causality, and function of the system.
Thus, creating a visual explanation facilitates the selection
and integration of information underlying learning.
Drawing visual explanations appears to be an underused
method of monitoring and supporting students’
understanding of scientific concepts. One obstacle is an
objective scoring system for evaluating visual explanations.
We have shown that scoring systems can be devised, and
have shown benefits to students of creating visual
explanations. There are also benefits to teachers,
specifically, revealing gaps in knowledge and
misunderstandings. The bottom line is quite clear. Creating
a visual explanation is a good way to learn and master
complex systems. What’s more, as evident from the
examples here, it’s creative and fun.

References
Ainsworth, S., Prain, V., and Tytler, R. (2011). Drawing to
learn in science. Science, 26, 1096-1097.
Gobert, J.D., & Clement, J.J. (1999). Effects of studentgenerated diagrams versus student-generated summaries

211

