UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-Modal Grounding of Meaning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9056c0p8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Chui, Kawai

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-Modal Grounding of Meaning
Kawai Chui (kawai@nccu.edu.tw)
Department of English & Research Center for Mind, Brain and Learning, No. 64, Sec. 2, ZhiNan Rd.
Mucha, Taipei City, 11605, Taiwan
Abstract
The current study investigates how the speaker grounds
meaning for a referent by gestural repetition along with speech
in daily conversation. The domain of analysis is the stretch of
talk that encompasses the beginning and the end of the joint
action during which a pair of similar gestures is produced by
different speakers across turns to depict the same referent. A
particular cross-modal grounding strategy was found: The
previous speaker’s gesture is replicated to form a semantic
foundation shared by the participants; upon such common
ground in gesture, the speaker readily conveys a new meaning
with a new lexical expression. The use of the cross-modal
grounding strategy facilitates the expression of shared
knowledge in gesture and new meaning in speech within a
clausal unit. It also bears out the bilateral process of speaking:
During the construction of utterance, the speaker grounds new
meaning by considering the addressee’s current state of
knowledge as revealed by gestural repetition. In turn, the
addressee informs the speaker about his/her acknowledgement
of the newly established meaning.
Keywords: grounding; meaning; gestural repetition; crossmodal strategy

Introduction
Grounding is an important aspect of language use (Clark,
1996; Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark & Krych, 2004; Clark &
Schaefer, 1987, 1989; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). “In
dialogue, speakers try to ground their communicative acts as
they go along: They work with their partners to reach the
mutual belief that the partners have understood them well
enough for current purposes” (Clark & Krych, 2004: 63). In
Clark and Krych’s (2004) study, pairs of participants, each
comprised of a Director and a Builder, engaged in the task of
assembling ten Lego models. It was found that whether the
Director could see the Builder or not, and whether both were
given instructions by audiotape or not affected the linguistic
and gestural performances of the participants in grounding
the Lego pieces. The findings provided evidence that being
able to see the addressees’ workspaces was crucial to making
grounding more efficient. In daily conversation, participants
also see each other. Then, when they do not engage in
referent communication tasks, how do participants ground
meaning by speech and gesture? The present study
investigates
participants’
linguistic
and
gestural
manifestations in the act of the grounding of meaning for a
referent under discussion in conversation.
While multimodal resources can be employed to
accomplish the social communicative act of providing
semantic information for mutual understanding between the
speaker and the addressee(s), the study focuses on gestural
repetition along with speech. The re-enactment of a manual
configuration which has previously been produced by another

speaker for the same referent is called ‘gestural mimicry’
(Kimbara, 2006), and gestures of this kind are called ‘return
gestures’ (de Fornel, 1992), ‘gestural rephrasings’ (Tabensky,
2001), ‘mimicking gestures’ (Kimbara, 2006) or ‘mimicked
gestures’ (Holler & Wilkin, 2011; Parrill & Kimbara, 2006).
The current study aims to investigate gestural repetition
along with speech in conversational interaction during which
speakers provide and ground meaning naturally. It will be
demonstrated that gestural repetition can reveal the
interactive nature of grounding, and provide the clearest
evidence for speaking as a bilateral process (Clark & Krych,
2004), manifesting what information about addressees’ state
of knowledge speakers would take into account and how
speakers use that information during the construction of their
linguistic-gestural units, and also how addressees inform
speakers about their understanding.

Data and Method
The study was based on videotaped data from daily face-toface conversations in Mandarin Chinese. The participants
were recruited to hold a conversation with their friends,
family members or colleagues who knew each other. For
every recording, the participants chose a place where they
could talk in a leisurely manner, such as a classroom,
students’ lounge, dorm room or living room. Participants
were free to find and develop topics of common interest, and
were filmed for approximately an hour with a visible camera.
All of the participants were paid, and they were told that they
were participating in a study on conversation; gestures were
not mentioned. One stretch from each talk, of about twenty to
forty minutes, in which the participants were comfortable in
front of the camera, was then selected for transcription. The
speech and the gesture data relevant for the present study
were extracts from seven conversations among adult native
speakers of Mandarin for a total of about 140 minutes of talk;
seven males and ten females were involved.
The domain of analysis is ‘a stretch of talk’ that meets two
criteria: First, each stretch comprises the beginning and the
end of an exchange about the meaning of a referent across the
turns. Second, it includes a pair of similar gestures produced
by different speakers to depict the same referent across the
turns. For each pair of similar gestures in a stretch of talk, the
judgment on whether one repeated the other rest on ‘form’
and ‘meaning’: The high similarity between two gestures in
this study was determined by the congruence rates across five
gesture features: ‘handedness’, ‘position’, ‘orientation’,
‘hand shape’, and ‘motion’ (McNeill 1992, 2005); a
replicated gesture also represents the same referent depicted
by its corresponding gesture in the prior context.

2038

Only representational gestures conveying substantive
meaning were considered in the present study. Example (1) is
about the strange behavior of a friend. The stretch of talk has
to do with a discussion of the meaning of the ideophone
which sounds like [yuyu]. Within the stretch of talk
encompassing three turns, a pair of similar gestures is
produced by the two participants. In Line 1, the first speaker
asserts that the friend behaves in a ‘yuyu’ way and the
ideophone is also depicted in gesture (Fig. 1a): Hands at each
side of the body, with fingers together and curled into fists,
move slightly up and down alternately. In the next turn in
Line 2, the second speaker provides her understanding of the
‘yuyu’ behavior and grounds it by the use of the new lexical
verb tiàowŭ ‘dance’ and the repetition of the first speaker’s
gesture (Fig. 1b). The third turn in Line 3 is the end of the
discussion, as the addressee displays the acceptance of the
second speaker’s understanding that dancing is the strange
behavior of the friend by the use of the agreement marker duì
‘right’ three times.
(1) 1 1st:
2 2nd:
3 1st:

.. xiànzài
biànchéng
yuyu
zhèyiàngzhi
now
become
IDEOPHONE like this
‘Now, (he) became ‘yuyu’, like this.’
..ránhoù
hái
hùi tiàowŭ
then
also
will dance
‘(He) will also dance.’
.. duì duì
duì
right right
right
‘Right, right, right.’

Fig. 1a Gesture for ‘yuyu’ behavior

Fig. 1b Gestural repetition of 1a

Two coders worked separately to identify stretches of talk,
each comprising the whole discussion of the meaning of a
referent. A total of 63 stretches were found in the data.
Among the 24 stretches involving the occurrence of speechaccompanying gestures, there were 12 instances of gestural
repetition, constituting twelve co-referential gesture pairs for
the study: The initial representational gesture was produced
by the ‘first speaker’. Later, the ‘second speaker’ repeated it
his/her turn. The similarity between the two instances in each
pair was rated on a five-point scale of agreement: The
realization of a feature in both gestures of each pair was
coded as ‘Alike’ if the coder chose ‘agree’ or ‘strongly agree’,
as ‘Not Alike’ if the judgment was ‘disagree’ or ‘strongly
disagree’, and as ‘Neutral’ for the choice ‘neutral’ on the
scale. The judgment was subject to the relatively objective
spatio-physical manifestation of the features, and coders
reached total agreement on their analysis. See the high
congruence rates in Table 1.
Not only does gestural repetition in conversation reveal the
interactive nature of grounding, it also manifests what
information about the addressee’s state of knowledge the

second speaker would take into account during the
construction of utterance.
Table 1. The congruence rates across the five gesture features
Hand shape
Handedness
Position
Alike
12
100%
10
83%
11
92%
Not alike 0
0%
2
17%
1
8%
Neutral
0
0%
0
0%
0
0%
Motion
Orientation
Alike
11
92%
8
67%
Not alike 1
8%
4
33%
Neutral
0
0%
0
0%
*(‘Alike’: coders (strongly) agreed that the realization of the feature was
similar in both gestures; ‘Not Alike’: coders (strongly) disagreed that the
realization was similar in both gestures; ‘Neutral’: similarity or difference
not noticeable)

Linguistic-gestural grounding of meaning
How do speakers ground meaning in speech and by gestural
repetition? First, it is necessary to consider the stretch of talk
encompassing the whole of the exchange which is concerned
with the meaning of a referent, and including a pair of similar
gestures produced by two different speakers to depict the
same referent. On the one hand, the contextual situation that
includes the initial occurrence of a replicated gesture, and the
fact that the first speaker in the contextual situation typically
becomes the addressee when the second speaker performs the
act of grounding help understand the situation in which the
need for the grounding of meaning arises and the
incorporation of linguistic-gestural contextual elements in the
second speaker’s turn. On the other hand, the consideration
of the first speaker’s act and of the addressee’s later
acceptance of the second speaker’s idea about the referent are
relevant to the discussion of the bilateral process of speaking.
This section presents four kinds of contextual situation, as
manifested in the turn of the first speaker, that includes a
gesture and that would prompt another participant to provide
and ground meaning for a referent having been brought up in
the first speaker’s turn. It will be shown that despite the
situational difference, a particular cross-modal grounding
strategy can be found in the second speaker’s turn. The talk
about the meaning of a referent ends when the addressee
displays his/her acknowledgement of the newly established
meaning.
In the first kind of situation, when new referents are
expressed by demonstratives, non-conventional ideophones,
or homonyms, the lexical meaning lacks clarity. In the data,
during the discussion about the shape of the body of a friend,
a speaker mentions that the girl was fat at the time that he
saw her in a college-preparatory cram school, but that she
was very thin at the time when he next saw her in the school
library in college. At the time that the first speaker tries to
provide a reason for the change in the girl’s shape, as shown
in Example (2), his utterance includes the demonstrative nàge
‘that’ as the main predicate (Line 1) and he simultaneously
produces a gesture (Fig. 2a) to specify the meaning: The right
hand first rises up with the fingers open from the thigh to the
front of the chest; then the left hand starts rising up with the
fingers open. Both hands move up and down alternately four

2039

times, depicting the idea of the changes in the body shape.
The absence of an explicit lexical meaning for the new
gestural referent in the prior context prompts the second
speaker to provide an explicit meaning for the demonstrative
and ground it by the use of cross-modal resources. The
second speaker produces a new lexical verb tiáojié ‘adjust’;
in gesture, he repeats the first speaker’s gesture of bodyshape-adjustment (Fig. 2b) by copying the shape of hands
being in front of the chest, its handedness (both hands) and
the direction of movement (up and down). Finally, the
addressee, who is also the first speaker in the first turn,
displays the acceptance of the newly established meaning by
the use of the agreement marker duì ‘right’ in the next turn
(Line 3). More elaboration follows the agreement marker in
this acceptance phase, providing further information about
the idea of adjustment as being a process of becoming fat and
then thin and then fat again and thin again over time. The
elaboration indicates further confirmation of the newly
established meaning and mutual understanding between the
participants.

be meant by the idealization of a person by formulating a
new statement with a different verb měihuà ‘beautification’
in Line 2. She also grounds her interpretation by gestural
repetition, depicting lǐxiănghuà in a similar way (Fig. 3b). At
the end of the discussion, the addressee, who is also the first
speaker, does not signal acceptance verbally or gesturally;
instead, the talk moves on without opposition. The absence of
opposition typically implicates agreement and mutual
understanding, and the act of grounding the meaning is still
accomplished.

Fig. 3a Gesture for idealization
(3) 1 1s:

2 2nd:

Fig. 2a Gesture for body-shape adjustment Fig. 2b Gestural repetition of 2a

(2) 1

1s :

2

2nd:

3

1s :

..qíshí tā
bĕnlái
jìu
mán huì nàge a
in fact 3SG originally then quite can that PRT
‘Actually she was originally quite good at that.’
..hái
mán
néng
tiáojié
jìu
duì
le
still quite
can
adjust
then
right
PRT
‘(She) is quite good at adjusting (her body shape).’
..duì a
tā
..tā yĕ
pàng shòu pàng shòu
right PRT 3SG 3SG also fat
thin fat
thin
.. zhèyàng
like this
‘Right. She…she’s fat, and then thin, and then fat, and then
thin, and then fat, and then thin, like this.’

..nĭ
débúdào de
dōngxī.. ránhoù yìzhí
2SG
NEG.get DE thing then
continuously
dùi tā
hěn lĭxiănghuà de.. hěn
to 3SG very idealize
PRT very
‘For the things that you can’t get, then (you) very much keep
idealizing him, very’
... nĭ
bă tā
měihuà
2SG BA him beautify
‘You beautify him.’

The third situation has to do with alignment, in that what
the first speaker talks about is recognized by the second
speaker. See Example 4.

Fig. 4a Gesture for idealization
st

In another situation, the first speaker encounters difficulty
in verbalization, and the turn-construction unit is incomplete
and the meaning is not fully conveyed. Thus, the need arises
for the next speaker to provide meaning. Example (3) is
about idealization. The first speaker says that if a person were
someone with whom she had failed to establish a close
relationship with, s/he would idealize the person. A gesture is
produced to depict the idea of lǐxiănghuà ‘idealization’ in
Line 1 (Fig. 3a): The right hand rises to cheek level with
fingers slightly apart and bent, after which the hand turns
around clockwise. After the assertion, the speaker attempts to
further explicate her understanding of ‘idealization’ yet fails
to finish her expression of her thought after her utterance of
the second degree adverb hěn ‘very’ (Line 1). To deal with
the first speaker’s incomplete verbalization, the second
speaker provides a meaning for the idea of idealization in the
next turn. She presents her own understanding of what may

Fig. 3b Gestural repetition of 3a

(4) 1 1 :
2 2nd:

Fig. 4b Gestural repetition of 4a

.. yīnwēi
tā
yoŭ [máng a]
because 3SG have prickle PRT
‘Because it has prickles.’
..shàngmiàn yoŭ nàge
háomáo
on there.be that fine
hair
‘There are fine hairs on (it).’

In Example (4), the conversational topic is about feeling
itchy during the harvesting of rice crops in a field. The first
speaker is explaining that there are small thorns or prickles
máng on the stems in Line 1. At the same time, a gesture is
produced for prickles (Fig. 4a): The right hand at shoulder
level curves into the palm; the left-hand fingers at chest level
come together. The configuration as a whole enacts the
holding the stem of a crop on which there are prickles. The
second speaker then demonstrates his agreement in Line 2.
Again, cross-modal grounding is in evidence: Linguistically,
the second speaker provides more semantic information
about the crops - having háomáo ‘fine hairs’ on the stems;

2040

manually, the initial gesture produced in the addressee’s
previous turn is replicated (Fig. 4b), with a repetition of the
hand shape of holding a stem with both hands in front of the
chest, as well as the orientation of the hands and fingers
being together and curved in. As in Example (3), in the
acceptance phase, the stretch of talk for the discussion of
máng and háomáo is finished with no opposition from the
addressee.
In contrast to the case in the agreement situation, the
second speaker may engage in the discussion of a referent
because s/he does not agree with what had been uttered by
the first speaker in the prior turn. A talk in the data is about
the kind of musical instrument played by a character in a
movie. As shown in Example (5), the first speaker uses a
general term yuèqí ‘musical instrument’ in speech (Line 1)
but gestures a particular kind that requires the use of a bow to
play (Fig. 5a): The right hand goes up to shoulder level with
the fingers curled into a fist as if holding a bow; the left hand
rises to waist level, also with fingers curled into a fist as if
holding the lower part of the instrument. Then, the right hand
moves horizontally to the left one time to enact the playing of
a stringed musical instrument that requires the use of a bow.
Since the second speaker holds a contrary opinion about the
referent yuèqí in regard to the instrument played in the movie,
he brings up a different understanding and grounds it by
gestural repetition along with speech in his turn. In Line 2, he
mentions that it is the type that is played with the fingers, as
represented in speech by yuèqìn ‘plucked lute with a wooden
body’. But, what is of note is that in gesture, instead of
enacting yuèqìn which is played with the fingers, the speaker
repeats the first speaker’s gesture (Fig. 5b), as his right-hand
fingers form a fist as for holding a bow, and the right hand
moves in the same leftward direction to enact the idea of
playing a musical instrument with a bow. After that, the
addressee also conveys acceptance by use of the commonly
used particle duì ‘right’, followed by more elaboration to
indicate re-assurance that what the second speaker has
mentioned about the musical instrument is correct.

Fig. 5a Gesture for musical instrument
played with a bow
(5) 1 1st:

2 2nd:

Fig. 5b Gestural repetition of 5a

.. màobó shì
nà
zŏng... zhūanyiè
de nà
Maobo COP that kind
professional DE that
zŏng... yùeqì
de.. nĭ
zhīdào ma.. sŭoyĭ
kind
musical instrument DE 2SG know PRT so
‘Maobo (used) that kind of professional musical instrument,
you know. So,’
(0) méiyiŭ.. tā
shì
nàge...(1.1)jù
xúanzăi
NEG
3SG COP that
play plucked lute with
a wooden body
‘No, he played a kind of plucked lute with a wooden body.’

3 1st:

.. duì a
duì a... jiu
shì nà
zŏng
right PRT right PRT EMP COP that kind
...yùeqì
de
musical instrument PRT
‘Righ, right. It’s that kind of musical instrument.’

To summarize, in the four types of contextual situation
mentioned above, no matter whether the first speakers’
utterances were complete or not, or clearly or vaguely
expressed, each utterance was an assertion or assessment
about the quality of states, activities, or processes or about
the characteristics of people or objects. Each of the utterances
included a referent in gesture. Among the total of eleven
gestures, six depict concrete entities or activities, such as the
gesture for musical instruments, and five enact abstract ideas,
such as ‘idealization’. All of the gestural referents carry new
information, as the corresponding lexical referents had not
been brought up previously in the conversation prior to the
point at which they were uttered.
In the next turn, when the other participant wants to
express the meaning of a referent brought up in the first
speaker’s utterance, be it gestured or not, be the action
prompted by the first speaker’s lack of clarity or by the
presence of an obstacle to verbalization in the utterance, or
by the second speaker’s alignment or disagreement with what
the first speaker has uttered, “the speaker must design what
she says against the current common ground with her partner.
His beliefs about their common ground should be
coordinated with hers if they are to understand one another
efficiently” (Wilkes-Gibbs & Clark, 1992: 184). The way to
make such a design in face-to-face conversational interaction
is cross-modal, and the new interpretation is provided and
grounded through the collaboration between speech and
gestural repetition: During the construction of utterance, the
second speaker repeats the first speaker’s gesture and
expresses new meaning for the referent under discussion in
speech.
The process of the grounding of meaning could take
numerous turns across speakers. When the addressee finally
expresses acceptance of a new meaning, the act is
accomplished and mutual understanding is reached.
Agreement markers such as duì ‘right’ or o ‘I see’ are
frequently used to convey agreement with the newlyestablished meaning. Acceptance can also be signaled nonverbally, for instance by head nods. More elaboration about
the referent after the agreement marker further confirms the
understanding of the new meaning provided by the second
speaker. Finally, the talk could move on to another subject
matter without the addressee’s overt acceptance. The absence
of opposition usually suggests agreement and mutual
understanding.

Cross-modal grounding strategies
There are various ways speakers can incorporate gestural
signals in the process of grounding. According to Clark and
Krych (2004: 79), participants in task-based communication
relied on gestural signals like “exhibiting, poising, pointing at,
and placing physical objects, nodding and shaking heads, and

2041

directing eye gaze, and on other mutually visible events.” As
to the participants in face-to-face conversations, when they
engage in the act of the grounding of meaning for a referent
under discussion, the linguistic-gestural manifestations
demonstrate the use of a particular cross-modal strategy: The
first speaker’s gesture, and sometimes together with the coreferential lexical expression, is replicated to form a semantic
foundation shared by the participants; upon such gestural
common ground, the speaker readily conveys a new meaning
with a new lexical expression. What is of note is that the
second speaker would rather repeat the addressee’s previous
gesture than produce a different one for the new constituent,
even though the speaker opposes the meaning or referent
being uttered and/or depicted.
Such pairing of the initial gesture and its replicated
counterpart and their collaboration with speech to ground
meaning in speech communication bears out the principle of
least joint effort (Clark, 1996; Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark
& Schaefer, 1987; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), in that
“[f]ace to face, [people] should exploit that combination of
vocal and gestural actions they judge will take the least joint
effort” (Clark & Krych, 2004: 64). In this study, the
combination of gestural repetition and speech would be the
least joint effort the two modalities undertake for the
realization of the expression of common ground in gesture
and new meaning in speech within a clausal utterance in the
second speaker’s turn. The cross-modal collaboration would
also facilitate the addressee’s comprehension of a newly
established meaning in the presence of a knowledge
foundation already shared between the speaker and the
addressee.
Moreover, the use of a grounding strategy based on
gestural repetition along with speech supports speaking as a
bilateral process to achieve mutual understanding. In a
bilateral process, “[s]peakers monitor not just their own
actions, but those of their addressees, taking both into
account as they speak. Addressees, in turn, try to keep
speakers informed of their current state of understanding”
(Clark & Krych, 2004: 62). In daily conversation, the second
speaker not only provides meaning for the referent at issue,
but s/he also grounds the new information by considering the
addressee’s current state of knowledge at the same time, as
evidenced by the occurrence of gestural repetition. In other
words, as the first speaker mostly becomes the addressee
during the second speaker’s construction of utterance, the
initial occurrence of a replicated gesture is produced by the
addressee in his/her prior turn as the first speaker. Even
though the addressee is a third participant, s/he in the same
discourse environment would have recognized the gesture
produced by the first speaker. Thus, the repetition of the
gesture constitutes a semantic foundation of knowledge
shared by both the speaker and the addressee, based on which
a new meaning of the referent at issue is readily conveyed in
speech.
Finally, addressees also play an active role in the bilateral
process of speaking, as “[they] take an active part both: (1)
by telling speakers about their understanding and (2) by

giving them access to evidence of understanding” (Clark &
Krych, 2004: 77). In the conversational data, after the second
speaker has finished the gestural repetition and presentation
of new meaning, the addressee displays understanding of the
new meaning. If the addressee shows lack of understanding,
then the grounding of meaning continues and more turns are
required. The acceptance phase comes when confirmation of
understanding is expressed. The use of agreement markers
and head nods is common. In addition, more elaboration can
be provided to further indicate acceptance. For the talk to go
on in spite of the lack of the addressee’s explicit display of
acceptance of the new meaning implicates agreement with no
opposition. All of the various types of responses given by the
addressees, again, support the bilateral process of speaking.

Conclusion
In daily conversation, the use of replicated gestures is not
frequent. One reason for this is that speakers have numerous
communicative goals and perform many actions other than
providing the grounding of meaning for mutual
understanding. Another reason is that speakers do not
necessarily repeat others’ gestures at the time they ground
semantic information about the same referent. Nevertheless,
the use of replicated gestures is by no means a matter of
chance. In Holler and Wilkin (2011), the study required the
two participants to focus their talk on referents, “in order to
figure out whether they are talking about the same thing”
(ibid, 136). A total of 113 occurrences of gestural repetition
were found. While replicated gestures in speech
communication do not occur by chance, the present study has
shown that their occurrence and collaboration with speech
indicates the use of a cross-modal strategy for the grounding
of meaning. The use of such grounding strategy, in turn,
bears out the bilateral nature of speaking in that it manifests
that the speaker takes into account the addressee’s knowledge
state to form a semantic common ground across the turns
during the construction of their own utterance. The addressee
in the next turn also informs the speaker about his/her
understanding. Whether this cross-modal grounding strategy
used by Mandarin speakers in conversation is languagespecific or not awaits future studies across different
languages.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by grants from the National
Science Council, Taiwan (NSC 97-2410-H-004-111-MY3).

Referents
Clark, H. H., & Krych, M. A. (2004). Speaking while
monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of
Memory and Language , 501, 62-81.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S.D.
Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition

2042

(pp. 127–149). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1987). Concealing one’s
meaning from overhearers. Journal of Memory and
Language, 262, 209–225.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal,
132, 259–294.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 221, 1–39.
de Fornel, M. (1992). The return gesture: Some remarks on
context, inference, and iconic gesture. In P. Auer, & A. Di
Luzio (Eds.), The Contexualisation of Language (pp. 159176). Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
Holler, J., & Wilkin, K. (2011). Co-speech gesture mimicry
in the process of collaborative referring during face-toface dialogue. Journal of Nonverbal Behaviour, 35, 133–
153.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture: Visible Action as Utterance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kimbara, I. (2006). On gestural mimicry. Gesture, 61, 39–61.
Koschmann, T., & LeBaron, C. (2002). Learner articulation
as interactional achievement: Studying the conversation of
gesture. Cognition Instruction, 20, 249-282.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind – What Gestures Reveal
about Thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture and Thought. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Parrill, F., & Kimbara, I. (2006). Seeing and hearing double:
The influence of mimicry in speech and gesture and
observers. Journal of Nonverbal Behaviour, 304, 157–166.
Tabensky, A. (2001). Gesture and speech rephrasings in
conversation. Gesture, 12, 213–235.
Wilkes-Gibbs, D., & Clark, H. H. (1992). Coordinating
beliefs in conversation. Journal of Memory and Cognition,
31, 183-194.

2043

