UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Degenerative Techo-Cognitive Niches. Unforeseen Dangers of the Hyper-Technological
Paradigm

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3502p5jz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Berolotti, Tommaso
Magnani, Lorenzo

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Degenerative Techo-Cognitive Niches
Unforeseen Dangers of the Hyper-Technological Paradigm
Tommaso Bertolotti (bertolotti@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section
University of Pavia, ITALY

Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section
University of Pavia, ITALY
(Odling-Smee et al., 2003, p. 2).1 By modifying their environment and by their affecting, and partly controlling, some
of the energy and matter flows in their ecosystems, organisms
(not only humans) are able to modify some of the natural selection pressure present in their local selective environments,
as well as in the selective environments of other organisms.
In brief, the general inheritance system (natural selection
among organisms influences which individuals will survive
to pass their genes on to the next generation) is usually regarded as the only inheritance system to play a fundamental
role in biological evolution; nevertheless, where niche construction plays a role in various generations, a second inheritance system occurs, also called ecological inheritance by
Odling-Smee. In the life of organisms, the first system occurs through a univocal endowment through the process of
reproduction (sexual for example): on the contrary, the second system can in principle be performed by any organism
towards any other organism (“ecological” but not necessarily
“genetic” relatives), at any stage of their lifetime. Why? Because organisms adapt to their environments, but also adapt
to environments as they are modified by themselves or other
organisms.2 From this perspective, acquired characteristics
can play a role in the evolutionary process, even if in a nonLamarckian way, through their influence on selective environments via niche construction.
It has to be noted that cultural niche construction alters selection not only at the genetic level, but also at the ontogenetic
and cultural levels as well: with a broader explanatory reach
than sociobiology and evolutionary psychology, the theory of
niche construction simultaneously explains the role of cultural aspects (transmitted ideas), behavior, and ecologically
persistence inheritance. Of course niche construction may
also depend on learning. It is interesting to note that sev-

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to connect studies in cognitive niches
with the diffusion of high-technologies, cyborgs and robots, so
to obtain a new framework for analyzing some dilemmas of
future technological developments. Digital technologies dramatically boosted the niche constructing dynamics by allowing the construction of new informational environments and
by the introduction of synthetic-minds that are able to carry
on niche construction and maintenance activities side-to-side
with human beings. Cognitive niches, structured to ease the
environmental selective pressure, may progressively degenerate causing an increase in selective pressure and hence a reduction in welfare for the individuals: yet, when the failure is
caused exactly by what was meant to benefit the population,
and when the reversal of niche is (or seems to be) unfeasible,
it is possible to individuate a “degenerative niche.”.
Keywords: Cognitive niches; maladaptation; financial systems.

Cognitive Niches: from Biological to
Technological Cultures
In order to understand the concept of “degenerative niche”
one must be fairly acquainted with the notion of cognitive
niche: the first section of this paper is devoted to a brief analysis of the cognitive niches theory, some of its assumptions
and theoretical consequences. In a nutshell, a cognitive niche
consists in a series of externalizations of knowledge into the
environment, for instance through material culture, resulting
in a modification of the selective pressure that an organism
has to face (Odling-Smee, Laland, & Feldman, 2003; Magnani, 2009). The fact of championing cognitive niche construction could be seen as what intrinsically characterizes human beings (which are individuated by the theory as ecocognitive engineers). The rest of the paper will then focus
on the notion of degenerative niche: a cognitive niche that
becomes maladaptive because of the externalized knowledge
structures that primarily did (or were thought to) cause the
beneficial trade-off in selective pressure.

1 Attention is drawn for the first time to the idea of niche construction by important researchers like Schrödinger, Mayr, Lewontin, Dawkins, and Waddington. Firstly in the field of physics and
subsequently in the field of the theory of evolution itself. Waddington particularly stressed the influence of organism development.
2 This perspective has generated some controversies, since the extent to which modifications count as niche-construction is not clear,
thus entering the evolutionary scene. The main objection regards
how far individual or even collective actions can really have ecological effects, whether they are integrated or merely aggregated
changes. On this point, see (Sterelny, 2005) and the more critical
view held by (Dawkins, 2004). For a reply to these objections, see
(Laland, Odling-Smee, & Feldman, 2005).

Building Cognitive Niches
A recent book by Odling-Smee, Laland and Feldman
(Odling-Smee et al., 2003) offers a full analysis of the concept of cognitive niche from a biological and evolutionary
perspective. “Niche construction should be regarded, after
natural selection, as a second major participant in evolution.
[. . . ] Niche construction is a potent evolutionary agent because it introduces feedback into the evolutionary dynamics”

928

• Modifications impressed on the material culture to support
memory and share informations, such as notches on bones
and woods to count, cave painting to record the nearby
wildlife, and so on (Mithen, 1996).

eral species, many vertebrates for example, have evolved a
capacity to learn from other individuals and to transmit this
knowledge, thereby activating a kind of proto-cultural process which also affects niche construction skills: it seems
that in hominids this kind of cultural transmission of acquired
niche-constructing traits was ubiquitous, and this explains
their success in building, maintaining, and transmitting the
various cognitive niches in terms of systems of coalition enforcement. “This demonstrates how cultural processes are not
just a product of human genetic evolution, but also a cause of
human genetic evolution” (Odling-Smee et al., 2003, p. 27).
From this viewpoint the notion of docility (Simon, 1993) acquires an explanatory role in describing the way human beings manage ecological and social resources to make their
own decisions.
Indeed, the shift from the ecological relevance to the constructed niche to the cognitive one is explicated by Tooby &
DeVore, Clark, and Pinker (Tooby & DeVore, 1987; Clark,
2005; Pinker, 2010). Clark’s definition of cognitive niche is
the one that fits our argument the best:

• Language as a cognitive support allowing a scaffolding of
cognitive operations on one’s surrounding (Clark, 2005).
• Hunting as a complex of strategies, know-how (also biologicals about the species of preys and predators) and tools
(Mithen, 1989; Bingham, 2000).
While other, more intuitive ones can be:
• Traffic signals and markings on the tarmac to help drivers
solve problems relating to circulation and the behavior to
engage with other drivers.
• A school as a physical building aimed at conveying
knowledge, in which every class (with particularly disposed desks, blackboards, computer, instruments) instantiates a cognitive niche aimed at providing support for a
knowledge-dissemination problem.

[Cognitive niche construction is] the process by which
animals build physical structures that transform problem spaces in ways that aid (or sometimes impede)
thinking and reasoning about some target domain or
domains. These physical structures combine with appropriate culturally transmitted practices to enhance
problem-solving, and (in the most dramatic cases) to
make possible whole new forms of thought and reason
(p. 256 – 257).

Virtualized and High-Tech Cognitive Niches
The theory of cognitive niches is extremely valuable because
it affords us not only to understand traditional human “cultural” development (roughly from the Stone Age to the twentieth century), but its frame can be extended to comprehend
hyper-technological cultures as well: the of cognitive niches
we sketched out so far could be say to work at least until
the Fifties of past century, then something changed. Until
the computer age, a cognitive niche could be satisfactorily
described as a relationship between biota, abiota and dead
organic matter (DOM). Either you are alive, and then you
can be a constructor, either you are not, and then you are a
constructed. What is constructible is the object of cognitive
niche construction: it is the target and the materiel on which
the externalization of knowledge was built. And that would
be it. Since the computational revolution, though, cognitive
niche construction was enhanced by something that was neither biota, nor abiota or DOM: it was the category of constructed constructors.
The main effects of this enhancement belong to two categories: first, the so-called “virtualization” produced a multiplication of cognitive niches that go beyond traditional ecologies, their ontologies and what they can afford. Computers and internet allowed the creation of a “sub-enviroment”
(Bertolotti & Cinerari, 2013) that is able to interact with our
natural environment (or to simulate it), but that can be manipulated in a much easier way, also because it is ontologically
consistent with the way knowledge is expressed: this is to
say, the environment and its modifications are expressed in
the same coding.4

Cognitive niche construction, which can be rightly considered as a subkind of ecological niche constriction, still involves the modification of an organism’s or a species’ environment (by the same organism or species), but is aimed at the
implementation of knowledge-based externalizations, which
in turn have an epistemic relevance for the agent and the organism. In the cognitive niche, an externalization becomes a
mediation: both information production and transfer are dependent on various mediating structures, which are the result
of more or less powerful cognitive delegations, namely, niche
construction activities. Of course, it is hard to develop and
articulate a rich culture as humans did, and still do, without
effective mediating systems (writing, artifacts, material culture, etc.).
The line dividing merely ecological from cognitive niches
can be set at different points, depending on how keenly the
researcher extends to animals other than humans the ability
to modify the environment so that it better supports cognitive
operations.3 Some originally examples of cognitive niches
can be:
3 Clark himself refers to the possibility that “animals build physical structures that transform problem spaces in ways that aid (or
sometimes impede) thinking and reasoning” (Clark, 2005, p. 256),
but in the same paper he brings forward the example of the spacial
organization of glasses employed by a bartender to remember orders,
and presents no animal examples.

4 Think

of virtual realities such as Second Life: avatars can easily “create” things because there is no gap between information and
matter. Matter is reduced to coding, and the only space requirement
is available memory to host the coding.

929

Secondly, but perhaps more importantly, the activity of
high-tech niche construction involves the production of more
or less complicated “artificial minds” (Magnani, 2007a). Understood for the sake of this paper within the notion of ecocognitive engineering, the notion of artificial mind is interesting: it can be seen as a help, or as a “maid-mind,” but the
aim is the same, that is to obtain a new kind of eco-cognitive
engineer that contributes to the activity of niche-construction.
Virtual niches, and high-technological niches, are populated by a number of constructed constructors, that is by
agencies that were constructed externalizing knowledge on
abiota materiel, but can actively engage a more or less extended range of active behavior within the niche. These new
actors can either chiefly serve either as assessors, maintainers and mediators of existing externalizations, or as engineers
of new externalizing solutions in the niche, or as full-right
agents in the cognitive niche.
These actors need not be “material:” those interacting
within traditional cognitive niches (such as driving aid systems) tend to be material, but can be embodied in the coding
of a software, for instance in the form of anti-malware or a
virtual assistant, and yet be able of causing significative modification to the global structure of the niche. In all of these
cases, the crucial feature is the presence of non-human cognitive agents, usually embedded within a cognitive niche, that
are able to:
• Assess a situation.

that the limit situation could be described as a combination of
robotic niche construction activity and cyborg niche construction activity: consider an architect, or a medic, acting in her
cognitive niche and manipulating her environment not only
relying on her own cognition, but – in a partly seamless way
– elaborate on data that are being fed to her by a wearable
computing device. In other words, the high-tech cognitive
niche could be seen as supporting artificial decision maker
and hybridized (part biota and part abiota) decision maker.5
Of course, there would be much more to say about high
and hyper-technological cognitive niches, first of all about
the abundance of available information stored in the environment, its accessibility and ubiquity and so on (Bertolotti &
Cinerari, 2013), but that would transcend the scope of this
paper. What we mean to focus on is how, since the dawn of
material culture onwards (Mithen, 1996), human beings built
cognitive niches by externalizing knowledge onto their surroundings. Technological developments are still part of material culture, and supported this externalization just as stone
and paper did: it is a matter of a quantitative enhancement,
and not qualitative. The qualitative jump comes with the delegation of niche-construction activities, that is to say of decision making, to artificial (abiota) within the niche. This, in
our opinion, is the boost afforded to niche construction by the
computational era, and furthermore by artificial intelligence.
Selective pressure is dramatically affected if the agents that
counteract it to make it more favorable to human life are not
only human but also technologically crafted “minions.”

• Make an appraisal.

Degenerative Niches
What happens, though, when artificial-minds as ecocognitive engineers cease to collaborate with human beings?
Actually, the question is not accurate, since it would bean to
imbue them not only with passive moral rights, but also of an
intentional moral will not to cooperate: more properly asked,
could it happen that such agents keep pursuing the tasks they
were endowed with by their human programmers in a way
that is not beneficial to human beings anymore? In order to
answer this question, we must not forget that the essence of
niche construction is in fact to lessen selective pressure, not to
increase it making life more difficult or simply unsustainable:
degenerative niches need not be necessarily high-technology
niches. In fact, the conditions for the emergence of a degenerative niche are simple: the niche must turn maladaptive
because of some of the structures that chiefly achieved (or
were thought to achieve) the ease in selective pressure; and,

• Take a decision based on that appraisal.
The final decision, which is usually the contribution to the
cognitive nice is meant to be for the good of the human user –
or at least of some human users, as in the case of “intelligent”
weaponry (Krishnan, 2009). As already stressed, the revolutionary steps consisted in the assumption of non-biological
material to the status of actor in a cognitive niche. It is not
the same as stating that, for the first time, the new status
was given to something different than a human being: animals have traditionally been actors of cognitive niches, also
as assessors and decision makers (a trivial example: watchdogs are expected to be able to tell a friend from a foe), but
animals are part of the biota, they are trained and not constructed, and do sometimes actively resist niche construction
activity. Conversely, in high-tech cognitive niches new actors
are introduced, and they are shaped precisely as their creators
want them to be.
One related feature of technocognitive niches is the presence of cyborgs (Clark, 2003; Magnani, 2007b). This is not
the place for a discussion of cyborgs, but they are worth mentioning because not only we witness on the one hand the delegation of cognitive niche construction to artificial agency (for
maintenance tasks, surveillance, alert), but on the other hand
biological agents, the traditional constructors, are further and
further hybridized with wearable technological artifacts, so

5 For a fuller discussion of the cyborg notion, refer to Bertolotti
& Magnani, Reintroducing the Cyborg Concept to Explain InternetRelated Safety Issues, in this volume. The heart of the relevance
of the notion of cyborg for the discussion of technocognitive niches
is this: Dennett (2003) famously commented that experiments such
as Libet’s simply prove that we are not excluded from our decision
making loop, but we are the whole loop, that cannot be reduced to the
“mere” consciousness. Consequently, technological hybridization
turns biological niche constructors into beings that are even wider
loops comprehending organic and cybernetic processing, thus able
to intervene on the niche in a different way than a simply biological
agent.

930

the more the conditions cause by the cognitive niches grow
sever, the harder it gets to revert and dismantle the cognitive niche. Within an hyper-technological niche, as we will
see, the degenerative phase can acquire some peculiar characteristics – that depend on the discussion we just sketched
out about high and hyper-technological niches – but cognitive
niches have already happened to turn the change of selective
pressure against the human beings who had engineered them.
A much illuminating example is provided by anthropologist Steven Mithen (Mithen, 2004, pp. 47–48), as he describes a population, called the Natufians, that lived in Eastern Mediterranean from 13.000 to 9.800 years ago. To make a
long story short, the essence of Mithen’s theory is that Natufians’ eventual disappearance was caused by their way of picking which preys to hunt. Hunting can be rightfully considered a cognitive niche, inasmuch as it copes with problemsolving issues concerning technical skills and information on
which prey should be preferably killed. Archeological evidence suggests that the Natufians “solved” the problem hunting large gazelle males while sparing most females, thus enacting the knowledge that the perpetuation of the population
is guaranteed as long as females outnumber males. While
initially granting the welfare of the group, over centuries this
practice – embedded in the hunting cognitive niche – caused
the progressive reduction of the average size of the gazelle
(larger males were killed before they had the chance to reproduce), which led to a decrease of the hunting population’s
welfare, until all the resources of the area were exploited and
the remaining Natufians had to leave the impoverished area
forever.
A degenerative cognitive niche is different from a simply maladaptive niche. The irreversibility (actual or perceived), on the one hand, and the progressive nature of the
phenomenon should be retained as fundamental traits of a degenerative niche: it is very hard to acknowledge one has entered a degenerative niche before one feels the effects on her
own ability to live well, or survive – and then, sticking to the
same habits (without attempting a renegotiation of the niche)
appears to be still the less damaging way out. Conversely, a
niche can be acknowledged to be maladaptive and such acknowledgment can spark a revolution within the niche itself.
As far as hyper-technological cognitive niche are concerned,
we are still far from the degenerative scenarios portrayed by
science-fiction, but this should not prevent us from attempting a reading of certain contemporary phenomena through the
frame of techno-cognitive degenerative niches. Many examples could be made, but the financial systems seem one of
fittest to understand the phenomenon and its risks.

solving or to act as a repository of problem-solving techniques: the notion of space need not be physical, but rather
refers to the cognitive niche as the product of an externalization process, which in turn needs to be maintained. In this
sense, finance can be seen as a cognitive niche, for the reasons we shall briefly explain. Finance responds to a problemsolving need, that is the need to provide money to enterprises,
offer remuneration to investors, let investors know where it is
wiser to invest, facilitate commerce, and on the overall promote the increase of wealth: all of these tasks can be defined
cognitive, qua acts of cognitions, understood as the ability to
display a smart behavior in response to certain environmental features. If we denied this, and appeal to a more specific
definition of human cognition, then few instances of cognitive
niche would be accepted, starting from Clark’s rudimental example of the bartender: indeed, the discourse about cognitive
niches clearly partakes of wide notion of cognition, consistent with the extended and distributed paradigms rather than
with a neurological notion of cognition.
Finance is not only a cognitive niche, but one of the best examples of hyper-technological cognitive niche, as it is greatly
virtualized and its actors are not only human beings but software and algorithms (such as those for risk-assessment) and
other forms of robotic intelligence. This, in turn, means that
the human agents involved are significantly cyborgized (cf.
footnote 5), as the cognitive tasks they perform without external delegation are nevertheless seamlessly based on the output of computational intelligences. Can the description of
finance as a hyper-technological cognitive niche foster a theoretical understand of the crisis that we are just beginning to
recover from?
In the early 2000s, financiers believed that, through our
integrated financial systems, we could fragment and disperse loan risk so much as to make that risk completely
negligible. Risk itself would magically disappear in the
ecstasy of post-structuralist communications [. . . ]. Like
a starship, financial risk would at last achieve escape velocity and reach the financial galactic beyond. And so
we created the giant Ponzi scheme known as the international financial system based on almost infinite hedging
and fund fragmentation and dispersal, all made possible by our integrated global financial technologies. Like
pre-enlightenment financial alchemists, we could turn
base sub-prime loans into gold. Instead, we found that
we turned it into a global bank debt crisis and eventually
a sovereign catastrophe. (Stapleton, 2012, p. 5)
Stapleton’s analysis is unforgiving. Or even better, it is
“curiously” forgiving inasmuch as he does not approach the
crisis from the financial point of view, but from that of hypertechnological cognitive niches. Focusing on the crack of the
Anglo-Irish Bank, he claims that the fault is not to be found
in masterminds of crime or cognitive “slackerism,” but rather
in the decision-making system that was cyborg-like, shared
between humans and the computers they had – themselves –
programmed.

Hyper-Technological Degenerative Niches:
Neo-Liberal Finance
In order to explain why finance is a hyper-technological cognitive niche, we must first spend a few word stating why finance can be rightfully considered to be a cognitive niche. A
cognitive niche is a space that is either modified for problem-

931

What was the role of management information systems
in all this? It was surely these systems that facilitated
financial imprudence and light tough regulation, simultaneously providing a sense of a controlled and wellmonitored business. Rather than deliver solid management information to support wise decision-making processes, the systems not only failed, but created an illusion that all was well. [. . . ] Thus, management does
not gain a real-time, true and integrated picture of their
firm. Instead, technology and culture operating together
in this Faustian tryst produce the very opposite effect:
an illusion of prudence and effective risk management.
A technoculture of deceit, of hiding and cover-ups, is
therefore potentially enabled by our technology-cultural
system. (p. 6)

agents or face falling stock prices and the threat of hostile takeover (Crotty, 2003, p. 1).
For the sake of brevity, we have to make very short a
story that would be much longer. We have a cognitive niche
(finance) which impose itself over market competition, but
which cannot make the necessary gains from market competition (which conversely it impairs), therefore it creates some
proper schemes for increasing its welfare by assuming counterintuitive principles such as the rationality of economical
agents and the illusion of control by calculating risk through
unrealistic mathematical models. It is not necessarily to postulate evil, this is how cognitive niches work: furthermore,
as argued by Stapleton, the reliance on an artifactual hypertechnological niche blissfully blinded (and still blinds) many
operators: finance in many cases is not a mere self-fulfilling
prophecy, but a prophecy that aims at being self-fulfilling, but
falls short of it because prophets are not even human but cyborgs or artificial intelligences.
Actually, the description of finance we just sketched out,
which is quite an approximation but consistent with serious
economical analyses, is not that different from adopting the
hunting decision to kill the biggest gazelle males, so to get
more food and let the population of preys thrive by not subtracting females to the herds. Too bad history proved the
Natufians wrong: human beings have an innate desire to have
their cake and eat it. A certain kind of degenerative niche
can be seen as the externalization of this desire. In particular,
hyper-technological cognitive niches can make the actualization of this desire as something more possible, and at least
at the beginning they make it happen: human beings have a
conscience, most of them anyway, but computational intelligences, if “properly” programmed, can create whole systems
of meaning and whole possibilities of action which, albeit in
traditional cognitive niches they would be quickly debunked
as unfeasible, do appear as viable.
Finance as a degenerative niche plays the same game: as
everybody witnessed, current politics, aimed at regulating
markets, coupled with generous insertions of liquidity from
the Federal Reserve and European Central Bank, have not
achieved a stable recovery yet. According to economists such
as Palley, the only way out would be to revert the financialization of the entire world economy (Palley, 2007).7
Employing a notion introduced by Woods (2013), cognitive niches can be seen as affected by “doxastic irresistibility,” that is the desperate need to believe what is commonly
said. This, summed to a tendency towards resilience and persistence that is vital for the maintenance of cognitive niches,
triggers a sclerotization of degenerative niches (Magnani,
2011, chapters 4 and 5): the more they fail in offering a positive trade-off in selective pressure, the harder human beings
cling to them. Each time the current financial crisis seems to

Whereas it had long since been theorized that crises are
endemic to the structure of capitalism, those crises following speculative bubbles such as the 1929 one that caused the
Great Depression, and the the 2008 subprime loans one that
turned into the latest global crisis, seem to be shifting from
something structural to something that is jeopardizing the
welfare (and potentially the survival) of those who populate
and maintain the niche.
Albeit they did not use the term “degenerative niche,” since
they are not adopting the niche theory at all, many economists
(for instance in the Post-Keynesian school) have argued about
the intrinsic unstable nature of financial markets (seminal
work of Minsky) and have stressed the pervasiveness and the
disruptive nature of an excessively financialized economic
system. Neoclassical finance considers economical agents as
entirely rational (and this trust was extended to the hybrid
and artificial agents of the past few decades), and – basing on
this philosophically uncertain assumption – developed models that too often mix up “risk,” as something that can be measured, and Keynes’ concept of fundamental “immeasurable
uncertainty.”6
Minsky, in 1963, claimed that financial markets are intrinsically unstable because of debt structured built by economical agents (namely Ponzi schemes), that will sooner or later
cause the collapse of the whole system (Minsky, 1963).
Recently, when the latest economical crisis was far from
exploding, Structural Keynesian economist James Crotty
showed that:
NFCs [US large Nonfinancial Corporations] were eventually placed in a neoliberal paradox: intense product
market competition made it impossible for most NFCs
to achieve high earnings most of the time, but financial
markets demanded that NFCs generate ever-increasing
earnings and ever-increasing payout ratios to financial
6 For specific events (for instance a roulette table) we can calculate the probability of the outcome. Conversely for others – such as
catastrophes and other events, which have been often used as the underlying of many derivatives instruments – we just cannot measure
the probability of the outcome.

7 We

are talking about dismantling a cognitive niche. History
shows that, in order to break the resilience of a cognitive niche, significant impetus is required: for instance, massive invasions, cataclysms and similar things.

932

be touching an all-time low, neoliberal think-tanks (such as
the Tea Party movement in the US) call for harsher neoliberal
politics. Telling people “It has worked till now, it will recover
and work again” – notwithstanding the epistemic scarcity of
inductive reasoning – is more welcome than alternatives such
as “This is not working anymore, we have to look somewhere
else for a solution.”

ply to Griffiths, Okasha and Sterelny. Biology and Philosophy, 20, 37–55.
Magnani, L. (2007a). Semiotic brains and artificial minds.
How brains make up material cognitive systems. In R. Gudwin & J. Queiroz (Eds.), Semiotics and Intelligent Systems
Development (pp. 1–41). Hershey, PA: Idea Group Inc.
Magnani, L. (2007b). Morality in a Technological World.
Knowledge as Duty. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive Cognition: The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding Violence. Morality, Religion, and Violence Intertwined: a Philosophical Stance.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Minsky, H. P. (1963). Can ‘it’ happen again? In D. Carson
(Ed.), Banking and monetary studies. Illinois: Homewood.
Mithen, S. (1989). To hunt or to paint? Animals and art in
the upper paleolithic. Man, 23, 671–695.
Mithen, S. (1996). The Prehistory of the Mind. A Search for
the Origins of Art, Religion, and Science. London: Thames
and Hudson.
Mithen, S. (2004). After the ice: A global human history,
20,000 - 5000 bc. Cambridge (MA): Harvard University
Press.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003).
Niche Construction. The Neglected Process in Evolution.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Palley, T. I. (2007). Financialization: What it is and why
it matters. Working Paper No. 25, The Levy Institute and
Economics for Democratic and Open Societies Washington
D.C.
Pinker, S. (2010). The cognitive niche: Coevolution of intelligence, sociality, and language. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 17(Suppl. 2), 8993 – 8999.
Simon, H. (1993). Altruism and economics. The American
Economic Review, 83(2), 156–161.
Stapleton, T. (2012). Zarathustra and beyond: exploring culture and values online. AI & Society, DOI 10.1007/s00146012-0412-4.
Sterelny, K. (2005). Made by each other: organisms and their
environment. Biology and Philosophy, 20, 21–36.
Tooby, J., & DeVore, I. (1987). The reconstruction of hominid behavioral evolution through strategic modeling. In
W. G. Kinzey (Ed.), Primate Models of Hominid Behavior
(pp. 183–237). Albany: Suny Press.
Woods, J. (2013). Errors of Reasoning. Naturalizing the
Logic of Inference. London: College Publications.

Conclusion
The aim of this paper was to present the issue of degenerative cognitive niches, and to examine – through the example of contemporary finance – how the degenerative paradigm
could apply to hyper-technological cognitive niches without
analyzing science-fictional issues. Degenerative cognitive
niches differ from simply maladaptive ones since they embed an element of inescapability (perceived or real, apparent
or transparent) that prevents the users of the niche from actively searching a way to modify the niche in order to achieve
a better balance. Referring to hyper-technological cognitive
niches, the issue becomes crucial inasmuch as the niche is
populated by a new category, produced by technological advancement, that is constructed constructors transcending the
traditional separation between biota and abiota within the
ecological and cognitive niche. Those new agents, together
with their hybridization with biological human agents, face
the risk of jeopardizing from the cognitive level (i.e. the ability to assess a situation and react smartly) the function of the
niche itself, thought at an inapparent level, thus originating a
degenerative cognitive niche.

References
Bertolotti, T., & Cinerari, C. (2013). The gospel according
to google: The future of religious niches and technological
spirituality. European Journal of Science and Theology,
9(1), 41–53.
Bingham, P. M. (2000). Human evolution and human history: a complete theory. Evolutionary Anthropology, 9,
248–257.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-Born Cyborgs. Minds, Technologies, and the Future of Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2005). World, niche and super-niche: How language makes minds matter more. Theoria, 54, 255 – 268.
Crotty, J. (2003, July). The neoliberal paradox: The impact
of destructive product market competition and impatient finance on nonfinancial corporations in the neoliberal era.
Research Brief 2003-5 of the PERI - Political Economy
Reseach Institue, University of Massachusetts-Amherst.
Dawkins, R. (2004). Extended phenotype - but not extended.
A reply to Laland, Turner and Jablonka. Biology and Philosophy, 19, 377–397.
Dennett, D. (2003). Freedom Evolves. New York: Viking.
Krishnan, A. (2009). Killer robots: Legality and ethicality of
autonomous weapons. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Laland, K. N., Odling-Smee, F. J., & Feldman, M. W. (2005).
On the breath and significance of niche construction: a re-

933

