UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dimensional Distinctiveness Constraints on Comparison Processing Across Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vt8c7q8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Augier, Luc
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dimensional Distinctiveness Constraints on Comparison Processing Across
Development
Luc Augier (luc.augier@u-bourgogne.fr)
Université de Bourgogne – LEAD – UMR CNRS 5022
21065 Dijon, France

Jean-Pierre Thibaut (jean-pierre.thibaut@u-bourgogne.fr)
Université de Bourgogne – LEAD – UMR CNRS 5022
21065 Dijon, France
Abstract
We investigated how the benefits of comparisons (withinand/or between- category comparisons) for generalizing novel
names for novel objects along a non-salient dimension
(texture) might depend on dimensional distinctiveness. We
tested 4- and 6-year-olds. We found that in the case of a lower
distinctiveness, older children gave more texture-based
answers following within-category comparison whereas
younger children gave more texture-based answers in betweencategory comparisons. When distinctiveness was high, both
groups benefited from within-comparison. They also benefited
from between-category comparison only when within-category
comparison were available (i.e. when both kinds of comparison
were available). We interpret these findings in terms of
differential costs of comparison for varying levels of
distinctiveness along either nonsalient or salient dimensions.
Keywords: Comparison, Distinctiveness,
development, Executive Functions.

Conceptual

Introduction
Acquiring a novel concept requires to find out important
diagnostic features and to neglect irrelevant aspects of the
stimuli. A major difficulty for children is that in many cases
there are irrelevant similarities or differences which are more
salient than variations along the relevant features (Murphy,
2004; Gershkoff-Stowe & Rakison, 2005). Hence,
understanding what situations help them to favor nonobvious
over salient properties is a crucial issue for concept
development. In this respect, comparison represents a
powerful means for learning about the world (e.g., Gentner &
Namy, 1999; Goldstone, 2010; Thibaut, 1991). A growing
body of research in both children and adults shows that
comparison can highlight nonobvious shared properties
(Gentner & Colhoun, 2010). In preschoolers, the benefits of
comparison have been shown for object names (e.g., Gentner
& Namy, 1999; Graham, Namy, Gentner, & Meagher, 2010),
names for parts (Gentner, Loewenstein, & Hung, 2007),
adjectives (e.g., Waxman & Klibanoff, 2000), action verbs
(e.g., Childers & Paik, 2009; Haryu, Imai, & Okada, 2011),
relational nouns (Gentner, Anggoro, & Klibanoff, 2011) or
labels for spatial relations (Christie & Gentner, 2010).
In a seminal study, Gentner and Namy (1999) used pictures
of objects from familiar taxonomic categories (e.g. fruits) to
test 4-year-olds novel names extensions. When only one
standard was presented (e.g. an apple labelled blicket)
children preferred to extend this new label to a perceptually

similar object (e.g. a balloon) rather than to a taxonomically
related but perceptually dissimilar object (e.g. a banana).
Crucially, this preference was reversed when children were
given two standards in comparison (e.g. an apple and a pear,
both labelled blicket). With the same paradigm, Graham,
Namy, Gentner, and Meagher (2010) also obtained this
beneficial effect of comparison with unfamiliar objects. They
pitted a perceptually non-salient dimension (texture) against
a perceptually salient one (shape). In the no-comparison
condition only one standard was presented. There were two
test objects, one sharing its texture but not its shape with the
standard, the other sharing its shape but not its texture. In this
no-comparison situation, a majority of children generalized
the novel name to the same-shape transfer object. In the
comparison condition, two same-texture standards were
introduced with the same label. In this case, a majority of
children extended the novel label to the same-texture match.
Comparing same-texture items promoted the use of this
nonsalient dimension to guide their categorization.
Using the same paradigm (texture against shape), the
present study investigated how the effect of comparison
might interact with dimensional distinctiveness. Indeed,
despite a large body of research on the benefits of
comparisons in concept learning, the cognitive constraints
generated by comparisons are largely understudied (see
Augier & Thibaut, 2013). Our central hypothesis is that
different levels of dimension distinctiveness will generate
different cognitive costs that might affect performance.

Kinds of Comparisons
Comparison helps preschoolers to find shared non-salient
properties for their categorizations. One less investigated,
kind of comparison is the comparison between items from
different categories (i.e. contrast-category comparison). In
preschoolers, contrast had a positive effect on learning
subordinate categories (Waxman, Lynch, Casey, & Baer,
1997), proper names (Hall, & Rhemtulla, in press), adjectives
for objects properties (Au, & Laframboise, 1990; Waxman &
Klibanoff, 2000), perceptual categories (Ankowski, Vlach, &
Sandhofer, 2012) or verbs meanings (Childers, Hirshkowitz,
& Benavides, in press).
Recently, Namy and Clepper (2010) introduced a condition
with a contrast item (e.g., a perceptually similar but
taxonomically different light bulb presented as “not a blicket”
to contrast with the standards, namely an apple and a pear).

1874

They found limited benefits of contrast and only when there
was already comparison. However, using multidimensional
stimuli, knowing that perceptual similarity was irrelevant did
not tell that the correct dimension was taxonomy. Indeed,
being told “X is a dax and Y is not a dax” children can infer
that featural commonalities (here shape similarity) between
X and Y are not sufficient to define what a dax is. However,
knowing that one attribute does not discriminate between two
categories does not tell which attribute might discriminate
them except when the number of attributes defining the
categories is very small (see Hammer, Diesendruck,
Weinshall, & Hochstein, 2009).

Cognitive Costs of Comparisons
Recently, with the same task as Gentner, and Meagher’s
(2010) study, Augier and Thibaut (2013) manipulated the
number of items to-be-compared in 4- and 6-year-old
children. The underlying hypothesis was that increasing the
number of items belonging to the same category would
provide more evidence in favor of a unifying, but not salient,
dimension (texture). However it would also mean more
comparisons to perform and more information to integrate,
which would increase the executive costs. They included age
as a factor with the hypothesis that increasing the number of
items would not be beneficial in the same way at different
ages because of executive functions maturation differences.
Consistently with their hypothesis, they found that while both
groups benefited from comparing two standards, only the
older group benefited from an increased number of standards
(four standards instead of only two standards). This finding
suggests that integrating similarities along a nonobvious
dimension comes with executive costs, even though such
evidence is converging.
These results are supported by previous findings from
analogy tasks (Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006;
Thibaut, French, & Vezneva, 2010). In these studies, the
presence of semantic distractors predicted children’s
performances. These authors argued that increasing the
number of distractors required more inhibition and flexibility
capacities to solve the task.

The Present Study
The present study investigates how comparison interacts with
the properties of the objects to-be-compared. We
manipulated dimensional distinctiveness in the sense that we
varied the between object similarity along the shape and the
texture dimensions. In the low distinctiveness condition, two
textures (or two shapes) were more similar one to the other
than in the high distinctiveness condition. In our experiment,
noticing the texture similarity among the standards increases
the weight of texture to ground category membership while
the shape dissimilarity decreases the weight of shape. These
similarities and differences would be harder to notice in a low
than in a high distinctiveness case because it would require
more systematic explorations. Further, we included different
age groups (4- and 6- year-olds) in order to manipulate the
cognitive resources available to process comparisons. Indeed,

given that executive functions develop progressively through
childhood (Anderson, 2002), we hypothesized that children
of different ages would not benefit from comparison in the
same way. In the executive functions context (Andrews &
Halford, 2002; Zelazo, Muller, Frye & Marcovitch, 2003), we
hypothesized that comparison situations would involve
executive costs such as exploring the relations, inhibiting the
salient dimension and shifting to the nonsalient dimension.
We predicted that the benefits of comparison would be
lowered in younger children when the distinctiveness was
low because low distinctiveness would generate increased
comparison costs.
We also manipulated the available type of comparisons:
within-category and/or between-category comparisons. In
their study, Augier and Thibaut (2013) manipulated the
presence of a shape-contrastive item (a shape-related item as
a non-member of the category, i.e. “not a blicket”) and found
a positive yet marginal role of contrast for both 4- and 6-yearolds. In the present study we also included a shapecontrastive item. In the case of contrast, the repetition of
shape decreases its relevance for category membership.
However, children need to use negatively the commonality to
reject the shape and look for other diagnostic features, which
would require inhibition and flexibility. How will decreasing
the distinctiveness along this dimension affect how children
make sense of this contrast-category comparison? On one
hand, as for the texture similarity among standards, noticing
the shape similarity of the contrast item could be harder when
differences are more subtle. On the other hand, on the
contrary to our comparison situation, the commonality is
about the most salient dimension and thus could be less
affected by distinctiveness variations.
Finally, we included an experimental condition in which
both kinds of comparison were available (i.e. within- and
between- category comparisons). How children will integrate
the information in this maximally informative condition? The
same question arises for the low distinctiveness case in which
the relevant information is more difficult to find. Hence, even
if the comparison situation provides more information, it
might not be necessarily beneficial, depending on how easy
are the comparison to process.
We tested 4- and 6-year-old children with four
experimental conditions: a baseline No-Compare/NoContrast condition (one standard and no contrast), a
Compare/No-Contrast condition (two standards and no
contrast), a No-Compare/Contrast condition (one standard
and one contrast) and a Compare/Contrast condition (two
standards and one contrast).

Methods
Participants
A total of 240 preschoolers were tested individually at school.
We recruited younger children (n= 120, mean age = 53.7m,
SD = 3.6, range: 44-59m) and older children (n= 120, mean
age = 65.2m, SD = 3.6, range: 60-76m). They were randomly
assigned to one of the eight experimental conditions with 15

1875

children per condition. Informed consent was obtained from
their school and their parents.

Design
Younger and older groups of children participated in one of
eight between-subject experimental conditions resulting from
the crossing of the variables Comparison (No Comparison vs.
Comparison), Contrast (No Contrast vs. Contrast) and
Distinctiveness
(Low
Distinctiveness
vs.
High
Distinctiveness) (See Figure 1).

Materials
Seven sets of six artificial grey-scale objects pictured on
cards were created for each condition of distinctiveness. The
dimensions of the cards were 12*9 cm (width*height) and the
dimensions of the objects pictured on the cards were
approximately 6*6 cm. The objects’ textures and shapes were
chosen to be less distinctive in the low distinctiveness
condition than in the high distinctiveness condition. This
difference was established in adults with overall perceptual
similarity ratings ranging from 1 “not similar at all” to 7
“extremely similar”.
Different-texture-but-same-shape
objects were significantly judged more similar in the low
distinctiveness set (M = 4.3) than in the high distinctiveness
set (M = 2.2), t(9) = 14.88, p < .001. Different-shape-butsame-texture pairs of objects were also significantly judged
more similar in the low distinctiveness set (M = 4) than in the
high distinctiveness set (M = 2.2), t(9) = 5.25, p < .01.
Textures and shapes used in one trial differed from those used
in other trials. The standards shared the same texture but had
different shapes. The contrast object in the Compare/Contrast
condition had the same shape as one of the standards. One
test object, the shape match, had the same shape as one of the
two standards (and as the contrast object) but differed in
terms of its texture. The other test object, the texture match,
had the same texture as the standards (and a different texture
than the contrast object). Finally, unrelated test objects
(different texture and different shape) were used in a control
experiment (see control experiment below) to assess the level
of texture-responding when there was no shape match but
only a texture match pitted against an unrelated object. Each
set was associated with one of seven two-syllable novel
names: youma, buxi, dajo, zatu, sepon, xanto, vira

Fig. 1 Sample stimulus sets and instructions used in the
eight experimental conditions that crossed the three factors:
Comparison (No Comparison or Comparison), Contrast (No
Contrast or Contrast) and Distinctiveness (Low or High).

Procedure
The experiment started with two practice trials which were
followed by five test trials presented in a random order. Each
standard was introduced with a novel count noun (e.g. “this
is a buxi” and “this is a buxi TOO” for the other standard). In
the contrast conditions, a contrast object was introduced
below the standard(s) as a non-member of the category (e.g.
“this is NOT a buxi”). The objects were presented
sequentially and left in view. In the comparison conditions,
stimuli were presented in a row and their location was
determined randomly. The forced-choice test phase was
identical in all conditions. The two test objects (i.e., the shape
and the texture match) were introduced and the child was
asked to point to the one which was also a member of the
category (e.g., “Show me which one of these two is also a
buxi”).

Results
We performed a 2 Age (4 vs. 6-year-olds) x 2 Distinctiveness
(high vs. low distinctiveness) x 2 Comparison (1 vs. 2
standards) x 2 Contrast (0 or 1 contrast) ANOVA on the
percentage of texture match choices. This analysis revealed
significantly more texture-based answers with comparison
(20%) than without comparison (60%) (F (1,224) = 103.66,
p < .001, 𝜂 2𝑃 = .316) and with contrast (46%) than without
contrast (35%) (F (1,224) = 7.66, p < .01, 𝜂 2𝑃 = .033).
Importantly, there was a Comparison by Distinctiveness
interaction (F (1,224) = 18.51, p < .001, 𝜂 2𝑃 = .076). As
shown by Figure 2A, it was due to the larger difference
between the No-comparison and Comparison conditions in
the high distinctiveness than in the low distinctiveness
condition. Tukey post hoc tests revealed that the conditions
of distinctiveness significantly differed only in the Nocomparison case (31% vs. 10%) and that the benefit of
comparison was significant for each level of distinctiveness

1876

(31 to 54% for the low, and 10 to 67% for the high
distinctiveness conditions).

there was significantly more texture-consistency with than
without comparison. On the contrary, in the low
distinctiveness condition, the superiority of comparison over
no-comparison was only present for the older children when
there was no contrast (7 to 47%). The age groups were
significantly different in the compare/no-contrast condition
only (7% for the younger children and 47% for the older
children).

Fig. 2 Mean percentage of texture-based choices (+SEM)
as a function of Comparison and Distinctiveness (A) or
Comparison and Age (B).
There was an Age x Comparison interaction (F (1,224) =
7.20, p < .05, 𝜂 2𝑃 = .008) (see Figure 2B). Tukey post hoc
tests revealed that the effect of comparison was significant
for both age groups (24 vs. 53% for the younger, and 17 vs.
68% for the older children) but that younger performed lower
than older children when there was a comparison (53% and
68% respectively).
Overall, this analysis shows that contrast and comparison
promoted more texture-based responding but that the impact
of comparison was more important in the high distinctiveness
condition, and for older children.
We also ran chi square tests of independence corrected for
multiple comparisons (Bonferroni) (p <.05) on patterns of
consistency (see Figure 3). Children were categorized as
“texture-consistent” when they chose at least four texture
matches (out of five) and “shape-consistent” when they chose
at least four shape matches. They were “non-consistent” in
the other cases. Indeed, a given percentage (e.g., 50%) of
texture choices can result from a majority of consistent
participants (i.e., 50% shape consistent and 50% texture
consistent participants) or from a majority of inconsistent
participants.
This analysis shows that, in the high distinctiveness
condition and for both conditions of contrast or groups of age,

Fig. 3 Percentage of children, for each experimental
condition and for each age group, who were either texture
consistent, shape consistent, or nonconsistent.
In the high distinctiveness condition, comparison was more
powerful for the older children than for the younger children
and contrast was equally powerful for both groups (but only
powerful when there was already comparison). Further, in the
low distinctiveness younger children appeared to be mostly
influenced by contrast, and older children mostly influenced
by comparison (see Figure 3).

Control Experiment
We also ran a control study with a texture-only condition for
both the high and low distinctiveness conditions in order to
test whether our results could be explained in terms of texture
accessibility differences across distinctiveness levels. To do
so, we pitted a texture-related option against an unrelated
option to assess texture-responding when texture was the
only potential dimensional match.

1877

A total of 60 preschoolers participated in a control
experiment: a younger group (n= 30, mean age = 53.8m, SD
= 3.2, range: 48-59m) and an older group (n= 30, mean age =
66.5m, SD = 4.2, range: 60-71m). The procedure and
materials were identical to the No-Compare/No-Contrast
condition except that the shape-match object was replaced by
an unrelated item (different texture but also different shape).
We performed a 2 Age (4 vs. 6-year-olds) x 2
Distinctiveness (high vs. low distinctiveness) ANOVA on the
percentage of texture match choices. This analysis revealed
significantly more texture-responding in older (94%) than
younger children (82%) (F (1,490) = 4.4, p < .05, 𝜂 2𝑃 = .04)
but no differences across distinctiveness levels for either the
younger or the older group. Both groups’ performance was
above the best conditions in the conditions of the main study.
This suggests that the difficulties children met in the low
distinctiveness condition were specific to the task of
comparing less distinctive items to generalize along the
nonsalient texture dimension.

already helped children to find out the texture commonality
among the standards. The additional contrastive item could
then have played the role to confirm that shape was irrelevant
and texture was acceptable. However, this confirmatory role
of contrast was probably harder to process in the low
distinctiveness condition, which could explain why the older
children did not benefit from the contrast in the
compare/contrast condition when the distinctiveness was
low. Indeed, the challenge of handling both kinds of
categorical information would have been strengthened in this
situation. When both sources are available, children need to
interpret similarities or differences in opposite ways (i.e.
within-category commonalities lead to choose the common
texture dimension whereas between-category commonalities
lead to the rejection of the common shape dimension). As
similarities and differences, along both dimensions, were
more subtle in the low distinctiveness condition, it was
probably harder to process categorical cues in separate and
opposite ways.

Conclusion

Discussion
We studied how dimensional distinctiveness would interact
with age in comparison and no comparison conditions. We
hypothesized that manipulating distinctiveness would
differentially tax cognitive processing in children of different
ages. With the same purpose, we also used various
comparison conditions.

Dimensional Constraints on Comparisons
Consistently with our hypothesis, we found that withincategory comparison interacted with the “cognitive costs”
variables (distinctiveness and contrast) and cognitive
resources (manipulated with the age factor). Both groups
could benefit from comparison when the distinctiveness was
high but only the older children could when the
distinctiveness was low. We interpret this finding in terms of
higher executive costs to integrate nonobvious
commonalities when the differences are more subtle.
In the low distinctiveness condition, patterns of consistency
suggest that younger children were mostly influenced by
contrast (benefitting from contrast in both No-Comparison
and Comparison conditions). This result suggests that when
the nonsalient dimension is not very distinctive, younger
children would focus on the most salient dimension at hand.
Contrast was less important for the older group, possibly
because they processed both texture and shape variations and
did less focused on shape.
In the high distinctiveness condition both groups benefitted
from comparison but neither groups from the contrast item in
the No-Comparison condition, even though shape was more
distinctive. This result could suggest that in this case, not only
the older but also the younger could notice commonalities
and differences along both the shape and the texture, and
therefore needed to handle both dimensions. However, when
there was comparison, both groups benefitted from an
additional contrast item. In this case, the contrast item would
have played a confirmatory role in the sense that comparison

Our study shows that the distinctiveness of properties which
are involved in comparisons interacts with development,
arguably because of executive capacities differences. This
information integration costs mirror the findings by Augier &
Thibaut (2013) who showed that more items to-be-compared
was differentially beneficial to younger and older children. In
the present study, we first found that comparing shared
nonsalient properties generates cognitive costs which are
more important when the distinctiveness is low.
Distinctiveness also impacted the use of contrasting
information but in an indirect way. Indeed, the costs of
processing salient commonalities are probably less sensitive
to distinctiveness variations, but the use of contrastive
information also depends on how other dimensions are
processed and how categorical information might compete.
These findings have important implications about the role
comparisons play in learning. The executive constraints on
comparison processing might explain under which conditions
comparisons can or cannot be fruitful, and which kind of
categorical comparisons could be effectively used.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the Conseil Régional de
Bourgogne for its financial support (PhD grant to the first
author), Faber Program and from the ANR Anafonex grant
(ANR-10-BLAN-1908) to the second author. We thank the
children, their parents and the school staff for participating.

References
Anderson, P. (2002). Assessment and development of
executive function (EF) during childhood. Child
Neuropsychology, 8(2), 71-82.
Andrews, G., & Halford, G. S. (2002). A cognitive
complexity
metric
applied
to
cognitive
development. Cognitive psychology, 45(2), 153-219.

1878

Ankowski, A. A., Vlach, H. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2013).
Comparison Versus Contrast: Task Specifics Affect
Category Acquisition. Infant and Child Development,
22(1), 1–23.
Au, T. K. F., & Laframboise, D. E. (1990). Acquiring color
names via linguistic contrast: The influence of contrasting
terms. Child Development, 61(6), 1808-1823.
Augier, L., & Thibaut, J. (2013). The benefits and costs of
comparisons in a novel object categorization task:
Interactions with development. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 20(6), 1126–32.
Childers, J. B., Hirshkowitz, A., & Benavides, K. (in press).
Attention to Explicit and Implicit Contrast in Verb
Learning. Journal of Cognition and Development.
Childers, J. B., & Paik, J. H. (2009). Korean-and Englishspeaking children use cross-situational information to learn
novel predicate terms. Journal of Child Language, 36(01),
201-224.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where Hypotheses Come
From: Learning New Relations by Structural Alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3), 356–373.
Gentner, D., Anggoro, F. K., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2011).
Structure mapping and relational language support
children’s learning of relational categories. Child
development, 82(4), 1173–88.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007).
Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for
parts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8(3), 285–
307.
Gentner, D., & Colhoun, J. (2010). Analogical processes in
human thinking and learning. In B. Glatzeder, V. Goel, &
A. von Müller (Vol. Eds.), On Thinking: Vol. 2. Towards a
Theory of Thinking, pp 35–48. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Gentner, D, & Namy, L. L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14(4),
487–513.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Rakison, D. H. (Eds.).
(2005). Building object categories in developmental time.
Psychology Press.
Goldstone, R. L., Day, S. & Son, J. Y. (2010). Comparison.
In B. Glatzeder, V. Goel, & A. von Müller (Vol. Eds.), On
Thinking: Vol. 2. Towards a Theory of Thinking, pp 103–
122. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Graham, S. A., Namy, L. L., Gentner, D., & Meagher, K.
(2010). The role of comparison in preschoolers’ novel
object categorization. Journal of experimental child
psychology, 107(3), 280–90.
Hall, D., & Rhemtulla, M. (in press). Young Children’s Use
of Contrast in Word Learning: The Case of Proper Names.
Journal of Cognition and Development.
Hammer, R, Diesendruck, G., Weinshall, D., & Hochstein, S.
(2009). The development of category learning strategies:
What makes the difference? Cognition, 112(1), 105–119.
Haryu, E., Imai, M., & Okada, H. (2011). Object Similarity
Bootstraps Young Children to Action‐Based Verb
Extension. Child Development, 82(2), 674-86.
Murphy, G. L. (2004). The big book of concepts. MIT press.

Namy, L. L, & Clepper, L. E. (2010). The differing roles of
comparison and contrast in children’s categorization.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 107(3), 291–
305.
Namy, L. L., & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a silk purse out
of two sow’s ears: Young children's use of comparison in
category learning. Journal of Experimental PsychologyGeneral, 131(1), 5–15.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94(3), 249-273.
Thibaut, J.P. (1991). Récurrence et variations des attributs
dans la formation de concepts. Unpublished doctoral
thesis, University of Liège, Liège.
Thibaut, J. P., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2010). Cognitive
load and semantic analogies: Searching semantic space.
Psychonomic bulletin & review, 17(4), 569-574.
Waxman, S. R., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2000). The role of
comparison in the extension of novel adjectives.
Developmental Psychology, 36(5), 571–581.
Waxman, S. R., Lynch, E. B., Casey, K. L., & Baer, L.
(1997). Setters and samoyeds: The emergence of
subordinate level categories as a basis for inductive
inference in preschool-age children. Developmental
Psychology, 33(6), 1074–1090.
Zelazo, P. D., Muller, U., Frye, D., & Marcovitch, S. (2003).
The development of executive function in early
childhood. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 68(3), Serial No. 274.

1879

