UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Discourse Connectives and Lexical Cohesion: An Experimental Investigation of Bi-Clausal
Sentence Processing in Turkish

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1p98s15b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gönül, Gökhan
Zeyrek, Deniz

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

DISCOURSE CONNECTIVES AND LEXICAL COHESION:
AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF
BI-CLAUSAL SENTENCE PROCESSING IN TURKISH
Gökhan Gönül (gokhan.gonul@metu.edu.tr)

Deniz Zeyrek (dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr)

Cognitive Science, Informatics Institute
Middle East Technical University, 06800, Ankara, Turkey
Abstract
It is a widely accepted fact that coherence enables a text’s
comprehensibility. A major source of coherence is discourse
cohesion (textual properties of the text). Lexical cohesion
(e.g. synonymy) and discourse connectives are two major
types of discourse cohesion. We investigate the contribution
of these two types of cohesion to the overall comprehension
of bi-clausal sentences in Turkish. In a two-phase study, we
ask the participants to judge the comprehensibility of
sentences while we obtain eye-gaze data and then ask them to
write recall protocols. We find that lexically cohesive
sentences (labeled as high coherent) are judged more
comprehensible and recalled better, and that in low coherent
sentences (those lacking lexical cohesion), the fixation counts
are high. This study shows that in short texts, lexical cohesion
guides coherence and it is singled out as an important factor
of discourse comprehension. The study concerns Turkish
discourse and may have implications on discourse coherence
and discourse comprehension in other languages.
Keywords: coherence, lexical cohesion, contrastive discourse
connectives, comprehension, eye-tracking, reading.

Introduction
People read a great deal of written material every day,
including newspapers, textbooks, research papers, the
material on the internet, etc. For the reader, the
comprehension of written (or spoken) material is simply a
reflexive behavior, but it is of interest to cognitive scientists,
linguists and psycholinguists to understand what exactly
causes the comprehensibility of a stretch of discourse. All
approaches to discourse maintain that discourse
comprehension is a cognitive process that arises from the
various sources of knowledge accessible to the reader.
Comprehension of texts is an integrated process, which
includes making sense of the individual sentences and
forming the gist of the whole text. In their constructionintegration (CI) model of text comprehension, Kintsch &
van Dijk (1978) propose that these levels are integrated by
the reader. These levels involve forming the text base,
where the sentences are parsed and the meaning of
individual sentences is constructed; and the level where a
global text understanding is formed by integrating only
those propositions from the text base that fit well with the
context of the text (also see McNamara, 2001; Kintsch,
1994). Construction (of meaning) is based on textual
properties and propositions conveyed in the text.
Integrations are processes in the readers’ cognition activated

with the help of the text; this activation is a dynamic process
which continues throughout the text.
The text-based mental representations are the
propositional networks that are created by the text and are
developed in the construction stage. The text has many
surface properties helping the construction process, e.g.
sentence connectives, lexical ties, pronouns. They connect
the prior discourse context to the current discourse context,
and help text-based memory or understanding. The textbased representations are affected by propositional
representations of texts and the readers' local inferences.
The whole process of construction and integration creates a
coherent text for a reader or listener.
In the current understanding of discourse (this is our term
for ‘text’, regardless of whether it is written or spoken), the
role of the reader is essential; to make sense of a piece of
text, the reader brings together parts of discourse to form
interpretative structures (Cornish, 2009, Halliday, 1994).
Discourse makes sense thanks to both discourse coherence
(global interpretative structures) and discourse cohesion
(lexical ties, pronouns, ellipsis, etc.). In this paper, we are
particularly interested in discourse coherence to the extent it
is guided by discourse cohesion, namely discourse
connectives and lexical links in sentences. Drawing
inferences from a span of discourse (e.g. via presuppositions
or conversational implicatures) are out of the scope of this
study. In the construction-integration model, cohesive
elements are helpful at the construction level. In this study,
we propose and test the assumption that in discourse (such
as bi-clausal sentences) two types of cohesive elements,
namely lexical relations (in our case, synonymous ties) and
connectives are competing factors in discourse processing.
This assumption has not been tested before in Turkish.
In this paper, we take discourse connectives as lexical
anchors making a discourse relation explicit, such as
Contrast, Cause-Effect, Expansion, Temporal, etc. (Kehler
2002, Mann & Thompson 1986, PDTB Research Group,
2008). It is known that discourse connectives exist in all
languages and make important contributions to discourse
coherence (Knott, Sanders et al., Mann & Thompson, 1986).
They can be drawn from natural language conjunctions, e.g.
coordinating conjunctions (and, but), subordinating
conjunctions (because), and discourse adverbials (however,
therefore). We will say that these connectors act as
discourse connectives when they relate two clauses. For
example, in (a), and is a discourse connective, while in (b),

2281

it is not, because it links two nouns rather than clauses.
Connectives like (b) are out of scope of the present paper.
a. Jane went to the store and Tim remained at home.
b. Jane and Tim went to the store.
The second type of cohesive device we deal with, i.e.
lexical cohesive devices involve repetition (the repetition of
the same word), synonymy (words with same or very
similar meanings), and collocation (defined as a cooccurrence tendency) (Halliday, 1994). While we keep
repetition and collocation out of the scope of this paper, we
concern ourselves with the category synonymy, which
includes: synonymy, antonymy (words with opposite
meanings), hyponymy (a relation of inclusion) and
meronymy (the part/whole relationship). Saeed (2003:6570) provides the following examples for these lexical ties:
couch/sofa (synonyms), death/life (antonyms), dog/animal
(hyponym), page/book (meronym).
Following early works on discourse comprehension (e.g.
McNamara, et al. 1996), we take it a fact that coherence
affects a text’s comprehensibility. To the best of our
knowledge, studies investigating the role of discourse
cohesion on discourse comprehension are few but they
exist. For example, Millis and Just (1994) report that
subjects recognize the verb from the first conjunct faster
when the statements are conjoined with connectives
(because, although), and read the upcoming sentence more
quickly. In a recent eye-tracking study, Köhne & Demberg
(2013) find that concessive discourse markers in German
(Dennoch ‘nevertheless’) can be processed rapidly if the
visual context is constraining enough, while causal
connectives (Daher ‘therefore’) are processed with a delay.
Regarding naturally occurring language, it is clear that
discourse may be regarded as perfectly coherent even
though it lacks a discourse connective, suggesting that other
sources establish coherence in cases where a discourse
connective is lacking. In this paper, we aim to tackle this
issue experimentally, limiting ourselves with two
contrastive discourse connectives in Turkish (ama ‘but, yet’,
fakat ‘but’) and lexical cohesion (synonymy). Firstly, we
wanted to see whether coherence arising from these two
sources facilitates comprehension in Turkish as in the
studies with other languages. Secondly, we asked whether
lexical cohesion might be a more powerful cue than
discourse connectives for discourse comprehension.
We tested our predictions via an with on-line (eyetracking) and an off-line task (i.e., comprehensibility
judgments and recall protocols). Based on our foci in the
study, we made the following predictions. In the rest of the
study, the sentences which have lexical cohesion are
referred to as high coherent sentences (HCoh) and the ones
without lexical cohesion are named as low coherent (LCoh)
sentences.
• Comprehensibility judgment results will be higher for
HCoh sentences than the LCoh sentences. Moreover,
comprehensibility judgment scores will exhibit a worsening

comprehensibility trend from HCoh sentences (G1, G2, see
below) to LCoh sentences (G3, G4, see below).
• The HCoh sentences will be better recalled than the LCoh
sentences and the recall results will decrease steadily from
from HCoh sentences (G1, G2) to LCoh sentences (G3, G4).
• Fixation counts per one word will be lower for the HCoh
sentences (G1, G2) than the LCoh sentences (G3, G4).
Moreover, the fixation counts per one word will increase
steadily from HCoh sentences (G1, G2) to LCoh sentences
(G3, G4).
• HCoh sentences with no discourse connective (G2) will
be recalled and processed similarly to HCoh sentences with
a discourse connective (G1); overall, HCoh sentences (G1
& G2) will be recalled and processed better than LCoh
sentences (G3 and G4).
What we take as high coherent and low coherent texts are
explained and illustrated in Table 1. In the examples, the
discourse connective is underlined; lexical ties are shown in
italics.

Method
Participants
We tested 46 right-handed native Turkish speakers with
healthy eyes, 3 of whom withdrew from the experiments
explaining that they had a breathing problem related to
articulatory suppression (explained below). In addition, the
data from 3 participants were not analyzed since their data
were substantially lower than that of the other participants;
upon examination of their data, it appeared that they were
unable to understand the procedure. Data from 40
participants (27 females 13 males) were analyzed. Only 1
participant’s data were not analyzed with respect to eye
movements because of the problems with the eye-tracker.
The age of the participants varied from 21 to 37 (M=23,
S.D=3.93). The participants were randomly placed in 4
experimental groups so that all the groups had 10
participants.

Materials, Design and Procedure
We constructed four groups of stimuli which were bi-clausal
sentences having or lacking lexical cohesion with or without
a contrastive discourse connective. All the words in the
stimuli were checked for frequency of use (Göz, 2003), and
only the high frequency words were included in the stimuli.
Two linguists checked all the test sentences, ensuring that
they were grammatical and coherent (i.e., made sense).
They also confirmed that G1 and G2 sentences have lexical
cohesion while G3 and G4 sentences lacked lexical
cohesion.
Group 1 (G1) sentences constituted lexically cohesive
clauses and a contrastive discourse connective, ama ‘yet,
but’ or fakat ‘but’, Group 2 (G2) sentences had lexically
cohesive clauses with no discourse connective, Group 3
(G3) sentences had disrupted lexical cohesion but contained
the discourse connective, Group (G4) sentences had

2282

disrupted lexical cohesion and lacked the discourse
connective. G1 and G2 were labeled the high coherent
group (HCoh), G3 and G4 were the low coherent group
(LCoh) (Table 1). Lexical cohesion was ensured by
synonymy, meronymy, antonymy, and hyponymy. For
example, in Table 1, G1 and G2 have antonymic lexical
cohesion relation (death in the first clause and life in the
second clause), however the highlighted words in G3 and
G4 (death in the first clause, nature in the second clause) do
not present clear antonymy relations. The total number of
words in the target sentences differed between minimum 4,
maximum 13 (G1: min=4, max=13, total=111; G2: min=4,
max=12, total=99; G3: min 5, max=12, total=105; G4:
min=4, max=11, total=93).
The sentences were presented to the participants in size
15 Times New Roman fonts in black color on a white
screen. All the participants saw 24 sentences randomly (12
distractors, 12 target sentences) after a training session with
6 sentences.
The experimental procedure consisted of two
consequently ordered phases; i.e., reading the sentence and
undertaking a comprehensibility judgment test, and typing a
recall protocol of the sentence.
Table 1: Examples of the stimuli used in the experiment
(Lexcoh: lexical cohesion; DC: Discourse connective)

(G1) Bir tabloda ölümü anlatmak
kolaydır ama yaşamı resmetmek
emek ister.
‘It is easy to convey death in
painting but to portray life
requires effort’.
(G2) Bir tabloda ölümü anlatmak
kolaydır, yaşamı resmetmek
emek ister.
‘It is easy to convey death in
painting, to portray life requires
effort’.
(G3) Bir tabloda ölümü anlatmak
kolaydır ama doğayı resmetmek
emek ister.
‘It is easy to convey death in
painting but to portray nature
requires effort’.
(G4) Bir tabloda ölümü anlatmak
kolaydır, doğayı resmetmek emek
ister.
‘It is easy to convey death in
painting, to portray nature
requires effort’.

Lexcoh

DC

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Phase I Throughout the whole experiment, participants'
eye-gazes were traced by an eye-tracking device (explained
below). The participants’ eye movements were calibrated

before the experiment. The experiment started when the
participants saw a fixation point (for 2000 ms). As they
started to read the sentences, they were asked to articulate
the sound [b] intermittently. This is the articulatory
suppression technique, ensuring that the participant’s ability
to use auditory cues to encode information in the (working)
memory is inhibited (Baddeley, 1992; Larsen and Baddeley,
2003). Kintsch & van Dijk (1978) emphasize that coherence
representations were under the limitations of working
memory. We know from the memory literature that people
may remember well-structured sentences easily (Jefferies,
Ralph & Baddaley, 2004). In long texts, there are various
elements for loading the working memory, forcing the
reader to make inferences from the text (i.e. at the
integration level in the CI model). In a similar way, given
that lexical cohesion is effective at the intra-sentential level
or among close sentences in texts, it was not implausible for
our subjects to memorize the words in the test sentences,
which are not long texts. Therefore, we aimed to create a
working memory load with the articulatory suppression
technique so as to obtain reliable results regarding the effect
of meaning construction in short texts.
The participants’ voices were recorded to ensure all
participants articulated the [b] sound. (None of the
participants whose data were analyzed failed to articulate
the [b] sound during the experiment). The participants were
asked not to move their head while they were reading the
sentences. They clicked the ‘enter’ button as soon as they
understood the sentence (and they stopped repeating the
sound [b]), and they were presented with a
comprehensibility judgment question. This question asks the
participant to evaluate the comprehensibility of the sentence
on a scale of 1 to 6, where '1' means ‘totally
comprehensible' and '6' means ' totally incomprehensible'.
Phase II After recording their comprehensibility judgment
score, the participants were asked to type a recall protocol of
the sentence they have just read and evaluated in terms of
comprehensibility. Only after the target sentences they were
asked to answer a judgment question and type a recall
protocol. Half of the distractors were bi-clausal sentences
with or without a DC.
The participants’ eye movements were traced by the Tobii
Studio T-120 eye-tracker, where the data rate is 120Hz and
accuracy is 0.5 degrees. The spatial resolution of the eyetracker is 0.3 degrees with 0.1 degrees for drift and 0.2
degrees for head movement error. The latency is maximum
33 ms, and the blink tracking recovery takes maximum 33
ms. The time to tracking recovery is 300ms.

Data Analysis and Results
Analyses were conducted with the variables Coherence
(HCoh & LCoh) and Group (G1, G2, G3, G4) with respect
to the comprehensibility judgment task and the recall
results. The comprehensibility judgment scores were
quantified by taking the sum of all the judgments in

2283

respective groups of sentences. The recall was calculated
per word. The total number of recalled discourse
connectives and the total number of discourse connectives
were removed from the analysis in order to compare groups.
The following formula was used:
[(sum of words in target sentences) – (sum of discourse
connectives in target sentences)]
[(sum of recalled words in target sentences) – (sum of recalled
discourse connectives in target sentences)]

Though the participants’ eye movements throughout the
whole procedure were traced, only the data obtained while
they were reading the target sentences were analyzed (i.e.
the data from their first fixation to their last fixation before
answering the comprehensibility question).
The number of single fixations in the sentences was
counted and the result was divided by the number of total
words in sentences. This is called fixation count per word
and was our independent variable. Only the fixation count
data were used.
Effect of coherence on comprehension
The t-test results of recall showed that there was a
significant effect of coherence, t(39)=2.71, p=.01; the words
in the HCoh group (M=0.85; S.D.=0.06) were better
recalled than those in the LCoh group (M=0.75; S.D=0.13).
The results are represented in a graph in Figure 1. We used
an alpha level of .05 for all statistical tests.
On the other hand, there was no significant effect of
coherence on comprehensibility judgments, t(39)=-1.74,
p=.09.
The mean of the fixation count of per word was
significant between the HCoh and LCoh groups, t(38)=2.265, p=.029; the mean of fixation counts per word was
lower in the HCoh groups (M=1.97, S.D= 0.49) than in the
LCoh groups (M=2.32, S.D=0.48). These results can be
seen in graphically in Figure 2.
The differential effect of lexical cohesion and discourse
connective on comprehension
In order to see the differential effect of lexical cohesion and
discourse connective on comprehension, we analyzed group
differences. We analyzed the following pairs of sentences
with planned contrast tests.
• LexCoh with or without DC (G1 x G2)
• LexCoh and DC (G2 x G3)
• LexCoh (G1 with G2 x G4 and G1 x G3),
• LexCoh with DC (G1 x G4)
In what follows, only significant results are reported.

Figure1: Means of recall per word
for high cohesive or low cohesive clauses

Figure 2: Means of fixation counts per word
for high and low cohesion groups
For the recall test, one way ANOVA results showed that
there was a significant relation between groups,
F(1,39)=1.924, p=.04. The analyses revealed a significant
relation between the LexCoh groups (G1 and G2) and G3
(cohesion by a DC), t(39)=2.771 (two-tailed), p=.009. The
analyses also indicated a significant relation between G1
and G3, t(39)=2.75 (two-tailed), p=.009. The relation
between G1 and G4 was close to the significance level,
t(39)=1.979 (two-tailed), p=.055, though not reaching
significance (Figure 3).
The comprehensibility judgment scores exhibited a
gradual worsening from G1 to G4 and they differed
significantly, F(3,36)=3.01, p=.042. The relation between
G1 (M=16.11; SD=4.45) and G4 (M=22.8; SD=7.15), t (39)
= -2.08, p<.045 was significant.
The group results showed that the mean of fixation counts
per word increased gradually from G1 (M=1.93, SD=0.54),
to G2 (M=2, SD=0.47), G3 (M=2.17, SD=0.32), and G4
(M=2.51, SD=0.6), F (1, 38)=6.67, p=. 012 (Figure 4).

2284

Figure 3: Means of recall per word for groups

Figure 4: Means of fixation counts per word showing the
differences between groups

Discussion and Conclusion
This study predicted that coherence arising from lexical
cohesion and discourse connectives would increase
comprehensibility (McNamara et al., 1996, McNamara and
Kintsch, 1996, and McNamara, 2001). We took coherence
as a matter of well-connected texts, which involved either a
discourse connective and lexical cohesion, or only lexical
cohesion. We ran a two-phase experiment where we tested
native speakers’ judgments about the comprehensibility of
bi-clausal sentences, their recall protocols of the stimuli, and
obtained eye-tracking data while they were reading the
stimuli. Recall results and comprehensibility judgment
results showed that high coherent sentences were recalled
better and gave better comprehensibility judgments,
showing the facilitative role of coherence both with online
and offline methods using Turkish bi-clausal sentences.
Furthermore, we found that the comprehensibility
judgments are aligned with the results from recall protocols.
The fixation count results showed that low coherent
sentences had more fixation counts per word than high
coherent ones. The sentences with lexical cohesion and a
(contrastive) discourse connective (G1) and those with only
lexical cohesion (G2) were recalled and evaluated better
than the sentences which lacked lexical cohesion and had a
contrastive DC (G3) and sentences which lacked both kinds
of cohesion (G4). Within the perspective of constructionintegration theory, we can say that lexical ties, which

provide lexical cohesion in the sentences, are effective both
in construction and integration stage of sentence
comprehension. These results suggest that lexical cohesion
has a stronger effect on coherence (and hence
comprehensibility) of bi-clausal sentences. In this way, we
have shown that among the two major elements of discourse
cohesion, i.e. lexical cohesion (synonymy in our case) and
(contrastive) discourse connectives, it is lexical cohesion
that has a stronger effect on coherence and
comprehensibility. To the best of our knowledge, this has
not been shown before in Turkish.
The eye movement data in our study show that in less
coherent texts, the fixation counts are high. Our results are
parallel with other eye movement studies, for example,
Carroll and Slowiaczek (1986) point to the facilitative role
of lexically associative words in sentences because the
patterns of eye movements change according to the effects
of words or phrases.
From a discourse processing perspective, an important
question in our study was whether lexical cohesion would
suffice for coherence; i.e. we wanted to see whether (in biclausal sentences), lexical cohesion without the linking role
of a discourse connective would change the native speakers’
recall and processing. The recall results from HCoh
sentences (G1 and G2) suggested that lexical cohesion is
quite adequate for readers to derive a meaning of the text
even when the sentences lacked a discourse connective.
Additionally, the between-group differences in the recall
experiment showed that the relation between G1 and G2 is
not significant. However, the relation between G1 with G2
and G3 is highly significant, with a clear bias for G1 with
G2. Similarly, eye movement data revealed that the
sentences which had lexical relations (G1 and G2) were
processed more easily than the ones which have disrupted
lexical relations. We interpret this result as evidence for the
facilitative role of lexical cohesion in guiding coherence
(and comprehensibility). In short, all these results point out
the fact that lexically cohesive clauses suffice for
interpreting a sentence as coherent, but the reverse is not
true; i.e., discourse connectives (in this experiment,
contrastive discourse connectives) alone are not sufficient to
interpret a sentence as coherent. This result that we found
for Turkish may have implications for discourse coherence
and discourse comprehension for other languages.
To conclude, although we found answers to the research
questions we asked, the current study is not without
limitations. For example, the articulatory suppression
technique was used in order to create a cognitive load for
the phonological loop and make difficult to recall items
(Schendel & Palmer, 2007). We did not control participants
with a high and low memory span. It is possible that the
high memory span participants are affected less from the
articulatory suppression technique (Baddaley, 2003).
Another issue is that we only tested sentences with a
contrastive discourse connective. Although contrastive
discourse relations is one of the most commonly occurring
discourse relations in Turkish (Zeyrek, to appear), we aim to

2285

test the interaction of lexical cohesion with other discourse
connectives in the future. Finally, further studies are needed
to understand whether the effect we found for lexical
cohesion in bi-clausal sentences exists in longer texts.

Acknowledgments
We thank Cengiz Acartürk for his help in measuring the
eye-gaze data, Ceyhan Temürcü for his help in constructing
the test material.

References
Birner, B. (2006). Inferential relations and
noncanonical word order. In B. J. & Ward, G. (2006).
Drawing the boundaries of meaning. 31-53.
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science,
255(5044), 556-559.
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory: Looking back
and looking forward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
4(10), 829-839.
Carroll, P., & Slowiaczek, M. L. (1986). Constraints on
semantic priming in reading: A fixation time analysis.
Memory & Cognition, 14(6), 509-522.
Cornish, F. (2009). Inter-sentential anaphora and
coherence relations in discourse: a perfect match.
Language and Sciences, 31: 572-592.
Göz, İ. (2003). Yazılı Türkçenin Kelime Sıklığı Sözlüğü
[Word Frequencies in Written Turkish]. Türk Dil Kurumu
Yayınları.
Köhne, J. & Demberg, V. (2013). . In Knauff, M.,
Pauen, M., Sebanz, N. & Wachsmuth, I. (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2013, Berlin). Austin
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to
functional grammar. (2nd ed.). London.
Jefferies, E., Lambon Ralph, M. A., & Baddeley, A. D.
(2004). Automatic and controlled processing in sentence
recall: The role of long-term and working memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 51(4), 623-643.
Kehler, Andrew. 2002. Coherence in discourse. Center
for the Study of Language and Information: Stanford.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The use of knowledge in discourse processing: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163–182.
Knott, A. & Sanders, T. (1998). The classification of
coherence relations and their linguistic markers: an
exploration of two languages. Journal of Pragmatics
30:135-175 (1998).
Larsen, J. D., & Baddeley, A. (2003). Disruption of
verbal STM by irrelevant speech, articulatory
suppression, and manual tapping: Do they have a
common source?. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section A, 56(8), 1249-1268.
Mann, W. C., & Thompson, S. A. (1986). Relational
propositions in discourse. Discourse processes, 9(1), 5790.

2286

Millis, K. K., & Just, M. A. (1994). The influence of
connectives on sentence comprehension. Journal of
Memory and Language, 33(1), 128-147.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning
from texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.
Discourse processes, 22(3), 247-288.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., &
Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better?
Interactions of text coherence, background knowledge,
and levels of understanding in learning from text.
Cognition and instruction,14(1), 1-43.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high-coherence
and low-coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and
prior knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology/Revue
canadienne
de
psychologie
exparimentale, 55.1: 51.
Reitbauer, M. (2008). Keep an eye on information
processing: Eye tracking evidence for the influence of
hypertext structures on navigational behavior and textual
complexity. LSP and professional communication (20012008), 8(2).
Saeed, John I. 2003. Semantics (Introducing
Linguistics). 2nd edition. Blackwell.
Schendel, Z. A., & Palmer, C. (2007). Suppression
effects on musical and verbal memory. Memory &
cognition, 35(4), 640-650.
The PDTB Research Group (2008). The Penn
Discourse TreeBank 2.0 Annotation Manual. Available at
http://www.seas.upenn.edu/˜pdtb/, or as part of the
download of LDC2008T05.
Zeyrek, D. (to appear). On the distribution of the
contrastive-concessive
discourse
connectives ama
‘but/yet’ and fakat ‘but’ in written Turkish. Languages of
Europe and Northern and Central Asia. John Benjamins
Publishing Company.

