UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does beat perception rely on the covert use of the motor system?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/49p1p6zm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Walker, Esther
Stillerman, Benjamin
Iverson, John
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does beat perception rely on the covert use of the motor system?
Esther J. Walker (e1walker@cogsci.ucsd.edu)

John R. Iversen (jiversen@ucsd.edu)

Department of Cognitive Science, University of
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience,
University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr
La Jolla, CA 92093-0559 USA

Benjamin Stillerman (ben.stillerman@tufts.edu)
Aniruddh D. Patel (a.patel@tufts.edu)

Benjamin K. Bergen (bkbergen@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
1

Department of Psychology
Tufts University, 490 Boston Ave
Medford, MA 02155 USA
Abstract
Listening to music often drives people to move along to the
beat of that music. Past research has suggested that motor
resources are recruited not just to produce a beat, but also to
perceive a beat. The present study extends this correlational
work and examines whether the motor system plays a
functional role in beat perception using a dual-task behavioral
paradigm. Wßhile performance on a beat perception task was
affected by a simultaneous motor task compared to a control
task (Experiment 1), pitch perception was not affected
(Experiment 2). Furthermore, this effect was mediated by
whether or not participants had received formal musical
trainingß. The results suggest that the motor system may play
a functional role in beat perception, even when people are not
overtly moving in time to the beat.
Keywords: beat perception; pitch perception; motor system;
dual-task

Introduction
When listening to music, people often experience a
compelling drive to move along to the beat. Moving along
with music appears to be a human universal, appearing in
very young children (Drake, Penel, & Bigand, 2000;
Kirschner & Tomasello, 2009) and across the world’s
cultures (Brown, 2003; Nettl, 2000). Thus, perhaps it’s not
surprising that a variety of neuroscientific research suggests
a tight link between the auditory and motor systems in
rhythm processing (for a review see Zatorre, Chen, &
Penhune, 2007). This body of work suggests that the motor
system is activated not only during beat production, but also
during beat perception, even when an overt movement is not
produced. For instance, the perception and production of
musical rhythm both activate brain areas implicated in
motor processing, including the supplementary motor area
(SMA), premotor cortex (PMC), the cerebellum, and the
basal ganglia (Grahn & Brett, 2007; Grahn & Rowe, 2009;
Grahn, 2009). Furthermore, based on MEG data, Iversen,
Repp, and Patel (2009) have suggested that the motor
system influences one’s interpretation of the metricality of a
sound, even when individuals are not required to move
when perceiving a beat. Behavioral research also supports
this idea. For example, Phillips-Silver and Trainor found in
both infants (2005) and adults (2007) that moving in time

Department of Cognitive Science, University of
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

with a particular musical beat influences one’s perception of
that music’s rhythm.
However, although studies like these have revealed motor
system activity during both production and perception of a
musical beat, it is largely unknown whether or not the motor
system plays a functional role in beat perception. Is
activation in motor areas during beat perception simply the
result of associating music with movement (that in some
cases is simply not expressed muscularly)? Or does motor
activation reflect calculations used to perceive a beat? For
instance, perhaps individuals, upon hearing music, use
motor planning areas to simulate moving to the beat. This
motor activity might then allow an individual to decide
whether the music is on or off beat, as put forth by the
action simulation for auditory prediction (ASAP) hypothesis
(Patel & Iversen, in press). The present pair of studies aims
to address this issue using a dual-task behavioral paradigm.
In order to investigate the functional role of the motor
system in beat perception, we prevented people from
moving to the beat (or even thinking about moving to the
beat, and presumably from engaging motor planning areas
in action simulation) by tying up their motor system with an
unrelated secondary motor task. This allowed us to ask
whether beat perception is selectively impaired by a
simultaneous motor task. If the motor system plays a
functional role in beat perception then we would expect to
see worse performance on beat perception during a motor
task, but no such impairment on a different perceptual task
that does not rely as extensively on the motor system.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants listened to clips of music and
had to decide whether an overlaid beat track was on or off
the beat of the music. Critically, they simultaneously
performed one of two secondary tasks, a Motor task, which
was designed to occupy the motor system, and a color
change detection task that served as a Control.
To interfere with the motor system, the Motor task had
participants continuously track a pseudo-randomly moving
dot on a computer screen with a computer mouse (more
details can be found in the methods section). Such visuallyguided motor movement is thought to involve many of the
areas also implicated in beat perception, including

3061

supplementary motor area (SMA) (e.g., in humans: Grafton,
Mazziotta, Woods, & Phelps, 1992; in monkeys: Picard &
Strick, 2003), premotor cortex (PMC) and the cerebellum
(e.g., Miall, Reckess, & Imamizu, 2001).
In the Control task, participants tracked the same dot
visually and kept track of whether or not it changed shade
during the trial. Visual tracking of moving objects (smooth
pursuit) largely recruits the middle temporal (MT) and
medial superior temporal (MST) areas, as well as the frontal
eye fields (see Krauzlis, 2004, for a review), which do not
overlap with motor areas purportedly active during beat
processing to the same extent as the Motor task.
If the motor system plays a functional role in beat
perception, then participants should be worse at making beat
perception judgments when their motor system is occupied
with the unrelated Motor task (which occupies the motor
areas putatively involved in beat perception) than when they
are occupied with the unrelated Control task (which does
not).

path (see Figure 1) that was pseudorandomly generated
frame-by-frame using a custom E-Prime script (Psychology
Software Tools, Pittsbugh, PA, USA).
In Motor (dot following) blocks, cursor position was
tracked on a frame-by-frame basis. The cursor was
considered to be successfully tracking the dot if it was
within the area of the dot or within a 25 pixel buffer around
the dot. Accuracy was defined as the proportion of each trial
in which the participant successfully tracked the dot.
In Control (color change) blocks, the dot changed color
on 50% of the trials. Color changes consisted of a slow (2s)
fade from black to dark gray to black during the second half
of the trial. These changes were very subtle to encourage
participants to pay close attention to the moving dot and to
avoid ceiling effects. Detectability of the color change was
verified for each participant.

Methods
Participants A total of 66 UC San Diego undergraduates
participated in the experiment for course credit. Their ages
ranged from 18 to 24 years old (mean age = 20.6 years). Of
these participants, 23 reported having no musical training.

Figure 1: Example trajectory of the visual stimulus (black line) and
the participant’s mouse path (blue dots) in a single Motor task trial.

Materials
Primary Task Stimuli The musical stimuli consisted of 135
unique sound files created from forty-five ten-second
excerpts from songs spanning a wide variety of genres (e.g.,
“One Way or Another” by Blondie, “Tuxedo Junction” by
Glenn Miller). All of the excerpts were instrumental (no
lyrics were included) and were in either 4/4 or 3/4 time. As
in Iversen and Patel (2008), a beep track (1 KHz pure tones,
100ms in duration) was overlaid on the excerpts after a five
second delay. To create the beat track, ten rhythmically
inclined volunteers listened to each excerpt three times
while tapping in synchrony with the natural pulse of the
music on a MIDI pad. A naturalistic beat track for each
excerpt was created from successful synchronization trials
by finding the median (across trials and tappers) tap time for
each beat. This was the on-beat version. Two off-beat
versions of each clip were then created by adjusting each
intertap interval (ITI) to either 10% shorter or longer than
the on-beat stimuli.
Participants heard each excerpt twice; once in each block.
They never heard the same version of a single excerpt (for
example, they never heard the on-beat version or the same
version of the off-beat stimulus more than once over the
course of the experiment).
Secondary Task Stimuli The two secondary tasks were
designed to be performable above chance but sufficiently
difficult to avoid ceiling effects. Both used a visual stimulus
that consisted of a black dot that was roughly 1 cm (30
pixels) in diameter. To ensure that there were no rhythmic
patterns in the secondary task, the dot moved along a curved

Procedure Participants were seated in a quiet room at a
desktop computer. Each participant completed two blocks of
trials. In both blocks, the participant’s primary task was to
determine whether a beat track superimposed on a musical
clip was on or off beat. At the same time, they performed
one of two secondary tasks: Motor (dot following) or
Control (color change). The order of secondary tasks was
counterbalanced across participants and all of the
participants completed one block with each secondary task.
To ensure participants were only moving during the Motor
task, they were asked to minimize their physical
movements, except for when it was required by the tasks
(e.g. following the dot with the mouse). The experimenter
remained in the room during the experiment to ensure
participants complied with these instructions and reminded
participants not to move if they started to move to the
music. In each block, participants completed three practice
trials followed by forty-five experimental trials. One-third
of the trials required “on-beat” responses while the other
two-thirds required “off-beat” responses.
During the Motor task block, in order to ensure that the
motor system was engaged before hearing the beat track,
participants started following the dot immediately at the
start of the trial, along with the start of the musical excerpt,
and the overlaid beat track began five seconds later. After
the excerpts ended, the screen prompted participants to
judge whether the beeps had been on-beat or off-beat. For
both blocks, responses (“on” or “off”) were reported
verbally and were recorded online by the experimenter, who
was seated away from the participant’s view to avoid any
unintentional cueing from the experimenter.

3062

During the Control task block, after the excerpts ended,
the screen prompted participants to judge whether the beeps
had been on-beat or off-beat. Then, the screen prompted
participants to judge whether or not the dot had changed
color during the trial (“yes” or “no”). Both types of
responses were reported verbally.
Once both blocks were completed, participants filled out a
questionnaire with demographic information, self-reported
rhythmic ability, and history of formal musical training.
Analysis As musical training is known to affect music
processing in a variety of ways (e.g., Elbert et al., 1995;
Hund-Georgiadis & von Cramon, 1999; Jäncke, Shah &
Peters, 2000; Chen, Penhune & Zatorre, 2007; Bangert et al,
2006), self-reported formal musical training was included as
a factor in the analyses. All analyses were implemented in R
(R Development Core Team, 2005). For the primary and
secondary tasks, ANOVAs were conducted on beat
judgment performance (percent correct) or secondary task
performance (z-score of accuracy) with type of secondary
task (Motor vs. Control) and musical training (Yes or No) as
factors.
Furthermore, to investigate whether any trade-offs
occurred between the primary and secondary tasks, the
difference in z-scores from the Motor and Control
secondary tasks was used as a measure of an individual’s
relative performance on the secondary tasks. The correlation
between that measure and the difference between
performance on the beat judgment task during the Motor
task condition and during the Control task condition was
then calculated. Any significant negative relationship
between the two would provide evidence of a trade-off
between the primary and secondary tasks.

training, b=.06, t(42)=5.42, p<.001, but
without, p=.17. Those with musical training
on the beat judgment task during the control
than during the motor task also did better
secondary task than the motor task.

not for those
who did better
secondary task
on the control

Figure 2: Average beat judgment accuracy during each of the
secondary tasks, split by musical training. Error bars represent
standard error.

Discussion

Results
Performance on primary task Overall, performance on the
primary, beat-perception task was affected by an interaction
between musical training and secondary task, F(1,64)=4.35,
MSE=.006, p=.041. While those with no musical training
performed significantly worse (M=.72) on the beat
perception task during motor interference than those with
musical training (M=.82), there was no difference between
the two groups during the control task (musical training: M
= .80, no musical training: M = .76) (Figure 2). There was
also a marginal main effect of musical training: those with
musical training performed marginally better (M=.81) on
the beat perception task than those without (M=.74),
F(1,64)=3.09, MSE=.049, p=.08. There was no main effect
of secondary task type, p=.93.
Performance on secondary tasks An analysis of the zscores of the accuracy on the secondary tasks revealed no
main effects (task: p=.85, music training: p=.83) nor an
interaction (p=.22). However, the difference in beat
judgment accuracy scores across the two secondary tasks
significantly predicted the difference of the z-scores of the
accuracy of the two secondary tasks for those with musical

When occupied with the Control secondary task,
participants with musical training performed as well on the
beat perception task as those without musical training.
However, during the Motor task, beat perception
performance suffered for those without musical training as
compared to those with musical training. Critically, this was
not simply due to a trade-off between the primary and
secondary tasks. Rather, there was a positive relationship
between participants’ beat perception scores during one
secondary task and their respective scores on that secondary
task.
Why did musical training affect the effectiveness of the
manipulation? One possibility is that individuals with
musical training, who are often trained specifically in beat
perception, may process beat information more efficiently
than those without such training. This efficiency might play
out in musicians relying less on secondary motor areas than
those without musical training for beat perception.
Corroboratory evidence comes from beat production, in
which the SMA is significantly less active in professional
pianists than in non-musicians (Hund-Georgiadis & Von
Cramon, 1999; similar results were also observed by Jäncke,
Shah, & Peters, 2000). Whether this also extends to beat
perception needs to be further explored.
Of course, because the motor task we used is known to
recruit many components of the motor system, we cannot
determine what specific motor areas might be differentially
recruited for beat perception as a function of musical
training. This remains a potentially fruitful direction for
future work to investigate.
More urgently, however, the results from Experiment 1
have an alternative explanation to the one that’s offered
above. It's possible that the Motor task is simply more
difficult than the Control task. If so, then the decrease in
performance in the primary beat perception task during the
Motor secondary task might not result from the specific
recruitment of the motor system. To ensure that the results

3063

weren’t due to this deflationary possibility, we conducted a
second experiment, with a different primary task.

Secondary Task Stimuli The secondary task stimuli were
the same as in Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to control for the possibility that
the Motor task is more demanding than the Control
secondary task. Rather than making beat perception
judgments for their primary task, participants made
judgments about the pitch of musical tones, which involves
auditory processing regions of the brain, but is not thought
to involve the motor system in the same manner as beat
perception (see Peretz & Zatorre, 2005, for a review). If
participants with and without musical training are
differentially affected across the two secondary tasks, as in
Experiment 1, then we cannot reject the possibility that the
results of Experiment 1 are due to differences in the two
secondary tasks independent of motor interference.
However, if participants with and without musical training
in Experiment 2 perform equally well on pitch judgments
during both secondary tasks, this suggests that the Motor
task is not simply more demanding than the Control task.

Methods
Participants A total of 70 UC San Diego undergraduates
that did not participate in Experiment 1 completed the
experiment for course credit. Their ages ranged from 18 to
28 years old (mean age = 20.9 years). Of these participants,
32 reported having no musical training.
Materials
Primary Task Stimuli The musical stimuli consisted of 90
unique 10-second excerpts containing two sets of three
notes each, played individually. There were two types of
excerpts created: one where the first and second sets of
notes contained the same notes as each other, regardless of
order (Same stimuli) and one where the second set of notes
contained different notes than the first, regardless of order
(Different stimuli). There were twice as many Different
stimuli as Same stimuli. The first set of notes was either a
major triad or a diminished triad (arpeggiated, not
necessarily in ascending order). For Same stimuli, the
second set of notes was the same triad with the order of
notes changed. For Different stimuli, the second set of notes
was a different triad.
For each Different stimulus, the new triad was different
from the first triad by one note. If the first set of notes was a
major triad, the root (tonic) note was moved down a whole
step to create a diminished triad as the second set of notes
(with the major third of the major triad serving as the new
root of the diminished triad). If the first set of notes was a
diminished triad, the fifth was moved up a whole step to
create a major triad (with the changed note serving as the
new root of the major triad). A second version of each of the
Different stimuli was also created by lowering the changed
note by an octave. Stimuli were created in GarageBand
(Apple, Inc.) using a default MIDI piano sound. All the
notes were uniform in intensity and duration.

Figure 4: Examples of pitch judgment stimuli. The correct answer
for the top example would be “same”, and the correct response for
the bottom two would be “different”.

Procedure The procedure and structure of the experiment
were identical to Experiment 1, differing only in the primary
task. Throughout both the Motor and Control blocks,
participants listened to the musical (pitch) stimuli and were
then prompted to determine whether or not the second set of
notes contained the same notes as the first (“same” or
“different”). Then they either proceeded to the next trial or
made a color change judgment (“yes” or “no”), depending
on which block they were currently completing. As in
Experiment 1, participants completed 48 trials per block (3
practice, 45 experimental), with one-third of the trials
requiring a “same” pitch response and the remaining trials
requiring a “different” pitch response.
Analyses The data were analyzed in the same manner as in
Experiment 1, except that pitch judgment accuracy was used
as the dependent variable for the primary task.

Results
Performance on primary task Those with musical training
(M=.73) significantly out-performed those without training
(M=.64) on the pitch judgment task, F(1, 68)=13.94,
MSE=.019, p<.001. In addition, there was a main effect of
secondary task: participants made more accurate pitch
judgments following the motor task (M=.70) than following
the control task (M=.67), F(1,68)=5.11, MSE=.004, p=.027.
No interaction was observed, p=.99 (see Figure 4).

3064

Figure 4: Average pitch judgment accuracy during each of the
secondary tasks, split by musical training. Error bars represent
standard error.

Performance on secondary tasks As in Experiment 1, an
analysis of the z-scored accuracy of the secondary tasks
revealed no main effects (task: p=1, musical training: p=.34)
nor an interaction (p=.85). Furthermore, the difference in
pitch judgment accuracy scores across the two secondary
tasks did not predict the difference of the z-scores of the
accuracy of the two secondary tasks for neither those with
musical training (p=.48) nor those without (p=.15).

Discussion
In Experiment 2, participants made judgments about
whether two sequences of musical notes contained notes of
the same or different pitches while they performed one of
two secondary tasks. Contrary to Experiment 1, there was
no interaction between musical training and secondary task
on pitch judgment accuracy. Furthermore, there was no
evidence that individuals performed worse as a result of the
Motor task as compared to the Control task. Rather, we
found the opposite: participants were worse at making pitch
perception judgments following the Control task than the
Motor task.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, we demonstrated that tying up the motor
system resulted in deficits in beat perception in the
musically untrained compared to the musically trained. This
was not due to the motor task being more difficult than the
control task. Indeed, in Experiment 2, participants actually
performed worse on a pitch perception task during the
control task, suggesting that if anything, the control task
was more demanding than the motor task. Together, these
studies suggest that the motor system plays an important
role in beat perception.
What role might the motor system be playing in beat
perception? One answer is that its connection to beat
perception is merely associative. On this account, the motor
system is active when listening to music only because we
often move to music (for instance, in dancing). In this case
motor system activity is a downstream process that does not
play any functional role in a person's ability to perceive the
beat. However, this account does not square with the results
reported above. It would predict that beat perception should
be equally affected by the two secondary tasks. This is not
what we found.
Rather, our results are consistent with the predictions of
an alternative account: the action simulation for auditory
prediction (ASAP) hypothesis (see Patel & Iversen, in press,
for a detailed description). According to the ASAP
hypothesis, when listening to music, motor planning regions
are used simulate body movement (particularly the
periodicity of the movement) that becomes entrained to the
beat, which in turn is used to generate a prediction about the
timing of an upcoming beat. This motor entrainment could
then provide feedback as to whether the music is on or off
the beat (independent of actual movement). When the motor
system is tied up, however, as in the Motor condition in

Experiment 1, it would be unable to provide such feedback,
making it more difficult for an individual to make beat
judgments.
Interestingly, the covert involvement of the motor system
has been observed in other domains, such as language. For
example, a study using theta burst TMS found that
individuals were faster to respond to action verbs that
typically involve the right hand following stimulation of the
left premotor cortex compared to right premotor cortex,
suggesting a functional role of the PMC in language
comprehension (Willems, Labruna, D’Esposito, Ivry, &
Casasanto, 2011).
While we have argued that the present results are due to
motor interference in the beat perception task (but not the
pitch perception task), we cannot completely rule out the
possibility that, due to the nature of this dual-task paradigm,
differences in difficulty and type of the primary tasks are
responsible for the observed patterns of results. However, if
there were large discrepancies in the difficulties of the two
primary tasks, one would expect this to be revealed in the
secondary task performance. For instance, if pitch
judgments were much more difficult for participants,
performance on both secondary tasks would suffer as
compared to the performance on the same secondary tasks
when beat judgments were the primary task. To address this
possibility, we compared performance on the secondary
tasks across experiments. A 2 (type of judgment: beat or
pitch) x 2 (type of secondary task: control or motor) x 2
(musical experience: yes or no) ANOVA was conducted
using the z-scores of secondary task accuracy as the
dependent variable. Neither an interaction nor any main
effects were observed (all p-values > .35), which suggests
that performance on the secondary tasks was equal across
experiments and thus cannot explain the differences
observed across experiments. Future studies could explore a
similar question using complementary paradigms to
examine whether the same pattern of results are observed.
One other wrinkle still to be addressed is the difference
between participants with and without formal musical
training. We've argued that individuals with musical training
may be less affected by a motor manipulation due to more
efficient processing of beat information (e.g., Jäncke, Shah,
& Peters, 2000). While the present data is consistent with
this idea, this hypothesis remains speculative.
We intend to investigate this moving forward. As
discussed in Experiment 1, musical training can change how
individuals process music on many levels. While we found
that those with musical training performed better on both
beat and pitch perception tasks, we had only limited
information about the musical training of the participants
(e.g., we did not obtain details the nature of their training,
how often they practiced, whether they were instrumental or
vocal musicians, etc.). By investigating varying levels and
types of musical training, the interpretation of the effects
observed in the present study may become clearer. Training
non-musicians to use various strategies of internalizing the
beat may similarly provide insight into the role that the

3065

motor system plays in beat perception and how it changes
with musical training.
In conclusion, these studies suggest that moving (or even
using the motor system to covertly simulate moving) to the
beat may not merely be a side effect of listening to music.
Rather, it may be critical in determining the beat of the
music, especially for those who have no formal musical
training.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Chitra Subrahmanyam, Erik
Evangelista, Courtney Moltzen, and Omar Masarweh for
help with data collection and stimulus generation.

References
Bangert, M., et al. (2006). Shared networks for
auditory and motor processing in professional pianists:
evidence from fMRI conjunction. Neuroimage, 30, 917926.
Brown, S. (2003). Biomusicology, and three biological
paradoxes about music. Bulletin of Psychology and the
Arts, 4, 15–17.
Chen, J.L., Zatorre, R.J., & Penhune, V.B. (2006).
Interactions between auditory and dorsal premotor cortex
during synchronization to musical rhythms. NeuroImage,
32, 1771-1781,
Drake, C., Penel, A., & Bigand, E. (2000). Tapping in time
with mechanically and expressively performed music.
Music Perception, 18(1), 1–23.
E-Prime 2.0 Software, (Psychology Software Tools,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA).
Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., &
Taub, E. (1995). Increased cortical representation of the
fingers of the left hand in string players. Science, 270,
305-307.
Grafton, S.T., Mazziotta, J.C., Woods, R.P., & Phelps, M.E.
(1992). Human functional anatomy of visually guided
finger movements, Brain, 115, 565-587.
Grahn, J.A. & Brett, M. (2007). Rhythm and beat perception
in motor areas of the brain. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19, 893-906.
Grahn, J.A. & Rowe, J.B. (2009). Feeling the beat: premotor
and striatal interactions in musicians and nonmusicians
during beat perception. Journal of Neuroscience, 29,
7540-7548.
Grahn, J.A. (2009). The role of the basal ganglia in beat
perception. The Neurosciences and Music III- Disorders
and Plasticity: Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1169, 35-45.
Hund-Georgiadis, M., & von Cramon, D.Y. (1999). Motorlearning-related changes in piano players and nonmusicians revealed by functional magnetic-resonance
signals. Experimental Brain Research, 125, 417-425.
Iversen, J.R. & Patel, A.D. (2008). The Beat Alignment Test
(BAT): Surveying beat processing abilities in the general
population. Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Music Perception and Cognition. Sapporo,
Japan, 465-468.

Iversen, J.,R. Repp, B.H., and Patel, A.D. (2009). Top-down
control of rhythm perception modulates early auditory
responses. The Neurosciences and Music III- Disorders
and Plasticity: Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1169, 58-73.
Jäncke, L., Shah, N.J., & Peters, M. (2000). Cortical
activations in primary and secondary motor areas for
complex bimanual movements in professional pianists.
Cognitive Brain Research, 10, 177-183.
Kirschner, S., & Tomasello, M. (2009) Joint drumming:
social context facilitates synchronization in preschool
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 102,
299–314.
Krauzlis, R.J. (2004). Recasting the smooth pursuit eye
movement system. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91, 591603.
Miall, R.C., Reckess, G.Z., & Imamizu, H. (2001). The
cerebellum coordinates eye and hand tracking
movements. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 638-644.
Nettl, B. (2000). An ethnomusicologist contemplates
universals in musical sound and musical culture. N.L.
Wallin, B. Merker, S. Brown S. (Eds.), The Origins of
Music, Mass: MIT Press, Cambridge, 463-372.
Patel A.D., & Iversen J.R. (in press). The evolutionary
neuroscience of musical beat perception: The action
simulation for auditory prediction (ASAP) hypothesis.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience.
Peretz, I. & Zatorre, R.J. (2005). Brain organization for
music processing. Annual Reviews of Psychology, 56, 89114.
Phillips-Silver, J., & Trainor, L.J. (2005). Feeling the beat:
movement influences infants’ rhythm perception. Science,
308, 1430.
Phillips-Silver, J. & Trainor, L.J. (2007). Hearing what the
body feels: Auditory encoding of rhythmic movement.
Cognition, 105, 533-546.
Picard, N. & Strick, P.L. (2003). Activation of the
supplementary motor area (SMA) during performance of
visually guided movements, Cerebral Cortex, 13, 977986.
R Development Core Team (2005). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, URL,
http://www.R-project.org.
Willems, R.E., Labruna, L., D’Esposito, M., Ivry, R., &
Casasanto, D. (2011). A functional role for the motor
system in language understanding: Evidence from theta
burst transcranial magnetic stimulation. Psychological
Science, 22, 849-854.
Zatorre, R.J., Chen, J.L., & Penhune, V.B. (2007). When the
brain plays music: auditory-motor interactions in music
perception and production. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
8, 547-558.

3066

