UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does coffee make you reason smarter? The effect of caffeine on executive functioning and
dual-process reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2c59r7qj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Pipijn, Katrijn
Visterin, Stievy
Janssens, Leen
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does coffee make you reason smarter? The effect of caffeine on executive
functioning and dual-process reasoning.
Katrijn Pipijn (Katrijn.Pipijn@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102 Bus 3711
3000 LEUVEN, Belgium

Leen Janssens (Leen.Janssens@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102 Bus 3711
3000 LEUVEN, Belgium

Stievy Visterin
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102 Bus 3711
3000 LEUVEN, Belgium

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102 Bus 3711
3000 LEUVEN, Belgium

Abstract
In a setup based on the Masicampo and Baumeister (2008)
lemonade study, the effects of caffeine on dual-process
reasoning were explored. Participants in this double-blind
study were divided into a caffeine and a caffeine-free control
group. Participants had to solve several classical dual-process
paradigms. Participants in the caffeine group were expected to
perform better on analytic reasoning trials. In a follow-up
experiment participants were also given an unexpected
implicit recollection task to see whether caffeine has an affect
on conflict monitoring, an executive function underlying
dual-process reasoning. Even though the paradigms being
used proved to be appropriate for dual-process testing, no
effects of caffeine on dual-process reasoning or on conflict
monitoring were found.
Keywords: Dual-process reasoning, conflict monitoring,
executive functions, caffeine

Literature
On average, people drink about 148 liters of coffee each
year. Although reasons for drinking coffee vary between
different people, an often recurring reason is a subjective
feeling of better cognitive performance. For example, a
student in the middle of an exam period or an employee
with a high workload may think they will perform better
after a couple cups of coffee. In our study, we found out
whether or not dual-process reasoning is influenced by those
cups and whether coffee is the elixir many people take it for.
Research in thinking and reasoning repeatedly concluded
that human reasoning is supported by two distinctive
systems and can be considered dual-process reasoning. Two
very easy-to-use and neutral terms for these two Systems
were proposed by Stanovich (1999) and Stanovich and West
(2000), System 1 and System 2. System 1, which can be
described as an instinctive System, that is formed by
associative learning processes, works rapidly, parallel, and
automatically, and is based on heuristic reasoning. System 2

on the other hand is capable of abstract hypothetical
thinking. It requires more mental resources and works much
slower. System 1 is believed to do the primary reasoning
whereas System 2 has the ability to override, inhibit or
correct the default responses produced by System 1. System
2’s location in the brain has repeatedly been explored and
one of its main locations is believed to be the prefrontal
cortex (Goel, Buchel, Frith, & Dolan, 2000; Goel & Dolan,
2003; De Neys & Goel, 2011). Reasoning researchers
increasingly believe that System 2 has a high inhibitory role
and thus will be supported by the central executive System.
For an extensive review on dual-process reasoning, see
Evans (2008). In our current study, we looked at the effects
of caffeine on these dual-process reasoning Systems.
In 2008, Masicampo and Baumeister found that the
ingestion of sugar enhanced the reliance on System 2
reasoning. They tested whether more blood glucose is
needed for the highly demanding System 2 processes than is
needed for System 1. They found that when participants had
to complete highly demanding tasks, which relied on
executive functioning, their blood glucose levels dropped.
Not enough glucose remained available after these tasks for
System 2 to operate optimally. As a result, System 2’s
influence in subsequent tasks decreased. The low levels of
glucose had a diminishing effect on dual-process reasoning
tasks, which participants performed later on. When the
blood glucose levels were restored by administering sugarholding lemonade, System 2 regained functionality and
performances on the dual-process tasks recovered to normal.
The participants performed better in the dual-process
reasoning tasks compared to the control group which was
depleted but received sugar-free lemonade and the control
group which was not depleted in the first place.
Pocheptsova, Amir, Dhar, and Baumeister (2009) found that
depleting participants of their limited resource of glucose by
giving them self-regulating tasks, influences their

1168

performance on reasoning tasks afterwards. The resource
depletion decreased the ability to rely on effortful and
deliberative reasoning. After the System 2 performance
decline, only the System 1 automatic and intuitive processes
remain available for the participant to rely on. From these
studies we can conclude that glucose is necessary for
optimal System 2 reasoning performance. Gailliot and
Baumeister (2007) explained that not all psychological
processes, such as System 1 and System 2 reasoning, have
the same high energy requirements. More specifically, the
rational and intelligent decision making of System 2
requires more energy and thus more glucose. This is in
contrast to the automatic information processing of System
1, which still needs energy, but only in low quantities. In
our current research, we investigated whether the effects of
caffeine on dual-process reasoning are comparable to the
effects of glucose administration.

Experiment 1
In 1984, Nehlig, Lucignani, Kadekaro, Porrino, and
Sokoloff studied the effects of acute administration of
caffeine to certain brain regions of the rat. Even after the
administration of small doses of caffeine (0.1 mg/kg and 1.0
mg/kg), they were able to find increased levels of glucose
utilization in certain regions of the brain. When they
increased caffeine dosages up to 10 mg/kg, caffeine
produced a widespread increase in glucose utilization
throughout the brain. An increase of 15% in the average rate
for the whole brain was determined. These results imply that
not only will the metabolism be able to extract more glucose
from the blood; these elevated levels of glucose will also be
used more effectively. When these results are linked to the
results of Masicampo and Baumeister (2008), we would
expect the increased glucose utilization caused by caffeine
administration to result in improved System 2 reasoning and
thus in better logical reasoning.
In their experiment, Masicampo and Baumeister (2008)
used the asymmetrical dominated alternative choice
dilemma to test dual-process reasoning. Although this
paradigm has proven to be an adequate method to test dualprocess reasoning, it is used only occasionally in the field.
Paradigms that are more straightforward to the dual-process
framework by producing a clear distinction between analytic
and heuristic reasoning might be more adequate. Therefore,
in our experiment we not only used the alternative choice
dilemma used by Masicampo and Baumeister (2008), we
also used several more widely accepted testing paradigms,
complemented by another less known paradigm.
First of all, we included the probably most commonly
used dual-process reasoning paradigm: syllogisms with
content. Evans, Barston, and Pollard (1983) initially
introduced syllogisms into the dual-process literature. Evans
et al. argued that syllogisms create a conflict between two
different responses, produced by, respectively, System 1 and
System 2.
We also used the Wason selection task. We included two
versions: one abstract indicative version and one more

realistic and heuristic problem (Johnson-Laird and Tagart,
1969; Griggs and Cox, 1982) .
A third task used in this study was originally developed
by Huber, Payne, and Pluto (1982), the asymmetrical
dominated alternative choice dilemma. In this task
participants are faced with a decision between two options
with several relevant dimensions on each option given and a
third option, which is added as a decoy. The decoy option
resembles one of the two other options, but is inferior to it
in on all relevant dimensions. Studies show how participants
do not choose the decoy option, but favor the option lying
closest to a decoy option, which is called the attraction
effect. Dhar and Simonson (2003) explained this
phenomenon by postulating that the attraction effect is
mainly based on the intuitive and perceptual System 1
processes, excluding the logical System 2.
Another type of task used in our study is the classical
base-rate neglect problems, introduced by Kahneman and
Tversky (1973). Participants are confronted with two
statements made about a person in a description and are
asked to pick to one that is most likely according to the
description. Participants should give their answers based on
a mentioned sample distribution, but instead they often
choose their answers based on the heuristic beliefs cued by
the short description. They intentionally ignore the
normative System 2 response and rely on the heuristic
System 1 resolution.
Tversky and Kahneman (1983) also developed the
conjunction fallacy task. A conjunction fallacy task gives a
description of a person, followed by three statements about
that person. It is the participant’s task to order these three
statements based on their probability. The theoretical rule
behind this type of problem is that the probability of a
conjunction of two items can never be greater than the
probabilities of its constituents. We used both the famous
Linda problem and the Bill problem, translated into Dutch.
Finally, a relatively new task was used to research the
dual-process framework. In 2009, Gillard, Van Dooren,
Schaeken, and Verschaffel used simple proportional and
non-proportional denominator neglect problems. They
declared that proportional mathematical reasoning is the
result of System 1 heuristic reasoning. They believe that
non-proportional mathematical reasoning is the result of
System 2 reasoning. Therefore, errors are made on nonproportional problems as a result of System 1 interfering
and solving the problems proportionally.
In the present study, we looked at the effects of caffeine
on dual-process reasoning performance. Using several
commonly accepted dual-process reasoning paradigms, we
first looked at the general distinction between analytic and
heuristic trials. We expected to find a main effect for the
analytic-heuristic distinction. We expected to replicate the
general findings of the literature that accuracy is the highest
when the analytic and the heuristic response are in
correspondence to each other but lower when they are in
conflict. Next, we looked at the effects of caffeine and the
interaction of caffeine with the analytic-heuristic distinction.

1169

We expected to find a significant interaction between
caffeine condition and the distinction between analytic and
heuristic trials. More specifically, we predicted accuracy
levels on the heuristic items to remain unchanged, and
accuracy levels on the analytical items to increase as a result
of caffeine intake. Finally, we also expected to find a main
effect of task type, as a result of the different accuracy rates
expected for each different task.

Method
Sixty-four University students (11 men and 53 women) took
part in the experiment (M = 18.8, SD = .9). They received
course credit for participation and they had low to moderate
caffeine consumption habits (mean cups/day = .81, SD =
.94). We did not use participants that consumed more than
four cups daily avoid possible tolerance effects.
The study had two different conditions: an experimental
caffeine condition and a placebo control condition.
Participants were randomly divided into the two groups,
with 29 participants in the experimental condition. The
participants were told the study dealt with caffeine and
reasoning. They all received a cup of decaffeinated coffee at
the beginning of the session. 200 mg of caffeine was
dissolved in the cups of the experimental group and all
participants were allowed to add milk to their cup.
Participants agreed to refrain from all caffeine consumption
during the morning of the experiment. After drinking the
coffee, participants completed several irrelevant tasks for 40
minutes, since that is the time it takes caffeine to get
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and get distributed
throughout all tissues of the bodies (Fredholm, Bättig,
Holmen, Nehlig, and Zvartau, 1999). After the filler tasks,
participants started on the seven different dual-process
reasoning tasks. They began with eight syllogisms, followed
by an abstract Wason selection task, three attraction effect
tasks and a realistic Wason selection task. Next, they
completed four base rate-neglect problems, two conjunction
fallacy problems and finally two denominator neglect
problems. The Departmental Ethical Committee approved
all experimental procedures.

Results
The scores on the tasks are summarized in Table 1. Four of
our tasks had a clear distinction between problems that
could be solved heuristically and problems that had to be
solved analytically. These were Wason selection tasks,
syllogisms, base-rate neglect tasks and the denominator
neglect problems. For the analysis, we used a repeated
measures analysis of variance design. We created a 2
(caffeine vs. placebo) by 2 (analytic vs. heuristic) by 4
design (task type). The analyses for the attraction effect and
the conjunction fallacy problems were done separately.
For the first four tasks, a significant difference was found
between analytic versus heuristic trials, F(1, 1) = 225.29,
MSE = 30.70, p < .001. We were able to replicate the
classical dual-process reasoning experiments. This means
that accuracy on items that could be solved correctly using

heuristics was higher than for items that had to be solved
analytically. We also found a significant main effect for the
four different tasks, F(1, 3) = 18.82, MSE = 2.33, p < .001.
This means there is a significant difference in the results for
the different tasks. This is as we would expect, based on the
different accuracy rates on the different tasks found in
previous research. We expected, for example, that accuracy
rates for the denominator neglect problems would be much
higher than for the Wason selection tasks. We did not find a
main effect of caffeine condition (F(1, 1) = .06, MSE = .00).
This implies that there is no difference in dual process
reasoning between participants who took in caffeine before
testing and those who did not. The interaction between
caffeine condition and the distinction analytic-heuristic,
which was the subject of our main research question, was
not significant. This means that accuracies on the analytical
and heuristic items were independent of the caffeine
condition. (F(1, 3) = .05, MSE = .01). The interaction
between caffeine conditions and task type was not
significant either. We did find a significant interaction
between the different types of task and the distinction
between analytic and heuristic (F(1, 3) = 4.78, MSE = .55, p
= .003). This is congruent with what can be found in
literature and can be explained by the unequal input by
System 1 and System 2 for the different tasks.
We did a separate analysis for the attraction effect. Here
again we could not find an effect of caffeine condition on
performance (F(1, 1) = .17 , MSE = .01). We also could not
find a main effect of caffeine condition for the conjunction
fallacy task (F(1, 1) = .52 , MSE = .04).

Discussion
From our results, we conclude that there are no effects of
caffeine on dual-process reasoning. When looked at the
results more closely, we found a clear distinction between
the analytic and heuristic items. This means that the used
experimental paradigms were appropriate to test dualprocess reasoning. For each separate paradigm results were
in agreement with existing literature. In every paradigm,
accuracy was highest when the heuristic response was in
accordance with the logical response and lowest when they
were in contrast. If anything, we found even lower accuracy
rates for the items that required analytic reasoning compared
to the ones found in previous research. Accuracy for the
analytic version of the Wason selection task was no higher
than 9 percent. The non-proportional word problems had
accuracy rates up to 40 percent, while original literature
predicted accuracy rates up to 68 percent. Yet, the
administered amount of caffeine did not elicit improved
accuracy for the analytic responses compared to the placebo
condition.

Experiment 2
From an executive functioning perspective, dual-process
processing is assumed to be based on three executive
functions. First of all, Sloman (1996) and Epstein (1994)
assume a process of conflict monitoring is at work during

1170

dual-process reasoning. The central executive is triggered
when a conflict arises between a System 1 and a System 2
response. A second executive function that seems necessary
for good dual-process reasoning is response inhibition (De
Neys & Everaerts 2008). Once a conflict between System 1
and System 2 is detected, our central executive is supposed
to inhibit the System 1 response. For a participant with a
properly working central executive system, dual-process
reasoning is assumed to follow a pattern. When the
participant is confronted with a dual-process task, the
central executive will get triggered because of a conflict
between the System 1 and System 2 response. Next, the
inhibition function will suppress the System 1 response. As
a result, the System 2 response will have a clear pathway
and the participant will report this System 2 response.
Thirdly, working memory capacities have been repeatedly
linked to System 2 reasoning, where individual differences
in capacities predict differences in dual-process reasoning
(Handley, Capon, Beveridge, Dennis, & Evans, 2004;
Stanovich, 1999).
The effects of caffeine on numerous executive functions
have been studied. We will only discuss those executive
functions that are relevant for dual-process reasoning.
Caffeine does not appear to have the same effect on all
executive functions relevant to System 2 reasoning. In one
study, Tieges, Ridderinkhof, Snel, and Kok (2004) showed
how caffeine improves the action of conflict monitoring.
Tieges, Snel, Kok, and Ridderinkhof (2009) indicated how
response inhibition was not influenced by caffeine. Working
memory was also not affected by caffeine, as shown in a
study by Smith, Clark, and Gallagher (1999).
The work of De Neys and colleagues can bring more
clarity on the matter. Based on the interplay between these
executive functions and caffeine, some conclusions can be
made. In an fMRI-study, De Neys, Vartanian, and Goel
(2008) showed that the conflict monitoring area in the brain
is always activated when the participant is confronted with a
conflict between a System 1 and a System 2 response. This
activation was present even when the participant reasoned
according to System 1. The inhibition area, on the other
hand, was activated mainly when the participant’s response
was based on logic and the stereotypical response was
avoided. Another study by De Neys and Franssens (2009),
indicated that a failure to produce a logical response is not
the consequence of a failing conflict monitoring System.
These erroneous answers result from a failure to complete
the inhibition of the System 1 response, even when the
conflict is noticed by the central executive in the first place.
This annotation by De Neys and colleagues could be a
possible explanation as to why we did not find an effect of
caffeine on dual-process reasoning tasks. It is possible that
the only effect caffeine had, was on conflict monitoring. It is
likely that caffeine lead to even more brain-activation at the
conflict-monitoring level, but the caffeine did not stimulate
the inhibition in the same way. As a result, the participants
were not able to bring out the System 2 response, making
them stay with the default System 1 response.

Our hypothesis for the second experiment is that with
implicit measurement, we will find a positive effect of
caffeine on conflict monitoring. With the knowledge of De
Neys and colleagues and their implicit measurements and
tasks used in the previous research, we made a test battery
including explicit dual-process tasks and an unannounced
implicit recollection task. For the recollection tasks we were
not as much interested in the exact remembered numbers, as
we were in the ratios of the remembered numbers. We
hypothesize that when the conflict monitoring in used in a
conflicting item, participants would implicitly direct more
focus on the ratios in the stimuli. This unconscious focus
would lead to a deeper processing and consequently a better
recollection for the conflict items, compared to the nonconflict control items. We hypothesize that under the
influence of caffeine, the conflict monitoring is stimulated,
which would lead to a better recollection of the rates of
conflict items.

Method
Fifty-three students (9 men and 44 women) took part in the
experiment (M = 19.96). All participants had low to
moderate caffeine consumption habits with an average of no
more than two cups of coffee a day.
The experiment procedure was equal to Experiment 1 but
the test-battery was reduced. The experiment can be roughly
divided in two parts, the explicit reasoning part and the
implicit recollection part. Participants completed a
denominator neglect problem and a base-rate neglect
problem. After these two task, we presented the participants
with an unannounced recollection task. Participants were
asked to recollect the ratios of the presented denominator
neglect items and the base-rates for the base-rate neglect
task. The denominator neglect problems were slightly
altered to make them suitable for a recollection task. In the
figures for the different items the dots were changed to
small figures like flowers or clocks (see Figure 1). We also
used different colors in each items. This allowed us to
differentiate between the items easier and allowed the
participants to better remember each item separately.

Figure 1. Example of a stimuli in the denominator
neglect problem.

Results
The data from four participants was deleted due to bad
performance on the control items. This resulted in a total of

1171

53 participants, 26 in the non-caffeine group and 27
participants in the caffeine group.
For this statistical analyses, The Mann-Whitney U test, a
non-parametric test for the comparison of a (semi-)
continuously variable between two independent groups, was
used.
For the denominator neglect problems, we didn’t find any
significant differences in correctness between the congruent
and incongruent items. In a within group comparison, none
of both item-types was significantly solved better than the
other. There were not more or less errors made on the
incongruent items compared to the congruent items in the
whole group. 90,57% of the congruent items and 83,96% of
the incongruent items was solved correctly. The results does
not show any statistical differences between analytic or
heuristic items you would expect in a reasoning task to test
the dual process theory, which is in contrast to Experiment
1. In a between group comparison, where we compare the
results of the caffeine group against the non-caffeine group.
The effect of caffeine did not provide any significant
enhancements on the performance on the task, not even on
the conflicting, incongruent items.
For the base-rate neglect problems, accuracy was highest
on congruent (100%) and neutral analytic (100%) problems,
the lowest on the incongruent items (only 54% correct) with
the neutral heuristic problems (90,56%) somewhere in
between. Only about 46% of the incongruent items were
solved heuristically, which is much lower than what
Kahneman and Tversky (1974) published. However, this
number is still significantly different from all the other itemtypes.
The sum of the correctly solved items is distributed
significantly different between the two caffeine conditions.
Whereas the caffeine group solves about 80% of the items
correctly, the non-caffeine group manages this in only 71%
of the items. An in-between group comparison on the
incongruent items reveals an important significant effect.
Incongruent conflicting items are answered significantly
better than non-conflicting items (U= 243.0, z= -1.79, p=
0.04). The caffeine group performed better on the
incongruent items and solved almost 12% more items
correctly compared to the non-caffeine group. This
observation is again in contrast to the results from
Experiment 1.
For the recollection part of the denominator neglect
problem, we compared the ratios given by the participants
against the actual ratios of the stimuli. We found a
significant effect between the congruent and incongruent
items (t(51) = 422; p= .02). It seems that the recollection of
incongruent items was much better than the recollection of
the congruent items. There was however no difference in
recollection between the two caffeine groups.
A vast majority (68.5%) of recollected base-rates were
exactly the ones that were presented in the task. There were
no significant differences between the different item types.
Performance on all the different items, congruent and
incongruent, was equal. This is in contrast to the results

from the works of De Neys and colleagues. There was
however a marginal difference between the two caffeine
groups (U= 284.5, n1= 27, n2= 26, Z= 1.5726, p= .0579).
Participants that had consumed caffeine were barely better
at recollecting the base rates of the incongruent items.

Discussion
The results from the second experiment were mixed. First of
all, we were not able to replicate the explicit results for the
denominator neglect problems. There was a significant
effect of item in the implicit recollection task afterwards.
The main idea in De Neys and Glumicic (2007) of the
presentation of an implicit recollection task is that when
people successfully detect a conflict within an item they
must have incorporated the analytical information as well as
the heuristic. This extra processing time leads to a better
imprinting of the information and eventually to a better
recollection. Even though participants were equally good in
answering the explicit items, it seems that more effort was
put into the conflict items and conflict monitoring was
stimulated, which led to a better recollection afterwards. No
effects of caffeine were found in these tasks though.
Several reasons for the lack of a main effect of caffeine in
the denominator neglect problems can be argued. One on
the reasons that seems obvious, is the task alterations. The
task features were altered to make the task suitable for a
implicit recollection task. We also wanted to make this task
as similar as possible to the base-rate neglect task. The test
battery from Experiment 1 was very divers which made task
comparison very hard. It is possible that these task
alterations made the task just too different from the original
to replicate the results.
Another possible explanation for the lack of an effect could
be the number of items that were presented. Only two
incongruent and two congruent items were presented.
However, increasing the number of items would be
disastrous for the recollection task. For each item, four
values had to be recollected. This gives a total of 16 values
to remember, which in our opinion was sufficient enough to
remember implicitly. Increasing the number of items would
only lead to very limited recollection.
The base-rate neglect worked better. Performance on
conflict items was more heuristic than on the non-conflict
items and caffeine administration reduced this effect. This
finding confirms the hypothesis that caffeine strengthens
conflict monitoring. But this difference in performances
does not continue in the implicit part of the experiment.
Participants did not recollect the base-rates of the
incongruent items more accurately. This is against our
expectations and a opposition to the work done by De Neys
and colleagues. Again, caffeine had no clear effect on the
recollection task.

General discussion
In sum, we did not find a clear effect of caffeine on dualprocess reasoning, nor on the executive function of conflict
monitoring. Even though we did find an effect in the base-

1172

rate neglect task of the second experiment, this result needs
to be interpreted with caution due to the deviation of
performance on this task to previous research. However, this
effect and the marginally significant effect on the implicit
part give enough reason to further explore the area of
research. It would also be interesting for further research to
look at the effect of depletion before the administration of
caffeine, congruent to Masicampo and Baumeister (2008).
Still, it seems that all those daily cups of coffee consumed
by millions of people worldwide do not make them reason
exceptionally better and that caffeine is not the elixir many
people take it for.

Acknowledgments
This research was carried out with the financial support of
the National Council for Scientific Research – Flanders,
Belgium (FWO grant G.0634.09).

References
De Neys, W., & Everaerts, D. (2008). Developmental trends
in everyday conditional reasoning: The retrieval and
inhibition interplay. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 100, 252-263
De Neys, W., & Franssens, S. (2009). Belief inhibition
during thinking: Not always winning but at least taking
part. Cognition, 113, 45-61
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual process theories of reasoning. Cognition, 106, 12481299.
De Neys, W., & Goel, V. (2011). Heuristics and biases in
the brain: Dual neural pathways for decision making. In
O. Vartanian & D. R. Mandel (Eds.), Neuroscience of
Decision Making. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
De Neys, W., Vartanian, O., & Goel, V. (2008). Smarter
than we think: When our brains detect that we are biased.
Psychological Science, 19, 483-489.
Dhar, R., & Simonson, I. (2003). The effect of forced choice
on choice. Journal of Marketing Research, 40, 146-160.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the
psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologist,
49(8), 709-724.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of
reasoning, judgment and social cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 255–278.
Evans, J. S. B. T., Barston, J. L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On
the conflict between logic and belief in syllogistic
reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 11, 295-306.
Fredholm, B.B., Bättig, K., Holmen, J., Nehlig, A., and
Zvartau, E.E. (1999). Actions of caffeine in the brain with
special reference to factors that contribute to its
widespread use. Pharmacological Reviews, 51, 83-133.
Gailliot, M. T., & Baumeister, R. F. (2007). The physiology
of willpower: Linking blood-glucose to self-control.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 303–327.
Gillard, E., Van Dooren, W., Schaeken, W., & Verschaffel,
L. (2009). Proportional Reasoning as a Heuristic-Based

Process Time Constraint and Dual Task Considerations.
Experimental Psychology, 56, 92-99.
Goel, V., Buchel, C., Frith, C., & Dolan, R. J. (2000).
Dissociation of mechanisms underlying syllogistic
reasoning. NeuroImage, 12, 504-514.
Goel, V., & Dolan, R. J. (2003). Reciprocal neural response
within lateral and ventral medial prefrontal cortex during
hot and cold reasoning. NeuroImage, 20, 2314-2321.
Griggs, R. A., & Cox, J. R. (1982). The elusive thematicmaterials effect in Wason selection task. British Journal
of Psychology, 73, 407-420.
Handley, S. J., Capon, A., Beveridge, M., Dennis, I., &
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2004). Working memory, inhibitory
control and the development of children’s reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 10, 175–195.
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding
asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of
Consumer Research, 9, 90–98.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Tagart, J. (1969). How implication
is understood. American Journal of Psychology, 82, 367373.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). Psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237-251.
Masicampo, E. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (2008). Toward a
physiology of dual-process reasoning and judgment Lemonade, willpower, and expensive rule-based analysis.
Psychological Science, 19, 255-260.
Nehlig, A., Lucignani, G., Kadekaro, M., Porrino, L. J., &
Sokoloff, L. (1984). Effects of acute administration of
caffeine on local cerebral glucose-utilization in the rat.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 101, 91-100.
Pocheptsova, A., Amir, O., Dhar, R., & Baumeister, R. F.
(2009). Deciding without resources: Resource depletion
and choice in context. Journal of Marketing Research, 46,
344-355.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is Rational? Studies of
Individual Differences in Reasoning. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Tieges, Z., Ridderinkhof, K. R., Snel, J., & Kok, A. (2004).
Caffeine strengthens action monitoring: evidence from the
error-related negativity. Cognitive Brain Research, 21,
87-93.
Tieges, Z., Snel, J., Kok, A., & Ridderinkhof, K. R. (2009).
Caffeine does not modulate inhibitory control. Brain and
Cognition, 69, 316-327.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: the conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.

1173

