UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Early Understanding of Intensive Properties of Matter: Developmental and Cultural
Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vp0r6xh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hill, Julia
Schlottmann, Anne
Ellefson, Michelle
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Early Understanding of Intensive Properties of Matter: Developmental and
Cultural Differences
1

Julia L. Hill (julia.hill@ucl.ac.uk)
Anne Schlottmann (a.schlottmann@ucl.ac.uk)
2
Michelle R. Ellefson (mre33@cam.ac.uk)
2
Keith S. Taber (kst24@cam.ac.uk)
1
Venus W. S. Tse (wingsum1216@gmail.com)
1
Tiffany S.W. Yung (see.yung.11@ucl.ac.uk)

1

1

Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London
2
Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge

Abstract
Many properties of substances/materials are intensive, and
children are widely believed to have difficulties with
reasoning about intensive quantities. Here we used a novel
judgment method, together with a cross-cultural paradigm
to study 4- to 9-year-olds’ understanding of the intensity/
concentration (sweetness) of sugar-water solutions. UK
children knew from the youngest age that intensity
increases with amount of solid, and a significant, but small
effect for decreasing amount of liquid appeared by age 7, a
couple of years prior to the age typically reported. Hong
Kong children were more advanced, with strong liquid
effects and the normative concentration pattern from the
youngest age. Problems with intensive quantity reasoning
may not reflect a universal cognitive limitation, but seem to
depend on cultural experience. This has implications for
children’s chemistry reasoning and education.
Keywords: intensive properties, chemistry, reasoning,
cognitive development.

Introduction
We have learnt much about young children’s
understanding of objects, but far less is known about how
they understand the substances/materials of which these
objects are composed. Matter has extensive and intensive
properties, those that depend on amount (e.g. weight,
height, volume) and those that hold independent of
amount, for every bit of homogenous matter (e.g., density,
strength, temperature, colour, taste). Many properties we
consider basic characteristics of substances/materials are
of the latter, intensive kind. Here we consider children’s
understanding of the taste intensity of mixed substances
(sweetness of solutions of sugar in water). Prior work
concludes that children have little understanding of
intensive properties, including sweetness, until the late
primary years. This study re-opens the case, applying an
Information Integration approach, previously successful in
eliciting understanding in other domains deemed difficult
for children, and using a cross-cultural paradigm, studying
children in the UK and Hong Kong.
Prior work on intensive properties: Which cup is
sweeter? Much work documents that children have great
difficulty with intensive quantities. Some attribute this to
conceptual problems, such as insufficient differentiation
of extensive and intensive concepts (Jäger & Wilkening,
2001; Piaget & Inhelder, 1974; Smith, Carey, & Wiser,
1985) or logical incongruence of intensive concepts
(Kloos, 2007). Another set of accounts focuses on

measurement of intensive quantities as ratio of two
extensive quantities, e.g., sweetness depends on the ratio
of sugar to water, or density depends on the ratio of mass
to volume. In this view, children’s problems reflect
difficulties with proportional thinking (Nunes, Desli, &
Bell, 2003; Stavy, Strauss, Orpaz, & Carmi, 1982). Most
studies used choice tasks, e.g., children chose which of
two cups of water was sweeter, one half full or one full,
both with the same quantity of sugar added. Children up
to 9 or 10 years either said that both were equally sweet,
containing the same amount of sugar, or that the full glass
was sweeter, mistaking the indirect, diluting effect of the
water for a direct effect (Stavy et al., 1982). Nunes et al.
(2003) had similar findings for a range of intensive
properties, but also reported that problems with intensive
quantities go beyond those with indirect variables:
Children were worse on intensive than extensive problems
even when both involved indirect variables. The reasons
remain unclear, but it is clear that in choice paradigms
children have problems until fairly late.
Information Integration Approach: How sweet is this
cup? In other domains, choices turn out to be insensitive
measures of children’s competence. When a densely
spaced row of pennies is pushed further apart, children
say that the longer row has more – centration and lack of
number conservation (Piaget, 1965). But when making
graded judgments of numerosity on graphic, not
numerical scales, as used within Information Integration
Theory (Anderson, 1981, 1996), children as young as 3
take both length and density of the row into account
(Cuneo, 1982). When asked to choose which of two plates
with red winner and clear loser marbles is better for
winning in a blind draw, many 8-year-olds still choose
based on the number of winners only (Siegler, Strauss, &
Levin, 1981). But when making judgments of how easy it
is to win in a blind draw, even 4-year-olds consider both
winners and losers (Anderson & Schlottmann, 1991). This
may come about because choice tasks tend to elicit
analytic, system II forms of reasoning, with dimensionby-dimension comparison (Siegler et al., 1981), while
graded judgment tasks tap into more synthetic, intuitive
system I forms of thinking (Schlottmann & Wilkening,
2011). This intuitive understanding can be dramatically
more advanced than children’s analytic understanding.
Here, we use an Information Integration approach to
study children’s concepts of taste intensity, sweetness, as
a function of both amounts of solid/sugar and liquid/water

2357

used to create a solution, in order to see whether this
approach can assess intuitions of intensive quantities that
prior, more analytic methods may have missed.
Cultural Differences in Mathematics/Science: We
studied children’s understanding of solution intensity in
the UK and Hong Kong. It is well documented that East
Asian students typically outperform Western students in
maths and science (Geary, Bow-Thomas, Liu, & Siegler,
1996; IEA, 2013; Leung, 2002; Stevenson et al., 1990).
There is also a growing body of research on young
children: Chinese pre- and primary schoolers count or add
numbers or solve novel mathematical problems at a level
1 to 2 years above comparable American children (Geary
et al., 1996; Siegler & Mu, 2008). The most recent Trends
in International Mathematics and Science Study (IEA,
2013) finds advantages from 4th grade, e.g., Hong Kong
students outperformed their English peers in
maths/science. This Asian advantage persists up to
university level (Bao et al., 2009; Huang & Waxman,
1995; IEA, 2013). It is attributed to many factors,
including instruction differences, greater investment of
Asian parents in their children’s education and parental
expectation of academic success (Kao, 1995; Schneider &
Lee, 1990), the dominance of pre-entrance exams in Asian
schools (Bao et al., 2009), different attitudes towards
extra-curricular activities, and more time spent on
homework (Leung, 2002; Schneider & Lee, 1990). We
study Hong Kong and UK children here to see whether
intensity understanding is also culturally variable. If Hong
Kong children are more advanced than UK children,
difficulties with intensity understanding, typically
attributed to inherent cognitive factors, also depend on
cultural experience.

Method
Participants
A total of 203 children participated. In Hong Kong, 116
children were recruited from church groups, including 36
4- and 5-year-olds (M = 5 years 1 month, Range = 4 years
to 5 years 11 months, 30 girls), 44 6- and 7-year-olds (M
= 7 years, Range = 6 years to 6 years 11 months, 30 girls),
and 36 8- and 9-year-olds (M = 8 years 10 months, Range
= 8 years to 9 years 11 months, 22 girls). In the UK, 87
children were recruited at London state schools including
28 4- and 5-year-olds (M = 5 years, Range = 4 years 6
months to 5 years 5 months, 15 girls), 32 6- and 7-yearolds (M = 7 years 1 month, Range = 6 years 1 month to 7
years 7 months, 16 girls), and 27 8- and 9-year-olds (M =
8 years 10 months, Range = 8 years 5 months to 9 years 8
months, 15 girls).

Design
Each child judged sweetness of all mixtures created from
small, medium and large sugar volumes, factorially
combined with small, medium and large water volumes.
UK and 48 Hong Kong children judged two replications,
18 trials in total, to improve analysis at the individual
level. Initially there were two separate smaller Hong
Kong datasets using similar procedures and materials,
however, children in the first set judged only one
replication. The datasets showed no differences in
preliminary analyses, so were combined. Overall, the

study thus had a 2 (culture) x 3 (age) x 3 (solid volume) x
3 (liquid volume) mixed model design.

Materials
Children used a graphic sweetness scale with 17 wooden
dowels increasing in height from 2.5 to 18.5cm, with each
stick 1cm taller than the previous one. Similar scales have
been used successfully with young children before (e.g.,
Schlottmann & Wilkening, 2011) Children pointed to a
stick to indicate how sweet each mixture would be. Small
jars, containing only water or only sugar sat by the ends of
the scale, to remind children of scale direction
Experimental trials involved 3 water flasks holding
25ml to 1l of water, and 3 vials, holding .8g to 20g of
sugar, with different containers/amounts used for
instruction.

Figure 1: Measures of solid (sugar, left) and liquid (water,
right), and the stick scale

Procedure
Children were tested individually in English/Chinese at
their school/church by experimenters with English/
Chinese as first language. Initially, children were shown
how sugar dissolves in water, then asked, “what
happened?” and “what would happen if we added more
sugar/water to this?” to probe baseline understanding.
Children were then introduced to the scale, with long
sticks for sweeter and short sticks for less sweet mixtures,
and asked to place jars with only sugar/only water by the
scale to check understanding. During instruction, children
made four mixtures (fewer in some Hong Kong children),
combining small and large amounts of sugar and water.
Only one ingredient, water or sugar, changed from one
trial to the next, so that sweetness increased from the
previous trial when sugar was added, while it decreased
when water was added. Prior to the sugar dissolving
completely, these mixtures first turned cloudy, depending
on the sugar/water ratio, which provided another,
temporary, visual cue to intensity. On each trial, children
were asked, “Now, how sweet is this mixture? Which
stick do you think it belongs with?”, and corrections were
made if changes in children’s ratings from one trial to the
next were not in the expected direction. To prevent
memorizing of responses, different amounts were used
than in experimental trials.
Four practice trials followed in which children saw the
separate ingredients, but did not mix them, rating how
sweet the mixture would be, as in experimental trials.
Feedback was only given if children reversed the scale or

2358

only used the extreme sticks, but typically not needed.
The 18 experimental trials, in individually randomized
order, followed immediately, with no feedback at all.

Results
Group Analysis
Figure 2 shows the mean judgments of sweetness
(solution intensity) at 3 ages (rows) and in 2 cultures
(columns). Each panel shows the mean judgments as a
function of amount of solid (horizontal) and amount of
liquid (curve factor). Overall, children gave meaningful
judgments from the youngest age, but age and culture
differences are also evident in Figure 2.
Hong Kong!

Intensity Rating!

8 & 9 Years!

16!

16!

12!

12!

N=36!

8!

8!

6!

Quantity of Liquid! 6!
small !
medium!
large!

4!
2!
small !

medium!

small !

large!

medium!

large!

medium!

large!

14!

N=44!

12!

10!

10!

8!

8!

6!

6!

4!

4!

2!

N=32!

2!

0!
small !

medium!

large!

16!

0!
small !
16!

14!

Intensity Rating!

medium!

16!

14!

Intensity Rating!

6 & 7 Years!

2!

large !

16!

4 & 5 Years!

4!
0!

0!

12!

N=28!

10!

10!

12!

United Kingdom!

14!

14!

14!

N=36!

12!

10!

10!

8!

8!

6!

6!

4!

4!

2!

2!

0!

N=27!

0!
small !

medium!

Quantity of Solid!

large!

small !

Quantity of Solid!

Figure 2: Mean judgments of sweetness/intensity as a
function of liquid and solid
The oldest Hong Kong children (top left) show a pattern
as normatively expected. Intensity ratings increase with
amount of solid (curve slope), and decrease with amount
of liquid (curve separation). Curves diverge towards the
right, as predicted by the normative proportion model,
concentrationsolid = volumesolid/(volumesolid + volumeliquid).
These judgments reflect appropriately how water dilutes
concentration of the mixture.
The other panels all have positive slope as well,
indicating that children of both cultures and all ages
understood that sweetness increases with amount of solid,
F(1.68, 329.95) = 784.58 in the overall ANOVA. (Unless
specifically noted, all F values are reported at p<.05, here
and in subsequent analyses, with Greenhouse-Geisser
corrections if needed). The solid effect differed by age,
F(3.35, 329.95) = 4.30, and culture, F(1.68, 329.95) =
11.27, being slightly smaller for the youngest age and for
Hong Kong children. The liquid effect, F(1.49, 293.42) =
48.03, differed between cultures and ages as well, F(1.49,
293.42) = 11.27 and F(2.97, 293.42) = 2.94, respectively:
Hong Kong children show more curve separation than UK
children (left versus right panels), and older show more

curve separation than younger children (top to bottom).
The divergent curve pattern led to an overall liquid x solid
interaction, F(3.66, 720) = 10.04, with bilinear trend, F(1,
197) = 12.52, a more stringent test of the fanning. This
divergence was more pronounced for older and Hong
Kong children, leading to a liquid x solid x culture x age
interaction, F(7.32, 720) = 2.50. Finally, the main effect
of culture, F(1, 197) = 23.98, of little interest, showed
slightly higher ratings overall for Hong Kong children.
The Hong Kong sample had far fewer boys than girls,
so the culture differences above could be sex differences
in disguise. However, if sex is included in the analysis, all
effects remain, and the only additional effect is the sex x
culture x solid interaction, F(1.71, 326.02) = 7.02, due to
a slightly smaller solid effect in Hong Kong boys than UK
boys or girls of either culture. If the sample was genderbalanced, therefore, cultural differences in solid effect
would likely increase, not decrease, while there were no
sex differences in liquid effect or interaction in the first
place. Sex differences therefore do not provide an
alternative account of the cultural differences found here.
When the two cultures were analysed separately, both
showed main effects of liquid, F(1.70, 142.70) > 8.11, of
solid, F(1.63, 184) > 308.89, and the interaction, F(4,
336) > 5.74, with bilinear components, F(1,84) > 4.61.
Only the solid effect differed by age for the Hong Kong
children, F(3.26, 184) = 2.64. For UK children, the solid
effect and the solid x liquid interaction differed by age,
F(3.18, 133.39) = 2.92 and F(8,336 = 2.57), the liquid x
age interaction missed significance F(3.40, 142.70) =
2.13, p = .091.
Despite these age differences, the solid effect appeared
at each age in each culture, F(1.47, 51.37) > 51.55,
confirming the visual impression. The liquid effect was
significant in all three Hong Kong groups, F(1.32, 59.90)
> 9.35, but only in the oldest UK children, F(1.59, 41.24)
= 14.25. The liquid x solid interaction was significant for
the youngest and oldest Hong Kong children F(2.67,
93.60) > 3.25, with bilinear trend, F(1, 35) > 4.27 and the
two older UK groups, F(4, 124) > 3.72, with bilinear trend
close to significance F(1, 26) = 3.60, p =.069 and F(1, 31)
= 3.90, p = .057, as expected under the proportion model.
Overall, the results fit with the often-reported advantage
in maths/science for East Asian children (Siegler & Mu,
2008; Stevenson et al., 1990). Hong Kong children of all
ages understood that sweetness increases with amount of
solid, but decreases with amount of liquid, with support
for the normative concentration model from 4 and 5 years
of age. UK children’s judgments were less affected by
liquid amount at all ages and support for the concentration
model appeared only from 6 or 7 years.

Individual Subject Analysis
In developmental work, it is important to check whether
group data are representative of individuals, so we also
considered the data at the single subject level. We
worried, in particular, that small liquid effects at younger
ages or in UK children may reflect averaging of children
with dilution effect, and children with incorrect, direct
liquid effect, as noted in previous literature. Seventeen
children here (of 201 for which we had data on this, all
but one at the younger ages), made direct errors when

2359

initially asked about the effect of adding water. To assess
if such errors also occurred on experimental trials, we
classified individuals into 3 groups, with direct, inverse or
no main effect of solid/liquid. As single subject ANOVAs
have little power with children, who will not sit through
many replications, we used a combined means-based and
statistical criterion, attributing an effect at individual level
by either significance or size of effect. In previous
applications this approach amplified statistical trends
without changing the patterns (Schlottmann, 2001) and
the same appeared here.
Children were thus taken to show a direct (or inverse)
effect, if mean judgments for the largest volume were
higher (lower) than for the smallest volume, with this
difference either 2 points or larger, or significant in a
single subject ANOVA with 9 df for error. No effect was
diagnosed if this difference was less than 2 points and not
significant. The percentage of UK and Hong Kong
children falling into each of the 3 groups are in Table 1.
Table 1: Proportion (%) of Hong Kong (top) and UK
children (bottom) with solid and liquid main effects
(correct pattern in bold)
Group
Effect Inverse Direct None
N
HK 4&5
6
72
22
36
HK 6&7
Solid
2
91
7
44
HK 8&9
0
89
11
36
HK 4&5
50
0
50
36
HK 6&7 Liquid
48
16
36
44
HK 8&9
72
3
25
36
UK 4&5
0
86
14
28
UK 6&7
Solid
0
100
0
32
UK 8&9
0
100
0
27
UK 4&5
21
11
68
28
UK 6&7 Liquid
31
3
66
32
UK 8&9
48
4
48
27
In the top and third block, most children, at all ages, in
both cultures show direct effects of solid, confirming the
impression of uniformly good understanding in the group
data. In both cultures, a small developmental increase,
less than 20% across all three ages, is also evident.
In the bottom and second block, fewer children of all
ages and in both cultures show appropriate inverse liquid
effects, also confirming the group impression.
Nevertheless, in Hong Kong, about half at even the
youngest age display this inverse effect, while this
appears for only about 20% in the UK. The developmental
increase for liquid is well over 20% across the three ages.
The individual data confirm age and culture differences
apparent in the group data. Moreover, they show that
inappropriate direct water effects (Stavy et al., 1982) are
rare in our sample. Thus the impression of a weaker effect
for amount of liquid is not due to averaging of children
with direct and inverse patterns. Rather, many children
showed no effect for amount of liquid at all, judging
sweetness of a solution largely based on the amount of
solid in it, ignoring the amount of liquid.

Qualitative Data
After children made their first mixture, before intensity
was ever mentioned, we asked, “What would happen if
we added more sugar/water to this?” to determine what
aspect of the event would be children’s natural focus.
(These questions were asked only in one Hong Kong
sample and in the UK). Responses in Figure 3 fell into
four categories: Children talked about (1) intensity (i.e.,
sweetness or more/less sugary; directionless, correct and
incorrect direction effects fell in this category), (2) other
physical features (i.e., colour, fizzy, floating/sinking,
volume), (3) they re-described once more that the sugar
would dissolve/melt or merely stated that the flask would
look the same as before, or (4) they gave unclear/don’t
know responses.

Figure 3: Proportion of verbal responses to questions on
what would happen if we added more solid (top panel) or
more liquid (bottom panel) to the mixture
The red bars in Figure 3 show that Hong Kong children
more often focus naturally on intensity/sweetness than
UK children, χ2(1)=9.34. This focus increases with age in
both cultures. The latter is clear in the top panels for
responses when asked about effects of adding more sugar,
χ2(2)>6.94, but non-significant age trends appear as well
(bottom panel) for adding liquid. Children generally
talked less about sweetness in the latter case, suggesting
more natural focus on intensity for solid than liquid.
Alternatively, this may reflect simply that the question
about adding water came second, and children did not
want to repeat previous answers about sweetness.
However, that children did not mind repeating event
descriptions (green bars) speaks against the latter option.
When taste intensity answers are compared to other
types of answer, it seems that Hong Kong children from
the earliest age talked more often about taste than about
any other physical feature of the solution (colour, fizz,
floating or volume, summed together in the blue bars) and
rarely merely re-described the dissolving event they had
already heard about (green). For UK children, in contrast,
taste was no more salient than other physical feature

2360

(blue) and they often just repeated the previous
description (green). These qualitative data fit well with
our quantitative results, highlighting similar age and
cultural differences in children’s natural focus on taste
intensity of these mixtures as we found in their judgments.

Discussion
The present study used a novel judgment method and
cross-cultural
comparison
to
study
children’s
understanding of an intensive property of solid/liquid
mixtures. The results both confirm and disconfirm that
children have deep-seated difficulty with intensity
judgment. For UK children, results largely confirm this
impression. For Hong Kong children, however, our
method produced substantially better performance, from
the youngest age. This contrast in the data suggests that
what previous views have typically taken to reflect
children’s cognitive limitations substantially depends on
children’s cultural experience.
Had we tested only UK children, our results would have
cross-validated previous findings with a novel judgment
method, one more sensitive than standard choice
paradigms to early intuitive knowledge of comparable
complexity in other domains. Probability, for instance,
like intensity, involves a direct and an inverse variable.
When young children chose which of two options is more
probable/intense, they often ignore the inverse variable in
both cases. When children judge how probable each
option is, in contrast, they show strong effects of the
inverse variable by age 4. Children’s intensity judgment
here improved as well – weak effects of the inverse
variable appeared from age 7, plus we found few direct
errors – but not as dramatically as in other areas. This
would seem to confirm that children have problems with
intensive concepts that go beyond difficulties with inverse
variables (Nunes et al., 2003) and that appear even in
intuitive judgments.
One might object that the difficulty lies with the
specific materials used, because everyday experience
provides no continuously visible cue to taste intensity.
This may delay children’s learning about such concepts.
The same point could be made about many other intensive
concepts that trouble children. Taste, heat and density can
all be felt, of course, but this typically involves short
experiences one has to focus on, while visual information
can be taken in more continuously and incidentally. This
plausible view does not explain the present data, because
in other work, children perform similarly for sugar-water
and colour-water solutions (Schlottmann, Moss, Hill,
Ellefson, & Taber, 2013). More strikingly, Jäger and
Wilkening (2001) who first proposed this, found, contrary
to expectation, that children believe a mixture of dark and
light liquids is darker than the darker of the constituents.
Availability of visual intensity cues thus does not seem to
help children reason about intensive concepts. Jäger and
Wilkening also concluded that children had genuine
difficulties with intensive concepts.
Our findings with Hong Kong children, however, rule
out this view. From ages 4 or 5, these children gave
sophisticated intensity judgments, with strong liquid
effects and a data pattern as predicted by the normative

proportion model. Children’s good understanding
appeared with our Information Integration judgement
method, and it remains to be seen whether the Hong Kong
advantage is strong enough to show up also with less
sensitive, traditional choice measures. Some doubt
remains, in any event, about whether Hong Kong
children’s judgment conforms to the proportion model
from the youngest age, because the 6-year-olds’ data did
not diverge. Nevertheless, that children this young are
able to cope with the inverse variable is clear: it showed
up at all ages at group and individual level. Future studies
should address whether the inverse relation precedes the
proportion model, whether both appear at the same age, or
whether development is, as on face value here, U-shaped,
with younger and older children doing better than children
around school entry. Stavy (1982) already reported Ushaped trends in intensity choices, suggesting this
reflected a transition from intuitive to analytic thought. In
Stavy’s view, echoing Piaget’s, however, intuition is a
global, undifferentiated, immature form of thought, while
children here displayed highly structured, adaptive
intuitions from the youngest age. Our Hong Kong data
show that by 4 or 5 years, children can have a functional
intensity concept.
Further research should investigate what elements of
Hong Kong, but not UK pre-schoolers’ experience
support this advantage. Work on cross-cultural differences
in mathematics cites better socio-cultural and academic
support and attitudes, differences in curriculum and
teaching style from the early years, as well as differences
in number language, all supporting Asian children’s
better, earlier achievements (e.g., Aunio, Aubrey,
Godfrey, Pan, & Liu, 2008). There may be similar
positive attitudes towards, and more/better practices of,
science from a young age, e.g., more focused, teachercentric teaching may lead to more focused science
observation which might help with noting variables.
Language might also support or amplify such effects.
English is a count/mass language, while Chinese is a
classifier language. The latter may help to make
substances salient, with effects noted from the ages
considered here (Li, Dunham & Carey, 2009). In addition,
Chinese allows dropping much pragmatically inferable
information from a sentence, which might also support
focus on situational essentials. Indeed, Hong Kong
children’s verbal answers here were not just more focused
on intensity than same-aged UK children’s, but also had
only half the number of words. Howe, Nunes, and Bryant
(2010) discuss, for English, how intensive quantity
reasoning depends greatly on how language makes some
variables salient, e.g., talk of sweetness highlights the
direct variable, when talk of wateriness might highlight
the indirect variable. More subtle effects, e.g., depending
on which variable is unitized, are also described. Crosslinguistic differences in how language affects variable
salience seem likely and require further investigation.
Finally, we need to point to the relevance of intensive
quantity reasoning to children’s learning about
substances/materials, i.e., early chemistry. There is little
work on young children’s chemistry and much of what
there is concludes that children have little understanding;
an impression largely derived from interview studies (e.g.,

2361

Liu & Lesniak, 2006). These are not sensitive to young
children’s abilities, but clearly problems remain even in
less verbal experimental paradigms as considered here.
How substances mix is thought to be one of the earliest
aspects of chemistry accessible to children, and even in
this area errors abound. The present study and a few
others (Quinn, Ellefson, Schlottmann, & Taber, 2013)
suggest that even pre-schoolers are capable of using
appropriate reasoning in this area. While the conditions
under which children do so are not well understood at
present, this study provides an important new perspective
both on children’s understanding of intensive quantities
and on their understanding of substances/materials.

Acknowledgm ents
This work was supported by Leverhulme Trust RPG-115.
Thanks to Josephine Leung for help with data collection
and to participating students, their teachers and parents.

References
Anderson, N. (1981). Foundations of Information
Integration Theory: Academic Press New York.
Anderson, N. (1996). A Functional Theory of Cognition:
Routledge.
Anderson, N., & Schlottmann, A. (1991). Developmental
Study of Personal Probability. . In N. H. Anderson
(Ed.), Contributions to Information Integration Theory:
Developmental Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Aunio, P., Aubrey, C., Godfrey, R., Pan, Y., & Liu, Y.
(2008). Children’s early numeracy in England, Finland
and People’s Republic of China. International Journal
of Early Years Education, 16, 203-221.
Bao, L., Cai, T., Koenig, K., Fang, K., Han, J., Wang, J.,
.Luo, Y. (2009). Learning and scientific reasoning.
Science, 323, 586-587.
Cuneo, D. O. (1982). Children's judgments of numerical
quantity: A new view of early quantification. Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 13-44.
Geary, D. C., Bow-Thomas, C. C., Liu, F., & Siegler, R.
S. (1996). Development of arithmetical competencies in
Chinese and American Children: Influence of age,
language, and schooling. Child Development, 67, 20222044.
Howe, C., Nunes, T., & Bryant, P. (2010). Intensive
quantities: Why they matter to developmental research.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 28, 307329.
Huang, S.-y. L., & Waxman, H. C. (1995). Motivation
and learning-environment differences between AsianAmerican and White middle school students in
mathematics. Journal of Research & Development in
Education.
IEA. (2013). TIMSS Report: Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study at the 4th and 8th
Grades. Boston, USA: ERIC.
Jäger, S., & Wilkening, F. (2001). Development of
cognitive averaging: When light and light make dark.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 79, 323345.
Kao, G. (1995). Asian Americans as model minorities? A
look at their academic performance. American Journal
of Education, 103, 121-159.

Kloos, H. (2007). Interlinking physical beliefs: Children’s
bias towards logical congruence. Cognition, 103, 227252.
Leung, F. K. S. (2002). Behind the high achievement of
East Asian students. Educational Research and
Evaluation, 8, 87-108.
Li, P., Dunham, Y. & Carey, S. (2009). Of substance: The
nature of language effects on entity construal.
Cognitive Psychology, 58, 487-524.
Liu, X., & Lesniak, K. (2006). Progression in children's
understanding of the matter concept from elementary to
high school. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
43, 320-347.
Nunes, T., Desli, D., & Bell, D. (2003). The development
of children's understanding of intensive quantities.
International Journal of Educational Research, 39,
651-675.
Piaget, J. (1965). The Child's Conception of Number.
Oxford, England: W. W. Norton & Co.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1974). The Child's Construction
of Quantities. London: Routledge & Keagan Paul.
Quinn, C., Ellefson, M. R., Schlottmann, A., & Taber, K.
S. (2013). Using Property Induction to Evaluate
Understanding of Mixing. Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Mahwah, NJ.
Schlottmann, A. (2001). Children's probability intuitions:
understanding the expected value of complex gambles.
Child Development, 72, 103-122.
Schlottmann, A., Moss, C., Hill, J., Ellefson, M., & Taber,
K. (2013). Children's intuitive chemistry: 3rd and 4th
graders understanding of the strength of mixtures of
water with sugar or paint Poster presented at SRCD
Biennial Meeting. Seattle, US.
Schlottmann, A., & Wilkening, F. (2011). Judgment and
Decision-making in Young Children. In M. Dhami, A.
Schlottmann & M.Waldmann (Eds.), Judgement and
Decision-making as a skill: Learning, Development,
Evolution: Cambridge University Press.
Schneider, B., & Lee, Y. (1990). A model for academic
success: The school and home environment of East
Asian students. Anthropology & Education Quarterly,
21, 358-377.
Siegler, R. S., & Mu, Y. (2008). Chinese children excel
on novel mathematics problems even before Elementary
School. Psychological Science, 19, 759-763.
Siegler, R. S., Strauss, S., & Levin, I. (1981).
Developmental sequences within and between concepts.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development.
Smith, C., Carey, S., & Wiser, M. (1985). On
differentiation: A case study of the development of the
concepts of size, weight, and density. Cognition, 21,
177-237.
Stavy, R., Strauss, S., Orpaz, N., & Carmi, G. (1982). UShaped Behavioural Growth: Implications for Theories
of Development. In W. H. (Eds). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Stevenson, H. W., Lee, S.-y., Chen, C., Lummis, M.,
Stigler, J., Fan, L., & Ge, F. (1990). Mathematics
achievement of children in china and the United States.
Child Development, 61, 1053-1066.

2362

