UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Comparison and Explanation on Analogical Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4p29654g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Edwards, Brian
Williams, Joseph
Gentner, Dedre
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Comparison and Explanation on Analogical Transfer
Brian J. Edwards1 (Brian.Edwards@U.Northwestern.Edu), Joseph Jay Williams2
(Josephjaywilliams@Stanford.Edu), Dedre Gentner1 (Gentner@Northwestern.Edu), Tania Lombrozo3
(Lombrozo@Berkeley.Edu)
1

2

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, 2029 Sheridan Road – 102 Swift Hall, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Office of the Vice Provost for Online Learning and Graduate School of Education, Stanford University, Littlefield 253, 365
Lausen Street, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
3
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract

For example, Williams and Lombrozo (2010) found that
participants who explained why a set of robots belonged to
their respective categories were more likely than control
participants to discover an abstract rule that could be used to
accurately categorize all robots.
The view that engaging in explanation can lead people to
search for principles that apply to multiple cases – an
implication of Williams and Lombrozo’s (2010)
“subsumptive constraints” account – suggests synergy
between comparison and explanation. Specifically, in order
to determine whether a principle that applies to one case
also applies to another case, comparing the two cases may
be useful, or even necessary. Edwards, Williams, and
Lombrozo (2013) investigated this possibility in a category
learning task similar to that of Williams and Lombrozo
(2010); participants who received explanation prompts
reported doing significantly more comparison processing
than participants who received control prompts.
The findings that generating explanations can stimulate
spontaneous comparison and that comparison may be a key
mechanism by which generating explanations supports
learning provide evidence for a relationship between
comparison and explanation and raise the question of how
these processes might work together to support learning. In
one study, Gadgil, Nokes-Malach, and Chi (2012) found
that comparing learner-generated and expert explanations
helped participants detect errors in systems of relations
between beliefs in addition to helping them notice errors in
individual beliefs. More broadly, the Edwards et al. (2013)
and Gadgil et al. (2012) studies suggest that combining
comparison and explanation may yield even greater learning
benefits than engaging in just one of these processes.
In the present work, we investigate the relationship
between comparison and explanation in analogical problem
solving. We chose this domain for two reasons. First,
analogical transfer is a hallmark of learning because it
represents the ability to generalize knowledge from one’s
past experience to situations with novel surface features but
a shared underlying structure. Second, both comparison and
explanation have been shown to play important roles in
supporting analogical problem solving (Gick & Holyoak,
1983; Needham & Begg, 1991).
In a seminal study, Gick and Holyoak (1983) found that
students who compared two analogous stories were more
likely to spontaneously transfer the solution principle to a

Although comparison and explanation have typically been
studied independently, recent work suggests connections
between these processes. Three experiments investigated
effects of comparison and explanation on analogical problem
solving. In Experiment 1, explaining the solutions to two
analogous stories increased spontaneous transfer to an
analogical problem. In Experiment 2, explaining a single
story promoted analogical transfer, but only after receiving a
hint that may have facilitated comparison. In Experiment 3,
irrelevant stories were interspersed among the two story
analogs to block unprompted comparison; prompts to
compare were effective, but prompts to explain were not.
This pattern suggests that effects of explanation on analogical
transfer may be greatest when combined with comparison.
Keywords: Comparison; explanation; analogical transfer;
problem solving; learning.

Introduction
Making comparisons and generating explanations can have
robust effects on learning. The value of these processes in
learning contexts, along with their centrality and ubiquity in
everyday cognition, have inspired rich but largely separate
literatures studying comparison and explanation (for
reviews, see Gentner, 2010, on analogy and comparison;
Lombrozo, 2012, on explanation).
Comparison is the process of identifying similarities and
differences between two cases. According to structuremapping theory, comparison operates by a process of
structural alignment based on finding common relational
structure (Gentner, 1983; Gentner & Forbus, 2011; Gentner
& Markman, 1997). As such, comparison is helpful for
acquiring abstract relational schemas and for discovering
deep relational commonalities between cases (e.g., Gick &
Holyoak, 1983; Loewenstein, Thompson, & Gentner, 2003).
Generating explanations (hereafter, “explanation”)
consists of a number of related phenomena, including
answering “why” and “how” questions. Explanation can
support learning through a variety of mechanisms, including
promoting deeper processing and helping learners detect
gaps and inconsistencies in their knowledge (for a review,
see Fonseca & Chi, 2011). Explanation can also affect
learning by encouraging learners to seek broad patterns and
unifying principles that apply to multiple cases (Williams &
Lombrozo, 2010; Williams, Lombrozo, & Rehder, 2013).

445

novel scenario than those who studied one analogous story
(plus an irrelevant control story). Catrambone and Holyoak
(1989) extended these findings by showing that participants
who were prompted to compare two analogs achieved
greater transfer than those who read the same two analogs,
but were not prompted to compare (see also Loewenstein et
al., 2003).
There is also evidence that generating explanations can
boost analogical transfer. Needham and Begg (1991) found
that participants who were asked to explain the solution to a
puzzle-like problem were more likely to transfer the
solution to an analogous problem than control participants
who studied the solution to prepare for a memory test.
In the present study, we investigated the roles of
comparison and explanation in analogical problem solving.
In Experiment 1, participants read two analogs and
performed a comparison task, an explanation task, both
tasks, or a control task. All participants then attempted a
transfer problem. Experiment 2 asked whether effects of
explanation on analogical transfer would extend to a
situation in which participants received just one analog (and
thus could not engage in comparison), and also attempted to
replicate previous work finding that comparison increases
analogical transfer. Experiment 3 evaluated the effects of
comparison and explanation on analogical transfer in a
revised protocol in which participants studied two analogs
and two irrelevant stories, which was designed to reduce
unprompted comparison between the story analogs in the
explanation and control conditions.

story or stories at which a prompt was directed were always
redisplayed on-screen above the prompt. The total study
time (five minutes) was matched across conditions.
Comparison Prompt: “What are the similarities and
differences between the problems faced in these stories and
how they were resolved?” (300 seconds, both stories).
Explanation Prompt: “Explain the problem faced in this
story and how it was resolved.” (150 seconds per story).
Both Prompts: Participants responded to both the
comparison (150 seconds, both stories) and explanation
prompts (75 seconds per story); the order of these prompts
was randomized across participants.
Control Prompt: “Write out your thoughts as you study
the problem faced in this story and how it was resolved.”
(150 seconds per story).
Next, participants received the transfer problem and were
given a maximum of five minutes to solve this problem.
After submitting their solution, participants were asked
whether they had thought of using the solutions to the
fortress and oil well fire stories to solve the tumor problem.
Participants were then given a hint that these solutions
might be useful for solving the tumor problem, and had the
option to try to solve the tumor problem again.
As a manipulation check, we then asked participants to
report how much comparison and explanation they engaged
in when studying the story analogs. In all experiments, these
data confirmed that comparison and explanation prompts
significantly increased self-reported comparison and
explanation processing, respectively. Due to space,
however, these data are not discussed further.
Finally, participants answered end-of-study demographic
questions, reported whether they had previously done a
study with similar materials, and received a “catch trial” that
tested whether they were reading the instructions.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants Four-hundred-thirty-one adults participated
online via Amazon Mechanical Turk. An additional 165
adults were tested, but were excluded because they failed a
“catch trial,” performed poorly on comprehension questions,
or had previously participated in a similar experiment. In all
experiments, the proportion of excluded participants did not
vary across conditions.

Coding1 Each attempted solution to the tumor problem was
coded as 1 (correct), 0 (incorrect), or “unsure.” Across
experiments, one percent of responses were coded as
“unsure” and were not analyzed. A response was coded as
“correct” if it mentioned (1) using multiple non-highintensity rays, and either (2) using the rays simultaneously
or (3) using the rays from different directions.

Materials The materials were taken from Gick and
Holyoak’s (1983) study. There were two analogous stories,
the fortress story and the oil well fire story, and a transfer
problem, the tumor problem (Duncker, 1945). Both story
analogs and the transfer problem could be solved using the
same principle: dividing a large force into several smaller
forces, and simultaneously using the smaller forces from
different directions to destroy a central target.

Results and Discussion
Only 19% of participants made the optional second attempt
to solve the tumor problem; thus, we only analyzed
spontaneous (before-hint) solutions. A log-linear analysis of
Explanation task (Yes/No) × Comparison task (Yes/No) ×
Solved the tumor problem (Yes/No) found that performing
the explanation task made participants significantly more
likely to solve the tumor problem, χ2(1) = 6.31, p = .012.2 In

Procedure The procedure consisted of a study phase
followed by the transfer problem. Each participant began
the study phase by reading the fortress story followed by the
oil well fire story. After reading each story, participants
answered true/false comprehension questions about that
story. Each participant was then randomly assigned to study
both stories in one of four study-prompt conditions. The

1

All responses were analyzed by at least one blind coder. A
subset of the data was also independently analyzed by a second
blind coder and disagreements were resolved by discussion.
Reliability was 95%.
2
Among participants who received both comparison and
explanation prompts, the order of these tasks did not have a

446

contrast to previous and predicted effects, however, the
comparison task did not have a significant effect on tumor
problem performance, χ2(1) = 0.65, p = .42 (see Fig. 1).

Procedure Each participant was randomly assigned to one
of five study conditions as follows.
Baseline Condition: Participants only received the transfer
problem.
One-Analog Explanation Condition: Participants read one
of the two analogs and responded to the prompt “Explain
the problem faced in this story and explain how it was
resolved.”
One-Analog Control Condition: Participants read one of
the two analogs, but did not receive the explanation prompt.
Two-Analog Comparison Condition: Participants read
both analogs and responded to the prompt “What are the key
parallels between the problems faced in these stories and
how they were resolved?”
Two-Analog Control Condition: Participants read both
analogs, but did not receive the comparison prompt.
Participants had a maximum of six minutes to respond to
each study prompt, but were allowed to advance earlier if
they wished. Additionally, we randomized which story oneanalog participants received and the order in which twoanalog participants received the two stories.
In all conditions, after reading and studying the stories,
but before receiving the transfer problem, participants
completed a 10-item anagram task. The anagram task served
as a buffer between the study phase and transfer problem to
create a temporal gap and make transfer more difficult.
Next, participants received the transfer problem and were
given a maximum of five minutes to solve the problem. In
all conditions except baseline, after participants attempted
the tumor problem they received the hint and made a second
attempt to solve the tumor problem. The structure of the hint
and second attempt were similar to Experiment 1, except
that the second attempt was mandatory. To ensure that
participants took some time to think about the hint, we also
required that they spend at least one minute on the second
attempt. After participants completed the second attempt,
they answered two basic comprehension questions about the
transfer problem; participants who answered either question
incorrectly were excluded from the analyses.
We then asked participants in the one-analog and twoanalog conditions to report how much explanation they
engaged in when studying the stories, and additionally
asked two-story participants to report how much
comparison they engaged in. Finally, participants answered
the same end-of-study questions as in Experiment 1.

Percentage of Correct Solutions

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Control

Comparison Explanation

Both

Figure 1: % of participants solving tumor problem in Exp. 1.
In all figures, error bars indicate +/- 1 SE.
One possible reason that we did not find significant
effects of prompting comparison is that the two story
analogs were presented back-to-back and participants read
both stories before responding to the study prompts. Thus,
participants who did not receive comparison prompts may
have noticed similarities between the stories, even though
they weren’t instructed to compare them.
Despite this limitation, the data from Experiment 1 are
informative in that they provide further evidence of a role
for explanation in spontaneous analogical transfer. In
particular, the observation that unprompted comparison may
have been easy raises an intriguing possibility. Explanation
participants may have done so well on the tumor problem
(in fact, as well as participants who received both
comparison and explanation prompts) in part because they
also engaged in comparison processing, regardless of
whether they were asked to do so. If this view is correct, the
benefits of explaining a single analog versus a control task
should be relatively weak because there is no opportunity
for comparison. Experiment 2 explored this hypothesis, and
additionally, sought to replicate the well-established result
that comparing two analogs promotes analogical transfer.

Experiment 2

Results and Discussion

Methods

We first analyzed whether the proportion of participants
solving the tumor problem before the hint differed across
conditions. This is the key index of spontaneous analogical
transfer. To analyze these data, we conducted a series of
log-linear analyses of Study Condition × Solved the Tumor
Problem (Yes/No) (see Fig. 2). Comparison participants
were significantly more likely than one-analog control
participants to solve the tumor problem, χ2(1) = 20.0, p <
.001, replicating Gick and Holyoak (1983). However, in
contrast to Catrambone and Holyoak (1989), we did not find

Participants One-thousand adults participated online via
Amazon Mechanical Turk. An additional 521 participants
were tested, but were excluded. The exclusion criteria were
the same as in Experiment 1.
Materials The materials were the same as in Experiment 1.

significant effect on tumor problem performance, χ2(1) = 1.78, p =
.18. Thus, we collapsed the data across task order.

447

an advantage of a comparison task over a two-analog
control condition, χ2(1) = 0.94, p = .33. There was also no
significant difference between the proportion of explanation
and one-analog control participants who solved the tumor
problem, χ2(1) = 0.28, p = .60. Not surprisingly, receiving
more analogs improved performance: two-analog control
participants were significantly more likely than one-analog
control participants to solve the tumor problem, χ2(1) =
12.8, p < .001, and one-analog control participants were
significantly more likely than baseline participants to solve
the tumor problem, χ2(1) = 8.62, p = .003.
Analysis of participants’ ratings of the amount of
comparison that they engaged in when studying the stories
suggests that unprompted comparison may have diluted the
(weak) effects of prompting comparison. Although
comparison participants reported more comparison than
two-analog control participants t(353) = 7.81, p < .001, even
control participants reported moderate amounts of
spontaneous comparison (M = 4.39 on a 1-7 scale, SD =
2.00). Furthermore, self-reported comparison among twoanalog control participants was marginally positively
correlated with before-hint tumor problem performance,
W(1) = 3.54, p = .060 (and significantly positively
correlated with total tumor problem performance, W(1) =
5.36, p = .021). These data suggest that unprompted
comparison may have helped control participants solve the
tumor problem. If so, then the results are consistent with
prior findings of the efficacy of comparison processing for
achieving analogical transfer.
Next, we examined the total proportion of participants
who solved the tumor problem, either spontaneously or after
the hint to use the prior stories. The only significant
difference across study conditions was that explanation
participants were more likely than one-analog control
participants to solve the tumor problem, χ2(1) = 4.23, p =
.040.

hint, is that the hint acted as a cue to compare the tumor
problem and the story analog that participants read
previously. The combination of having previously explained
and then subsequently comparing the analog and transfer
problems may have contributed to their superior
performance after receiving the hint. While control
participants likely performed a similar comparison after the
hint, deeper processing or more abstract encoding may have
led explanation participants to benefit more from the
comparison. These results are consistent with the intuition
that in Experiment 1, explanation participants performed
well because they performed both explanation and
comparison processing.
In Experiment 3, we modified the procedure by including
distractor stories to address the possibility that spontaneous
comparison in the two-analog control condition
overwhelmed the effects of prompts to compare.

Experiment 3
Participants in all conditions read two irrelevant stories
interspersed among the two story analogs. Additionally,
Experiment 3 more closely mirrored the Gick and Holyoak
(1983) procedure by presenting the initial four stories as if
they were a separate study from the phase containing the
tumor problem. We predicted that with these changes,
Experiment 3 would replicate previous work showing that
comparison supports analogical transfer relative to reading
two analogs without a prompt to compare. Adding the
irrelevant stories also allowed us to test the hypothesis that
making it harder for participants to detect similarities
between the story analogs would reduce the benefits of
explaining two analogs that we found in Experiment 1.

Methods
Participants Four-hundred-fourteen adults participated via
Amazon Mechanical Turk. An additional 184 adults were
tested, but were excluded from the analyses. The exclusion
criteria were the same as in the previous experiments.

Percentage of Correct Solutions

70
60
50
40

Materials The materials consisted of four study stories plus
the tumor problem. Two of the stories were the fortress and
oil well fire stories from Experiments 1 and 2, and the other
two stories were stories about negotiations, the shipment
story and the farm story, which shared a common principle
between them but were unrelated to the tumor problem
(adapted from Loewenstein, Thompson, & Gentner, 1999).

Before Hint
Total

30
20
10

Procedure Each participant was randomly assigned to the
comparison, explanation, or control condition.
Comparison Condition: Participants read and compared
the fortress and oil well fire stories, and then the shipment
and farm stories. The comparison prompt was the same as in
Experiment 2.
Explanation Condition: Participants read and explained
the first analog, the shipment story, the second analog, and
then the farm story. The explanation prompt was the same
as in Experiment 2.

0
Baseline

Control (One Explanation Control (Two Comparison
Analog)
Analogs)

Figure 2: % of participants solving tumor problem in Exp. 2.
One hypothesis for why explanation participants were
more likely to solve the tumor problem than one-analog
control participants in total, but not before receiving the

448

control participants to solve the tumor problem, W(1) =
4.03, p = .045. On the assumption that our control condition
improved memory for details, rather than being a more
neutral baseline, we conclude that Experiment 3 replicated,
with Amazon Mechanical Turk participants, the result that
comparing two analogs increases analogical transfer.

Percentage of Correct Solutions

Control Condition: Participants read and summarized the
first analog, the shipment story, the second analog, and then
the farm story. The summary prompt was “Summarize the
story you just read.”
In the explanation and control conditions, the order of the
two analogs (the fortress and oil well fire stories) was
randomized across participants. In these conditions, the two
analogs appeared non-consecutively to make unprompted
comparison more difficult. In the comparison condition, the
position of the two analogs (left vs. right) was randomized.
Participants were given a maximum of six minutes for each
explanation and summary prompt, and a maximum of 12
minutes for each comparison prompt.
After studying the stories, participants received
instructions for a second experiment to make them think
that the tumor problem was unrelated to the four stories.
The procedure for the tumor problem, including the second
attempt, was the same as in Experiment 2.
After the tumor problem, we evaluated participants’
memory for the four stories by asking five true/false
memory questions about each of the four stories. Next,
participants rated the amounts of comparison and
explanation that they engaged in when studying the fortress
and oil well fire stories and received the same demographic
and catch-trial questions as in Experiments 1 and 2.

70

Before Hint

60

Total

50
40
30
20
10
0
Comparison

Explanation

Control

Figure 3: % of participants solving tumor problem in Exp. 3.
As expected, comparison participants were significantly
more likely than control participants (50% vs. 34%) to think
of using the story analogs to solve the tumor problem, χ2(1)
= 7.40, p = .007. However, of participants in these
conditions who tried to use the solutions to the story analogs
to solve the tumor problem, the proportion who
spontaneously solved the tumor problem did not differ
across conditions, χ2(1) = 0.11, p = .74. This is consistent
with prior findings that (at least for these materials) the
benefit of comparison processing during study is to increase
spontaneous retrieval of the story analogs, rather than to
improve participants’ ability to map the solution between
the story analogs and the tumor problem. In cases in which
the solution principle is more difficult to extract,
comparison participants might show both greater retrieval
and greater ability to map the solution from base to target.

Results and Discussion
Log-linear analyses of Study Condition × Solved the Tumor
Problem (Yes/No) found that before the hint, comparison
participants were marginally more likely than control
participants to solve the tumor problem, χ2(1) = 3.02, p =
.082, but there were no other differences across conditions
(Comparison vs. Explanation: χ2(1) = 1.22, p = .27,
Explanation vs. Control: χ2(1) = 0.42, p = .52); see Fig. 3.
Interestingly, in contrast to Experiment 1, explaining two
analogs did not seem to boost analogical transfer, perhaps
because the presence of the irrelevant stories made it harder
to compare the two analogs. The total proportion of
participants who solved the tumor problem (combining
before- and after-hint solutions) did not differ across study
conditions, χ2(2) = 0.27, p = .87.
Closer inspection of the before-hint data found that
although comparison and control participants who received
the fire story first performed equally well on the tumor
problem, of participants who received the fortress story first,
comparison participants outperformed control participants,
χ2(1) = 5.88, p = .015. Participants’ memory for the two
analogs may help explain the effect of study order. Control
participants who received the fire story first had better
memory than those who received the fortress story first,
t(127) = 2.67, p = .009, and overall, control participants had
better memory than comparison participants, t(256) = 3.21,
p = .001. Indeed, among comparison and control
participants, a logistic regression of Solved the tumor
problem (Yes/No) on Study condition and Memory for the
relevant stories found that after controlling for memory,
comparison participants were significantly more likely than

General Discussion
We investigated the effects of comparison and explanation
tasks on analogical problem solving. We found that both
types of tasks can promote spontaneous (i.e., before-hint)
analogical transfer; however, the effectiveness of these tasks
varied considerably across experiments. With respect to
comparison, we replicated prior findings that comparing two
story analogs led to better performance on an analogous
transfer problem than studying a single analog (Experiment
2). However, comparing two analogs was not more effective
than reading the same two analogs (Experiments 1 and 2), in
contrast to some prior findings (Catrambone & Holyoak,
1989; Loewenstein et al., 2003). Self-reports indicated that
unprompted comparison among control participants may
have diminished the difference between these two
conditions. The results of Experiment 3 support this
hypothesis. When irrelevant stories were interspersed to
make it more difficult to detect similarities between the two

449

References

story analogs, comparison participants were significantly
more likely than control participants to spontaneously solve
the tumor problem (controlling for memory).
With respect to explanation, we found benefits for
analogical transfer, but only under limited circumstances. In
Experiment 1, explaining two analogous stories increased
spontaneous analogical transfer. In Experiment 2,
explaining one analog led to greater analogical transfer after
a hint, but did not improve spontaneous transfer. In
Experiment 3, explaining two analogs did not improve
tumor problem performance either before or after the hint.
One hypothesis consistent with these results is that
explanation may benefit from comparison processing. That
is, engaging in explanation may be most helpful for
analogical transfer when participants perform relevant
comparisons and are able to find common principles. In
Experiment 1, which found the most robust effects of
explanation, participants read both analogs before
explaining them, making such comparisons easy. In
contrast, in Experiment 3, irrelevant stories were placed in
between analogs to impede comparison of the story analogs.
Here the explanation task did not increase analogical
transfer. In Experiment 2, explanation participants
outperformed control participants only after participants
received a hint to use the story analog to solve the tumor
problem; this hint may have served as an invitation to
compare the analog and the tumor problem.
Conversely, comparison may benefit from explanation
processing. The finding that explaining a story analog led to
better post-hint performance than simply reading the same
analog suggests that the explanation task supported an
encoding that enhanced the effects of the invited
comparison between the analog and the tumor problem.
More broadly, the present findings highlight the
interconnectedness of comparison and explanation and
provide further evidence that comparison is one mechanism
by which generating explanations supports learning (see
also Edwards, Williams, & Lombrozo, 2013). We
hypothesize that in the present experiments, engaging in
comparison helped learners notice common relational
structure across cases, and that engaging in explanation
encouraged learners to identify important patterns that could
apply to multiple cases. Future work exploring the
relationship between comparison and explanation in other
domains can examine the nature and generality of
interactions between comparison and explanation, and can
shed further light on both the unique aspects of each process
and how these processes may work together to enhance
learning.

Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 15, 1147-1156.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological
Monographs, 58.
Edwards, B. J., Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (2013).
Effects of explanation and comparison on category
learning. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I.
Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Fonseca, B., & Chi, M. T. H., (2011). The self-explanation
effect: A constructive learning activity. In Mayer R., &
Alexander, P. (Eds.), The Handbook of Research on
Learning and Instruction. Routledge Press.
Gadgil, S., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Chi, M. T. H. (2012).
Effectiveness of holistic mental model confrontation in
driving conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 22,
47-61.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34,
752-775.
Gentner, D., & Forbus, K. (2011). Computational models of
analogy. WIREs Cognitive Science, 2, 266-276.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 586-597.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L. & and Gentner, D. (2003).
Analogical learning in negotiation teams: Comparing
cases promotes learning and transfer. Academy of
Management Learning and Education, 2, 119-127.
Lombrozo, T. (2012). Explanation and abductive inference.
In K.J. Holyoak and R.G. Morrison (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning (pp. 260-276),
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Needham, D. R., & Begg, I. M. (1991). Problem-oriented
training promotes spontaneous analogical transfer:
Memory-oriented training promotes memory for training.
Memory and Cognition, 19, 543-557.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (2010). The role of
explanation in discovery and generalization: evidence
from category learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 776-806.
Williams J. J., Lombrozo, T., & Rehder, B. (2013). The
hazards of explanation: overgeneralization in the face of
exceptions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 142, 1006-1014.

Acknowledgments
We thank Amy Lee for assistance with coding. The research
was supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
(BJE), ONR grant N00014-13-1-0470 (DG), and NSF grant
DRL-1056712 (TL).

450

