UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Problem Schema on Successful Maximizing in Repeated Choices

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/215492m8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gao, Jie
Corter, James

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Problem Schema on Successful Maximizing in Repeated Choices
Jie Gao (jg2902@columbia.edu)
Center for Decision Sciences, Columbia University
New York, NY 10027 USA

James E. Corter (jec34@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York, NY 10027 USA
Regarding statistical concepts, Nisbett, Krantz, Jepson,
and Kunda (1983) argue that people learn intuitive versions
of abstract principles such as the law of large numbers
through life experience in various domains. These
representations are often referred to as statistical heuristics.
These heuristics can be improved by statistical training and
successfully applied across domains (Fong, Krantz &
Nisbett, 1986). Nonetheless, people do not always use
statistical reasoning when it is appropriate (e.g., Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974). Accordingly, Nisbett et al. argue that it
is important to study what kinds of events and problems
most often elicit statistical reasoning. They list three factors
that affect whether statistical reasoning is applied in a
particular context: the clarity of the sample space and the
sampling process, the perceived relevance of chance factors,
and cultural norms for the specific domain.
We believe that such pragmatic or semantic factors can
affect learning and application of formal knowledge across a
broad array of tasks, including optimal versus non-optimal
choices in decision making. Thus, in the present paper we
investigate the influence of such prior pragmatic knowledge
on people’s ability to find and select the “rational” or
optimal strategy in repeated random binary choices, a
situation where sub-optimal behavior (specifically,
probability matching) is not infrequent.
To illustrate, imagine Situation 1, wherein a die with two
faces colored black and four colored red is rolled, and
suppose that your task is to predict the color that will occur
on each of the next five rolls. Now imagine Situation 2,
where there are two dice, the first colored as above and the
second with the colors reversed. Here, your task is to predict
which die will show red, on each of five successive trials.
Although the two situations share many surface features
(and the same objective probability of success on each trial,
if you pick the more likely outcome), we believe that they
are psychologically different, that they are associated with
different experience-based pragmatic schema. In the first
example, the two possible outcomes, black and red, are not
just negatively correlated, they are complementary events.
In terms of experience, this situation may be associated with
common everyday examples of repeatedly trying to predict
a binary outcome: Heads versus Tails, making a shot in
basketball versus missing it, will it be a sunny day or a rainy
day? In most of these experienced situations, the element of
chance variation is very salient.

Abstract
We investigate the effects of problem schema type
(complementary events versus independent events) on
participants’ tendency to adopt probability matching or
maximizing strategies across repeated decisions. These two
general problem types were compared in an online study
(N=300), using a between-subjects design. We also varied
abstraction level of the problem story context, using abstract
contexts, contexts involving physical randomizing devices,
and “real-world” social/pragmatic contexts. Participants made
a binary choice on each of 20 trials, receiving trial-by-trial
outcome feedback. Maximization was consistently higher for
independent events contexts than for complementary, while
abstraction level of the context had no significant effect on
the prevalence of maximizing behavior. The results support
our hypothesis that people may find it especially difficult to
discover the maximizing strategy for problems exemplifying
the complementary-outcomes schema. In contrast, when the
problem involves choosing between two distinct objects or
entities (a common instantiation of the independent events
schema) it seems to be easier to maximize, perhaps due to
cueing of a pragmatic “pick the winner” schema.
Keywords: probability matching; maximizing; repeated
decisions; pragmatic schemas; abstraction

Introduction
It has been shown that past experience has an important
impact on people’s reasoning and decision making. In one
influential line of research, Cheng and Holyoak (1985)
argue that people often reason not according to the rules of
formal logic, but based on a set of abstract (or partly
abstract) knowledge structures induced from daily-life
experience. They term these knowledge structures
“pragmatic reasoning schemas”. These pragmatic schemas
have been shown to affect people’s perceptions, problem
solving and decision making. For example, many studies
have shown that reasoning problems that are situated in a
real-world context are solved more easily than those posed
in purely abstract forms (Evans, 1982; Johnson-Laird et al.,
1972; Wason, 1966; Wason & Evans, 1975). Other
researchers have found a significant impact of previous life
experience on perception and cognition, both experience in
the physical world (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992) and in
domains that are abstracted from or unrelated to the physical
environment (cf. Bargh, 2006). Williams, Huang and Bargh
(2009) have used the term “mind scaffolding” to refer to
how higher mental processes are often grounded in early
experience of the physical world.

511

The independent events (pick-a-winner) schema is an
abstraction, as is the complementary-events schema.
However, we believe that these particular abstractions arise
from experience, thus they retain some associations with
semantic aspects of real-world situations – i.e. that they are
“pragmatic schemas” (Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; Marshall,
1993; Nisbett 1993; Nisbett, Krantz, Jepson, & Kunda,
1983). Many researchers (e.g., Bassok, Chase, & Martin,
1998; Reeves & Weisberg, 1994) have demonstrated that
formal reasoning methods may be more accurately used in
an applied context, due to the effects of experience-based
semantic knowledge. Bassok and co-workers argue that the
applied or “grounded” context must map onto the abstract
schema in order for people to better understand or apply the
reasoning rules.
If reasoning problems situated in a real-world context
tend to be solved more easily than those posed in purely
abstract forms (Evans, 1982; Johnson-Laird et al., 1972;
Wason, 1966; Wason & Evans, 1975), another factor that
may influence the prevalence of maximizing behavior is
level of abstraction of the problem context. Accordingly, in
the present study we also investigate if people do better at
identifying and applying the normative strategy with
abstract scenarios (representing “fully abstracted” schemas
for complementary and independent events), or with
“grounded” story contexts involving concrete objects or
other real-world situations (that should invoke pragmatic
experiential knowledge). The real-world problems are of
two types: “concrete” problems involving simple
randomizing devices (e.g. coins, dice) that ground the
decision problems in the behavior of simple physical
objects, and pragmatic or social problems (games, foraging)
that might be influenced by these sorts of experiences.

In the second situation, the two events (Die 1 shows red)
and (Die 2 shows red) are not correlated, rather they are
independent events. The decision maker is in the position of
trying to select an entity that will offer superior outcomes.
This type of situation may recall experiences with “pick a
winner” type scenarios: which player is more likely to hit a
free throw, which berry bush will have more berries on it?
In many such real-life situations, causal models might be
invoked, correctly or incorrectly.
Note that Situation 1 resembles tasks commonly used in
studies of probability matching (e.g., James & Koehler,
2011; Shanks, 2002; Barron & Leider, 2010), a welldocumented form of suboptimal behavior. The literature on
probability matching amply documents that people often fail
to use maximizing strategies when making sequential
predictions (e.g., Chen & Corter 2006; Hertwig, Barron,
Weber, & Erev, 2004). Many of these studies have used
tasks where participants repeatedly predict outcomes for
simple randomizing devices: coins or dice. But do the
documented failures to maximize generalize beyond this
narrow situation? Or would people do better in an
independent-events scenario?
We hypothesize that the answer to the latter question is
affirmative. Put another way, we suspect that the failures to
maximize commonly observed in the probability-matching
literature may depend critically on the complementaryoutcomes nature of the prediction task. In a coin flip, or any
type of process with complementary-outcomes, observing
that Heads has occurred means that Tails has not. For such
events, most people have vast prior experience observing
mixed sequences of outcomes, as well as an appreciation of
the futility of trying to predict the next flip. These
experiences may impede their ability to find the maximizing
strategy if one exists (for a biased coin that strategy involves
predicting pure sequences of the more likely outcome).
In contrast, for the independent-events situation, a
participant does not predict the outcome of one repeated
(identical) event with binary outcomes, rather s/he is
choosing between two different and independent options,
where the options may represent distinct entities. In real
life, it is common for people to expend a great deal of effort
to choose the better option (entity). For example, people try
to choose a better partner to work with for every project
they do, or to choose a better mate, or to choose a better
problem-solving strategy, etc. We term the pragmatic
schema formed from these types of life experience the “pick
a winner” schema.
For the above reasons, we hypothesize that decisions and
choices involving independent events will result in more
optimal behavior than those involving complementary
events, even when the payoff probabilities for the options in
the two situations are the same, because two different
schemas are likely to be activated: the complementaryevents schema which leads to probability matching and the
“pick-a-winner” independent events schema which is more
likely to lead to maximizing behavior.

Empirical Study
This study is designed to investigate factors influencing
people’s ability to find and apply the normative
“maximizing” strategy in a repeated-decisions task. To
investigate the role of pragmatic schema in this task, we
compared people’s performance on problems exemplifying
the two schema types (independent events vs.
complementary events), including scenarios with three
different abstraction levels: abstract, concrete physical
(randomizing devices, such as dice), and “real-world”
pragmatic or social contexts. Thus, there are six conditions,
as shown in Table 1. In order to increase generalizability of
the findings, we used more than one example of “concrete”
and “real-world” problem types.
Table 1. Conditions and Scenarios
Complementary

Independent

Abstract

(Options are A or B)

(Options are A or B)

Concrete

Die, Marble, Spinner

Die, Marble, Spinner

Real-world Basketball, Fishing

512

Basketball, Fishing

You are participating in a basketball free-throw shooting
contest. Your team consists of two players, A and B. Player
A hits 2/3 of his free throws on average, while Player B hits
1/3 of his free throws on average. On each trial, you get to
select a player to take a single free throw. If the player you
select hits that free throw, that trial is a “success”.

We hypothesize that in the independent-schema scenarios
people will be more likely to choose the optimal decision
alternative than in the complementary events. We have no
specific hypothesis about the effect of level of abstraction of
the problem contexts, although based on the previous
literature on grounding and application of formal schemas
one might expect performance to be best in the concrete
contexts.

Participants
Participants were recruited from an online worker
marketplace, Amazon's Mechanical Turk. We specified in
our instructions that each participant can only do this task
once, and subsequent completions would not be accepted.
We recruited 25 participants for each specific problem, so
that the total sample size was 300. Participants were
restricted to US location only. The average age was 29.31,
ranging from 13 to 68. 38.7% of them were female, and
61% were male. Only 4.6% of them had taken more than
three statistics or mathematics courses at the college level,
45.6% had taken one to three courses, and the rest of them
had not taken any.

Materials
In designing the materials, we took care to make sure that
the descriptions of the problems were as parallel as possible
between scenarios and schema types. This may be checked
by examining the following example problems for each of
the six conditions. For instance, comparing example 1
(Complementary Events, Abstract context) with example 4
(Independent events, Abstract context), both problems offer
a choice between an option A that has a 2/3 chance of
“success”, and an option B that offers 1/3 chance, with no
further information other than the contrasting schemas.

Procedure

1. Complementary Events, Abstract context:
You will be asked to predict 20 trials of a random event. On
each trial you will choose one of two options, A or B. Then,
either Event A occurs (with probability 2/3) or Event B
occurs. If the event you predicted occurs, that trial is a
“success”.
2. Complementary Events, Concrete context (dice):
You will be asked to predict 20 trials of a random event, the
color that shows when a single die is rolled. The die has 4
of its faces colored Red, and 2 faces colored White. On
each trial you will pick either Red or White, then the die is
rolled. If the face of the die that comes up shows the color
you picked, that trial is a “success”.
3. Complementary Events, “Real-World” context
(basketball):
You will be asked to predict hits and misses as a basketball
player, Player X, shoots 20 free throws. Player X hits 2/3 of
his free throws on average. On each trial you will predict
Hit or Miss. If you predict correctly, that trial is a
"success".
4. Independent Events, Abstract context:
You will be asked to predict 20 trials of a random event. On
each trial, you will choose one of two options, A or B. On
any trial, Option A has a 2/3 chance of showing a
“success”. Independently, on any trial Option B has a 1/3
chance of showing a “success”. Your goal is to choose one
that shows a “success”.
5. Independent Events, Concrete context (dice):
You will be asked to predict 20 trials of a random event,
whether a die with colored faces shows a Red face when it is
rolled. There are two dice, Die A and Die B. Die A has 4 of
its faces colored Red, and 2 faces colored White. Die B has
2 of its faces colored Red, and 4 faces colored White. On
each trial you will pick one of the two dice. If the face of the
die you picked shows Red, that trial is a “success”.
6. Independent Events, “Real-world” context (basketball):

The task took about 5 minutes to complete. Participants
were paid $0.25 as the base pay for completing the study,
plus a performance-based bonus payment (in the amount of
$0.05 for each of the trials that they predict correctly). The
expected total pay for a person using maximizing strategy is
$1.05 (0.25+0.05*80%*20), and for someone using a
probability matching strategy the expected total payment is
$0.93 (0.25+0.05*68%*20).
Upon accepting the task, participants were randomly
directed to one of the 12 specific-scenario conditions. After
reading the instructions, they were asked to complete the
prediction task twenty times (trials). They made their choice
for each trial by clicking one of two side-by-side buttons on
the screen. After they made a choice for a trial, they were
shown immediate feedback (randomly generated according
to the specified probabilities. Feedback consisted of the
actual obtained outcome, plus notification of whether their
prediction or choice was a “success” (i.e., paid off) in the
current trial. The feedback screen also displayed the
accumulated amount of bonus payment they had won.
Afterwards a questionnaire was given to each participant,
asking about the strategies he or she used and basic
demographic information such as gender, age, math ability
and educational background.

Results
The probability of choosing the optimal alternative was
compared across conditions. Prediction accuracy (the
prevalence of maximizing behavior) was measured by
coding a response 1 if the participant made the “rational”
maximizing choice (i.e., chose the outcome with the higher
probability of payoff), and 0 for the other choice.
The mean probabilities of choosing the more likely
outcome for each specific problem are shown in Table 2.
These means are computed across both trials and

513

i.e., whether it is abstract, involves concrete random
devices, or “real-world” social or pragmatic contexts.

participants. Overall, less maximizing behavior was
observed for complementary events (Mean proportion =
.778, SD = .016) than for independent events (Mean = .835,
SD = .014).
Table 2 Probability of predicting the more likely
outcome: mean and standard error for each specific context,
by condition (N=25 for all cells).
Scenarios

Complementary

Independent

Abstract (A or B)

0.75 (0.051)

0.83 (0.038)

Dice

0.83 (0.037)

0.86 (0.035)

Marbles

0.83 (0.037)

0.82 (0.032)

Spinners

0.71 (0.044)

0.80 (0.042)

Basketball Players

0.79 (0.029)

0.83 (0.036)

Fishing

0.76 (0.033)

0.87 (0.031)

Total

0.77 (0.016)

0.84 (0.015)

Figure 1. Probability of choosing the more likely outcome
(Schema Type x Abstraction Level)

In order to test the hypotheses concerning the effects of
schema type and the three abstraction levels on selection of
the more likely option, the data were conceptualized as a 2 x
3 unbalanced ANOVA design. Because the data for each
subject consist of 20 binary variables (the choice on each
trial) for a given problem, the data were analyzed as a
generalized linear mixed model (GLMM), using the
GLIMMIX function in SPSS. The model included main
effects for abstraction level, schema type, and trial, plus all
two-way interactions. The covariance structure was assumed
to be AR(1), i.e., that the response at time point t+1 is
correlated with the response at time point t.
The results show that the main effect of schema type is
significant, F(1, 5918) = 20.418, p < .001. The direction of
this effect is consistent with our expectation that
independent events contexts should lead to more
maximizing behavior because of the “pick a winner”
schema, which makes it seem more reasonable to predict the
alternative with higher payoff probability for all the trials.
The main effect of schema type was consistently found
across different abstraction levels of the scenarios. As
shown in Figure 1, there was no significant interaction
effect with abstraction level of context (abstract, concrete,
real-world), F(2, 5918)=1.396 p = .248, and independent
events led to more choice of the optimal strategy for all
three context levels.
The mean probability of choosing the more likely
outcome did not differ greatly across abstraction levels.
Descriptive statistics were as follows: abstract context (M =
.791, SD = .027), concrete context (M = .807, SD = .015),
and the real-world context (M = .813, SD = .019).
The results of a generalized linear mixed model (GLMM)
analysis showed that the main effect of abstraction level was
not significant, F(2, 5918) = .475, p = .62. This result
suggests that the probability of choosing the more likely
outcome is not affected by the abstraction level of a task,

Trend over trials – effects of DM experience
In repeated decision tasks with outcome feedback,
experience can change the proportions of maximizing
behavior (e.g., Chen & Corter, 2014; Yechiam &
Busemeyer, 2005; Newell & Rakow, 2007). In order to
assess if there was any change in maximizing responses
across trials here, the twenty trials were divided into four
“pseudo-blocks” or pseudo-sets of five trials each. Figure 2
shows the mean probability of choosing the optimal
alternative across four pseudo-sets. The graph shows that
the advantage in maximizing behavior for the independent
events scenarios over the complementary events scenarios is
relatively stable across trials, and the overall levels of
maximization did not show any consistent linear trend. The
dip in maximization in the middle pseudo-blocks may be
due to exploratory behavior.

Figure 2. Mean probability of maximizing for the two
schema types across blocks.

514

(Gilovich, Vallone & Tversky, 1985) and the Gambler’s
Fallacy, also seem to be influenced by problem context
(e.g., human performance versus chance processes). Thus,
irrational behaviors as well as rational may be influenced by
problem context and problem schema.
In the present study, abstraction level of the problem
context was not found to have a significant effect on the
prevalence of rational choice. This is somewhat surprising
given the body of prior research that shows advantages in
formal reasoning for concrete as opposed to abstract
contexts. One possible explanation is that in our study the
repeated choice task may be more influenced by experienceor intuition-based decision processes than by formal
reasoning. Another possibility worth investigating is that
some of this prior research might have confounded schema
type, as defined here, and abstraction level.
A seemingly attractive alternative explanation for our
results is that the complementary events and independent
events situations offer different amounts of information
about foregone payoffs , a factor that has been shown to
affect tendency to maximize in some repeated decision tasks
(e.g., Yechiam & Busemeyer, 2006). Here, the occurrence
of one event in a pair of complementary events (such as
Heads) provides certainty that the complementary event
(Tails) did not occur, whereas independent events by
definition offer no predictive information about each other.
However, information about forgone payoffs cannot
account for the findings in this study. First, in previous
research forgone payoff information was found to be helpful
in prediction tasks when the payoff probabilities were
initially unknown to the participants (e.g., Yechiam &
Busemeyer, 2006; Grosskopf, Erev, & Yechiam, 2006). In
our study, there is no probability learning – the probabilities
of the two events were available from the first trial. Second,
the usual effect of providing information on foregone
payoffs is to speed up learning of the optimal response. But
in our task, it is the complementary-events condition that
inherently provides information on foregone payoffs, yet
this condition led to a lower rate of maximization here.
Thus, availability of information on forgone payoffs cannot
account for our results.
Elsewhere (Gao, 2013; Gao and Corter, 2011) we have
proposed that a decision maker’s implicit adoption of a
perfect prediction goal might be a factor promoting
probability matching behavior. That factor might also be
playing a role in this study. For complementary events, the
choice is between "either A or B", thus there is always a
"correct/successful" answer and a "wrong/unsuccessful"
answer; while for independent events, the choice is between
"better A? or better B?", where it is more apparent that
neither of the two options is guaranteed to lead to a
successful result. Therefore, the independent events scenario
might nudge people to abandon any unrealistic perfect
prediction goal, hence lead to more rational choices.
However, this potential explanation is speculative, and
would need to be explored in future studies.

Discussion
The results supported our hypothesis that problems
exemplifying the complementary-outcomes schema would
lead to a lower rate of maximization than problems
exemplifying the independent-events schema.
Differences between these two schema types in the
proportion of “rational” maximizing responses (i.e.,
selection of the more likely outcome) were consistently
observed across the three different abstraction levels of
event contexts, and no significant interactions were found.
Thus, the main effect of complementary- versus
independent-events schema generalized across different
abstraction levels of context: in abstract, concrete or
pragmatic “real-world” contexts. We included more than
one random device and more than one real-world context,
and the effect was observed in all contexts. Thus, the results
demonstrate that the type of schema, complementary versus
independent events, has a strong and consistent effect on
prediction behavior for stochastic binary events.
The results shed light on cognitive factors that affect why,
and when, people are successful in finding maximizing
strategies. We suspect that a primary cause of this gap
between the rate of maximizing for independent and
complementary events is that when people must choose
between two objects or entities (a common instantiation of
the independent events schema), they will be more prone to
maximize due to influence of the “pick a winner” pragmatic
schema.
We further believe that people’s difficulty in finding the
maximizing strategy for complementary events arises due to
prior experience (and is related to a representativeness
heuristic) – For a coin flip, it is natural to envision mixed
sequences, but less natural to envision a sequence of all
Heads or Tails, because there are probabilistic constraints
that make “pure’ sequences quite rare in one’s experience.
Yet for biased events with one outcome more likely than the
other, such pure sequences correspond to the optimal
maximizing choice strategy. In contrast, for “pick a winner”
situations, expert performance might often result in perfect
performance over many trials (imagine a professional
violinist playing a well-learned etude). These arguments
suggest why probability-matching behavior, a well-known
type of decision irrationality, may not generalize robustly
beyond tasks based on complementary events.
Additionally, it may be that people’s predilection to see
patterns in randomness and to search for causal
interpretations for these patterns plays a role in differential
behavior and cognition in situations exemplifying the two
schemas. For example, it may be hard to generate causal
explanations (other than simple physical principles) for why
a coin lands Heads rather than Tails, but easier when
choosing among fishing ponds or basketball players. Thus,
the present findings suggest that such causal beliefs might
have adaptive impact even when erroneous. However,
Ayeton and Fisher (2004) document that inappropriate or
irrational expectations of recency effects in repeated events,
as exemplified by the “hot-hand” fallacy in basketball

515

Nisbett, R. (1993). Rules for reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Nisbett, R., Krantz, D., Jepson, C., & Kunda, Z. (1983). The
use of statistical heuristics in everyday inductive
reasoning. Psychological Review, 90, 339–363
Reeves, L. M., & Weisberg, R. W. (1994). The role of
content and abstract information in analogical transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 115, 381–400.
Shanks, D. R., Tunney, R. J., & McCarthy, J. D. (2002). A
reexamination of probability matching and rational choice.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 15, 233-250.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological
foundations of culture. In J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J.
Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. Foss (Ed.), New
Horizons in Psychology. Harmondsworth, England:
Penguin.
Wason, P. C., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (1975). Dual processes
in reasoning? Cognition, 3, 141–154.
Williams L.E., Huang J.Y., & Bargh J.A. (2009). The
scaffolded mind: Higher mental processes are grounded in
early experience of the physical world. European Journal
of Social Psychology, 39, 1257–1267.
Yechiam, E., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2005). Comparison of
basic assumptions embedded in learning models for
experience-based decision making. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 12, 387–402.
Yechiam, E., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2006). The effect of
foregone payoffs on underweighting small probability
events. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 1-16.

References
Ayeton, P., & Fischer, I. (2004). The hot hand and the
gambler’s fallacy: Two faces of subjective randomness?
Memory & Cognition, 32(8), 1369-1378.
Bassok, M., Chase, V.M., & Martin,S.A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99–134.
Barron, G, & Leider, S. (2010). The role of experience in
the gambler's fallacy. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 23, 117–129.
Chen, Y.J., & Corter, J. E. (2006). When mixed options are
preferred in multiple-trial decision making. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 19(1), 17-42.
Chen, Y. J., & Corter, J. E. (2014). Learning or framing?:
Effects of outcome feedback on repeated decisions from
description. To appear in P. Bello, M. Guarini, M.
McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the
36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (xx-yy). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic
reasoning schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391–416.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1982). The Psychology of Deductive
Reasoning. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Fong, G.T., Krantz, D. H., & Nisbett, R.E. (1986). The
effects of statistical training on thinking about everyday
problems. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 253-292
Gao, J. (2013). Factors affecting probability matching
behavior. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Columbia
University.
Gao, J., & Corter, J. (2011). Predicting outcomes or
patterns? Matching and maximizing in a sequential
prediction task. Poster presented at annual meeting of the
Society for Judgment and Decision Making. Seattle, USA,
November 10-11.
Gilovich, T, Vallone, R., & Tversky, A. (1985). The hot
hand in basketball: On the misperception of random
sequences. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 295-314.
Grosskopf, B., Erev, I., & Yechiam, E. (2006). Foregone
with the wind: Indirect payoff information and its
implications for choice. International Journal of Game
Theory, 34, 285-302.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events.
Psychological Science, 15, 534-539.
James, G., & Koehler, D. (2011). Banking on a bad bet:
probability matching in risky choice is linked to
expectation generation. Psychological Science, 22(6),
701-711.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., & Legrenzi, S. M.
(1972). Reasoning and a sense of reality. British Journal
of Psychology, 63, 395-400.
Marshall, S. P. (1993). Assessment of rational number
understanding: A schema-based approach. In T. P.
Carpenter, E. Fennema & T. A. Romberg (Eds.), Rational
numbers: An integration of research, pp. 261-288.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

516

