UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Temporal and Causal Schemas on Probability Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jn7c43s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gugga, S. Sonia
Corter, James E.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Temporal and Causal Schemas on Probability Problem Solving
S. Sonia Gugga (ssg34@columbia.edu)
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

James E. Corter (jec34@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

Abstract
Causal beliefs have been shown to affect performance in a wide
variety of reasoning and problem solving. One type of
judgment bias that can result from implicit causal models is
causal asymmetry -- the tendency to judge predictive
inferences as more plausible than comparable diagnostic
inferences. In the present study we investigate if the
directionality of implicit causal models can also affect
application of formal methods, specifically the solution of
conditional probability word problems. The study examined
temporal and causal schemas, in which the convention is that
events are considered in forward direction. Pairs of conditional
probability (CP) problems were written depicting events E1
and E2, such that E1 either occurs before E2 or causes E2.
Problems were defined with respect to the order of events
expressed in CPs, so that P(E2|E1) represents the CP in
schema-consistent, intact order by considering the occurrence
of E1 before E2; while P(E1|E2) represents CP in schemainconsistent, inverted order. Participants had greater difficulty
encoding CP for events in schema-inconsistent order than CP
of events in the conventional deterministic order.
Keywords: Conditional probability; social schemata; causal
schemata.

Introduction
Previous research on statistical reasoning has illustrated that
individuals often disregard statistically prescribed processes,
employing heuristics and biases which may produce invalid
inferences (see Barbey & Sloman, 2007; Cohen, 1981;
Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 2007; Kahneman & Tversky, 1979;
Krynski & Tenenbaum, 2007; Nisbett, Krantz, Jepson, &
Kunda, 1983; Stanovich, Toplak, & West, 2008; and Tversky
& Kahneman, 1974, 1980 for extensive treatments of the
debate). Improvement in inferential accuracy has been
affected by training, expression of likelihood in frequency
formats, partitive formulation of the information space, or by
expressing real-world application to contexts in which
individuals are more likely to reason probabilistically with
respect to causal or social schemas (Fox & Levav, 2004;
Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995, 2007; Girotto & Gonzalez,
2007; Krynski & Tenenbaum, 2007; Macchi, 2000).
A mathematical word problem's cover story provides realworld context and semantic content, sometimes considered
“surface features”, because they are usually assumed not to
directly affect a problem's technical difficulty or formal
solution processes. When a cover story relates to social
interactions, however, pragmatic reasoning schemas formed

in response to real-world experiences may be invoked in the
mind of the problem solver (e.g., Cheng & Holyoak, 1985;
Fong, Krantz, & Nisbett, 1986; Bassok, Chase, & Martin,
1998). The claim made here is that problem solving in
probability is particularly affected by domain-specific
knowledge in probabilistic reasoning.
Previous research has found discrepancies between formal
quantitative probabilistic assessments (“System 2”
processing) and on-the-fly, qualitative probabilistic
judgments (tapping “System 1”). This prior research has led
to a theory of dual-systems representations for probability
judgments (Evans & Frankish, 2008; Fox & Levav, 2004;
Sloman, 1996; Sloman & Rips, 1998; Smith & Collins, 2009;
Stanovich, Toplak, & West, 2008; Tversky & Kahneman,
1983; Windschitl & Wells, 1998). While the two processes
have been well-differentiated, it remains to be determined
how they may interact in formal problem solving contexts.
Individuals have been shown to have a strong bias toward
System 1 processes for evaluating social behavior or
characteristics qualitatively, while System 2 processes are
engaged in symbolic contexts. It may be that the specific
interaction of the two processes depends on how problem
elements are represented in the mind of the problem solver.
The study reported below examines reasoning effects
stemming from the direction of temporality and causation of
events in an applied problem’s content, examining whether
inverting the temporal direction of a schema affects the
difficulty of a conditional probability problem. It was
hypothesized that it would be easier for individuals to reason
forwards regarding temporal or causal events given the
deterministic nature of causal and, by extension, temporal
schemas (Cheng & Nisbett, 1993; Tversky & Kahneman,
1980). In other words, it should be easier for subjects to
calculate the conditional probability of an event given the
probability of events preceding it versus calculating the
probability of an event given the probability of events
occurring later. Similarly, it was expected that problems
asking for the conditional probability of an effect given the
probability of its cause(s) would be easier than problems
asking for the probability of a cause given the probability of
its effect(s). It was supposed that inverting the direction of
determination should introduce an additional level of
difficulty to the problem. It was also expected that the
perceived causal strength between events would mediate the
effect. The results, described below, yield insights into how
probability problems are categorized and solved, what effects

2321

these pragmatic schemas have on problem-solving success,
and how they may inform theories of probabilistic reasoning
in general.

Causality and Conditional Probability
With respect to temporal and causal schemas, it is the
convention to reason forwards, considering earlier events
before those that happen later, and causes before effects, a
preference which may affect the perceived strength of a
causal relationship (Fernbach, Darlow, & Sloman, 2011;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1980). This convention may, in part,
explain why, when given a choice, individuals prefer to
wager on the outcomes of events which have yet to happen
rather than those of past events which may have already
occurred (Brun & Teigen, 1990; Fischhoff, 1975, 1976;
Rothbart & Snyder, 1970; Wright, 1982).
These temporal asymmetries in reasoning facility or
preference might extend to certain conditional probability
problems. For example, if event A is a cause of B, or if A
merely temporally precedes B, then the conditional
probability of B given A may be easier to reason about than
the reverse conditional. These reasoning effects may not
extend to simple computational problems, since P(A|B) and
P(B|A) are equally easy to compute.
One probabilistic reasoning error that we might expect to
be related to the hypothesized asymmetries in causal and
temporal reasoning is the so-called fallacy of the transposed
conditional or the inverse fallacy, in which P(A|B) is
confused with P(B|A) (Bar-Hillel & Falk, 1982; Díaz & de la
Fuente, 2007; Krynski & Tenenbaum, 2007; Mackie, 1981;
Neath, 2010; Tversky & Kahneman, 1980; Villejoubert &
Mandel, 2002). Among these discussions there has been
speculation of conditions in which this fallacy is more or less
likely to occur, but little evidence demonstrating the
phenomenon systematically within judgment under
uncertainty. If reasoning about forward-direction causal and
temporal CPs is easier and more natural than reasoning about
“inverted” CPs, then it might be that this error would arise
more often by misinterpreting an inverse-order CP as a
forward-direction CP than vice-versa.

Empirical Study
If the ease of reasoning about conditional probabilities shows
temporal and causal asymmetries (but formula-based
calculations do not), then we would expect to see effects of
this directionality on the difficulty of probabilistic reasoning
and problem-solving for word problems in which the
conditional probabilities are described or given in the
problem text, not derived via formula. This study tests if such
effects are observed.

Method
Participants. Participants were students enrolled in one of
four sections of an introductory course in probability and
statistical inference during the Fall 2011 term at a graduate
school of education. Two instructors each taught two of the

sections. Number of subjects per condition for each item is
detailed in Table 1. A total of 123 students completed the
quiz. Data from one student in the causal-intact condition was
lost, so total N for that item is 122.
Materials. Two test items were presented to each student,
embedded in an in-class quiz. The test items are listed in the
Appendix. There were two versions of the temporal-schema
problem (one invoking the temporally-consistent conditional
probability, the other invoking the inverted-order
probability), and two versions of the causal schema
(consistent and inverted orders).
Procedure. Both instructors gave the quizzes during the
fourth week of the course, after covering the topic of
conditional probability. Each student saw one temporal
schema problem (either order intact or order inverted) and the
other version of the causal schema problem. Quizzes were
administered during the last 30 minutes of class. Students
were permitted to use notes and a calculator.

Results
The dependent variables of interest were 1) correctness of
numeric solution, and 2) whether the student encoded
conditional probability (CP) correctly. Percentage correct for
the two measures is summarized in Table 1, by condition.
Table 1: DVs: Percent accuracy for overall problem
solution and encoding of CP (with freq), by condition.
Temporal Items
Solved the problem
Coded CP correctly
N

Intact
58.2 (32)
74.5 (41)
55

Inverted
52.5 (35)
57.4 (39)
68

Total
54.5 (67)
65.0 (80)
123

Causal Items
Solved the problem
Coded CP correctly
N

Intact
25.4 (17)
65.7 (44)
67

Inverted
20.0 (11)
36.4 (20)
55

Total
23.0 (28)
52.5 (64)
122

Separate generalized linear models (GZLM) were fit for the
temporal and causal problems on each outcome according to
a binary distribution with logit (i.e., log-odds) link function.
Each model had two predictors: Order (=intact, inverted) and
Instructor.
For temporal problems, the proportion of participants
correctly solving the problem was higher for order-intact than
for order-inverted items, as hypothesized, but this difference
was not significant: X2 LR (1, N = 123) = 0.52, p = .472. For
the second DV, correct encoding of the given conditional
probability information, the hypothesis was confirmed: order
(=intact, inverted) significantly predicted correct encoding,
X2 LR (1, N = 123) = 6.02, p = .014. The odds of correctly
encoding CP for the order-intact version relative to orderinverted was estimated as 2.67. The effect of instructor in
temporal problems was significant for both DVs: X2 LR (1, N

2322

= 123) = 3.93, p = .048 for correctness of solution, X2 LR (1,
N = 123) = 4.47, p = .034 for correctness of CP encoding.
For the causal-schema problems, order (=intact, inverted)
significantly predicted correct coding of CP, X2 LR (1, N =
122) =11.71, p < .001, confirming the hypothesis. The odds
of expressing CP correctly for order-intact items was
estimated as 3.70, relative to order-inverted items. However,
order did not significantly predict overall problem solution
success, X2 LR (1, N = 122) = 1.21, p = .272. The effect of
instructor was significant for both DVs: X2 LR (1, N = 122) =
3.90, p = .048 for correctness of solution, X2 LR (1, N = 122)
= 3.98, p = .046 for correctness of CP encoding.
One reason why consistency with temporal or causal
schema is related to correct encoding of CP, but not with
overall solution success, is that encoding CP is just one of
many steps that must be carried out to solve a problem
correctly. Table 2 presents the conditional probability of
problem solution success given correct encoding of CP.
Table 2: Conditional probability of correct answer given
correct CP-encoding, by condition.
Item Type
Temporal
Causal

Intact
.78
.39

Inverted
.76
.55

difference was marginally significant, X2 LR (1, N = 58) =
4.81, p < .057. Students in the order-inverted condition were
significantly more likely to commit compound substitution
errors, X2 LR (1, N = 58) = 6.66, p < .010.
Table 3: Observed percentages (with frequencies) of
selected encoding errors, by condition.
Temporal Items
Intact Inverted Total
Transposed Conditional
0 (0) 51.7 (15) 34.9 (15)
Compound Substitution 7.1 (1)
6.9 (2)
7.0 (3)
Other Errors 92.9 (13) 41.4 (12) 58.8 (25)
N
14
29
43
Causal Items
Intact
Transposed Conditional 8.7 (2)
Compound Substitution 60.9 (14)
Other Errors 30.4 (7)
N
23

Inverted Total
31.4 (11) 22.4 (13)
25.7 (9) 39.7 (23)
42.9 (15) 37.9 (22)
35
58

Discussion

Total
.77
.44

Error analyses. A set of post-hoc analyses examined the
frequency of several known errors in probability problem
solving. Written protocols were analyzed with respect to
deviations from the correct solution for each problem type
(see Appendix). Table 3 summarizes the observed
frequencies of the two most common probabilistic-reasoning
errors exhibited in these data, the transposed conditional
(substituting P(A|B) for P(B|A)) and “compound
substitution”, in which the conditional probability P(A|B) is
confused with the joint-event probability P(A^B). Other
errors included miscalculations, otherwise incorrectly
formalizing the problem, and some idiosyncratic errors.
Another commonly documented type of error, simple
substitution (substituting P(A) or P(B) for P(A|B)), did not
occur in these data.
The hypothesized asymmetries in reasoning about intactand inverted-order temporal/causal schemas are reflected in
an asymmetry in the rate of transposition errors:
misinterpreting P(A|B) is much more common than
misinterpreting P(B|A). For temporal items, no participants in
the intact-order condition made transposed conditional
errors. GZLM could not be used to analyze these data because
zero cells yield complete separation in the data, thus
unreliable estimates. A chi-square test of independence
between condition (intact, inverted) and this error type was
therefore evaluated using Fisher's exact test, and was
significant, X2 (1, N = 43) = 11.12, p < .001. The number of
students making compound substitution errors in temporal
items was too low for statistical analysis.
For causal items, more errors were of the transposed
conditional type for the order-inverted condition, and the

The rationale behind this study was to demonstrate the effect
of temporal or causal order on coding conditional probability
and overall solution success. When a problem text presents
conditional probabilities in verbal form, they are more likely
to be encoded correctly as conditional probability P(A|B)
when the natural temporal or causal order of events is A → B
rather than B → A.
Temporal order significantly affected encoding conditional
probability (CP). The odds ratio for encoding CP correctly in
temporal items was 2.66, indicating that a student receiving
an order-intact item was 2.66 times more likely to encode
conditional probability correctly than a student receiving an
order-inverted item, controlling for instructor. In an error
analysis of students who did not encode CP correctly for
temporal items, only students receiving order-inverted items
transposed the order of events. Order effects were also
demonstrated in the causal-schema problems. Participants
were more than three times more likely to encode CP
correctly for order-intact items than for order-inverted items,
controlling for instructor. Error analyses using GZLM
indicated that a marginally greater proportion of students
made the transposed conditional error in the order-inverted
condition, controlling for instructor.
For temporal-schema problems, the conditional probability
for solving a problem correctly, given that conditional
probability was correctly encoded, did not differ for both
order conditions (Table 2). For the causal-schema items,
fewer students in the intact condition correctly solved the
problem correctly (given having encoding CP correctly) than
did students in the inverse condition. This may be explained
by fact that the causal items required calculating the
probability of the complement of the given event in addition
to encoding CP, introducing an additional source of noise into
the DV of solution correctness. In fact, this complementary
event was linguistically signaled by the phrase “DID NOT”

2323

in the order-inverted problem (but not in the order-intact
version), perhaps introducing a source of bias.
The results from the error analyses indicate that there may
be schema-specific effects related to temporal and causal
order. Recall that that the likelihood of committing a
compound-substitution error in causal items was significantly
higher in the order-intact condition (Table 3). Since types of
errors coded were mutually exclusive, it makes sense that in
absence of making a transposed conditional error, students
erring in encoding CP may be more likely to make another
systematic error. Compound substitution errors are fairly
common when interpreting conditional probability, thus
these data do not necessarily indicate that mistaking joint for
conditional probability is specifically affected by temporal or
causal order. In other words, these error analyses may
demonstrate that transposed conditional errors are sensitive
to order effect, while compound substitution errors are not
specific to order effect.
Findings from this study seem related to a phenomenon of
judgment bias demonstrated by Tversky and Kahneman
(1980). They showed that, in cases in which P(A) = P(B), and
P(A|B) = P(B|A), individuals were more likely to judge
P(B|A) as greater than P(A|B) if they believed that A was a
cause of B. The results of our study demonstrate that, possibly
as a result of the strength of causal direction, students are
more prone to recognize and correctly encode a conditional
probability that preserves the natural “forward” direction of
cause to effect.

General Discussion
Results from the present study support the idea that there are
differential schematic effects on probability problem solving.
Systematically altering the causal or temporal schema
depicted in a probability problem's cover story is shown to
affect the correct encoding of conditional probability as well
as the type of errors, which in turn affects correctly solving a
problem. Importantly, effects of pragmatic reasoning
schemas are demonstrated for formal probability calculations
and encoding usually assumed to be characterized by System
2 reasoning processes, which have typically been shown to
be resistant to heuristics and biases.
The study showed that for both temporally- and causallyrelated events, participants were more likely to encode given
conditional probabilities incorrectly when the events are
expressed in inverse order. In addition, those errors were
more likely to transpose the events from inverse order to
intact order than from intact to inverse order. For problems
depicting causally-related events, participants were also more
likely to incorrectly encode CP when solving for CP
expressing events in inverse order.
This finding may be considered in light of the phenomenon
of the fallacy of the time axis, as illustrated by Falk (1986).
In a within-subjects study, participants were asked to
consider the events of drawing two marbles from an urn
containing two black and two white marbles. Asked first to
evaluate the probability of drawing a second white marble
after having drawn a first white marble without replacement,

P(W2|W1), most participants provide the correct answer with
relative ease. Next, asking the same participants to consider
P(W1|W2), a significant proportion of participants reply that
the question is meaningless. Of those who attempt to solve
the problem, many indicate that the probability is 1.00 or
incorrectly solve the item without considering the probability
of the conditioning event.
Although the results from the current study parallel Falk's
(1986), the results discussed here generalize her results by
demonstrating that the fallacy also occurs in encoding CP in
formal probability problem solving, typically considered to
be governed by System 2 processes. Furthermore, to date
there has been little evidence or explanation put forth
concerning processes influencing the occurrence of the
fallacy of the transposed conditional. Villejoubert and
Mandel (2002) documented that frequency formats reduced
the number of transposed conditional errors, however, their
offered explanation was only that "people simply confuse
p(H|D) with p(D|H) because the latter sounds a lot like the
former."
Krynski and Tenenbaum (2007) speculated that transposed
conditionals are more likely when P(A|B) is estimated as
roughly equivalent to P(B|A), as proposed by Tversky and
Kahneman (1980). Our findings suggest that the transposed
conditional error also can occur when P(A|B) and P(B|A) are
not equal. Rather, our results suggest that that problem
solvers tend to exhibit the error only (or mainly) when the
temporal or causal order of events in the problem contradict
the natural causal or temporal ordering of the depicted realworld events. But note that these order effects in CP may not
necessarily affect overall difficulty of a problem over-andabove encoding CP.
These results demonstrate that investigating the specifics
of how conditional probability is interpreted in context may
inform a bias produced by the order of events depicted in
probability problems and their relation to pragmatic
reasoning schemas induced by real-world experiences. If, in
the cover story of a problem (and in the underlying real-world
pragmatic schema), event A occurs before event B or causes
event B, then the conditional probability P(B|A) reflects a
schema-consistent, intact order of events, translated as “the
probability that B occurs given that A has occurred,”
reflecting a deterministic, forward-looking time perspective.
In contrast, translating P(A|B) as “the probability that A
occurs given that B has occurred” seems nonsensical given
the problem script. Representing and reasoning about P(A|B)
demands consideration of events in inverted chronological
order and may be validly translated as only “the probability
that A has occurred given that B has occurred,” requiring
retrospective time perspective. These two representations of
conditional probability reflect two different types of
reasoning about uncertainty (Hacking, 1975; Fox &
Ülkümen, 2011). While P(B|A) may be addressed in the
predictive, aleatory sense, P(A|B) must be considered with
epistemic evaluation postdictively.
The phenomenon we document may also have implications
for education. Schematic effects on probability problem

2324

solving may inform instruction on statistical inference via
consideration of how the two types of probability judgments
are theoretically distinct. Evidence from the present study
supports an interpretation which addresses this difference in
reasoning as parallel to the process of statistical inference and
has implications for statistical education and scientific
reasoning generally.
Specifically, in evaluating evidence from a sample, the
process of hypothesis testing requires considering the
conditional probability of finding a result in light of the null
hypothesis H0, a preexisting fact in the world, which in fact
either is, P(H0) = 1, or is not, P(H0) = 0. So while results from
the present study indicate that it is easier to conceptualize
P(some observed phenomenon | H0), hypothesis testing
evaluates P(H0 | some observed phenomenon). In addition, in
evaluating the validity of statistical inferences, students are
taught to consider the likelihood of Type I and Type II errors,
terms which have become shorthand for particular
conditional probabilities (Neath, 2010). Training in statistical
inference demands a level of mastery of understanding CP in
inverted order, which is inconsistent with causal schemas and
may warrant more classroom discussion with respect to the
nuances and implications for hypothesis testing.

References
Bar-Hillel, M. & Falk, R. (1982). Some teasers concerning
conditional probabilities. Cognition, 11, 109-122.
Barbey, A. & Sloman, S. (2007). Base-rate respect: From
ecological rationality to dual processes. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 30, 241.
Bassok, M., Chase, V. M., & Martin, S. A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99–134.
Brun, W. & Teigen, K. H. (1990). Prediction and postdiction
preferences in guessing. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 3, 17-28.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391–416.
Cheng, P. W. & Nisbett, R. E. (1993). Pragmatic constraints
on causal deduction. In R. E. Nisbett (Ed.), Rules for
reasoning (pp. 207-227). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen, L. J. (1981). Can human irrationality be
experimentally demonstrated? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 4, 317-370.
Díaz, C. & Fuente, I. de la (2007). Assessing students’
difficulties with conditional probability and Bayesian
reasoning. International Electronic Journal of
Mathematics Education, 2, 128-148.
Evans, J. S. B. T. & Frankish, K. (Eds.). (2008). In two minds:
Dual processes and beyond. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Falk, R. (1986). Of probabilistic knights and knaves. The
College Mathematics Journal, 17, 156-164.
Fernbach, P. M., Darlow, A., & Sloman, S. A. (2011).
Asymmetries in predictive and diagnostic reasoning.
Journal of experimental psychology: General, 140, 168185.

Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight is not equal to foresight: The
effect of outcome knowledge on judgment under
uncertainty. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 1, 288-299.
Fischhoff, B. (1976). The effect of temporal setting on
likelihood estimates. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 15, 180-194.
Fong, G.T., Krantz, D. H., & Nisbett, R.E. (1986). The effects
of statistical training on thinking about everyday problems.
Cognitive Psychology, 18, 253-292.
Fox, C. R. & Levav, J. (2004). Partition-edit-count: Naive
extensional reasoning in judgment of conditional
probability. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 626-642.
Fox, C. R. & Ülkümen, G. (2011). Distinguishing two
dimensions of uncertainty. In W. Brun, G. Keren, G.
Kirkebřen, & H. Montgomery (Eds.), Perspectives on
thinking, judging and decision-making (pp. 21-35). Oslo:
Universitetsforlaget.
Gigerenzer, G. & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Gigerenzer, G. & Hoffrage, U. (2007). The role of
representation in Bayesian reasoning: Correcting common
misconceptions. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 264.
Girotto, V. & Gonzalez, M. (2007). How to elicit sound
probabilistic reasoning: Beyond word problems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 268.
Hacking, I. (1975). The emergence of probability: A
philosophical study of early ideas about probability,
induction and statistical inference. NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979). On the interpretation of
intuitive probability: A reply to Jonathan Cohen.
Cognition, 7, 409-411.
Krynski, T. R. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). The role of
causality in judgment under uncertainty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 430-450.
Macchi, L. (2000). Partitive formulation of information in
probabilistic problems: Beyond heuristics and frequency
format explanations. Organizational behavior and human
decision processes, 82, 217-236.
Mackie, J. L. (1981). Propensity, evidence, and diagnosis.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 4, 345-346.
Neath, A. A. (2010). Statistical Inference, Statistics
Education, and the Fallacy of the Transposed Conditional.
Paper presented at the Joint Statistical Meetings,
Vancouver, British Columbia.
Nisbett, R. E., Krantz, D. H., Jepson, C., & Kunda, Z. (1983).
The use of statistical heuristics in everyday inductive
reasoning. Psychological Review, 90, 339-363.
Rothbart, M. & Snyder, M. (1970). Confidence in the
prediction and postdiction of an uncertain outcome.
Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue
canadienne des sciences du comportement, 2, 38-43.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.

2325

Sloman, S. A. & Rips, L. J. (1998). Similarity and symbols in
human thinking. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smith, E. R. & Collins, E. C. (2009). Dual-process models:
A social psychological perspective. In J. S. B. T. Evans &
K. Frankish (Eds.), In two minds: Dual processes and
beyond (pp. 197-216). New York: Oxford University Press.
Stanovich, K. E., Toplak, M. E., & West, R. F. (2008). The
development of rational thought: A taxonomy of heuristics
and biases. In R. V. Kail (Ed.), Advances in child
development and behavior: Vol 36 (pp. 251-285). San
Diego: Elsevier.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1980). Causal schemas in
judgments under uncertainty. In M. Fishbein (Ed.),
Progress in social psychology. (pp. 49-72). Hillsdale, N J:
Erlbaum.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.
Villejoubert, G. & Mandel, D. (2002). The inverse fallacy:
An account of deviations from Bayes’s theorem and the
additivity principle. Memory & Cognition, 30, 171-178.
Windschitl, P. D. & Wells, G. L. (1998). The alternativeoutcomes effect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 1411-1423.
Wright, G. (1982). Changes in the realism and distribution of
probability assessments as a function of question type. Acta
Psychologica, 52, 165-174.

Appendix: Test Items & Solutions
Temporal-schema items
Order Intact. You are waiting to meet your friend, who is
coming from work. He phones saying he will get on the next
bus. From experience you know that if he catches an express
bus his chances of being on time are 90%, but if he catches a
local bus his chances of being on time are 65%. You also
know that 60% of the buses that stop by his work are locals,
thus he has a 60% chance of catching a local bus today. What
is the probability that he arrives on time?

Solutions: E: Catch express bus; OT: Is on time

Order Intact

P  OT | E   .9
c
P OT | E  .65




P  E   .6
c



P  OT   P  OT | E  P  E   P OT | E
  .9 1  .6    .65  .6 
 .36  .39
 .75

c

 PE 
c

Order Inverted

P  E | OT   .9
c
P E | OT  .65





P OT

c


  .6





P  E   P  E | OT  P  OT   P E | OT P  OT 
  .9 1  .6    .65  .6 
 .36  .39
 .75
c

Causal-schema items
Order Intact. At a journalism school, a professional ethics
exam is given to all students at the end of their first year.
Extensive research has established that the probability that a
student studies specifically for this exam is 70%. The overall
proportion of students who pass the exam is 92%. Exactly
66% of the students will study for the exam and pass it. If we
know that a student has studied specifically for the exam,
what is the probability that the student FAILS?
Order Inverted. At a journalism school, a professional
ethics exam is given to all students at the end of their first
year. Extensive research has established that the probability
that a student studies specifically for this exam is 70%. The
overall proportion of students who pass the exam is 92%.
Exactly 66% of the students will study for the exam and pass
it. If we know that a student has passed the exam, what is the
probability that the student DID NOT study specifically for
it?
Solutions: P: Pass exam; S: Studies

Order Intact

Order Inverted. You are waiting to meet your friend, who
is coming from work. He phones saying he will get on the
next bus. From experience you know that when he arrives
on time, 90% of the time he has caught an express bus, but
when he arrives late, 65% of the time he has caught an
express bus. You also know from experience that he is late
60% of the time, thus you figure that he has a 60% chance
of being late today. What is the probability that he catches
an express bus?

P  P   .92
P  S   .7
P  S  P   .66
c
P P S
c
P P |S 
P S 
.7  .66

.7
.04

.7
 .057



2326







Order Inverted

P  P   .92
P  S   .7
P  S  P   .66
c
P S P
c
P S |P 
P  P
.92  .66

.92
.26

.92
 .283









