UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Electrophysiology of Pragmatic Processing: Exploring the Processing Cost of the Scalar
Implicature in the Truth-Value Judgment Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6566q5j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Spychalska, Maria
Kontinen, Jarmo
Werning, Markus

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Electrophysiology of Pragmatic Processing: Exploring the Processing Cost of the
Scalar Implicature in the Truth-Value Judgment Task
Maria Spychalska* (maria.spychalska@rub.de), Jarmo Kontinen* (jarmo.kontinen@rub.de),
Markus Werning* (markus.werning@rub.de)
*Institute of Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum
Abstract
Most theoretical as well as empirical work regarding the scalar
implicature not all of the quantifier some has focused on the
controversy of whether this implicature is generated by default or based on context. Independently of this question, it
can be also asked whether this scalar implicature contributes
to the truth-conditional content of sentences. We present results of an ERP study which tackles both these questions. We
adopt a sentence-picture verification paradigm to investigate
whether the violation of this implicature, when it is based on
short-term memory rather than semantic memory, elicits N400
or late positivity (e.g. P600) effects. Additionally, we test if
the truth-value judgments of the pragmatically infelicitous sentences correlate with the elicited ERP components.
Keywords: scalar implicature; truth-value judgment; N400 effect; Post-N400-Positivity; P600

Introduction
In this paper we present results of the EEG experiment in
which we investigate how people process the scalar implicature nicht alle (not all) of the German quantifier einige (some)
in a truth-value judgement task. Scalar implicatures are pragmatic inferences, i.e. they are based not only on the literal
meaning of a given linguistic expression, but also on the additional assumption that the speaker is contributing to a conversation in a cooperative way, in particular by providing an appropriate amount of information. In standard semantics Some
As are B is understood to be equivalent to There are As that
are B and, hence, is semantically compatible with All As are
B. This standard meaning of some is usually referred to as
its logical (semantic) meaning. However, if a speaker says
Some of the students passed the exam, the addressee is in a
position to infer that Not all students passed the exam, since,
according to the cooperativity requirement, the speaker is expected to either utter a more informative statement with the
quantifier all if she knew that it was true, or reveal her lack
of knowledge on this matter. The meaning of some, when enriched with the implicature not all, is often referred to as its
pragmatic meaning.
One particularly often addressed question regarding scalar
implicatures is the default vs. context-based controversy. According to the default theory the implicature not all is generated by the lexical item some by default, i.e. locally and
more or less automatically, albeit it may be canceled in special circumstances (Horn, 1984; Levinson, 1983; Chierchia
et al., 2012). The proponents of the second approach (Bott &
Noveck, 2004; Breheny et al., 2006) postulate that the logical reading is the default interpretation of some, whereas the
scalar implicature result from complex and global reasoning
processes that are based on context.

Somewhat orthogonal to this debate, the emphasis in the
philosophy of language concerning the semantics-pragmatics
distinction has recently shifted towards the role pragmatic
processes play in establishing truth-conditions of sentences.
From this perspective, one can ask whether scalar implicatures are purely post-semantic processes that do not contribute to what is (literally) said, or whether they enter
the content of what is said and hence influence the truthconditions. Minimal semanticists (Cappelen & Lepore, 2005;
Borg, 2012) argue that a sentence’s truth-conditions are determined solely by its compositional semantics, which is a
function only of the semantic values of the sentence’s constituents and the way they are syntactically combined. This
traditional picture has been recently challenged. For instance,
Recanati’s truth-conditional pragmatics (Recanati, 2010) allows top-down pragmatic enrichment of what is said, therefore questioning the classical semantics-pragmatics distinction. According to this approach, not only primary pragmatic
processes such as saturation of indexicals, but also free pragmatic processes, such as implicatures, can influence intuitive
truth-conditions of sentences.
Most empirical work regarding scalar implicatures focuses
on the default- vs. context-based controversy. In order to shed
some light on this debate some researchers have investigated
the processing of the implicature on the neural level, with
the use of EEG (electroencephalography). Noveck & Posada
(2003); Nieuwland et al. (2010) investigated whether the violation of the scalar implicature triggers a so-called N400
effect – an amplitude difference between the event-related
potentials (ERPs), i.e. the time-locked EEG signals, in two
compared conditions recorded roughly 400ms after the onset of the stimulus. This effect is known to be linked to the
recognition of a semantic incongruence in language (Kutas &
Federmeier, 2000). In the case of pragmatic infelicity, which
is due to implicature violation, an N400 effect could be interpreted as evidence of an early incremental integration of
the implicature into the sentence meaning, and thus support
the default theory. Nieuwland et al. (2010) compared ERPs
elicited by pragmatically less felicitous sentence-final predicates in underinformative sentences with some, e.g. Some
people have lungs (All people have lungs would be more informative in this case), with felicitous sentence-final predicates in informative sentences with some, e.g. Some people
have pets. They showed that people differ in the way they
process these sentences, depending on their pragmatic language ability, which was estimated based on their score in
the Autism Spectrum Quotient Questionnaire (AQ) (Baron-

1497

Cohen et al., 2001). Individuals with low AQ (high pragmatic
skills) were more sensitive to implicature violation, whereas
participants with high AQ (low pragmatic ability) were more
sensitive to the local lexical-semantic relationships in sentences, that were stronger in underinformative than in informative sentences. This relationship, measured by a so-called
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Landauer et al., 1998), generally negatively correlates with the size the N400 effect.
In contrast, Politzer-Ahles et al. (2012) applied a paradigm
in which the felicity of the use of the quantifier some was
evaluated with respect to picture-models, e.g. pictures in
which all agents were engaged in the same activity (allmodels) or pictures in which only some of the agents were
engaged in one activity and the rest in another activity (somemodels). Measuring the ERPs at the onset of the quantifier,
they showed that those quantifiers that were used in a pragmatically inconsistent (some in the case of all-models), but
not semantically inconsistent way (all in the case of somemodels), were associated with a sustained negativity effect,
i.e. a prolonged negativity starting ca. 300ms post-stimulus
onset that has often been observed in response to ambiguous
words (Van Berkum et al., 2007).
The reported studies, however, have not given a satisfying response to a question, whether the violation of the scalar
implicature, when unaffected by lexical-semantic constraints,
can trigger the N400 effect independently of the general pragmatic skills (AQ score) of the subjects. Furthermore, since we
know that people are usually divided in the way they evaluate
the underinformative sentences (Bott & Noveck, 2004), we
can also ask to what extent those intuitive truth-value judgments would affect the elicited ERP components in the case
of the implicature violation. Nieuwland et al. (2010) did not
provide any differential analysis of this sort, whereas in the
study by Noveck & Posada (2003) no modulation of the ERPs
by the truth-value judgements was found. Still, we can expect such a modulation to take place, especially if the process
of evaluating pragmatic felicity is dissociated from semantic
memory. From a logical perspective semantic truth is a case
of a semantic congruence, whereas falsity represents a semantic violation. Thus, sentences evaluated as false should be associated with larger N400 ERPs than sentences evaluated as
true. It is then also expected that in the case of pragmatically
infelicitous sentences the elicited N400 ERPs should depend
on the truth-value evaluation given by the subjects.
To investigate these questions we examined ERP effects
associated with a violation of the scalar implicature in a
sentence-picture verification paradigm. The reason to adopt a
sentence-picture verification paradigm was to dissociate the
process of implicature calculation from world-knowledgebased or semantic memory-based sentence evaluation and
record ERPs elicited by pragmatic violations that are based
on short-term memory. The ERPs were measured on the onset of the critical sentence-final nouns, that determine semantic truth and pragmatic felicity of the quantified sentences. In
this way we focused on the felicity of the use of this noun in

given sentences with some or all in the context of visually presented models. Sentences with all were used to control across
evaluation-conditions for the model type, especially the priming effect of the critical word (see details below). Truth-value
judgements were gathered along with the EEG data in order
to test whether the semantic evaluation of the underinformative sentences correlates with the elicited ERP components.
Additionally, we screened our participants with three parts of
the Wechsler Intelligence test (WAIS) to measure their logical
fluid intelligence (the matrix reasoning test), linguistic intelligence (the vocabulary test), and working memory (the digit
span memory test) and with the Autism Spectrum Quotient
Questionnaire.

Experimental design
In our experiment, the target sentences with the quantifier
some and the control sentences with the quantifier all were
evaluated with respect to visual models, consisting of five
pictures. Each sentence was of form (1), where X denotes
the critical noun.
(1)

Einige/alle Bilder enthalten Xs.
Some / all pictures contain Xs.

Models were presented before the critical noun X, but after
the first part of a sentence containing the quantifier phrase.
In each model two different categories of objects were presented: one occurring in each of the pictures, the other occurring only in two or three of the pictures. There were three
evaluation-conditions for each of the two quantifiers which
gives us a 2 × 3 design: For the quantifier some (S-conditions)
these were: true and felicitous (ST ), true and infelicitous (SI),
and false (SF). For all (A-conditions) there was one true condition (AT ), and two false conditions: when the critical noun
denoted one of the object categories presented in the pictures
(AF) and when it denoted an object category that was not
displayed in the pictures (AF2). The conditions SI and AT
corresponded to the case when X denoted the object category
that was contained by each of the pictures, ST and AF corresponded to the case when X denoted the object category
that was contained by only a subset of the pictures, finally SF
and AF2 corresponded to the case when X denoted an object
category that was not displayed in any of the pictures. Thus,
true and false A-conditions were reversed relative to true and
infelicitous S-conditions with respect to whether the object
category denoted by the critical noun occurred in all or only
in some of the pictures. Furthermore, conditions AF2 and AF
differed with respect to priming of the critical word, in the
same way as conditions SF and SI/ST, however, unlike SF and
SI/ST, they did not differ with respect to the semantic status
of the sentence. The structure of an experimental trial is illustrated in Figure 1, whereas Table 1 presents the evaluationconditions for each of the critical words in the given example.
Subjects gave the truth-value judgements at the end of each
trial, after the critical word disappeared. No feedback was
given throughout the experiment and the subjects were asked
to follow their intuition in the truth-value judgment task.

1498

Figure 1: Time-course of an experimental trail

Table 1: Evaluation-conditions for both quantifiers with respect to
the given picture and depending on the critical word
Quantifier
Some
All

Balls
SI
AT

Cats
ST
AF

Teeth
SF
AF2

Materials
For the preparation of the stimuli, we constructed eighty ordered triples of nouns hn1 , n2 , n3 i. All words were used in
their plural form, were two-syllabic and had the length of
4 − 9 characters; the compound nouns were excluded. The
word frequency value1 was kept between 8 and 17. In each
triple the words were matched with respect to their length
(maximal character difference was 4) and frequency (maximal value difference was 2). All nouns denoted concrete easily identifiable objects. For each triple we created individual
pictures of n1 and n2 as single objects, and a picture of a pair
of n1 and n2 .
For each participant a different list of stimuli was generated from the base of noun-triples and pictures in a pseudorandom way. The same combination of nouns and pictures
was used for each of the three conditions for a given quantifier. Depending on the evaluation-condition a different noun
was displayed at the end of the trial. Thus, each picture set
was seen three times, but each word only once. In each experimental trial two categories of objects were presented: one in
each of the pictures, the other in three or two of the pictures.
The position of these object categories (right- vs. left-hand
side of the picture) was balanced across conditions but kept
consistent within a trial. The proportion 5/3 vs. 5/2 was also
balanced evenly per condition.
There were 40 trials per condition, which yields a total of
240 experimental trials, plus 60 filler trials, with quantifiers:
keine (no), die meisten (most), zwei (two), drei (three), vier
(four), fünf (five).

EEG recording and data processing
We measured fifty-seven (twenty-nine women) neurotypical,
monolingual German native speakers (age: 18-44, mean:
24.2, SD: 4.4).2 EEG was recorded from 64 active electrodes
with a BrainAmp acticap EEG recording system. AFz was
1 checked in the Wortschatz Leipzig corpus. The frequency value
v of a word w is equal to the quotient of the log2 of the frequency of
the word “der” and the frequency of the word w in corpus
2 Three people were excluded from the analysis due to technical
problems.

the ground electrode and FCz the physical reference. FT9,
FT10, P09, PO10 were reprogrammed and used for controlling both vertical and horizontal eye-movements. The EEG
was recorded with a sampling rate of 500 Hz and a bandpass filter of 0.53 (a time constant of 0.3s was used for a low
cut-off) – 70Hz. Impedance was kept below 5kΩ for scalp
electrodes and below 10kΩ for EOG electrodes.
The EEG data were processed using Brain Vision Analyzer 2.0 software. We applied an off-line high cut-off filter at
40Hz. Automatic raw data inspection rejected all trials with
amplitude differences over 200µV in the interval of less than
200ms, or with activity of less than 0.5µV in the interval of
100ms. Maximal voltage step allowed was 50µV /ms. Eye
blinks were corrected using an independent component analysis. The data was off-line re-referenced to the linked mastoids comprising of TP9 and TP10. Segments from 200ms
pre-target onset until 1000ms post-onset were averaged for
every subject and every condition. Baseline correction used
the 200ms interval preceding the onset of the stimulus. The
minimal number of segments that was preserved in each condition was 26 out of 40 (60%).

Results
Behavioral results: “pragmatists” vs. “logicians”
division
The analysis of the truth-value judgements revealed that our
subjects were generally consistent in their choice of either the
pragmatic or the logical interpretation of the quantifier some.
Accordingly, we divided them into two groups based on
their responses in condition SI. People who had at least 70%
of pragmatic responses were called “pragmatists” (N = 26),
whereas those who had at least 70% of logical responses were
called “logicians” (N = 28). Applying the threshold of 70%
resulted in an exhaustive division. The analysis of accuracy
and reaction time is left out here due to the paper’s space limits.

EEG results
For the statistical analysis of the EEG data we used a Matlab
Fieldtrip package. We performed a non-parametric statistical procedure called cluster-based permutation test (Maris &
Oostenveld, 2007) that allows to determine positive and negative clusters, i.e. collections of time-channel points where the
measured amplitude in one condition is significantly higher
respectively lower than in the compared condition.3
We pairwise compared averaged ERPs between S- and Aconditions separately, i.e. we compared SI vs. ST, SF vs. ST
and SF vs. SI for the quantifier some, and AF vs. AT, AF2 vs.
AT and AF2 vs. AF for the quantifier all. The crucial comparisons for testing our hypotheses were between conditions
SI and ST, and between SF and SI. The comparison between
conditions false and true for some (SF vs. ST) and between
3 All the permutation tests were run on all channells and the
whole epochs (0 − 100ms), with α = .025, and 10000 permutations.

1499

the conditions for the quantifier all served as control. After applying Bonferroni correction for three comparisons per
quantifier, and for positive and negative clusters, our alpha
level was α = .05/6 = .0083. Our analysis revealed that for
the quantifier some subjects’ ERPs for critical words were
significantly more negative in condition infelicitous (SI) than
in condition true (ST) (p < .001), in the time window of 260436 ms post-onset, which corresponds to a standard N400 effect. This effect had a central topographical localization and
was followed by a marginally significant centro-parietal positive cluster (500-624 ms, p < .0099). Such late positivities
have been often observed after N400 effects (see (Van Petten
& Luka, 2012)), although their functional sensitivity is still
unclear. Following Van Petten & Luka (2012) we adopt a
theoretically neutral term Post-N400-Positivity (PNP) to refer
to any positivity observed after an N400 effect.
The control comparison between conditions false (SF) and
true (ST) for some predictably resulted in a significant N400
effect (236-492 ms, p < .0001) followed by a significant PNP
(520-998 ms, p < .0001). More importantly, however, there
was a significant N400 (254-514 ms, p < .0001) and a significant PNP (544-964 ms, p < .0001) in the second critical
comparison, i.e. between conditions false and infelicitous for
some (SF vs. SI). This means that even though the mean amplitude in condition SI was significantly larger in the N400
time-window than in ST, it was significantly smaller than in
SF; however in the PNP time-window the mean amplitude
was larger in SI than in SF, but smaller than in ST.
Similar effects were obtained for the quantifier all: Averaged ERPs in both false conditions were more negative than
in the true condition in the time-window corresponding to the
N400 effect: AF vs. AT (226-432 ms, p < .0001) and AF2 vs.
AT (226-432 ms, p < .0001). The N400 effects were followed
by significant PNPs: AF vs. AT (440-960 ms, p < .0001) and
AF2 vs. AT (510-998 ms, p < .0001). The comparison between the two false conditions (AF2 vs. AF) also resulted in a
significant N400 effect (258-540 ms, p < .0001) followed by
a significant positivity effect (760-998 ms, p < .0036). Note,
that in this case, the positivity effect differed from the positivity effects obtained for the other comparisons, i.e. it started
approximately 200ms later and had a more left-hemispheric
extension.

The ERP effects depend on the truth-value
judgement: the between-group differences
One of the main hypothesis of this study was that the ERPs
elicited in the infelicitous condition should be modulated by
subjects’ truth-value evaluation of the underinformative sentences. Thus, we expected that “pragmatists” should get
larger N400/P600 SI vs. ST effects than “logicians”. The
inspection of grand averages for both groups (Figure 2) suggested that this hypothesis could be sustained, and “pragmatists” and “logicians” indeed obtained different effects. The
follow-up analysis involving cluster-based permutation tests
that were performed separately for each of the two groups

confirmed this hypothesis (Table 2)4 . “Pragmatists” got a
large SI vs. ST N400 effect lasting for almost 200 ms with a
global topographical extension, followed by an over 400 mslong wide-ranging PNP that was maximal at parietal regions,
however, there were no significant effects in this comparison
found for “logicians”. In contrast, whereas “logicians” got a
significant N400 effect and PNP in the comparison between
conditions SF and SI, in the case of “pragmatists” only the
N400 effect was significant. The N400 effect in this comparison obtained for “pragmatists” could be associated with the
priming difference between conditions SF and SI.
To compare the size of the N400 effect and the PNP between the two groups we conducted independent t-tests. The
two groups were compared with respect to their average amplitude differences between conditions SI and ST, as well as
between SF and SI. The averages were calculated over all the
electrodes involved in the effects, i.e. all electrodes that had
at least one data point in the significant cluster.5 The timewindows for computing the averaged size of the N400 and
PNP effects were selected to be the time-windows of the corresponding significant clusters that were found by the permutation tests performed for all subjects, i.e. both groups
jointly. According to our predictions, “pragmatists” got a significantly larger than “logicians” the SI vs. ST N400 effect
(t(52) = 5.392, p < .001) as well as the SI vs. ST PNP effect (t(52) = −3.506, p = .001). There was also a significant correlation between the behavioral responses and these
effects: The more often the subjects responded pragmatically,
the larger was their N400 effect (r = −.592, p < .001), and
PNP effect (r = .467, p < .001). The two groups also differed significantly with respect to the effects obtained for
the comparison SF vs. SI. Both effects were significantly
larger for “logicians” than for “pragmatists”: the SF vs. SI
N400 effect (t(52) = −4.325, p < .001) and the SF vs. SI
PNP (t(52) = 2.238, p = .03). Both effects were also correlated with the behavioral responses: The more often the subjects responded pragmatically, the smaller was their PNP (r =
−.284, p = .037) and the N400 effect (r = .505, p < .001).
There were no between-group differences regarding the sizes
of the N400 effects or PNPs obtained in the control comparison SF vs. ST, as well as in any of the comparisons between
the A-conditions, except for the comparison AF2 vs. AF.6
Finally, “pragmatists” and “logicians” did not differ in any
of the personal characteristics measured: their intelligence,
working memory or AQ. None of the measured variables was
correlated with any of the ERP effects.
4 The level of significance was additionally corrected for the two
groups (per quantifier), i.e. α = .0083/2 = .00415
5 In each case we excluded the EOG electrodes, linked mastoids
and, due to excessive artifacts, the anterior electrodes: AF7, AF8,
Fp1, Fp2. For both N400 effects all remaining channels were included, except for F7. For the SI vs. ST PNP the non-involved
electrodes were: F8, FC6, T8, F5, FT7, FT8; whereas for SF vs. SI
PNP the non-involved electrodes were: F3, F8, AF3, AF4, F1.
6 Here the late positivity cluster was significant for “logicians”,
but a similar cluster found by the permutation test for “pragmatists”
was not significant.

1500

Figure 2: Topographical maps of the effects in all S-comparisons plus the grand averages for all three conditions for the quantifier some at
the electrode Cz

Table 2: Positive and negative clusters for each comparison for “pragmatists” and “logicians”
Pragmatists

Negative clusters

Logicians

Negative clusters

Positive clusters

Positive clusters

time (ms)
significance
time(ms)
significance
time (ms)
significance
time(ms)
significance

SI vs ST
264 − 436
p < .0005
482 − 894
p < .0001
Not sig.
Not sig.
Not sig.
Not sig.

SF vs ST
252 − 474
p < .0001
502 − 876
p < .0001
252 − 504
p < .0001
550 − 898
p < .0003

Discussion
The results of our experiment confirmed the main hypothesis that the violation of the scalar implicature can elicit an
N400 effect similar to the N400 effect characteristic for standard semantic violations. In the case of comparing a clear
semantic violation (SF) with the baseline condition ST, a typical N400 effect was observed for all subjects and for both
sub-groups separately. This effect was additionally followed
by a significant PNP. However, the N400 and PNP effects
observed in the comparisons of the pragmatically infelicitous
sentences (SI) with the baseline true (ST) or control false (SF)
sentences, were dependent on on subjects’ (behavioral) evaluation of the infelicitous sentences. These correlations of the
size of the N400 effect and the PNP in the critical comparisons SI vs. ST and SF vs. SI and with the pragmatic vs.
logical evaluation of underinformative sentences allows us to
conclude that these effects were triggered by a pragmatic violation only if a person explicitly adopted the implicature as
a part of the sentence’s truth-conditions.
The interesting fact is that our participants were almost
evenly divided into “pragmatists” and “logicians”. This result
could be interpreted as indicating an ad hoc semantic decision
taken by a subject who had to choose between the two possible interpretations of the same linguistic expression. This
conjecture is further reinforced by the fact that there were
no significant differences between the two groups: neither
involving their ERP differences in the control comparisons,

SF vs SI
304 − 556
p < .0017
Not sig.
Not sig.
256 − 498
p < .0001
542 − 998
p < .0001

AF vs AT
260 − 418
p < .0007
444 − 998
p < .0001
244 − 430
p < .0001
454 − 908
p < .0001

AF2 vs AT
238 − 460
p < .0001
500 − 838
p < .0002
242 − 464
p < .0001
522 − 892
p < .0001

AF2 vs AF
370 − 528
p < .001
Not sig.
Not sig.
330 − 520
p < .0011
810 − 998
p < .0035

their age, gender, AQ quotient, nor results from any part of
the intelligence test. Thus, one can conclude that the recorded
ERP effects in the critical comparisons SI vs. ST and SF vs.
SI indicated primarily the person’s truth-value evaluation of
the underinformative sentences.

The effect of truth-value judgment vs. priming
A significant N400 effect was observed in all cases in which
the compared conditions differed with respect to the truthvalue judgment given by subjects. However, comparing two
false conditions AF2 vs. AF, and SF vs. SI in the case of
“pragmatists”, also resulted in a significant N400 effect, even
though in both these cases the compared conditions did not
differ with regard to the given truth-value evaluation. The
N400 effect in the regarded comparisons can be associated
with priming: In conditions AF2 and EF the critical words
denoted a completely new object which was not depicted in
the respective model, whereas in conditions AF and SI the
critical word referred to one of the depicted objects. Thus,
even though in both compared conditions the sentences were
judged as false, only in AF2 and SF the critical word was not
visually primed by the preceding model. This lack of priming gave rise to more negative amplitudes in the N400 timewidows. Interestingly, the modulation of the PNP through
priming seemed marginal and of a different sort. There was
no significant cluster for “pragmatists” in the comparison SF
vs. SI. The clusters found for the comparisons AF2 vs. AF
(not significant for “pragmatists”) were 200ms delayed with

1501

respect to the PNPs in other comparisons and had a different topographical distribution, i.e. a more left-hemispheric
extension. Thus, a clear centro-parietal PNP with an onset
around 500ms and lasting for several hundred ms occurred
only for comparisons in which there was a difference in the
truth-value evaluation.

Conclusion
A strong version of the default theory cannot be supported by
our results. If the implicature was by default incorporated into
the sentence’s meaning at the early stage of semantic processing, then we could expect an indication of the recognition of
the implicature violation (e.g. the N400 effect) irrespectively
of the subject’s final decision to cancel this implicature. However, we found such an indication, i.e. the N400 effect, only
when the implicature was adopted as part of the sentence’s
truth-conditions. An alternative approach according to which
the implicature occurs as a purely context-based inference
seems neither fully supported by our data. If the scalar implicature is based on post-propositional inferential processes,
whereas it is the semantic meaning that is the default interpretation of some, why would the violation of this implicature trigger any N400 effect in the first place? In that case
we would rather expect only a P600 effect reflecting some
additional sentence reprocessing.
We find our results convincing enough to shed doubt on
the well-established default- vs. context-based distinction as
oversimplified and not providing sufficient theoretical framework to explain the nature of scalar implicatures. This leaves
space for a more refined theory that would take into account
both: a possibility of an incremental integration of the implicature into the sentence meaning as well as a non-mandatory
and non-automatic character of the implicature. One theory
of this sort could be the truth-conditional pragmatics account,
which seems to be well-supported by our data. The correlation between the truth-value responses and the recorded ERP
effects suggests that the implicature was incorporated into the
sentence’s truth-conditions at the early stage of semantic processing. Thus, the scalar implicatures can become a part of
the truth-conditional content. Having said this we are aware
that it is not the only way to account for the presented data.
A more in-depth philosophical discussion is still needed for
which the limits of this paper do not allow.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Stiftung Mercator Foundation within the project Theory
of Memory.

References
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J.,
& Clubley, E. (2001). The autism-spectrum quotient
(AQ): Evidence from Asperger syndrome/high-functioning
autism, males and females, scientists and mathematicians.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31, 5-17.
Borg, E. (2012). Pursuing meaning. Oxford University
Press.

Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar implicatures. Journal of Memory and Language, 51(3), 437-457.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are generalized implicatures generated by default? An on-line investigation into the role of context in generating pragamtic
inferences. Cognition, 100(3), 434-463.
Cappelen, H., & Lepore, E. (2005). A tall tale: In defense of semantic minimalism and speech act pluralism. In
G. Preyer & G. Peter (Eds.), Contextualism in philosophy:
Knowledge, meaning, and truth. (p. 197219.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chierchia, G., Fox, D., & Spector, B. (2012). The grammatical view of scalar implicatures and the relationship between semantics and pragmatics. In P. Portner, C. Maienborn, & K. von Heusinger (Eds.), An international handbook of natural language meaning. Mouton de Gruyter.
Horn, L. (1984). Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic inference: Q-based and R-based implicature. In D. Schiffrin
(Ed.), Meaning, form, and use in context: Linguistic applications (p. 11-42). Georgetown University Press.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. (2000). Electrophysiology reveals semantic memory use in language comprehension.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 4(12), 463-470.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). Introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25,
259-284.
Levinson, S. C. (1983). Pragmatics (B. L. Catalounia, Ed.).
Cambridge University Press.
Maris, E., & Oostenveld, R. (2007). Nonparametric statistical
testing of EEG- and MEG-data. Journal of Neuroscience
Methods, 164(1), 177-190.
Nieuwland, M., Diman, T., & Kuperberg, G. (2010). On the
incrementality of pragmatic processing: An ERP investigation of informativeness and pragmatic abilities. Journal
of Memory and Language, 63, 324-346.
Noveck, I., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterizing the time
course of an implicature: An evoked potentials study.
Brain and Language, 85, 203-210.
Politzer-Ahles, S., Fiorentino, R., Jiang, X., & Zhou, X.
(2012). Distinct neural correlates for pragmatic and semantic meaning processing: An event-related potential investigation of scalar implicature processing using picturesentence verification. Brain Research, 1490, 134-152.
Recanati, F. (2010). Truth-conditional pragmatics. Oxford
University Press.
Van Berkum, J., Koornneef, A., Otten, M., & Nieuwland,
M. (2007). Establishing reference in language comprehension: An electrophysiological perspective. Brain Research,
1146, 158-171.
Van Petten, C., & Luka, B. J. (2012). Review: Prediction
during language comprehension: Benefits, costs, and ERP
components. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
83, 176-190.

1502

