UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Enculturation Effects of Musical Training on Pitch Discrimination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0r73p455

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Grannan-Rubenstein, Greta
Grannan-Rubenstein, William
Thibodeau, Paul

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Enculturation Effects of Musical Training on Pitch Discrimination
Greta D. Grannan-Rubenstein (ggrannan@oberlin.edu)
William L. Grannan-Rubenstein (wgrannan@oberlin.edu)
Paul H. Thibodeau (paul.thibodeau@oberlin.edu)
Oberlin College Department of Psychology
120 West Lorain St; Oberlin, OH 44074
Abstract

facilitate the emergence of an innate faculty for
discrimination of domain-specific communicative categories
(Chomsky, 1965; Lerdahl, 1992), or does it facilitate
selective perception of learned communicative categories
(Cutting & Rosner, 1974; Tomasello, 2008)?
Existing research on pitch perception suggests that people
with extensive professional musical training recognize and
reproduce culturally familiar pitch-class sets better than
people without such training (Smith et al., 1994). That is,
musical training has been shown to facilitate discrimination
between a prototypical pitch and a pitch that deviates
slightly from this prototype. While this finding supports the
hypothesis that musical training tunes people to familiar
prototypical pitches, it does not rule out the possibility that
musical training facilitates unfamiliar pitch discrimination
as well (i.e., that musical training tunes people to variation
in pitch more generally).

Research on the acquisition and use of communicative
categories in domains such as language and music is largely
divided between approaches suggesting innate cognitive
constraints on domain-specific communicative forms, and
approaches suggesting domain-general mechanisms through
which specific communicative forms are learned. The present
study investigates the effect of greater or lesser enculturation
in the communicative system of Western tonal music on
peoples’ ability to discriminate culturally familiar and
culturally unfamiliar pitch categories. The results indicate that
while prior musical training affects peoples’ overall approach
to pitch discrimination, the advantage is dependent on the
familiarity (in both pitch and timbre) of the aural stimulus,
and is negligible under conditions of maximal musical
unfamiliarity. Observed differences in pitch discrimination
ability therefore appear to result from enculturation effects of
exposure to Western music, not from a relationship between
musical training and innate perceptual categories.

The Present Study

Keywords: Auditory perception; auditory representation;
music
cognition;
categorical
perception;
learning;
enculturation

Introduction
Do people with extensive Western musical performance
training differ in their ability to discriminate tones that vary
in pitch frequency from people without such training? To
what extent are differences between these groups a function
of the familiarity of the frequencies (i.e., musical scale
system) and timbres (i.e., musical instrument) in which
sounded tones are presented?
One possibility is that musical training tunes a person’s
perceptual system to the continuous dimension of pitch. On
this view, one would expect that people who are musically
trained would outperform people who are untrained in their
ability to discriminate small variations in pitch, irrespective
of the familiarity of the tones. A second possibility,
however, is that musical training facilitates the development
of prototypical sound categories, such as the 12 pitch classes
of Western tonal music. On this latter view, one would
expect that musically trained participants would outperform
untrained participants only in tasks in which they were
asked to discriminate variations in pitch from familiar
prototypes.
These two hypotheses represent opposing answers to the
underlying theoretical question: does perceptive and
performative training within a communicative system

To investigate how musical training affects the perception
of pitch, we recruited people from two populations — one
with extensive musical performance training and one
without — for participation in a pitch discrimination task. In
the task, participants were asked to identify sounds that
deviated from a designated set: in some cases, the set
included culturally familiar pitches (i.e., notes from the
Western major scale); in others, the set included culturally
unfamiliar pitches (i.e., notes from the scales used on
Javanese pelog gamelans).
Prior research utilizing a similar paradigm has shown that
Western trained musicians outperform an untrained sample
even on culturally unfamiliar pitches (Lynch et al., 1990;
Lynch & Eilers, 1991, 1992). However, this research
utilized small sets of tones within the context of a musical
melody. We expended on this paradigm by broadening the
number of tones, eliminating the melodic context (i.e.,
randomizing the order of presented pitches and
standardizing the inter-stimulus interval), and adding a
variable for timbre: in some cases sounds were presented in
the musically familiar timbre of a violin, while in others the
tone quality was flattened to a sine wave (Remez et al.,
1981, 1994). The present study, therefore, is better able to
address whether musically trained individuals are sensitive
to deviations in pitch from an unfamiliar prototype when
listening to isolated musical sounds.

2985

Method
Participants
Fifty Oberlin College and Conservatory students
participated in the study in exchange for course credit. Of
these, 26 were students from the College of Arts and
Sciences enrolled in an introductory psychology course and
24 were students from the Conservatory of Music enrolled
in an introductory musicology course.
To confirm that our samples differed with respect to
musical experience, everyone was asked to complete the
Musical Experience Questionnaire (MEQ) (Werner, Swope,
& Heide, 2006) at the end of the experiment. The MEQ
revealed strong differences between the two sample groups
in three of the six sub-dimensions of the scale: commitment,
t[48] = 4.731, p < 0.001; innovative musical aptitude, t[48]
= 4.736, p < 0.001; and positive psychotropic effects, t[48]
= 3.557, p < 0.001. The MEQ revealed marginally
significant differences for the other three sub-dimensions:
social uplift, t[48] = 1.878, p = 0.07; affective reactions,
t[48] = 0.152, p = 0.08; and reactive musical behavior t[48]
= 1.701, p = 0.10. In every case, the trained musicians
reported scores higher than the untrained sample. These
results help to confirm that our sample differed in important
ways with respect to musical experience.

Procedure
There were four blocks of the pitch discrimination task: one
for each of the tone types (violin major, sine major, violin
pelog, and sine pelog), presented in random order. The pitch
discrimination task consisted of familiarization and
discrimination phases. In the familiarization phase,
participants passively listened to a set of eight prototypical
tones. In the discrimination phase, participants were
instructed to press the spacebar when they heard a tone that
deviated from those played during the familiarization phase
(“even very slightly”).
In the discrimination phase 80% of the tones matched one
of the eight prototypes from the familiarization phase and
20% deviated. There were two levels of deviation: small (an
0.8% increase or decrease in absolute frequency from the
prototype) and large (a 2.4% increase or decrease in
absolute frequency from the prototype). In both phases,
tones played for 1,000 ms and were followed by 800 ms of
silence. The task was continuous, so each subsequent tone
began 1,800 ms after the previous, regardless of the
participant’s behavior.
Each block was designed such that people were presented
with approximately two minutes of familiarization, followed
by two minutes of discrimination, followed by a minute of
familiarization, followed by two minutes of discrimination
(see Table 1).

BLOCK 1

BLOCK 2

BLOCK 3

BLOCK 4

Violin MS

Sine MS

Violin PS

Sine PS

2 minutes of familiarization (80 tones)
2 minutes of discrimination (80 tones): 20% of the tones
deviated from those presented in the familiarization phase
1 minute of re-familiarization (40 tones)
2 minutes of discrimination (80 tones): 20% of the tones
deviated from those presented in the familiarization phase
Distractor Task: Lexical decision task with 80 self-paced
trials (50% words; 50% non-words)
Table 1. Design of the experiment (block types presented in
random order).

The end of each block included a lexical decision task,
which served as a buffer between blocks of the auditory
perception task. In the lexical decision task, participants
were shown strings of letters on the screen serially and were
asked to identify, as quickly and accurately as possible,
whether the string was an English word or not. Fifty percent
of the letter strings were English words and 50% were nonwords.
At the end of the experiment, participants were asked to
fill out the abridged MEQ (Werner, Swope, & Heide, 2006).

Results
Data Processing
Recognition Trials. In the auditory discrimination task,
responses faster than 500 ms from the stimulus onset were
trimmed. This cutoff is roughly two standard deviations
below the mean response time (RT) (M = 1,184.89, SD =
356.98) and included less than 1% of the trials (0.79%).
These responses likely reflect errant responses or slow
reactions to the preceding trial. Since RTs are calculated
from the onset of the tone, a participant who responded at
500 ms is reacting mid-tone and is unlikely to have had a
chance to make a decision and respond to the present trial.
Deviation Direction for Recognition Trials. Large upward
and large downward deviations were grouped into a single
category of “large” deviations; small upward and small
downward deviations were similarly grouped. Separate twoway (sample X block type) repeated measures ANOVAs
found no difference by deviation direction. For large
deviations, there were no differences in performance by
sample, F[1,191] = 1.67, p = 0.20, block type, F[3,191] =
1.83, p = 0.14, or interaction between sample and block
type, F[3,191] < 1. Similarly, for small deviations, there
were no differences by sample, F[1,191] = 3.82, p = 0.051,
1

There was a marginal effect of population such that the untrained
participants performed slightly better on upward deviations (by 2.7
percentage points) whereas the musicians showed no advantage for

2986

condition, F[3,191] = 1.97, p = 0.12, or interaction between
sample and condition F[3,191] < 1.
Block Order for Recognition Trials. The participants’
performance on the auditory discrimination task was not
affected by block order, F[3,79] < 1, nor was there an
interaction between block order and block type, F[9,79] <
1.2

Perceptual Discrimination Task

Figure 1. The difference in performance between the trained
musicians and untrained non-musician samples by block type.
Error bars reflect the standard error of mean.

These finding leave open the possibility that the trained
musicians’ performance on the tone recognition task is in
part aided by their practice of fine motor tasks (e.g.
repetitive, precision-oriented hand movement during
musical practice), improved attention to relevant stimuli or
overall improved signal detection. In order to evaluate these
questions, an analysis of the lexical decision task results for
both groups was performed.

Results of Lexical Decision Task

0.6

Overall, participants performed well on the lexical decision
task with a correct response rate of 91.53%. In analyzing
data from the lexical decision task relative to the auditory
perception task, we found an interaction in performance,
F[1,95] = 6.478, p < .05. The sample of musically trained
participants performed better on the auditory recognition
task whereas the sample of musically untrained participants
performed better on the lexical decision task (see Figure 2).

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

Musicians
Non−Musicians

d−prime

Response data were transformed to a comprehensive
measure of performance, d’, which accounts for sensitivity
to the signal (correct responses) while controlling for the
noise (false alarms). Because of the structure of the task,
deviating tones were treated as the “targets” and responding
on a “target” trial was coded as a “hit”; responding to a
prototypical, non-deviating, tone was coded as a “false
alarm.” For each scale and instrument condition, we
normalized “hit” distributions separately by “small” and
“large” deviation groups, averaged these scores and then
subtracted participants’ normalized false alarm rate from the
normalized hit rate (see Figure 1).
A repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a main effect of
training, F[1,195] = 13.479, p < 0.001, and an interaction
between training and scale, F[1,195] = 5.901, p < 0.05. We
found no effect of timbre, F[1,195] < 1 or interaction
between timbre and sample , F[1,195] < 1.
Post-hoc tests revealed that trained musicians were better
at the task overall, t[48]=3.64, p < .001, Cohen’s d = .922.
This difference was larger for tones from the major scale,
t[48] = 3.45, p < .01, Cohen’s d = .884, than for tones from
the pelog scale, t[48] = 2.22, p < .05, Cohen’s d = .606.
Indeed, when block types were coded by familiarity (in
order from most familiar to least familiar: major violin,
major sine, pelog violin, pelog sine) and included as a linear
predictor with sample population in a repeated-measures
ANOVA we find an interaction between familiarity and
sample , F[1,195] = 6.156, p < .05. That is, the difference
between groups shrank as the tones became less familiar
(see Figure 1).
Specifically, trained musicians outperformed nonmusicians on major violin, t[48] = 3.418, p < 0.01, major
sine, t[44] = 2.880, p < 0.01, and pelog violin, t[48] = 2.041,
p < 0.05, but not on the pelog sine trials, t[48] = 1.151, p =
0.256.

deviations in either direction (a difference of < .01 percentage
points).
2
Due to a coding error, a substantial portion of the non-musician
participants received the same block order: Pelog Violin, Major
Violin, Pelog Sine, Major Sine.

Auditory Discrimination

Lexical Decision

Figure 2. Mean d' for trained musicians and non-musicians on the
auditory discrimination and lexical decision tasks. Error bars
reflect the standard error of mean.

2987

General Discussion
The data generated in this study supported the initial
hypothesis regarding effects of enculturation: that while
prior musical training predicted better performance on the
pitch discrimination task, the resulting advantage depended
closely upon the familiarity of the pitches and timbres
presented. Not only did familiarity show a positive
correlation with accuracy of identification and a negative
correlation with reaction time, but these effects were more
marked for participants with substantial musical training,
which reduced the utility of subjects’ musical training as a
signal to predict their performance under conditions of low
familiarity. In fact, the demonstrated advantage resulting
from musical training was altogether absent for tone
discrimination of pelog sine prototypes and of pelog violin
and pelog sine large deviations. These results are in
agreement with previously established enculturation effects
in pitch discrimination, which suggest a learned rather than
generative aspect of communicative category formation.
The interactions between sample (trained vs. untrained)
and familiarity suggest that while the two groups may
approach the frequency discrimination task in
fundamentally different ways, these differences become
insignificant as the aural input becomes inconsistent with
sound patterns for culturally familiar musical sound. This
result holds true across not only the variable for pitch but
also the variable for timbre — where without accounting for
musical enculturation, the richness of overtones within the
violin timbre compared to the sine wave would presumably
lead to greater difficulty in distinguishing fundamental
frequencies. As a result, we can infer that what sets trained
musicians apart is the salience of cognitive schemas
established through the enculturation of familiar musical
pitches and timbres, rather than a heightened and innate
faculty for the discrimination of pitch frequencies.
The richness of the data set offers several promising
approaches for future analysis beyond what is presented in
this paper. Data from the musical experience questionnaire
given to each participant includes not only ordinal responses
on propositions relating to various facets of musical
experience, but also qualitative responses for the time,
intensity, and instrument(s) of participants’ musical
experience. Integrated into the main analysis, this data could
offer any number of ways to parse musical experience
beyond the trained/untrained binary provided by subjects’
institutional and academic backgrounds, allowing for
quantitative differentiation between multiple variables in
musical experience and their influence on pitch
discrimination.
In addition to further analysis on existing data, additional
experimentation within similar paradigms could build off of
existing research on the effects of linguistic interference
tasks on learned categorical perception (Winawer et al,
2007). If variable performance on pitch discrimination tasks
depends largely upon enculturation of specific sound
categories, interference tasks designed to impede the
utilization of complex cognitive schemas should have

similar effects on pitch discrimination as on discrimination
of categories in other domains, such as colors and
phonemes. Furthermore, these effects should show
significant variation in keeping with the varied extent of
subjects’ prior musical enculturation.
Demonstrating such effects on pitch category
discrimination would provide further support for theories of
domain-general communicative category formation,
underscoring an important consistency between the present
research and broader research directions within cognitive
science and cognitive linguistics (e.g. Evans & Levinson,
2009; Tomasello, 2014).

References
Berkowitz, A. (2010). The Improvising Mind: Cognition
and Creativity in the Musical Moment. Oxford University
Press.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects ofthe theory ofsyntax. MIT
Press.
Cutting, I.E., & Rosner, B.S. (1974). Categories and
boundaries in speech and music. Perception &
Psychophysics, 16, 564-570.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S.C. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance for
cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32,
429-492.
Hockett, C.F., & Altmann, S.A. (1968). A note on design
features. In Animal communications: techniques of study
and results of research, T. A. Sebeok, Ed. Indiana
University Press. 61 -72.
Juslin, P.N., & Laukka, P. (2003). Communication of
emotions in vocal expression and music performance:
Different channels, same code? Psychological Bulletin,
129:5, 770-814.
Large, E.W., & Palmer, C. (2002). Perceiving temporal
regularity in music. Cognitive Science, 26, 1-37.
Lerdahl, F. (1992). Cognitive Constraints on Compositional
Systems. Contemporary Music Review, 6:2, 97-121.
Levitin, D.J. (1994). Absolute memory for musical pitch:
Evidence from the production of learned melodies.
Perception & Psychophysics, 56:4, 414-423.
Liberman, A.M., Harris, K.S., Hoffman, H.S., & Griffith,
B.C. (1957). The discrimination of speech sounds within
and across phoneme boundaries. Journal ofExperimental
Psychology, 54, 358-368.
Lynch, M.P., & Eilers, R.E. (1991). Children's perception of
native and non-native musical scales. Music Perception,
9, 121-132.
Lynch, M.P., & Eilers, R.E. (1992). A study of perceptual
development for musical tuning. Perception &
Psychophysics, 52, 599-608.
Lynch, M.P., Eilers, R.E., Oiler, D.K., & Urbano, R.C. (1
990). Innateness,
experience,
and
music
perception. Psychological Science, 1 , 272-276.
MacDonald, M.C., Pearlmutter, N.J., & Seidenberg, M.S. (1
994). Lexical Nature of
Syntactic
Ambiguity Resolution. Psychological Review,

2988

101:4, 676-703.
McMullen, E., & Saffran, J.R. (2004). Music and language:
A developmental comparison. Music Perception, 21 , 289311.
Merker, B. (2002). Music: The missing Humboldt system.
Musicae Scientiae, 6, 3-21.
Patel, A.D. (1998). Syntactic processing in language and
music: different cognitive operations, similar neural
resources? Music Perception, 16:1, 27–42.
Patel, A.D. (2008). Music, Language, and the Brain. Oxford
University Press.
Remez, R.E., Rubin, P.E., Pisoni, D.B., & Carrell, T.D. (1
981 ). Speech perception
without traditional
speech cues. Science, 212, 947-950.
Remez, R.E., Rubin, P.E., Berns, S.E., Pardo, J.S., & Lang,
J.M. (1994). On the perceptual organization of speech.
Psychological Review, 101, 129-136.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical Learning by 8-Month-Old Infants. Science,
New Series, 274:5294, 1926-1928.
Smith, J.D., Kemler Nelson, D.G., Grohskopf, L.A., &
Appleton, T. (1994). What child is this? What interval
was that? Familiar tunes and music perception in novice
listeners. Cognition, 52:1, 23-54.
Tomasello, M. (2004). What kind of evidence could refute
the universal grammar hypothesis? Commentary on
Wunderlich. Studies in Language, 28:1, 642-645.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of Human Communication.
MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. (2014). A Natural History of Human
Thinking. Harvard University Press.
Werner, P.D., Swope, A.J., & Heide, F.J. (2006). The Music
Experience Questionnaire: Development and correlates.
Journal ofPsychology, 140, 329-345.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M.C., Wu, L., Wade,
A.R., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal
effects of language on color discrimination. Proceedings
of the National Academy ofSciences, 107:19, 7780-7785.
Zbikowski, L. (2012). Music, Language, and What Falls in
Between. Ethnomusicology, 56:1, 125-131.

2989

