UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Error-Driven Adaptation of Higher-Level Expectations During Reading

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00t2m3wr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Farmer, Thomas
Fine, Alex
Yan, Shaorong
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Error-Driven Adaptation of Higher-Level Expectations During Reading
Thomas A. Farmer1 (thomas-farmer@uiowa.edu), Alex B. Fine2 (abfine@illinois.edu), 1Shaorong Yan (shaorongyan@uiowa.edu), 3Spyridoula Cheimariou (spyridoula-cheimariou@uiowa.edu) &
4
T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu)
1

Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61820 USA
3
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
4
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA
2

Abstract

probabilistically associated with words from an expected
category) of an upcoming word. As the incoming signal
flows from lower-level sensory processes to progressively
higher levels of analysis (more abstracted away from the
physical input), it is assessed with respect to progressively
higher-level expectations that are generated via context.
Any mis-match between the properties of the signal and
the prediction (at any level) will generate a prediction error.
These “error signals” contain information about the
difference between what was predicted and the structure of
the input contained in the arriving signal. The error signal
feeds forward to higher levels of representation, potentially
facilitating an adjustment of higher-level expectations such
that the predictions generated in the future may be more
precise (see also Chang, Dell, & Bock, 2006; Fine & Jaeger
2013; Jaeger & Snider, 2013).1

Fine et al. (2013) recently demonstrated that readers continually
adapt their syntactic expectations in order to accurately
approximate the distributions of syntactic structures in a given
communicative context. Here, we examine patterns of eye
movements as subjects read sentences that contain an atypical
distribution of syntactic structures to gain more fine-grained
insight into the time-course and nature of this adaptive process.
An adaptation effect was only elicited on a late measure—
second-pass reading times—consistent with the claim that
expectation adaptation to an atypical distribution of syntactic
structures occurs at a higher level that is abstracted away from
the physical properties of the visual input.
Keywords: Language Comprehension; Eye Movements;
Prediction; Adaptation; Learning; Reading

Introduction
Based on a lifetime of experience, adults possess a wealth of
knowledge about the structure of language and about how
linguistic events are typically distributed within a specific
communicative context. Language comprehension arises by
synthesizing this stored knowledge with the information
available in the linguistic stimulus as it unfolds over time.
Stated alternatively, prior knowledge about contextualized
language facilitates the generation of expectations about
what types of information are likely to be contained in the
to-be-encountered portion of an unfolding linguistic signal.
Consistent with such a knowledge-driven model, it is
widely recognized that readers and listeners use linguistic,
visual, and social contexts to generate predictions for many
aspects of the incoming linguistic input during on-line
comprehension, from grammatical properties of the signal
(e.g. Arai & Keller, 2013) to semantic properties of a word
(e.g. DeLong, Urbach, & Kutas, 2005; Kamide, Altmann, &
Haywood, 2003), all the way down to very low-level formbased perceptual properties of the physical input (e.g.
Dikker, Rabagliati, Farmer, & Pylkkanen, 2010).
For example, upon encountering a single decontextualized
sentence such as, The child saved the … a reader isn’t likely
to accurately anticipate the precise word-form that they are
about to next encounter (the context provided by this
isolated sentence is not constraining enough), but can
generate expectations for, and thus pre-activate
representations for, syntactic information (a noun is likely to
appear), semantic features (savable things), and physical
form-based
properties
(physical
information

Syntactic Expectation Adaptation
One consequence of this error-driven fine-tuning process
is that it affords communicators the ability to rapidly adapt
their expectations about properties of the multi-dimensional
linguistic signal. Why is this important? Language use is
highly variable, from properties of the speech signal, to
lexical use, to the distribution of syntactic structures across,
for example, different genres and regions. Error-driven finetuning of expectations affords readers and listeners the
ability to deal with variability in the input. It fosters
adaptation by providing a means through which to
continuously update the expectations that are generated
within a communicative context, such that comprehenders
can more accurately anticipate aspects of the signal across
multiple levels of analysis over the course of experience.
Expectation adaptation has been demonstrated across a
wide range of perceptual and motoric tasks (Koerding &
Wolpert, 2004; Kohn, 2007). From the hierarchical
predictive processing account detailed above, however,
expectations, and prediction errors associated with
violations of them, should also occur at higher levels of
analysis. As a result, we should be able to observe evidence
of adaptation to those higher-level error signals as well.
Indeed, Fine, Jaeger, Farmer, & Qian (2013) recently
1

See Clark (2013) for a detailed perspective on “hierarchical
predictive processing” (see also Farmer, Brown, & Tanenhaus,
2013, for a discussion of on-line language comprehension within
such a framework).

2181

demonstrated that a subject’s a priori knowledge about how
syntactic structures are typically distributed in the real
world—knowledge that subjects carry into the testing
room—can be adapted upon encountering language that
contains an atypical distribution of linguistic events.
In Fine et al.’s Experiment 1, subjects were presented with
a sentence set adopted from MacDonald, Just, and Carpenter
(1992), as illustrated by (1a) – (1d):
1 (a) The experienced soldiers / warned about the dangers
/ before the midnight / raid.
(b) The experienced soldiers / spoke about the dangers /
before the midnight / raid.
(c) The experienced soldiers / warned about the
dangers / conducted the midnight / raid.
(d) The experienced soldiers / who were warned about
the dangers / conducted the midnight / raid.
For sentences (1a) and (1c), the syntactic role of the verb
warned is ambiguous. It could either act as the main verb
(MV) of the sentence, or as the beginning of a reduced
relative clause (RC) that modifies the subject. Although
readers cannot resolve the ambiguity before encountering
the disambiguating region (bolded in example 1), they
exhibit a strong bias in favor of the MV reading. This bias
stems from the fact that, in natural language, the probability
of an MV/RC ambiguity-producing verb being used in an
MV structure is .7 and the probability of the verb being used
as the beginning of the RC is less than .01 (estimated form a
large-scale corpus analysis of English, Roland, Dick, &
Elman, 2007). The point of disambiguation contains the
information necessary to arrive at the ultimately correct
interpretation of the ambiguity. People have a strong bias to
interpret the verb warned as an MV, such that when the
ambiguity is resolved in accordance with the MV
interpretation, little to no evidence of processing difficulty
is typically detected, relative to an unambiguous control
sentence (1b, where the verb spoke cannot head an RC, thus
producing no ambiguity). When the ambiguity is resolved in
accordance with the RC interpretation (1c), and thus in a
manner that is inconsistent with the reader’s expectations,
processing difficulty in the form of increased Reading
Times (RTs) at the point of disambiguation is observed (i.e.,
the garden-path effect), relative to an unambiguous control
(1d, where the inclusion of “who were” eradicates the
ambiguity) 2.
In a word-by-word self-paced reading (SPR) experiment,
Fine et al. (2013, Experiment 1) had subjects read a set of
sentences containing 9 items from each of the 4 conditions
in (1), coupled with 50 filler items. Note here that the
This ambiguity is disambiguated by the syntactic category of the
first word at “disambiguation”. In reality, however, disambiguation
is never guaranteed (for example, before the midnight raid in (1a)
could be part of a larger RC structure). We use this item set
because it reliably elicits a strong garden-path effect on RTs upon
RC disambiguation, and thus allows us to examine adaptation to
atypical distributions of syntactic structures.
2

probability of encountering an MV/RC ambiguity that is
resolved in accordance with the RC interpretation increases
substantially relative to subjects’ a priori distributional
knowledge, from less than .01 (based on estimates of the
statistics of written English, see Fine et al., 2013) to .5. As
such, the distribution of syntactic structures in the
experimental setting is shifted relative to the subjects’
experience prior to the task. Over the course of the
experiment, the difference in RTs between RC-Ambiguous
and RC-Unambiguous sentences at the disambiguation point
decreased until there was no longer a statistically detectable
difference in RTs between the two conditions at
disambiguation.
The decrease in the magnitude of the garden-path effect
was incremental and progressive (see Fine et al., Figure 5).
Fine et al. interpreted this as evidence that subjects were
continuously updating their expectations about the
probability with which they would encounter an RC
sentence. That is, subjects adapted their expectations about
the distribution of syntactic structures in the novel context
by integrating the statistical regularities of the local
environment with their prior knowledge.

Experiment
The results of Fine et al. (2013) provided evidence that
rapid adaptation can occur at high levels of representation.
One potential problem with such an interpretation, however,
is that syntactic structure is necessarily correlated with
lower-level aspects of the stimulus. For example, RC
disambiguation can be achieved with past participle verbs
(1c), and MV resolution can be achieved with adverbs (1a),
but in reality, disambiguation can be achieved by words
from a host of categories (although more so in the MV case
than the RC case, where many fewer disambiguation
possibilities exist). A syntactic expectation is thus
probabilistically yoked to lower-level lexico-syntactic
category information (of, for example, a word that is
intended to disambiguate a structural ambiguity).
Complicating matters, probabilistic relationships exist
between the lexical category of a word and its physical
form-based features (for example, nouns have physical
properties that differ, on average, from verbs, see Farmer,
Christiansen, & Monaghan, 2006).
Word-by-word RTs obtained in SPR experiments provide
only a coarse-grained index of the underlying processes that
drive on-line comprehension. Visual word recognition,
syntactic processes, and semantic interpretation are all a
necessary part of incremental interpretation, and all of these
processes are projected onto a uni-dimensional index of
processing difficulty, i.e. reading time. Acknowledging the
inter-correlations that exist between multiple levels of the
stimulus hierarchy, one question arises with respect to the
Fine et al. (2013) data: Do changes in patterns of RTs
directly reflect shifts in high-level syntactic representations?
The presence of an atypical distribution of syntactic
structures within a linguistic context will often entail
context-specific shifts in distributions of correlated semantic,

2182

category-, and form-based information. In principle,
incremental changes in patterns of RTs over the course of
experience with the experiment (context) could be caused
by summative learning-based shifts in expectations at all
affected levels, or across a subset of them.
One implication of the hierarchical predictive processing
account, as sketched above, is that different sources of
information are likely to be assessed at different points of
time along the continuum running from the concrete
physical properties of the stimulus up through its higherlevel abstract properties. Monitoring eye-movements during
reading provides a variety of more fine-grained measures
that can shed light on what processes are affected by
encountering atypical distributions of linguistic events, and
relatedly, when in the stream of processing expectation
adaptation occurs (see Clifton, Staub, and Rayner, 2007 for
an overview of the differential types of information that tend
to influence different EM measures). Eye-movement
measures have historically been categorized based on
whether they are early (first-fixation duration, first-pass RT)
versus later (regressions into a previously read segment,
second-pass reading times, and total reading times)
measures (see Clifton et al., 2007, for a more detailed
discussion). Historically, “earlier” measures are more likely
to be significantly influenced by factors that are associated
with visual word recognition, such as frequency, length, and
word predictability (e.g. Rayner, Ashby, Pollatsek, &
Reichle, 2004), and less likely to be influenced by higherlevel syntactic factors. Late measures have often been
argued to index a reanalysis process (e.g. Frazier & Rayner,
1982, but see Bicknell and Levy, 2010 & von der Malsburg
& Vasishth, 2011).
Here, we monitored eye-movements as subjects read a
modified version of the materials from Fine et al (2013).
Although we would not advocate for the explicit mapping of
a specific EM measure to a specific psycholinguistic process,
we rely on this “early versus late” distinction to provide
some insight into what types of information subjects adapt
to or otherwise learn about in this specific experimental
context. If adaptation were to show up on early measures
(especially first-fixation duration, which demonstrates
marked sensitivity to form-based aspects of a visual word,
and which tend to be less frequently influenced by higher
level processes), such a result might indicate that the RT
change was driven by shifts in low-level aspects of the
stimuli. Adaptation in a late measure would, however,
provide support for the notion that higher-level (potentially
syntactic) expectations resulted in the patterns of RT change
demonstrated by Fine et al.

Method
Participants Ninety-three native English speaking
undergraduates from the University of Iowa participated in
the experiment.
Materials We implemented the experimental design
described in Fine et al. (2013). For each item frame (1), four

sentences were created (1a-d), with one version
corresponding to each of the 4 conditions created by the 2 x 2
manipulation (Structure: MV vs. RC) x Ambiguity Status
(Ambiguous
vs.
Unambiguous).
Sentences
were
counterbalanced across four presentation lists such that each
subject only saw 1 version of each item, but an equal number
of trials per condition. We reduced the number of items from
36 to 24 in order to eliminate any overlap in exposure to the
ambiguity-producing verb (thus reducing any effects of
“lexical boost” associated by repetition of the ambiguityproducing verb (Pickering & Branigan, 2008), which was
minimally present in the materials used in Fine et al.’s
Experiment 1. Subjects were also presented with 72 filler
items that did not contain relative clause structures.
Procedure Eye movements were recorded with an EyeLink
1000 eye-tracker at a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz. Viewing
was binocular but data were only recorded from the right
eye. Stimuli were presented with a 19-inch ViewSonic CRT
monitor with a 1024*768 pixel resolution. Subjects were
seated ~60 cm from the screen, with their head positioned
on a chin rest.
Participants were randomly assigned to one presentation
list, and presentation order was randomized per each subject.
Each sentence remained on the screen until the subject
pressed a button on a hand-held controller to proceed to a
Y/N comprehension question.

Results and Discussion
In order to provide to provide an analysis of these data that
best parallels Fine et al.’s SPR data, we used the same
segment delineations as both Fine et al. and MacDonald et al.
(1992), denoted by “/” in example (1). The primary region of
interest, the disambiguation region (bolded in (1)), includes
the first word of disambiguation followed by all subsequent
words, but excluding the final word of the sentence. In order
to further investigate where the prediction error was most
strongly experienced, we also conducted the analyses at
disambiguation when each of the first three words of
disambiguation were delineated into different segments.
Both first-pass measures (First fixation times, First-pass
times, Go-past times, Probability of regressing out leftward
during first-pass) and later measures (Total reading times,
Second-pass times, & Probability of regressing back into a
region) were computed for each segment. Fixations less than
80 ms in duration and less than one character away from the
closest fixation were incorporated into the previous fixation.
Fixations longer than 800 ms or less than 80 ms were then
excluded, leaving over 99% of observations for analysis.
Linear mixed-effects models and mixed logit models (for
regression probabilities) were adopted in analyzing the
measures, and the analyses were implemented with the lme4
package (Bates & Maechler, 2010) in the R environment.
Each independent variable, Structure (MV vs. RC),
Ambiguity Status (Ambiguous vs. Unambiguous), Item order
(the presentation order of an item among critical items) was
entered into the model as a fixed effect with a full factorial

2183

design. Log stimulus order (the presentation order of an item
among all items including fillers) was also included to control
for general practice effects (Fine et al. 2010). Word length
and frequency were added to the model when modeling the
single word analyses. All predictors were centered to reduce
collinearity with higher-order interaction terms. The
maximum random effect structure by subjects and items was
identified for every model detailed in this paper based on
model comparison using log-likelihood ratio tests. T-values
(for linear mixed-effect models) and z-values (for mixed logit
models) for the analyses on the disambiguating region that are
larger than 1.96 were interpreted as significant at the .05
level.
Garden Path Effect Given that syntactic expectation
adaptation is defined as the updating of syntactic
expectations (in this case, the probability of encountering an
RC relative to an MV structure), as a result of an error
signal produced by an higher-level expectation violation (in
this case, RC resolution of an ambiguity produced by a verb
that is strongly biased against being used at the beginning of
an RC), we first examine the data for evidence of a gardenpath effect. Garden-path effects, in the form of longer RTs
or more regressive reading on RC ambiguous sentences,
were observed in various measures across the eyemovement record. This effect was represented in the model
by the positive interaction of Structure and Ambiguity (see
Table 1).
Similar to many of the previous EM Experiments
summarized by Clifton et al., when the full disambiguation
segment was analyzed as a whole, garden-path effects
appeared on second-pass reading times, a late measure, but
unlike some (but not all) of the previous experiments, no
garden-path effect was observed on measures that are
traditionally considered to be “first-pass” in nature. There
was, however, a garden-path effect on first-pass regressions
out. In the word-by-word analysis of the disambiguation
segment, the garden path effect was observed for go-past
time, and again on second-pass RTs and regressions out.

Adaptation Effects The garden-path effect associated with
RC resolution does not arise in the earliest eye movement
measures reported here, is present in many of the later
measures, and is strongest in second-pass RTs. We
inspected the data for evidence of RC adaptation by
examining the three-way interaction between Structure,
Ambiguity Status, and Item order. No adaptation effect was

found for traditional first-pass measures, either when
examining the combined disambiguation segment, or when
examining each measure on each separate word of
disambiguation (Table 2), but see below for a discussion of
a marginal adaptation effect on regressions out.

For the late measures, there was a near-significant
adaptation effect for second-pass times (β=-1.967, t=-1.90, p
= .057), and no other reliable adaptation effects were
identified (see Table 3). As illustrated in Figure 1, this
interaction was in the predicted direction, such that the
difference in second-pass RTs at disambiguation between
the Ambiguous and Unambiguous sentences decreased over
time, while no statistically distinguishable RT differences
existed between ambiguous and unambiguous MV
sentences over time. As subjects encountered more
instances of RC-resolution, they spent less time re-reading
the disambiguating region, commensurate with the SPR data
in Fine et al., which demonstrated a decreasing difference in
RTs at disambiguation between the ambiguous and
unambiguous sentences in the RC condition over time.

Re-analysis of SPR data from Fine et al. (Exp. 1) To
compare effects across the EM and SPR data, we re-analyzed
the original Fine et al. data with the disambiguation region
segmented in the same 5 ways used in the analysis of EMs
above. First, we reproduce the analysis reported by Fine et al.
(2013), in which we analyze length-corrected RTs averaged
across all three words of the disambiguating region. This
analysis replicated the key findings in the eye-tracking
experiment, producing a significant Structure x Ambiguity x
Item Order interaction, β=-0.5, p < .05.

2184

however, the effect does not approach statistical
significance at the third word in the disambiguating region
(β = 0.1, p = .8). In sum, the adaptation effect seems to be
occurring early in the disambiguating region.

Disambiguating Region

Second-pass times (in msecs)

500

400

General Discussion
Ambiguity
Ambiguous
Unambiguous

300

Structure
MV
RC

200

100

0

0

5

10

15

Item Order

20

25

Figure 1. Adaptation effect: The garden path effect (longer reading
time for RC ambiguous sentences than the other three) decreased
relative to Item order for Second-pass times.

Length−corrected reading times (ms)

In order to determine when exactly in the disambiguating
region the adaptation effect occurs, we then analyzed lengthin the disambiguating region, as well as for the RTs averaged
across the first and second words in this region. Because
averaging across the entire disambiguating region reduces
noise attributable to idiosyncratic lexical differences at each
individual word position, the results of the three models fitted
to individual words were slightly less statistically reliable
than those of the model conducted over the whole-region
averages. Nevertheless, a key point about the locus of the
adaptation effect can be discerned, which is that the effect
trends towards significance or is marginally significant and in
the predicted direction at both the first word in the
disambiguating region (β = -0.7, p = .16), the second word in
the disambiguating region (β = -0.7, p = .09), and in the
combined data from these two words (β = -0.7, p = .06);
Word 1

Word 2

Word 3

300
Ambiguity
Ambiguous
Unambiguous

200
100

Structure
MV
RC

0

−100
−200

0 102030 0 102030 0 102030

Item Order

Figure 2. Adaptation effect from the SPR experiment plotted
separately for words 1, 2, and 3 in the disambiguating region.

Upon arriving at the experiment, subjects had a strong bias
in favor of MV resolution of the MV/RC ambiguous
sentences. The results reported here, and in Fine et al.
(2013), demonstrate that those expectations shifted over the
course of the experiment such that the MV bias faded
incrementally and progressively as the subject encountered
progressively more instances of RC resolution. But, as
evident through the new data presented here, this adaptation
effect appears to occur only on a later measure (second pass
reading times). In both the EM and SPR data, the adaptation
effect seems to be most robust when RTs elicited by
multiple words of a disambiguating segment are averaged
together, and on only the first word of disambiguation.
A syntactic expectation adaptation effect on a late
measure is generally expected under a hierarchical
predictive processing framework—expectations for abstract
aspects of a stimulus should be evaluated later in the stream
of processing a stimulus than expectations that have been
generated for more concrete physical properties of the
stimulus. The “early” versus “late” distinction is a
simplifying heuristic that does not necessarily entail early
versus late processing (see Clifton et al. for discussion). But,
the fact that there was no evidence of adaptation on the
traditional first-pass measures, but only on a late measure,
supports the claim that changes in patterns of RTs on RC
disambiguated sentences do reflect shifts in higher-level
syntactic expectations, as argued by Fine et al.
It is important to note, however, that there was some
evidence of adaptation, in the form of a three-way
interaction with a p-value of .095, on the first-pass
regressions out measure. The probability of regressing
leftward upon fixating the first word of disambiguation on
first-pass increased on the RC Ambiguous sentences, and
decreased on the RC Unambiguous sentences, over the
course of the experiment. Depending on one’s view of firstpass regressions out (e.g. Altmann, 1994; Rayner & Sereno,
1994), such a result may be indicative of some lower level
learning. It is important to note that no other near-significant
trend was identified in the analyses conducted per-word (or
first two words combined) in the EM record (not reported
above due to space constraints).
One deviation from the original Fine et al. results involves
removing the presence of verb overlap from the materials. It
is possible that verb overlap provided a boost in the
adaptation effects observed in Fine et al. If so, then the
removal of verb overlap may explain the reason that the
only adaptation effects observed here were weak. Recent
work by Fine & Jaeger (in prep), however, has not been able
to detect evidence that error-driven adaptation on similar
sets of syntactically ambiguous materials is dependent upon
verb overlap. Additionally, Fine et al. demonstrated that the

2185

adaptation effect described here was still robust after all
items that contained the same verb were removed, except
for the first item that contained the verb.
Hierarchical predictive processing frameworks (e.g.
Clark, 2013) of on-line language comprehension may prove
viable in terms of facilitating an understanding of how prior
knowledge and top-down contextual information modulate
the perception and interpretation of a physical signal during
the lower-level, and even perceptual, processing of a
linguistic signal. More globally, we believe that such an
account has the ability to help unify prediction-based
accounts of contextualized language processing by guiding
work on questions related to what’s being predicted, and
when in the chain of processing those predictions are
generated and assessed.

Acknowledgments
We would like to think the reviewers for their diligent
comments, which did indeed lead to a very different
manuscript, along with an NSF	   CAREER	   award	   (IIS-­‐
1150028)	  to	  TFJ.

References
Altmann, G. T. M. (1994). Regression-contingent analyses of
eye-movements during sentence processing: Reply to
Rayner and Sereno. Memory and Cognition, 22, 286-290.
Arai, M. & Keller, F. (2013). The use of verb-specific
information for prediction in sentence processing.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 28, 525-560.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes.
Bicknell, K., & Levy, R. (2010). Rational eye movements in
reading combining uncertainty about previous words with
contextual probability. In Proc. 23rd annual conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological Review, 113, 234-272.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated
agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 36, 181-204.
Clifton, C., Staub, A., & Rayner, K. (2007). Eye movements
in reading words and sentences. In van Gompel, Fischer,
Murray, & Hill (Eds). Eye movements: A Window on the
mind and brain (pp. 341-372). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
DeLong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2005).
Probabilistic word pre-activation during language
comprehension inferred from electrical brain activity.
Nature neuroscience, 8, 1117-1121.
Dikker, S., Rabagliati, H., Farmer, T. A., Pylkkänen,
L. (2010). Early occipital sensitivity to syntactic category is
based on form typicality. Psychological Science, 21(5),
629-634.
Farmer, T. A., Brown, M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2013).
Prediction, explanation, and the role of generative model in
language processing. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36,

211-121.
Farmer, T. A., Monaghan, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H.
(2006). Phonological typicality influences sentence
processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 103, 12203-12208.
Fine, A. B., Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Jacobs, R. (2010).
Syntactic adaptation in language comprehension. In
Proceedings of ACL Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and
Computationa Linguistics. Uppsala, Sweden.
Fine, A.B. and Jaeger, T. F. (2013). Evidence for error-based
implicit learning in adult language processing. Cognitive
Science, 578-591.
Fine, A. B., Jaeger, T. F., Farmer, T. A., & Qian, T. (2013).
Rapid expectation adaptation during syntactic
comprehension. PLoS ONE, 8: e77661.
Frazier, L., & Rayner, K. (1982). Making and correcting
errors during sentence comprehension: Eye movements in
the analysis of structurally ambiguous sentences. Cognitive
Psychology, 178-210.
Jaeger, T. F., & Snider, N. (2013). Alignment as a
consequence of expectation adaptation: Syntactic priming
is affected by the prime’s prediction error given bothprior
and recent experience. Cognition, 127, 57-83.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G. Haywood, S. L. (2003). The timecourse of prediction in incremental sentence processing:
Evidence from anticipatory eye movements. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49, 133-156,
Koerding, K. P., & Wolpert, D. M. (2004). Bayesian
integration in sensorimotor learning. Nature, 427, 244–247.
Kohn, A. (2007). Visual adaptation: physiology, mechanisms,
and functional benefits. Journal of Neurophysiology, 97(5),
3155–64.
MacDonald, M. C., Just, M., A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992).
Working memory constraints on the processing of syntactic
ambiguity. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 56-98.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75(2), B13B25.
Rayner, K., Ashby, J., Pollatsek, A., & Reichle, E. D. (2004).
The effects of frequency and predictability on eye fixations
in reading: Implications for the E-Z Reader Model. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 30, 720-732.
Rayner, K., Pollatsek, A., & Reichle, E. D. (2003). Eye
movements in reading: Models and data. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 26, 518–526.
Rayner, K., & Sereno, S. C. (1994). Regressive eye
movements and sentence parsing: On the use of regressioncontingent analyses. Memory & Cognition, 22, 281-285.
von der Malsburg, T. and Vasishth, S. (2011). What is the
scanpath signature of syntactic reanalysis? Journal of
Memory and Language, 65,109-127
Warren, T., White, S. J., & Reichle, E. D. (2009).
Investigating the causes of wrap-up effects in eye
movements and E-Z Reader. Cognition, 111, 132-137.

2186

