UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidentiality in Language and Cognition: The View from Construal Level Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30v7146x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Smirnova, Anastasia
Iliev, Rumen

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidentiality in Language and Cognition:
The View from Construal Level Theory
Anastasia Smirnova (Anastasia.Smirnova@tufts.edu)
Center for Cognitive Studies, 111 Miner Hall
Medford, MA 02155 USA

Rumen Iliev (riliev@umich.edu)
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, 735 S. State St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA
Abstract

Does Evidentiality Affect Thinking?

This paper addresses the question of whether the presence of
grammatical category evidentiality in language, traditionally
defined as an expression of information source, affects
cognitive performance. Our research paradigm bridges
together two theoretical perspectives from linguistics and
cognitive psychology: (i) the position that evidentiality
encodes epistemic commitment, specifically, that evidential
forms present events as less certain and psychologically more
distant from the here and now; (ii) the assumption that
manipulation of psychological distance affects how events are
perceived by the speaker, originating from Construal Level
Theory. Results from Study 1 provide experimental support
for the hypothesis that evidentiality implies psychological
distance: evidential forms consistently trigger the perception
of an event as being less certain, further remote in time and
space, and involving distant social relations. However, Study
2 shows that evidentiality does not affect the level of
abstraction with which an event is conceptualized, thus
arguing against the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.
Keywords: Evidentiality; epistemic commitment; Construal
Level Theory; the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.

Evidentiality as Grammatical Category
About one sixth of the world’s languages have evidentiality,
a grammatical category that marks the source of information
(Aikhenvald, 2004). In English the source of information is
encoded lexically: we say I saw that it rained if we had
directly perceived the event and I heard from John that it
rained to report a second-hand account of the event. Unlike
English, languages like Bulgarian, Korean, and Turkish
encode the source of information grammatically by a piece
of morphology that usually attaches to the verb (just like
tenses in English do). Thus, the speaker of Bulgarian would
say valja if she saw that it rained and valjalo if she heard
from someone or inferred that it rained. Consequently, while
in languages like English the expression of information
source is optional, in languages like Bulgarian verbal forms
express this information obligatorily.
The question we address in the paper is this: Does
grammatical encoding of evidentiality in language have any
observable cognitive effects, as suggested by Whorf (1956)?

Unlike more traditional linguistic categories, such as
grammatical gender, evidentiality has received less attention
in the literature on the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis (cf.
Boroditsky, Schmidt, & Phillips, 2003 on gender). Recently,
however, the topic started to generate more interest.
Papafragou et al. (2007) compared how English and Korean
children monitor information sources. Unlike English,
Korean grammatically encodes the distinction between
information acquired directly and through hearsay. If
evidentiality facilitates cognitive performance, then Korean
children should perform better on tasks that test children's
ability to differentiate between direct information and
hearsay. The results showed that English and Korean
children perform similarly on these tasks, contrary to the
prediction of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. The authors
concluded that the development of the specific cognitive
skill – monitoring of information source – is not affected by
the presence of evidentiality in language.
Aksu-Koç, Ögel-Balaban, and Alp (2009) reached a
different conclusion about the effect of evidentiality on
cognitive performance. They report that Turkish children
show better memory retention about information source
compared to their English peers (cf. Drumey & Newcombe,
2002). The authors attribute these differences to language:
unlike English, and like Korean, Turkish grammatically
encodes information source. Aksu-Koç et al. (2009)
conjecture that the presence of a grammatical category that
encodes the way in which information was acquired, i.e.
through direct perception or indirectly, facilitates memory
for information source in Turkish children. This effect,
however, is short-lived and disappears by the age of 6, at
which point English and Turkish children perform similarly
on memory retention tasks.
This discussion suggests that the results of the previous
studies are inconclusive about the effect of evidentiality on
cognitive performance. In what follows, we attempt to shed
more light on the relation between evidentiality and
cognition. Unlike Papafragou et al. (2007) and Aksu-Koç et
al. (2009), who study evidentiality from a developmental
perspective and focus exclusively on children (cf. also
Fitneva 2008 on Bulgarian), we adopt an experimental
paradigm that targets adults. The question of whether

2943

evidentiality might affect cognitive processing in adults is
usually preempted by the assumption that information
source monitoring is an easy task for any adult, irrespective
of whether her language has grammatical category
evidentiality or not. In this study we take a different
methodological stance. Our approach is motivated by recent
work in theoretical linguistics, which suggests that besides
information source evidentiality encodes epistemic
commitment as part of its meaning. This perspective opens
up previously unexplored opportunities for experimental
research on evidentiality and its cognitive correlates.

Evidentiality and Psychological Distance
The idea that evidentiality encodes epistemic commitment is
rooted in the observation that the source of information
correlates with information reliability and its status in the
belief system of the speaker: information perceived directly
is more reliable than information acquired through hearsay
or inference. This observation led to an important theoretical
claim: in some languages evidentiality is not simply a
marker of information source but a grammatical expression
of epistemic commitment. One such language is Bulgarian
(Izvorski, 1997; Smirnova, 2013). In Bulgarian, nonevidential (indicative) forms encode that the speaker is fully
committed to the truth of the information she reports; this
type of commitment is equivalent to knowledge (cf. English
It rained). Valja ‘it rained’ from section 1 is an example of
such a non-evidential (indicative) form in Bulgarian. On the
other hand, evidential forms, such as valjalo ‘it rained (I
heard/inferred)’, grammatically encode a weaker epistemic
commitment, the closest equivalent in English being
utterances with modal verbs (cf. English It must have
rained).
By virtue of encoding epistemic commitment, evidential
forms in Bulgarian belong to the group of linguistic devices
that express displacement, i.e. the ability of the speaker to
distance herself from the here and now. While the
observation that evidential forms imply “psychological
distancing from the event” goes back to at least Slobin &
Aksu (1982, p. 196), it has not been experimentally tested.
In what follows, we first test the hypothesis that evidential
forms in Bulgarian imply greater psychological distance
compared to non-evidential forms (Study 1). We then test
whether manipulation of psychological distance by means of
evidential vs. non-evidential forms gives rise to observable
cognitive effects (Study 2). Our theoretical assumptions
about cognitive effects associated with manipulation of
psychological distance originate from Construal Level
Theory, to which we turn next.

Construal Level Theory of Psychological
Distance
According to Construal Level Theory (Trope & Liberman,
2008; Trope & Liberman, 2010), people's thinking about
events, places, and other individuals depends on how close
these entities are to one's “egocentric reference point”, i.e.
me, here, and now. Entities within the immediate reach from

this center activate low-level construal, or concrete mode of
thinking; those further away from the egocentric reference
point activate high-level construal, or a more abstract mode
of thinking. Intuitively, when making plans for a trip this
weekend, we think about specific details (where is my
toothbrush?), while planning a trip one year from now
triggers different sorts of questions (shall I drive or fly?).
Construal Level Theory (CLT) recognizes four different
dimensions on which entities in our psychological space can
be located: spatial, temporal, social, and hypothetical. Each
of these dimensions has a common center – the “egocentric
reference point”. Entities on these four dimensions can be
perceived as being proximal or distal to our reference point.
A concert tomorrow is an example of a proximal distance on
the temporal axis, while a similar event a year from now
exemplifies a distal relation to the center. Similarly, factual
events and those that are certain to occur are close to the
egocentric reference point on the hypothetical dimension,
while events to which we assign lower probability of
occurrence are psychologically further away.

Interrelation between Psychological Distances
One powerful prediction of CLT is that distances on
different psychological dimensions are interrelated. This
means that distal or proximal distance of an entity on one
dimension (e.g., hypothetical) affects how close or further
away this entity is perceived on other dimensions (spatial,
temporal, and social). For example, Wakslak and Trope
(2008) showed that when people think about events that are
less likely to occur (hypothetically distal), they expect them
to take place in a far away place (spatial distance), to be
distant in time (temporal distance), and to affect people who
are not in their immediate social circles (social distance).
Of particular interest to this study are experiments in
which language was used to prime psychological distance.
In a series of studies, Stepan, Liberman, and Trope (2010)
used politeness to manipulate psychological distance on the
social dimension (polite language implies greater
psychological distance), and tested whether it would affect
perceived psychological distance on the spatial and temporal
dimensions. They found that when subjects read
descriptions of actions in polite and more normative
language, they assumed that the actions would be performed
in a more distant future (temporal distance), while a less
polite description of an action triggered the perception about
a closer temporal location of the event (temporal proximity).
The authors also found similar effects of politeness on
physical distance: polite forms were consistently associated
with greater physical distance, while less polite colloquial
forms were associated with a closer spatial relation.
Building on this paradigm, we hypothesize that
evidentiality, in virtue of being a grammatical expression of
epistemic commitment, can be used to manipulate
psychological distance on the hypothetical dimension, just
as politeness in language was used to manipulate distance
on the social dimension in Stepan et al. (2010). Assuming
that psychological distances are interrelated, as predicted by

2944

CLT, we expect that evidentiality should also affect
perception of psychological distance on physical, temporal,
and social dimensions. We test this hypothesis in Study 1.

Psychological Distance and Levels of Abstraction
People, events, and entities can be represented at different
levels of abstraction (cf. playing the ball vs. exercising as a
description of the same events). According to CLT, what
level of abstraction or construal level is activated to
conceptualize a particular entity depends on psychological
distance of this entity from the self-centered reference point.
Greater psychological distance activates high-level construal
– the entity is perceived more abstractly, while
psychological proximity to the self-center triggers low-level
construal or more concrete mental representation. For
example, if we think about a concert one year from now, we
are more likely to think about the central features of this
event – the performer and the location – rather than about
more specific details, such as how to get there and whether
to take an umbrella. The latter acquire significance when the
event becomes temporally proximal.
The hypothesis about the interrelation of psychological
distance and construal level was confirmed in a number of
studies. We specifically focus on experimental paradigms
that use categorization and action identification as a
measure of abstraction. In one study Liberman, Sagristano,
and Trope (2002) used categorization tasks to investigate
the relation between construal level and psychological
distance on the temporal dimension. The participants were
asked to plan various leisure activities that were supposed to
take place in the near or in the distant future. Following this
task, participants classified objects thematically related to
the planned activities into categories. The authors found that
those who planned activities for the distant future tended to
classify objects into broader, more abstract categories
compared to the participants who planned activities for the
near future. A similar effect was observed by Wakslak et al.
(2006), who used psychological distance on the hypothetical
dimension for priming construal level. The study found that
when participants considered a less likely scenario, they
tended to use broader categories, thus showing that greater
psychological distance on the hypothetical dimension
activates high-level construal.
In action identification tasks participants are usually
presented with two alternative description of an action – a
concrete vs. a more abstract one. The choice of the
description is taken to manifest activation of low vs. highlevel construal. In one study by Liberman and Trope (1998)
participants were asked to think about activities in the
distant vs. in the near future. Following this task,
participants were presented with an action (cf. “locking a
door”) and were asked which of the two alternative
descriptions is a better match for that action. One of the
alternatives described the action in greater detail, and was
taken to manifest low-level construal (cf. “putting a key in
the lock”), while the second alternative abstracted over
details and represented the action in terms of high-level

construal (cf. “securing the house”).1 The results showed
that participants who were primed with a distant future
scenario tended to choose more abstract descriptions of the
action. Subsequent studies confirmed the association
between the level of abstractness on action identification
tasks and psychological distance for the hypothetical
(Wakslak et al. 2006), spatial (Fujita et al. 2006), and social
dimensions (Liviatan, Trope, & Liberman, 2008).
Building on previous work within the CLT paradigm, we
hypothesized that if evidentiality implies psychological
distance, it should affect performance on categorization and
action identification tasks. Study 2 addresses this question
experimentally. In what follows, we present experimental
results of Study 1 followed by Study 2.

Study 1
Method
Participants Forty-six volunteers were recruited using
Google Ad Words and redirected to a survey link on the
Qualtrics website. All participants indicated that they were
native speakers of Bulgarian.
Design and Procedure We constructed four short stories,
each describing a hypothetical event. Each story was
designed to target a particular dimension: hypothetical,
social, temporal, and spatial. The story targeting
psychological distance on the hypothetical dimension
described a situation where two people made conflicting
claims about the results of a recent soccer game. One person
used an evidential utterance, while the other person used a
non-evidential (indicative) utterance. The participants were
asked whose claim was more likely to be true.
The story targeting the social dimension described two
people who made the same claim about a third person. One
of the speakers used the evidential form, while the other
used a non-evidential form. The participants were asked to
estimate which of the two speakers was more likely to be a
close relative to the third person.
In the scenario targeting the temporal dimension, a person
talked about two events in the past, one described with the
evidential, and the other one without. The participants were
asked which of the events happened further in the past.
Finally, the spatial dimension scenario described two
people watching a soccer game on a stadium. They made the
same claim about a player, but one of the speakers used an
evidential utterance, while the other speaker used a nonevidential sentence. The participants were asked which of
the two speakers was physically closer to the player.
In order to control for content effects, each scenario had
two variants that were run between subjects. For example, in
1

The intuition behind the alternative formulation is that a more
concrete description is associated with the how aspect of the action
(cf. lock a door by putting a key in the lock), while a more abstract
level of thinking would activate the why question (cf. lock a door
in order to secure the house).

2945

Version 1 of the hypothetical dimension scenario the
sentence “Real Madrid won against Milan” was in the
evidential form, while “Milan won against Real Madrid”
was in a non-evidential (indicative) form. In Version 2
grammatical markers were reversed, so that “Milan won
against Real Madrid” was in the evidential form.
All answers were marked on a 6-point scale, where the
poles contrasted competing interpretations. In the
hypothetical distance scenario, 1 was “For sure Real Madrid
is the winner” and 6 was “For sure Milan is the winner”.
Notice that if an answer is due to cultural knowledge or
norms, then one of the poles will be consistently chosen
over the other, regardless of the version. For example, if
more people think that Milan is a better team than Real
Madrid, Milan would be consistently chosen as a winner
with high degree of certainty in both versions. If answers are
random or due to non-consensual subjective knowledge,
then the means will not be statistically different from chance
in both versions. If, on the other hand, the judgments are
driven by evidentiality, then the answers between the two
versions will differ.

the observed relation between evidentiality and
psychological distance has deeper psychological effects.

Results

Figure 1: The mean answers for each of the four
dimensions. The subjects answered on a 1 to 6 Likert scale.
For Version 1, low numbers indicate stronger association
between evidentiality and psychological distance, while in
Version 2 higher numbers indicate the same association.
The larger the difference between the two versions is, the
more the effect is due to the experimental manipulation
rather than to the scenario content.

We first ran a 2x4 mixed design ANOVA, where the withinsubjects factor was the 4 dimensions (hypothetical, social,
temporal, and spatial), while the between-subjects factor
was the version. The dependent variable was the answers on
the 6-point Likert scale. There was a significant betweensubject effect (F(1, 44) = 255.57, p<.05, all tests are twotailed), indicating that the answers in the two versions
differed.
A series of post-hoc independent samples t-tests revealed
that the effect was significant for hypothetical distance
(t(45)=9.64, p<.05), social distance (t(45)=10.16, p<.05),
temporal distance (t(45)=20.83, p<.05), and spatial distance
(t(45)=10.31, p<.05). All differences were in the predicted
direction: evidential forms were consistently associated with
greater hypothetical, social, temporal, and spatial distance.
Further tests revealed that for both versions the mean
answers were also statistically different from chance, where
chance was interpreted as the mean of the Likert scale at
3.5. For more details refer to Figure 1.
Somewhat unexpectedly, there was also a significant
within-subjects effect (F(3, 132) = 3.29, p<.05), indicating
significant differences between the four dimensions of
psychological distance, and marginally significant
interactions (F(3, 132) = 3.29, p=.09). It is difficult to
interpret these results, since they might be due to genuine
differences between dimensions or to different sensitivity of
the scenarios, the question to which we return later.
To summarize, the results of this study demonstrated that
evidentiality affects perception of psychological distance.
There was a strong consensus that information marked by
evidentials implies lower probability of occurrence,
increased social distance, increased temporal distance, and
greater spatial distance. A natural follow-up question is if

Study 2
In this study we investigate if evidentiality affects the level
of abstraction, as measured by performance on action
identification tasks (Study 2a) and categorization (Study 2b).

Study 2a
Method
Participants One hundred and eighty volunteers were
recruited using Google Ad Words, and redirected to a
survey link on the Qualtrics website. All participants
indicated that they were native speakers of Bulgarian.
Design and Procedure In this study we used action
identification task as a measure of construal level. Our study
was modeled after Liberman and Trope (1998): participants
were presented with a target action and two alternative
descriptions. The two descriptions differed in the level of
abstraction. For example, the alternatives to “studying” were
(i) “reading a textbook” (low-level construal) and (ii) “doing
well in school” (high-level construal). Since evidentiality
implies greater psychological distance (Study 1), we
hypothesized that when the actions are presented in the
evidential form, it will lead to a preference for more abstract
action descriptions.

2946

We constructed 18 target actions, each supplemented with
two alternative descriptions, a more specific one (for lowlevel construal) and a more abstract one (for high-level
constural). Within each triad all actions were in the same
form, either evidential or non-evidential. In two betweensubject conditions, each participant received either 10
evidential and 8 non-evidential forms or vice versa.

Results
For each participant we computed the proportion of abstract
choices in evidential triads and the proportion of abstract
choices in non-evidential triads. If evidentiality primes
construal level, then the first proportion should be higher
than the second. However, the observed difference was not
statistically reliable (M=.02, S.D.=.26, t(179)=1.30, p=.20).
These results indicate that while evidentiality affects
perception of psychological distance, it does not have the
same priming effect as more explicit instructions that target
distal relation on the hypothetical, social, temporal, and
spatial dimensions, used in previous studies. In the next
study we investigate the effect of evidentiality on construal
level by using categorization as a measure of abstractness.

Study 2b
Method
Participants A hundred and twenty eight participants from
the pool for Study 2a participated in the current experiment.
Design and Procedure For this study we used breadth of
categorization as a measurement of construal level. This
study was modeled after previous work within CLT, where
participants are presented with a list of objects and are asked
to sort them into groups. It has been found that when
thinking about psychologically distant events participants
sort items into fewer, broader categories, while when
thinking about psychologically closer events subjects form
multiple, narrow categories. The effects are robust and have
been found for the temporal (Liberman et al., 2002), spatial
(Henderson, et al., 2006), and hypothetical dimensions
(Wakslak et al., 2006).
In the current study we presented subjects with a scenario
describing a camping trip. After reading the scenario, the
participants were presented with a list of 20 items, and
asked to combine them into as many groups as they deemed
necessary. In a between-subjects design we manipulated if
the scenarios were written in evidential or non-evidential
form.

Results
The dependent measure for this analysis was the number of
categories constructed by the participants. If evidentiality
primes high-level construal, we should expect a smaller
number of categories in the evidential condition. In the
evidential condition participants constructed 5.36 categories
on average (S.D.=1.39) and in the non-evidential condition

5.63(S.D. = 1.48), with the difference not being statistically
reliable (t(126)=.99, p=.324). Similarly to Study 2a, in the
current study we did not find evidentiality to have priming
effects on the level of construal.

Discussion
In two experimental studies we investigated whether
evidentiality affects cognitive performance. We adopted a
novel experimental paradigm, which bridged together two
different theoretical perspectives from linguistics and
cognitive psychology: (i) the claim that evidentiality
grammatically encodes weaker epistemic commitment, and
that weaker epistemic commitment in turn implies greater
psychological distance; and (ii) the assumption that
psychological distance can be manipulated and that this
manipulation has observable effects on how speakers
conceptualize events, adopted from the CLT framework.
We had two research questions. First, we were interested
if there is experimental support for the claim that
evidentiality affects perception of psychological distance.
The results of Study 1 confirmed this hypothesis. We found
that evidential forms consistently affect participants'
perception of the event: it is perceived not only as less
certain, as we would expect given that evidentiality encodes
weaker epistemic commitment, but also implies greater
physical, temporal, and social distance between the speaker
and the event. These results support the analysis of
evidentiality as an expression of epistemic commitment in
the theoretical linguistics literature. Moreover, by showing
that evidentiality consistently implies greater psychological
distance not only on the hypothetical but also on the spatial,
temporal, and social dimensions, we also provided support
for the core assumption in CLT that psychological distances
are conceptually interrelated.
The affirmative answer to the first question raised the
second question, namely, if evidentiality can prime highlevel construal. We assumed that evidential forms would
activate more abstract perception of the event, similarly to
how scenarios involving more distant temporal or spatial
events activated high-level construal in previous studies
conducted within the CLT framework. However, we did not
find any reliable effects supporting such expectations. In
Study 2a participants did not use more abstract descriptions
for information presented in the evidential form, and in
Study 2b they did not form fewer, broader categories.

Conclusion
Our study has the following theoretical and methodological
implications. On the methodological side, the new interdisciplinary paradigm adopted here broadens the domain of
experimental research on evidentiality. Specifically, the
assumption that evidentiality expresses epistemic
commitment opens up previously unexplored possibilities
for studying effects of evidentiality on cognitive
performance in adults.
Our theoretical finding that evidentiality does not affect
construal level or the degree of abstraction with which an

2947

event is perceived suggests that evidentiality has no effect
on cognitive performance, as measured by categorization
and action identification tasks. These results argue against
the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.
An alternative interpretation, suggested by a reviewer, is
that the tasks used in this study are not sensitive enough to
detect possible cognitive effects of evidentiality on
cognitive performance. While in Study 1 we established a
link between evidentiality and the four dimensions of
psychological distance, our theoretical perspective suggests
that this link is driven by hypotheticality, since evidentiality
grammatically encodes a weaker epistemic commitment on
the hypothetical dimension only. Yet hypotheticality, when
encoded grammatically, might have a weaker priming effect
compared to other dimensions. Indeed, as Trope and
Liberman (2010) pointed out, psychological dimensions
differ in their prominence and the degree to which they
affect cognitive performance. For example, the spatial
dimension is considered to be more basic compared to e.g.
the temporal dimension (cf. Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008).
As for hypotheticality, Trope and Liberman (2010) observe
that “it is least prominent” (p. 444), and that its influence
might be weaker compared to that of other dimensions. It is
thus possible that the hypothetical dimension might not be
robust enough to trigger observable cognitive effects on
action identification and categorization tasks. In our followup studies we will address this concern by testing the
possible language-cognition link with a broader range of
cognitive tasks.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Bulgarian speakers who volunteered to
participate in this study. We thank Doug Medin for
insightful discussions that inspired this project, and Ray
Jackendoff and Lera Boroditsky for useful feedback.

References
Aikhenvald, A. (2004). Evidentiality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Aksu-Koç, A., Ögel-Balaban, H., & Alp, I. E. (2009).
Evidentials and source knowledge in Turkish. In S. A.
Fitneva & T. Matsui (Eds.), Evidentiality: A window into
language and cognitive development: New Directions for
Child and Adolescent Development, 125, 13-28. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex,
syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner & S. GoldinMeadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in the study
of language and cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579-598.
Drummey, A. B., & Newcombe, N. S. (2002).
Developmental
changes
in
source
memory.
Developmental Science, 5, 502-513.
Fitneva, S. (2008). The role of evidentiality in Bulgarian
children’s reliability judgments. Journal of Child
Language, 35, 845-868.

Fujita, K., Henderson, M., Eng, J., Trope, Y., & Liberman,
N. (2006). Spatial distance and mental construal of social
events. Psychological Science, 17, 278-282.
Henderson, M. D., Fujita, K., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N.
(2006). Transcending the “here”: The effect of spatial
distance on social judgment. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 91, 845-856.
Izvorski, R. (1997). The present perfect as an epistemic
modal. In A. Lawson & E. Cho (Eds.), Proceedings of
Semantics and Linguistic Theory VII (pp. 222-239).
Ithaca, NY: CLC Publications.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility
and desirability considerations in near and distant future
decisions: A test of temporal construal theory. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 5-18.
Liberman, N., Sagristano, M., & Trope, Y. (2002). The
effect of temporal distance on level of construal. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 523-535.
Liviatan, I., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2008). The effect of
similarity on mental construal. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 44, 1256-1269.
Papafragou, A., Li, P., Choi, Y., & Han, C. (2007).
Evidentiality in language and cognition. Cognition, 103,
253-299.
Slobin, D. I., & A. Aksu. (1982). Tense, aspect, and
modality in the use of the Turkish evidential. In P. J.
Hopper (Ed.), Tense, aspect: Between semantics and
pragmatics. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Smirnova, A. 2013. Evidentiality in Bulgarian: Temporality,
epistemic modality, and information source. Journal of
Semantics, 30, 479-532.
Stephan, E., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2010). Politeness
and psychological distance: A construal level perspective.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 268280.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2008). The Psychology of
transcending the here and now. Science, 322, 1201-1205.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of
psychological distance. Psychological Review, 117, 440463.
Wakslak, C. J., Trope, Y., Liberman, N., & Alony, R.
(2006). Seeing the forest when entry is unlikely:
Probability and the mental representation of events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135, 641653.
Wakslak, C. J., & Trope, Y. (2008). The who, where, and
when of low and high probability events: Probability as
distance and everyday decision-making. Unpublished
manuscript, New York University.
Wakslak, C. J., & Trope, Y. (2009). The effect of construallevel on subjective probability estimates. Psychological
Science, 20, 52-58.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). In J. Carroll (Ed.), Language, thought
and reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

2948

