UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Experiential Origins of the Mental Number Line

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0k1763tg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Pitt, Benjamin
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Experiential Origins of the Mental Number Line
Benjamin Pitt
(bpitt@uchicago.edu)

Daniel Casasanto
(casasanto@uchicago.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract
People map numbers onto horizontal space, forming an
implicit mental number line (MNL). The direction of the
MNL, which varies across cultures, has often been attributed
to the direction of reading and writing words. Yet, this
proposal is neither clearly motivated nor well supported by
experimental data. Here we tested the hypothesis that fingercounting habits can determine the direction of the MNL.
Americans were trained to count on their fingers from left to
right or from right to left. After rightward counting,
participants showed implicit associations of small numbers
with left space and large numbers with right space, typical for
Americans. After leftward counting, this space-number
association was extinguished, overall, and was qualitatively
reversed in a significant proportion of the individual
participants. A few minutes of finger counting experience can
redirect the MNL, supporting a causal role for finger counting
in the acquisition and maintenance of culture-specific mental
number lines.
Keywords: SNARC; finger counting; embodied cognition;
numerical cognition; motor experience

Introduction
Across many cultures, people use space to think about
number. In English speaking cultures, small numbers are
associated with the left side of an implicit mental number
line (MNL), and large numbers with the right side (Restle,
1970). The most abundant source of evidence for this MNL
is the Spatial-Numerical Association of Response Codes, or
SNARC effect: People tend to respond faster to small
numbers with their left hand and to large numbers with their
right hand, even when the magnitude of the number is
irrelevant to their response (Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux,
1993). Although the MNL has been the subject of more than
100 experiments (Wood, Willems, Nuerk, & Fischer, 2008),
there is little consensus about its developmental origins (de
Hevia & Spelke, 2009; 2010; cf., Gebuis & Gevers, 2011).
Where does this spatial mapping of number come from?
Cross-cultural variation in the MNL provides clues to the
origin of its directionality. According to one account, still
widely accepted, the direction of reading and writing in a
culture determines the direction of the MNL. In general,
people from left-to-right reading cultures show MNLs that
increase from left to right (e.g. French; Dehaene et al., 1993;
Scots: Fischer, 2008; Canadians; Shaki, Fischer, & Petrusic,
2009), whereas people from some Arabic cultures show
MNLs in the opposite direction (i.e. small numbers on the
right, large numbers on the left), consistent with the right-

to-left direction of reading in their cultures (Palestinians:
Shaki et al., 2009; Lebanese: Zebian, 2005).
Yet, overall, the available evidence calls into question the
role of reading experience in determining the direction of
the MNL. In their seminal study, Dehaene and colleagues
(1993) found “no evidence” of a reversed SNARC effect in
Iranian immigrants living in France who had extensive
exposure to a right-to-left orthography. Another study found
a reversed SNARC effect among Arabic-speaking
Palestinians but no SNARC effect among Hebrew-speaking
Israelis, who also read text from right to left (Shaki et al.,
2009). Across cultures, the direction of people’s MNL
appears to be only loosely correlated with the direction in
which they read and write text. Furthermore, evidence of a
culture-specific MNL has been found in preliterate children
as young as 3 years old (Hoffmann, Hornung, Martin, &
Schiltz, 2013; Opfer, Thompson, & Furlong, 2010; Shaki,
Fischer, & Göbel, 2012). Finally, the only direct
experimental test of the effect of reading experience on the
direction of the MNL produced a null result. French
participants responded to number words in either standard
or mirror-reversed orthography. Orthography had no effect
on the strength or direction of the SNARC (Dehaene et al.,
1993; Experiment 8). Although Dehaene and colleagues
concluded that, “[t]he particular direction of the spatialnumerical association seems to be determined by the
direction of writing,” (1993, pg. 394) there is little empirical
support for this claim. Some cultural practices appear to
determine the direction of the MNL, but which ones?

Does Finger Counting Shape the MNL?
The direction of the MNL has also been attributed to finger
counting. People whose finger-counting routines start with
the left hand (habitual left-starters) were found to be more
likely to show a standard SNARC effect than those who
started with their right hand (habitual right-starters; Fischer,
2008). Across cultures, finger-counting habits appear to
covary with writing direction. Reportedly, Americans and
western Europeans tend to be left-starters, whereas Persianspeaking Iranians tend to be right-starters (Lindemann,
Alipour, & Fischer, 2011; but see Di Luca, Granà, Semenza,
Seron, & Pesenti, 2006; Sato, Cattaneo, Rizzolatti, &
Gallese, 2007; Sato & Lalain, 2008). Could differences in
finger-counting habits contribute to the observed crosscultural variation in the MNL?
A variety of behavioral, neuropsychological, and brainimaging studies reveal tight links between fingers and

1174

numbers. In many numerate cultures, children learn to count
on their fingers (Butterworth, 2000). Their ability to
differentiate fingers predicts later numerical abilities (Fayol,
Barrouillet, & Marinthe, 1998; Noël, 2005) and training this
ability improves their performance on some numerical
reasoning tasks (Gracia-Bafallu & Noël, 2008). In adults,
passively viewing hands in canonical finger-counting
postures facilitates processing of the corresponding Arabic
numerals (Badets, Pesenti, & Olivier, 2010; Di Luca &
Presenti, 2008). Likewise, people are fastest to respond to
single digits when the response mapping between numbers
and fingers matches their own finger-counting routine
(DiLuca et al., 2006). The influence of the hands is also
evident in arithmetic, where both children and adults
commit a disproportionate number of split-five errors:
answers that differ from the correct answer by exactly five
(e.g. 18 – 7 = 6; Domahs, Krinzinger, & Willmes 2008;
Domahs, Moeller, Huber, Willmes, & Nuerk, 2010).
Neurostimulation studies support functional relationships
beteween hands and numbers. In participants who habitually
count on their fingers from left to right, transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) to motor cortex increased
excitability in right (but not left) hand muscles in response
to small numbers (1-4) relative to large numbers (6-9) and
controls; this pattern was found even when number
magnitude was irrelevant to the task (Sato et al., 2007).
These associations between fingers and numbers in
healthy participants are reflected in patients with brain
damage, as well. Patients with Gerstmann syndrome show
both severe acalculia (mathematical impairment) and finger
agnosia (inability to distinguish the fingers of one’s hand),
often as a result of damage to the left angular gyrus of the
parietal lobe (Gerstmann, 1940). Producing transient lesions
in this brain region using repeated transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) produces the same deficits in finger
differentiation and numerical processing as Gerstmann
observed, suggesting a functional overlap between
representations of numbers and fingers in the parietal cortex
(Rusconi, Walsh, & Butterworth, 2005). Likewise, fMRI
data show overlap in the BOLD signal pattern in bilateral
parietal cortex during simple arithmetic and fingerdiscrimination tasks (Andres, Michaux, & Pesenti, 2012; but
see Andres, Seron, & Olivier, 2007).
Together, these findings lend support to “manumerical”
accounts of numerical cognition, which posit a critical
functional role for the fingers in the representation and
manipulation of numbers (Fischer & Brugger, 2011; Wood
& Fischer, 2008; see also Di Luca & Presenti, 2011). Yet,
despite a wealth of data linking number representations with
the fingers, there has been no experimental test of the
relationship between finger counting and the construction of
the MNL. On the basis of the data reviewed above, it is not
possible to determine whether culture-specific fingercounting habits are a cause or an effect of culture-specific
mental number lines.

To test for effects of finger counting on the direction of
the MNL, here we trained participants to count on their
fingers in one of two randomly-assigned patterns, one
increasing from left to right (rightward) and the other
increasing from right to left (leftward). After training, we
assessed the strength and direction of participants’ mental
number lines as indexed by the SNARC effect. We reasoned
that if finger-counting habits can play a causal role in
determining the direction of the MNL, then manipulating
the direction of finger counting should cause corresponding
differences in the direction of the MNL.

Method
Participants
Thirty-two right-handers from the New School for Social
Research and the New York City area participated for
payment. Half were randomly assigned to the leftward
counting condition (n = 16) and the other half to the
rightward counting condition (n = 16).

Materials and Procedure
Participants performed a two-part experiment in which a
training phase was followed by a test phase. In the training
phase, participants counted on their fingers according to one
of two randomly-assigned patterns. In the test phase,
participants performed two standard tests of the SNARC
effect, a parity-judgment task and a magnitude-judgment
task, with the order of these tasks counterbalanced across
subjects using a Latin square design.
During both the training and test phases participants sat at
a desk in front of an Apple iMac computer (Apple Inc.,
Cupertino, CA). Instructions and stimuli were presented in
white text on a black background in the center of the screen,
approximately at eye level. All numbers were displayed as
Arabic numerals.
Training Phase. The experimenter asked participants to
count on their hands from 1 to 10 and documented their
spontaneous finger-counting pattern. He then stood to the
left of the participant, facing the same direction, and
demonstrated the randomly-assigned finger-counting pattern
once. Participants then repeated the pattern once in tandem
with the experimenter and once on their own before
continuing. In the rightward counting condition, participants
counted from left to right, starting with the left thumb and
ending with the right thumb. In the leftward counting
condition, participants counted in the opposite direction,
starting with the right thumb and ending with the left thumb.
Both hands were kept in the supine position (palms up)
during all counting tasks.
After participants were familiarized with the leftward or
rightward finger-counting pattern, they practiced the pattern
during three computer-based training tasks. In all three
tasks, the integers 1 through 10 were presented on the
screen. Participants were required to represent the presented

1175

number on their fingers using the finger-counting pattern
they had just practiced. Instructions appeared on the screen
at the beginning of each task. In task A, participants started
with their hands closed and counted up to the number
displayed, saying each number aloud while extending the
corresponding finger. In task B, participants started with
their hands closed and extended the set of fingers
corresponding to the number displayed on the screen (all at
once) while saying the number aloud. In task C, participants
held their hands open and wiggled the finger that
corresponded to the number displayed while saying the
number aloud. After the participant successfully completed
each trial, the experimenter advanced to the next trial by
pressing a key on a keyboard out of sight of the participant.
All ten integers were presented in random order three times
in task A and twice in tasks B and C. Participants performed
three rounds of this training sequence (i.e. ABC, ABC,
ABC), completing a total of 210 training trials. Training
lasted about 15 minutes, and was recorded by a digital video
camera positioned to the left and out of sight of participants.
Test Phase. After training, participants performed two
standard tests of the SNARC effect: a parity judgment task
and a magnitude judgment task. The order of these tasks
was counterbalanced across participants. For both tasks,
they were instructed to respond as quickly and accurately as
possible to the numbers on screen by pressing one of two
keys (“a” and “’” on the English-US keyboard), each
covered by a yellow sticker.
In the parity judgment task, participants were instructed to
press the yellow key on the left for odd numbers and the
yellow key on the right for even numbers for one block of
trials. In a second block this mapping was reversed, and the
order of blocks was counterbalanced across participants.
Each of eight digits (1 through 9 except 5) was presented
eight times in random order, yielding 64 trials per block.
Each trial began with a fixation cross for 500ms, after which
the digit appeared and remained on the screen until the
participant responded. Participants used their left index

finger to press the left key and their right index finger to
press the right key.
The materials and procedures used in the magnitude
judgment task were identical to those used in the parity
judgment task, with the exception of the task instructions. In
one block, participants were instructed to press the yellow
key on the left for numbers less than 5 and the yellow key
on the right for numbers greater than 5. In a second block
this mapping was reversed and the order of blocks was
counterbalanced across participants. In total, each
participant completed 256 trials across 4 blocks (2 parity
judgment blocks and 2 magnitude judgment blocks). The
order of blocks and tasks was counterbalanced across
participants using a latin square design.
After testing, participants completed a language history
questionnaire and the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory
(Oldfield, 1971) and were subsequently debriefed.

Results
Parity Judgment Task
The average error rate was 3.8% and did not differ
significantly between training conditions (χ2(1, N = 32) =
.02, p = .89). Inaccurate trials were excluded from the
reaction time (RT) analyses as were trials with RTs greater
than 2.5 standard deviations from the average, which
accounted for 2% of accurate responses.
To evaluate the strength of the SNARC effect in each
participant, mean RTs for each digit were calculated for
participants’ left hand and right hand responses. The
difference (right minus left) was then regressed over digit
magnitude to obtain non-standardized regression
coefficients representing each participant’s mapping of
numbers onto space (Fig 1a).
In the rightward counting condition, the mean slope was 10.84 ms/digit (t(15) = -4.02, p =.001), indicating a standard
SNARC effect in which small numbers are mapped to the
left and large numbers are mapped to the right. By contrast,

Figure 1. SNARC effects by task and condition. Bold lines show group effects, dashed lines show individual effects
in the rightward counting condition, and dotted lines show individual effects in the leftward counting condition.

1176

Figure 2. Direction of individual SNARC effects.
the mean slope in the leftward counting condition was only 1.23 ms/digit, and showed no reliable SNARC effect (t(15)
= -.42, p = .68). Importantly, these slopes differed
significantly between training conditions (F(1, 30) = 5.79, p
= .02), indicating that the finger counting training was
sufficient to modulate the strength of the SNARC effect.
The effect of finger-counting training was also evident in
a comparison of the proportion of participants in each
condition with positive slopes (reversed SNARC effect) vs.
negative slopes (standard SNARC effect): only 2 of 16
participants (12.5%) in the rightward counting condition
showed a positive slope, whereas 8 out of 16 participants
(50%) in the leftward counting condition showed a positive
slope, indicating a reversed SNARC effect (one-tailed
Fisher’s Exact p=.02; fig 2).

Magnitude Judgment Task
Data from one participant who failed to follow instructions
were excluded. The average error rate in the remaining 31
participants was 2.9% and did not differ significantly
between training conditions (χ2(1, N = 31) = 2.10, p = .15).
Inaccurate trials were excluded from RT analyses as were
trials with RTs greater than 2.5 standard deviations from the
average, which accounted for 2% of accurate responses.
In the rightward counting condition, the mean slope was 29.8 ms/digit (t(14) = -4.11, p = .001), indicating a strong
SNARC effect. By contrast, the average slope in the
leftward counting condition was only -7.66 ms/digit and did
not differ from zero (t(15) = -1.63, p = .12). As in the parity
judgment task, the average SNARC effect differed as a
function of finger counting training, as indicated by a
significant difference between the mean slopes (F(1, 29) =
6.73, p = .01).
This effect of finger counting training was also reflected
in an analysis of the polarity of the SNARC effect slopes in
the individual participants:,whereas 0 of 15 participants
(0%) in the rightward counting condition showed a positive
slope, 6 of 16 participants (37.5%) in the leftward counting
condition did so (one-tailed Fisher’s Exact p = .03; fig 2).

In summary, on the basis of the averaged data, it appears
that the SNARC effect was extinguished after rightward
finger counting, but not reversed. Yet, analyses of the
individual participants’ slopes suggest that group averaging
was obscuring an informative pattern. After rightward finger
counting, most participants showed the standard negative
SNARC effect slope; very few participants showed a
positive slope (12.5% in the Parity task; 0% in the
Magnitude task).
By contrast, after leftward finger
counting, a significantly greater proportion of the
participants showed a qualitatively reversed SNARC effect
(i.e., a positive slope: 50% in the Parity task; 37.5% in the
Magnitude task). If about 15 minutes of rightward finger
counting can cause up to 50% of participants to show
qualitatively reversed SNARC effects, perhaps more
sustained leftward finger-counting experience would cause
not only a modulation of the SNARC effect but also a
significant reversal in the group-averaged data.

Discussion
Ordinarily, native English speakers’ implicit mental number
line increases from left to right (e.g. Fischer, 2008; Shaki et
al., 2009). Yet, just a few minutes of finger counting
dramatically changed this space-number mapping. Whereas
training with a rightward finger-counting routine produced a
standard SNARC effect, training with a leftward fingercounting routine abolished this effect at the group level. At
the individual level, leftward finger counting caused more
participants to show a qualitatively reversed SNARC effect
than rightward finger counting. These results provide the
first evidence that finger counting can play a causal role in
determining the direction of the mental number line.

How experience shapes mental metaphors
Number is one of several abstract concepts people associate
with left-right space, but different concepts are spatialized
on the basis of different kinds of experience. Like left-right
spatial mappings of time (Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter,
1991) and emotional valence (Casasanto, 2009), spacenumber mappings can be considered to be a mental
metaphor: an implicit association between analog
continuums in two different conceptual domains, in which
the source domain (e.g., space) serves as a scaffold for
representations in the target domain (e.g., number), which is
typically more abstract (Casasanto, 2010; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980). The specifics of these mental metaphors are
established through correlations in particular kinds of
experience. In the case of time, the act of reading establishes
a correlation between progress through space and time in
one direction or the other. When reading each line of an
English text, the reader’s eyes begin on the left side (at an
earlier time) and end up on the right side (at a later time).
This correlation between space and time results in a culturespecific mental timeline in which earlier events are on the
left and later events are on the right, which can be

1177

Do other cultural practices shape the MNL?

transiently reversed when people are exposed to mirrorreversed text (Casasanto & Bottini, 2014).
In the case of emotion, people experience a correlation
between space and motor fluency: We tend to act more
fluently on our dominant side of space, and more clumsily
on our non-dominant side. Since fluent actions are
associated with positive emotions, right-handers come to
implicitly associate “good” with “right” and “bad” with
“left,” whereas left-handers show the opposite associations.
These body-specific associations can be reversed by making
the non-dominant hand temporarily more fluent than the
domiant hand (Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011).
How are space and number related in experience? In
finger counting, each number in the count list corresponds
to the spatial position of one finger. For rightward finger
counters, low numbers are on the left and high numbers are
on the right, and vice versa for leftward counters. In contrast
with finger counting, the process of reading written words
does not seem to provide any correlation between space and
number (unless people count words as they read, which
seems doubtful). The direction of the MNL is not likely to
be conditioned by the direction of reading and writing, per
se (cf., Dehaene, et al., 1993), but rather by other culturespecific conventions like finger counting.

Numbers are systematically spatialized not just on the
fingers but also on calendars, graphs, rulers, keyboards, and
on written number lines. Thus, written numbers provide
another plausible experiential basis for the MNL. The
direction of written numbers varies across cultures. In
Hebrew, the direction of written numbers dissociates from
the directon of written words. Hebrew speakers, who read
words from right to left but read numbers from left to right,
show SNARC effects that are reliably shallower than Arabic
speakers, who read both words and numbers from right to
left (Shaki et al., 2009). The spatial position of numbers on
the page has been shown to rapidly modulate the SNARC
effect. In a training experiment, reading text in which small
numbers appeared on the right and large numbers appeared
on the left caused a positive shift in the slope of
participants’ SNARC effects, even though reading direction
was held constant across conditions (Fischer, Mills, &
Shaki, 2010). Thus, the direction of written numbers can
influence the MNL even when in direct conflict with the
direction of written words. The relative contributions of
number reading and finger counting to the construction and
maintenance of the MNL have yet to be determined.

References

Finger counting and the MNL across cultures
Although the direction of finger counting covaries with the
direction of the MNL, the correlation may not be perfect. In
Americans and western European cultures, finger-counting
habits have been observed to progress from left to right
(Lindemann et al., 2011), consistent with the direction of the
standard SNARC effect in those cultures (e.g. Crollen,
Dormal, Seron, Lepore & Collignon, 2013; Fischer, 2008;
Shaki et al., 2009). However, some studies have found
leftward finger-counting habits in participants from cultures
where standard SNARC effects have also been observed
(Italians: Di Luca et al., 2006; Sato et al., 2007; French:
Sato & Lalain, 2008). As none of these studies tested fingercounting habits and the SNARC effect in the same
participants, it is possible that such within-subject tests
would reveal subject-by-subject covariation between finger
counting habits and the direction of the MNL, within
cultures (see Fischer, 2008). Discrepencies between the
direction of the SNARC and the direction of reported fingercounting habits may also be due to the method by which
finger counting was assessed. Self-reported finger-counting
habits differ from those produced spontaneously (Lucidi &
Thevenot, 2014). Finger-counting habits have not been
studied in either of the cultures in which clear reverse
SNARC effects have been observed (Palestinians: Shaki et
al., 2009; Lebanese: Zebian, 2005); if members of these
cultures tend to count from right to left, this finding would
support the hypothesis that finger-counting habits can
determine the direction of the MNL.

Andres, M., Michaux, N., & Pesenti, M. (2012). Common
substrate for mental arithmetic and finger representation in the
parietal cortex. Neuroimage, 62(3), 1520-1528.
Andres, M., Seron, X., & Olivier, E. (2007). Contribution of hand
motor circuits to counting. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
19(4), 563–76.
Badets, A., Pesenti, M., & Olivier, E. (2010). Response–effect
compatibility of finger–numeral configurations in arithmetical
context. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
63(1), 16–22.
Butterworth, B. (2000). The mathematical brain. London:
Macmillan
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts: good and
bad in right-and left-handers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 138(3), 351.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for thinking. In V. Evans. & P.
Chilton (Eds.), Language, Cognition and Space. (453-478). New
York: Equinox.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R. (2014). Mirror Reading Can Reverse
the Flow of Time. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General. 143(2), 473-9.
Casasanto, D., & Chrysikou, E. G. (2011). When left is “right”
motor fluency shapes abstract concepts. Psychological
Science, 22(4), 419-422.
Crollen, V., Dormal, G., Seron, X., Lepore, F., & Collignon, O.
(2011). Embodied numbers: The role of vision in the
development of number–space interactions. Cortex, 49(1), 276–
83.

1178

Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 122(3), 371–396.
de Hevia, M. D., & Spelke, E. S. (2009). Spontaneous mapping of
number
and
space
in
adults
and
young
children. Cognition, 110(2), 198-207.
de Hevia, M. D., & Spelke, E. S. (2010). Number-space mapping
in human infants. Psychological Science, 21(5), 653-660.
Di Luca, S., Granà, A., Semenza, C., Seron, X., & Pesenti, M.
(2006). Finger–digit compatibility in Arabic numeral
processing. The
Quarterly
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology, 59(9), 1648-1663.
Di Luca, S., & Pesenti, M. (2008). Masked priming effect with
canonical finger numeral configurations. Experimental Brain
Research, 185(1), 27-39.
Di Luca, S., & Pesenti, M. (2011). Finger numeral representations:
more than just another symbolic code. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2, 272.
Domahs, F., Krinzinger, H., & Willmes, K. (2008). Mind the gap
between both hands: Evidence for internal finger-based number
representations in children's mental calculation. Cortex, 44(4),
359-367.
Domahs, F., Moeller, K., Huber, S., Willmes, K., & Nuerk, H.C.
(2010).
Embodied
numerosity:
implicit
hand-based
representations influence symbolic number processing across
cultures. Cognition, 116(2), 251–66.
Fayol, M., Barrouillet, P., & Marinthe, C. (1998). Predicting
arithmetical
achievement
from
neuro-psychological
performance: a longitudinal study. Cognition, 68(2), 63–70.
Fischer, M. H. (2008). Finger counting habits modulate spatialnumerical associations. Cortex, 44(4), 386–92.
Fischer, M. H., Mills, R. A., & Shaki, S. (2010). How to cook a
SNARC: number placement in text rapidly changes spatial–
numerical associations. Brain and Cognition, 72(3), 333-336.
Fischer, M. H., & Brugger, P. (2011). When Digits Help Digits:
Spatial–Numerical Associations Point to Finger Counting as
Prime Example of Embodied Cognition. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2, 260.
Gebuis, T., & Gevers, W. (2011). Numerosities and space; indeed
a cognitive illusion! A reply to de Hevia and Spelke
(2009). Cognition, 121(2), 248-252.
Gerstmann, J. (1940). Syndrome of finger agnosia, disorientation
for right and left, agraphia and acalculia: local diagnostic
value. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 44(2), 398.
Gracia-Bafalluy, M., & Noël, M.-P. (2008). Does finger training
increase young children’s numerical performance? Coretx,
44(4), 368–375.
Hoffmann, D., Hornung, C., Martin, R., & Schiltz, C. (2013).
Developing number-space associations: SNARC effects using a
color discrimination task in 5-year-olds. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 116(4), 775–91.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lindemann, O., Alipour, a., & Fischer, M. H. (2011). Finger
Counting Habits in Middle Eastern and Western Individuals: An

Online Survey. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 42(4),
566–578.
Lucidi, A., & Thevenot, C. (2014). Do not count on me to imagine
how I act: behavior contradicts questionnaire responses in the
assessment of finger counting habits. Behavior Research
Methods, 1-9.
Noël, M. P. (2005). Finger gnosia: a predictor of numerical
abilities in children?. Child Neuropsychology, 11(5), 413-430.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness:
the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9(1), 97-113.
Opfer, J. E., Thompson, C. a, & Furlong, E. E. (2010). Early
development of spatial-numeric associations: evidence from
spatial and quantitative performance of preschoolers.
Developmental Science, 13(5), 761–71.
Restle, F. (1970). Speed of adding and comparing
numbers. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 83(2), 274-278.
Rusconi, E., Turatto, M., & Umiltà, C. (2007). Two orienting
mechanisms in posterior parietal lobule: an rTMS study of the
Simon and SNARC effects. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 24(4),
373–92.
Rusconi, E., Walsh, V., & Butterworth, B. (2005). Dexterity with
numbers: rTMS over left angular gyrus disrupts finger gnosis
and number processing. Neuropsychologia, 43(11), 1609-1624.
Riello, M., & Rusconi, E. (2011). Unimanual SNARC Effect:
Hand Matters. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 372.
Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Rizzolatti, G., & Gallese, V. (2007).
Numbers within our hands: modulation of corticospinal
excitability of hand muscles during numerical judgment. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(4), 684–93.
Sato, M., & Lalain, M. (2008). On the relationship between
handedness and hand-digit mapping in finger counting. Cortex,
44(4), 393–9.
Shaki, S., Fischer, M. H., & Göbel, S. M. (2012). Direction counts:
a comparative study of spatially directional counting biases in
cultures with different reading directions. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 112(2), 275–81.
Shaki, S., Fischer, M. H., & Petrusic, W. M. (2009). Reading
habits for both words and numbers contribute to the SNARC
effect. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(2), 328–31.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991). Cross-cultural
and developmental trends in graphic productions. Cognitive
Psychology, 23(4), 515-557.
Wood, G., & Fischer, M. H. (2008). Numbers, space, and action from finger counting to the mental number line and beyond.
Cortex, 44(4), 353–8.
Wood, G., Willems, K., Nuerk, H., & Fischer, M. H. (2008). On
the cognitive link between space and number  : a meta-analysis
of the SNARC effect. Psychology Science Quarterly, 50(4),
489–525.
Zebian, S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts, spatial
thinking, and directionality of writing: The SNARC effect and
the reverse SNARC effect in English and Arabic monoliterates,
biliterates, and illiterate Arabic speakers. Journal of Cognition
and Culture, 5(1-2), 1-2.

1179

