UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Following the Scent: Applying the Ecological Valence Theory to Odor Preferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34k4b8xk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Schloss, Karen B.
Goldberger, Carolyn S.
Palmer, Stephen E.
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Following the Scent: Applying the Ecological Valence Theory to Odor Preferences
Karen B. Schloss (karen_schloss@brown.edu)1, Carolyn S. Goldberger (csgoldberger@gmail.com) 2,
Stephen E. Palmer (palmer@cogsci.berkeley.edu) 3, and Carmel A. Levitan (levitan@oxy.edu)2
1

Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912 USA
2
Department of Cognitive Science, Occidental College, Los Angeles, California 90041 USA
3
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720 USA

Abstract
Preference is the primary dimension underlying odor
perception. Therefore, to understand odor perception it is
necessary to understand odor preferences. We propose that
preference for an odor is determined by preferences for all
objects and/or entities associated with that odor (extending
Palmer and Schloss’s (2010) Ecological Valence Theory of
color preferences to odor preferences). Odor preferences were
strongly predicted by preference for all associates with the
odors (e.g., people liked the apple odor which was associated
with mostly positive things like apples, soap, and candy and
disliked the fish odor associated with mostly negative things
like dead fish, trash, and vomit. Our model performed
significantly better than one based on preference for the
object the odors were designed to smell like (e.g., predicting
preference for the apple odor based on preference for apples).
These results suggest that odor preferences are a summary
statistic, coding the valence of previous odor-based
experiences.
Keywords: Odor preference; Hedonics; Associative Learning

Introduction
Odor perception is surprisingly complex, taking input from
350-400 functional olfactory receptors – far more than the 3
photoreceptors involved in normal color vision – and
feeding it into a high-dimensional system (Herz, 2014).
Several studies have tried to reveal the dimensional
structure underlying odor perception, and all have shown
that the first, most robust axis is preference (a.k.a., hedonic
response, pleasantness) (e.g., Berglund, Berglund, Engen, &
Ekman, 1973; Joussain, Chakirian, Kermen, Rouby, &
Bensafi, 2011; Khan et al., 2007; Schifman, Robinson, &
Erikson, 1977; Shiffman, 1974; Yeshurun & Sobel, 2010).
Why is preference such an important dimension of
olfaction? How are odor preferences formed? And why are
some odors preferred to others?
It is commonly held that the olfactory system’s primary
function is to signal organisms to approach beneficial
objects and situations and avoid harmful ones (e.g., Herz,
Beland, & Hellerstein, 2004; Proetz, 1953; Yeshurun &
Sobel, 2010; Zarzo, 2011). For example, rats have evolved
the adaptive quality of being afraid when they smell cats,
even if they have never encountered a cat before
(Dielenberg & McGregor, 2001). Odor preferences are
adaptive for an organism’s success to the degree that it likes

(dislikes) odors that are associated with positive (negative)
outcomes (e.g., Proetz, 1953).
Although there may be some innate components to odor
preferences, evidence suggests human odor preferences are
largely determined by experience and are context-dependent
(for reviews, see Herz, 2006; Yeshurun & Sobel, 2010). One
mechanism by which odor preferences may develop is
through associative learning (Bartoshuk, 1991; Engen,
1991; Herz, 2001). According to this account, when an odor
is paired with an affectively charged experience, the
affective valence of the experience transfers to degree of
preference for the odor. For example, the positive
experience of spending time with a friend who happens to
be wearing new perfume would tend to cause an increase in
one’s preference for the smell of the perfume. However, the
negative experience of getting the stomach flu while under
that friend’s care would tend to have the opposite effect,
possibly even causing one to hate the smell of the perfume.
The associative learning account makes several testable
predictions that have been empirically supported. First, it
predicts that preferences for novel odors can be learned by
pairing them with positive/negative experiences. Indeed,
when Herz et al. (2004) exposed participants to a novel odor
while they played a fun, monetarily rewarding video game,
preference for that odor increased relative to baseline.
Likewise, when a different set of participants played an
annoying, monetarily penalizing version of the game, their
preference for the odor decreased.
Second, the associative learning account predicts that two
populations whose prior experiences with a given odor have
different valences will have different preferences for that
odor. For example, people in Britain strongly disliked
wintergreen (methyl salicylate), where it was associated
with sickness and medicine (Moncreiff, 1966), whereas
people in the US strongly liked the same smell, where it was
associated with delicious candies (Cain & Johnson, 1978)
(see Herz, et al., 2004). Likewise, participants who were
afraid of dental procedures found the odor of clove
(eugenol, found in dental cement) particularly unpleasant,
whereas those who were unafraid liked the odor (Robin,
Alaoui-Ismaili, Dittmar, & Vernet-Maury, 1998).
A third, related prediction is that if people are prompted
to associate particular positive or negative experiences with
a given odor (semantic priming), they will like that odor
correspondingly more or less. Indeed, participants liked the
smell of an isovaleric-butyric acid mixture better when it

1377

was called “parmesan cheese” than when it was called
“vomit” (Herz & von Clef, 2001). They also liked the smells
of clean air and of isovaleric acid mixed with cheddar
cheese more when they were labeled “cheddar cheese” than
when they were labeled “body odor” (de Araujo, Rolls,
Velazco, Margot, & Cayeux, 2005).
Odor preferences are thus biased by which objects are
thought to produce the odor (de Araujo, et al., 2005; Herz &
von Clef, 2001) and can be manipulated by contextual cues
that activate particular associations. This idea that people’s
evaluation of a given stimulus is influenced by contextual
cues is consistent with situated conceptualization (e.g.,
Barsalou, 2003). If olfaction truly exists to steer organisms
to approach/avoid beneficial/ harmful objects, it would be
adaptive if the olfactory system continually updates
preferences as it gathers information about new odorassociated objects and/or entities and discerns which ones
are most relevant based on contextual cues.
Here, we propose that preference for a given odor is
determined by the cumulative effects of all previous
experiences with that odor. This hypothesis is derived by
analogy from Palmer & Schloss’ (2010) Ecological Valence
Theory (EVT) of human color preferences, which posits that
preference for a given color is determined by the combined
valence (liking/disliking) of all objects and/or entities
associated with the color. For example, people generally
like vivid blue, which they associate with mostly positive
things like clean water and clear sky, whereas they dislike
dark yellow (olive), associated with mostly negative things
like biological waste and rotting food.
Applied to odors, the EVT dovetails with the associative
learning account by claiming that preference for a given
odor is based on a summary statistic, coding the valences of
all things associated with that odor. We predict that
“default” odor preferences, such as those assessed in the
laboratory, are explained by the combined valences of all
associated objects. However, we readily agree that in the
real world, situational factors might make some associates
more salient and contribute more to odor preference than
others, as has be proposed for color preferences (Schloss &
Palmer, in press; Strauss, Schloss, & Palmer, 2013).
In their original test of the EVT for color preferences,
Palmer and Schloss (2010) compared average color
preferences to what they called the Weighted Affective
Valence Estimates (WAVEs) of the corresponding colors:
the average of the preference ratings for all objects
associated with each color, weighted by the how well the
colors of the objects match the relevant test color. The
WAVEs were calculated based on the data from three
groups of participants. Group 1 viewed each of the 32 colors
for 20-sec and wrote down all of the objects they associated
with each color. Group 2 was presented with a condensed
version1 of the object descriptions produced by Group 1 as
black text on a white background and rated the valence
(positive/negative) of each object description. Group 3 was
presented with object descriptions paired with each color
1

that elicited that description and rated how well the color
matched the color of the object described. The WAVE was
computed for each color by multiplying the valence of each
associated object by the match rating for that object-color
pair (as a weighting factor) and then calculating the mean of
the products. The WAVEs explained 80% of the variance in
average color preferences with no estimated free
parameters. People clearly liked colors that were associated
with objects that, on average, had more positive valences
and disliked the colors that were associated with objects that
had more negative valences.
Two other relevant approaches have been used to account
for odor preferences; odor profiling and physiochemical
properties. An odor profile is a list of odor descriptors with
ratings of how applicable the descriptors are for each odor
(Dravnieks, Masurat, & Lamm, 1984). The goal of odor
profiling was to predict how much people would like odors
based on their preferences for the odor descriptors (e.g.,
soapy, floral, spicy, nutty). Although this approach
resembles the WAVE procedure described above, odor
profiling uses one list of descriptors that is the same across
all odors; it does not attempt to predict odor preferences
from all objects associated with the particular odors. The
profiling approach was successful at predicting hedonic
responses to various odor sets (roughly 72%-92% of the
variance for 14-16 odors), based on hedonic responses to
146 descriptors in their odor profile (Dravnieks, 1983;
Dravnieks, et al., 1984). However, to evaluate whether odor
preferences are a summary statistic of all objects/entitles
associated with the odor, it was necessary to use a WAVElike procedure to compile a comprehensive list of the
objects and entities associated with the odors.
The psychochemical approach tries to predict odor
preference from the molecular structure of odorants (e.g.,
Joussain, et al., 2011; Khan, et al., 2007; Zarzo, 2011). For
example, Kahn et al. (2007) conducted a perceptual
principle component analysis (PCA) on 1565 odorants
based on their odor profiles (cf. Dravnieks et al., 1984) and
a physiochemical PCA based on their physiochemical
descriptions (e.g., molecular weight and atom counts). The
first component in the perceptual PCA, representing
pleasantness, was significantly correlated with the first
component in the physiochemical PCA, revealing a relation
between molecular structure and odor preference. Zarzo
(2011) subsequently found that larger molecules containing
oxygen and at least six other non-hydrogen atoms were
more preferred. Why do these specific molecular structures
produce more preferable odors? Returning to the idea that
odor preferences exist to steer organisms to approach/avoid
beneficial/harmful outcomes, organisms may like/dislike the
smell of odorants with certain physiochemical properties
because those properties are markers of evolutionarily
beneficial/harmful objects (Zarzo, 2011).
This study used a WAVE procedure for odors, analogous
to that of Palmer and Schloss (2010), to evaluate the EVT’s
account of odor preferences and to compare it to two other
potential explanations: (1) the single-associate hypothesis,

See Palmer and Schloss (2010) for the condensing procedure.

1378

according to which people would only associate one object
with each odor (e.g., only listing “apples” for the apple
odor), and preference for an odor (e.g., apple) would be
determined by preference for the single object type that
produced the odor (e.g., apples) and (2) the namesake
hypothesis, according to which people associate several
objects with each odor, but preference for a given odor (e.g.,
apple) is better predicted by preference for the namesake
object the odor was designed to smell like rather than to the
combined preferences of all associated objects. Our results
are most consistent with the EVT hypothesis, according to
which odor preferences are best explained by the combined
valences of all objects/entities associated with the odors.

Experiment
The goal of the experiment was to determine whether
average odor preference could be explained by preferences
for objects associated with the odors (i.e., by odor WAVEs).

Methods
Participants The participants were Occidental College
undergraduates who received course credit or cash payment
for their participation. Each participant completed one of
four tasks: odor-association descriptions (n = 32), odorpreference ratings (n = 30), object-valence ratings (n = 45),
and odor-object match ratings (n = 15). All gave informed
consent and the Occidental College Human Subjects
Research Review Committee approved the protocol.
Materials The olfactory stimuli were 31 Sniffin’ Sticks
odor pens (Burghart Messtechnik GmbH), (Hummel,
Sekinger, Wolf, Pauli, & Kobal, 1997). The odors tested
were apple, banana, chocolate, cinnamon, cloves, coconut,
coffee, coke, fish, garlic, ginger, grapefruit, grass, honey,
lavender, leather, lemon, lilac, licorice, melon, mushroom,
onion, orange, peach, pear, peppermint, pineapple,
raspberry, rose, smoked meat, and turpentine. Some were
derived from natural ingredients (e.g., orange), whereas
others (e.g., rose) were synthetic. An air purifier (Sharp KC86OU) was run during all tasks using the odor pens.
Design, Displays, and Procedure This experiment included
four between-subject tasks: (1) odor preference ratings, (2)
object descriptions, (3) object valence ratings, and (4) odorobject match ratings.
(1) Odor preference task. Participants first smelled 12
pens (selected to span the range of preference) one at a time
in random order to get an idea of the range of odors they
would be asked to rate. They were asked to consider which
odor they liked most and which odor they liked least. This
anchoring procedure was done so that participants
understood what liking odors “not at all” and “very much”
meant for them within the context of the present odors
(Palmer, Schloss, & Sammartino, 2013). Participants then
rated their preference for each of the 31 pens, one at a time
in random order. To do so, they made a line mark rating on
a slider scale that ranged from “not at all” (left end-point;

-100) to “very much” (right end-point; +100). The center of
the scale was marked to provide a neutral (0) point.
(2) Object description task. Participants were given one
odor pen at a time, in random order. They were instructed to
smell the odor and think of as many objects or concepts as
they could that they associated with the odor (no time limit).
They typed these objects/concepts into a text box displayed
on a computer monitor and pressed “enter” to go onto the
next trial. Participants were asked to be as specific as
possible but not to name objects that would not be known
by other people (e.g., “my best friend’s perfume”). They
were told that the experimenters were interested in all items
the pens reminded them of, whether pleasant or unpleasant.
Once participants said they were finished with a particular
pen, it was recapped and they were handed another pen.
This procedure produced a total of 2832 object
associations across all 32 participants. These items were
then compiled into a condensed list using a procedure
similar to that used by Palmer and Schloss (2010) for colorobject associations. First, all of the redundant object
associations were combined (e.g., several people reported
“banana” for the banana smell). Unlike in Palmer and
Schloss (2010), we included objects that were mentioned
only once in order to accumulate a more comprehensive list.
Objects were then grouped together in cases where
synonyms were used (for instance, “cinnamon gum” and
“Big Red gum” were combined and referred to as
“Cinnamon gum (e.g., Big Red)”). This process resulted in a
total of 791 separate items across all of the pens. Note that
in many cases, the same object was listed for several pens
(e.g., “forest” was mentioned for the grass, lavender,
leather, mushroom, and rose odors).
(3) Object valence rating task. Participants were first
given a list of 12 sample items (baked goods, dirty toilet
water, furniture, grocery store, oranges, rotting trash, socks,
unwashed stale man, vanilla, vacation, vomit, warm) to give
them an idea of the range of descriptions they would see.
They then were presented with each of the 791 object
descriptions as black text on a white background, one at a
time in a random order. They rated how much they liked
each object/entity using the same line-mark sider scale as in
the odor preference task. They were also given the option of
indicating that they did not know what a given item (e.g.
“terrarium”) was instead of rating it. When calculating the
average of the odor valence ratings, we excluded the cases
where participants said they did not know what the objects
were. We allowed this option because we had chosen not to
exclude objects that might be more obscure (as Palmer and
Schloss (2010) had done) so that the object description list
would be as complete as possible. Of the 791 objects, 641
objects were recognized by all participants and 772 of the
objects were recognized by all except 5 or fewer
participants. The most unfamiliar objects were raspberry
lime rickey (unfamiliar to 21 of the 45 participants),
terrarium (13), castor oil (12) and sour grass (10).
Odor-object match rating task. Participants smelled each
of the 31 odors one at a time in random order. For each

1379

smell preferences are strongly related to the average valence
of the objects associated with the smells, irrespective of how
well the object smells matched the smells of the pens).

Figure 1 shows the odor preferences for each pen, average
across participants. The fruity and minty smells were
generally most preferred and the savory, meaty smells were
generally least preferred. These preference ratings are
similar to the hedonics ratings from Hummel et al. (1997)
for the 15 pens that were common to both studies (r = 0.76).

20

peppermint
orange
grapefruit
apple
cinnamon
lilac
coffee
lemon

chocolate
grass
licorice
leather

0

turpentine
honey
ginger

-20

-40
cloves
mushroom
smoked meat
garlic
onion

-60

60

fish

40

-80
-40

20
0
-20
-60

Odor Pen

Figure 1: Average odor preference ratings (y-axis) for
each ‘Sniffin Sticks’ odor pen (x-axis). The x-axis labels
are manufacturer names of the pens. The error bars
represent the standard errors of the means.
We calculated the Weighted Affective Valence Estimate
(WAVE) for each odor pen (p), which is a measure of how
positive the objects (o) are that are associated with the pen
(vo), weighted by how well the odors of the objects matched
the odors of the pen (wpo), and np is the number of object
descriptions ascribed to pen p (c.f. Palmer & Schloss, 2010):
n

Wp =

-20

0
20
Odor WAVE

40

60

Figure 2: Average preference ratings as a function of the
WAVE for each odor pen (i.e., the average valence of
objects associated with each odor pen, weighted by how
well the odor of the object matched the odor of the pen).
The diagonal line represents the best-fit line between the
preferences and WAVEs (r = .87, p < .001).

-40

fish
onion
garlic
smoked meat
mushroom
cloves
ginger
honey
turpentine
leather
liquorice
grass
chocolate
rose
lemon
coffee
pear
lilac
coke
lavender
cinnamon
banana
apple
grapefruit
coconut
pineapple
raspberry
orange
peppermint
melon
peach

Avg. Preference Rating

raspberry
pineapple
coconut
banana
lavender
coke
pear
rose

40

Results and Discussion

-80

peach
melon

60

Average Preference Rating

odor, they were first given a list of all items that had been
associated with that odor and were asked to consider which
was the best match and which was the worst match for that
particular odor. They were then presented with each item,
one at a time in a random order, and rated how well the
item’s odor matched the pen’s odor on a scale from “very
poorly” to “very well.” These data were collected on the
same -100 to +100 scale described above, but rescaled to
range from 0 to 1. Participants had the option of indicating
that they did not know what a given item was instead of
rating it. When calculating the average of the odor-object
match ratings, we excluded the cases for which participants
said they did not know what the objects were. Because some
items were named for multiple different odors (e.g.,
“forest”), there were 1632 match trials in total.

1 p
∑ w povo
n p o=1

The WAVEs explained 76% of the variance in average
odor preferences (r = .87, p < .001), with no free parameters.
Figure 2 shows this strong relation between the preferences
and WAVEs for each smell. It is worth noting that when the
weighting factor (wpo) was eliminated from the equation, the
resulting Affective Valence Estimate (AVE) explained as
much variance (77%; r = .88) as the WAVE did. Therefore,

The odor WAVE results are analogous to those of Palmer
and Schloss (2010), where color WAVEs explained 80% of
the variance in average color preferences (r = .893).
However, unlike for odors, the color-object match weighting
factor was useful for predicting color preference, with the
unweighted object preferences explaining substantially less
variance (69%) than the weighted ones. It is unclear why
there is this discrepancy between the usefulness of the
weighting factor in predicting smell preferences vs. color
preferences. Perhaps it is because odor recognition is
relatively difficult and multiple objects – including those
that are weak matches – are triggered by each odor.
One shortcoming of the odor WAVEs is that most of them
are positive, even though several of the average odor
preference ratings were negative. Palmer and Schloss (2010)
reported a similar issue for color preferences and WAVEs.
This discrepancy may be due to people underreporting
negative objects if they were too shy to report gross and
disgusting things (cf. Palmer & Schloss, 2010). Alternately,
participants might be biased toward generating/thinking
about positive objects. Even so, the fit between the odor
preference and odor WAVEs is remarkably strong.

1380

coconut

coffee

coke

fish

garlic

ginger

grapefruit

grass

honey

lavender

leather

lemon

licorice

lilac

melon

mushroom

onion

orange

peach

pear

peppermint

pineapple

raspberry

rose

smoked meat

turpentine

20
10
0
-100 0 100

-100 0 100

-100 0 100

20
10
0
20
10
0
20
10
0
20
10
0
20
10
0

Frequency

Frequency

20
10
0

Frequency

Frequency

cloves

20
10
0

Frequency

cinnamon

Frequency

chocolate

Frequency

banana

Frequency

apple

preferences with the mean valence of the namesake objects
(e.g., preference for the apple pen with the mean valence for
“apples,” preference for the orange pen with the mean
valence for oranges, etc.). We had valence ratings for all of
the namesake objects except for “turpentine,” which was not
listed during the object description task. We therefore
computed the correlations between smell preference and
namesake object valence for the remaining 30 pens. This
correlation was .55 (p < .01) (30% variance explained),
which is significantly lower than the correlation between the
pen preferences and WAVEs for those 30 pens (r = .87, p <
.001; 76% explained) (correlations compared using the
Fisher r-to-z transformation; z = 2.63, p < .001). Thus,
preference for a given odor is better predicted by valences
of all the objects associated with the odor than by the
valence of the odor’s single namesake object.

General Discussion

-100 0 100

Avg. Valence

Avg. Valence Avg. Valence Avg. Valence

Figure 3: Histograms of the valences of objects associated
with each pen. The x-axis represents the average valence
rating for each object, divided in 10 equally spaced bins
from -100 to +100. The y-axis represents the number of
objects in each bin. The vertical line on each histogram
represents the mean of the distribution.
We were initially concerned that there might be a one-toone correspondence between the smell of a given pen and
one particular object associated with that smell. If so, the
present results would not be terribly interesting (e.g., if the
apple pen smelled only like apples, and we could predict
how much people liked the odor of the pen based on how
much they liked apples). Not only did people produce many
object descriptions for each pen (mean: 53; (range: 23-72),
but the range of objects varied from negative to positive for
every odor (see histograms in Figure 3).
Given that people associated many objects and entities
with each odor, the next question is whether WAVEs
(including all associates) predict odor preferences better
than the valence of the object that each pen was produced to
smell like (i.e., the “namesake” object). For example, does
preference for “apples” account for the preference for the
smell of the apple pen as well as the complete WAVE does?
We addressed this question by correlating the smell

The present study aimed at an increased understanding of
what determines odor preferences. It was motivated by the
Ecological Valence Theory (EVT) of color preferences,
which posits that preference for a given color is determined
by the combined valence (liking/disliking) of all objects
associated with the color (Palmer & Schloss, 2010). Here,
we extended the EVT to the olfactory domain by asking
whether preference for a given odor could be explained by
preferences for the objects and/or entities associated with
that odor (as estimated by odor WAVEs).
Odor WAVEs explained 76% of the variance in odor
preferences, supporting the hypothesis that odor preferences
can be well understood as a summary statistic of people’s
affective responses to all things associated with the odor.
This conclusion is consistent with associative learning of
odor preferences (Bartoshuk, 1991; Engen, 1991; Herz,
2001). This view of odor preferences as summary statistic
differs from the previous view that odor preferences are
largely determined by emotional state of the observer when
the odor is first encountered (e.g., Herz, 2001; 2006).
Although the present data do not discriminate between these
possibilities, subsequent research will address this issue.
Although the present results are correlational, there is
already causal evidence that odor preferences are learned
and manipulated by positive/negative experiences (e.g,
video games) and associations (e.g., labels) with the odors
(de Araujo, et al., 2005; Herz, et al., 2004; Herz & von Clef,
2001). This evidence is of a similar nature to that supporting
the causal claim of the EVT for color preferences. For
example, color preferences could be changed by priming
people to thinking about positive/negative objects of
particular colors (Strauss, et al., 2013).
In summary, we present evidence that odor preferences
are determined by preferences for all of the objects and
entities associated with the odors. These results mirror
findings in the color preference literature, where color
preferences are shaped by experiences with correspondingly
colored objects and entities (Palmer & Schloss, 2010;

1381

Schloss & Palmer, in press; Schloss, Poggesi, & Palmer,
2011; Strauss, et al., 2013; Taylor & Franklin, 2012). Thus,
we believe that odor and color preferences may be governed
by similar, associative learning mechanisms.

Acknowledgments
We thank Kelsey Harrington, Lisa Matsukata, Anisha
Narayan, Jake Nielsen, Evan Thomas, and Sara Wong for
collecting data, Rachel Herz, for insightful discussions on
odor preferences, and Josiah Nunziato and Christine
Gamble for input on this manuscript. This work was
supported by an Occidental College Faculty Enrichment
Grant to C.A.L. and NSF-BCS-1059088 to S.E.P.

References
Barsalou, L. (2003). Situated simulation in the human
conceptual system. Language and cognitive processes,
18(5-6), 513-562.
Bartoshuk, L. M. (1991). Taste, smell and pleasure. In R. C.
Bolles (Ed.), The hedonics of taste (pp. 15-28). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Berglund, B., Berglund, U., Engen, T., & Ekman, G. s.
(1973). Multidimensional analysis of twenty-one odors.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 14(1), 131-137.
Cain, W. S., & Johnson, F. (1978). Lability of odor
pleasantness: influence of mere exposure. Perception,
7(4), 459-465.
de Araujo, I. E., Rolls, E. T., Velazco, M. I. s., Margot, C.,
& Cayeux, I. (2005). Cognitive modulation of olfactory
processing. Neuron, 46(4), 671-679.
Dielenberg, R. A., & McGregor, I. S. (2001). Defensive
behavior in rats towards predatory odors: a review.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 25(7), 597-609.
Dravnieks, A. (1983). Odor character profiling. Journal of
the Air Pollution Control Association, 33(8), 775-778.
Dravnieks, A., Masurat, T., & Lamm, R. A. (1984).
Hedonics of odors and odor descriptors. Journal of the Air
Pollution Control Association, 34(7), 752-755.
Engen, T. (1991). Odor sensation and memory. New York:
Greenwood Publishing Group.
Herz, R. S. (2001). Ah, sweet skunk: why we like or dislike
what we smell. Cerebrum, 3(4), 31-47.
Herz, R. S. (2006). I know what i like: understanding odor
preferences. The Smell Culture Reader, 75-94.
Herz, R. S. (2014). Olfaction. In J.E. Wolfe, K.R. Kluender,
D.M. Levi, L.M. Bartoshuk, R.S. Herz, R.L. Klatzky, S. J.
Lederman & D. M. Merfeld (Eds.), Sensation &
Perception. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Herz, R. S., Beland, S. L., & Hellerstein, M. (2004).
Changing odor hedonic perception through emotional
associations in humans. International Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 17(4), 315-338.
Herz, R. S., & von Clef, J. (2001). The influence of verbal
labeling on the perception of odors: Evidence for
olfactory illusions? Perception, 30(3), 381-392.

Hummel, T., Sekinger, B., Wolf, S., Pauli, E., & Kobal, G.
(1997). 'Sniffin Sticks': Olfactory Performance Assessed
by the Combined Testing of Odor Identification, Odor
Discrimination and Olfactory Threshold. Chemical
Senses, 22(1), 39-52.
Joussain, P., Chakirian, A., Kermen, F., Rouby, C., &
Bensafi, M. (2011). Physicochemical influence on odor
hedonics: Where does it occur first? Communicative &
integrative biology, 4(5), 563-565.
Khan, R. M., Luk, C.-H., Flinker, A., Aggarwal, A., Lapid,
H., Haddad, R., & Sobel, N. (2007). Predicting odor
pleasantness from odorant structure: pleasantness as a
reflection of the physical world. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 27(37), 10015-10023.
Moncreiff, R. W. (1966). Odour preferences. New York:
Wiley.
Palmer, S. E., & Schloss, K. B. (2010). An ecological
valence theory of human color preference. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 107(19), 8877-8882.
Palmer, S. E., Schloss, K. B., & Sammartino, J. (2013).
Visual Aesthetics and Human Preference. Annual Review
of Psychology, 64, 77-107.
Proetz, A. W. (1953). Essays on the Applied Physiology of
the Nose: Annals Pub.
Robin, O., Alaoui-Ismaili, O., Dittmar, A., & VernetMaury, E. (1998). Emotional responses evoked by dental
odors: an evaluation from autonomic parameters. Journal
of Dental Research, 77(8), 1638-1646.
Schifman, S., Robinson, D. E., & Erikson, R. P. (1977).
Multidimensional scaling of odorants: Examination of
psychological and physicochemical dimensions. Chemical
Senses, 2(3), 375-390.
Schloss, K. B., & Palmer, S. E. (in press). The politics of
color: Preference for Republican-red vs. Democratic-blue.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Schloss, K. B., Poggesi, R. M., & Palmer, S. E. (2011).
Effects of university affiliation and "school spirit" on
color preferences: Berkeley versus Stanford. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 18, 498-504.
Shiffman, S. S. (1974). Physicochemical correlates of
olfactory quality. Science.
Strauss, E. D., Schloss, K. B., & Palmer, S. E. (2013). Color
preferences change after experience with liked/disliked
colored objects Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20(5),
935-943.
Taylor, C., & Franklin, A. (2012). The relationship between
color–object associations and color preference: Further
investigation of ecological valence theory. Psychonomic
bulletin & review, 19(2), 190-197.
Yeshurun, Y., & Sobel, N. (2010). An odor is not worth a
thousand words: from multidimensional odors to
unidimensional odor objects. Annual Review of
Psychology, 61, 219-241.
Zarzo, M. (2011). Hedonic judgments of chemical
compounds are correlated with molecular size. Sensors,
11(4), 3667-3686.

1382

