UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Foraging for Alternatives: Ecological Rationality in Keeping Options Viable

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1f86g9n6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Neth, Hansjorg
Engelman, Neele
Mayrhofer, Ralf

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Foraging for Alternatives:
Ecological Rationality in Keeping Options Viable
Hansjörg Neth, Neele Engelmann & Ralf Mayrhofer
{hneth|neele.engelmann|rmayrho}@uni-goettingen.de
Cognitive and Decision Sciences
Georg-Elias-Müller Institute of Psychology
University of Göttingen, Germany
Abstract
Do we invest irrational amounts of effort into keeping options
viable, or do we manage available and threatened options in an
adaptive fashion? To ask and answer this question, we advocate an approach that considers the dynamic properties of decision environments. By linking the exploration-vs.-exploitation
dilemma to animal foraging, we show that preserving and
abandoning options can both be adaptive. Specifically, people should stay and abandon options in progressive environments, and leave and seek alternatives in exhaustive environments. We extend a multi-arm bandit problem with threatened
options by a manipulation of environmental expectations. Our
findings show that people are highly sensitive to environmental
assumptions and small payoff differentials. This replicates the
original effect, but may explain the apparently irrational tendency to keep options open as an ecologically rational adaptation.
Keywords: exploration vs. exploitation; multi-arm bandit;
multi-tasking; switch costs; animal foraging.
Should I stay or should I go now?
If I go there will be trouble,
and if I stay it will be double. . .
The Clash

Introduction
Having a choice between multiple options confronts us with
a dilemma: We desire the availability of options, but keeping options open often comes with costs. For instance, the
simultaneous pursuit of several careers, research goals, or romantic relationships can reduce the success or satisfaction enjoyed by any particular one. The dilemma between freedom
of choice and the costs of preserving options is aggravated by
the fact that options tend to deteriorate or disappear when we
fail to invest enough effort or resources (e.g., attention, time,
or money) into their availability.
In an intriguing study, Shin and Ariely (2004) asked
whether options are valued differently when they are in danger of disappearing. The availability of multiple options was
operationalized by playing a virtual “door game” in which
participants first chose one of three doors to enter a room.
From then on, participants could either earn a monetary reward by pressing a button within the chosen room or select a
different door to switch to another room. As the overall budget of actions was limited to 100 clicks, switching between
rooms incurred the opportunity cost of forgoing one payoff
in the current room. In one condition, the three alternative
rooms were continuously available. A second condition imposed an additional threat of disappearing options by gradually shrinking unused doors. On any click within a room or on
the door to another room the two unchosen doors would lose

1/15th of their original width. This implies that the access
to a room would effectively vanish if it has not been chosen
within the 15 most recent clicks.
Shin and Ariely’s (2004) main result was that the threat of
losing options caused participants to invest additional efforts
into their availability. Crucially, the costs of keeping doors
open exceeded the potential benefits conveyed by them. Thus,
people exhibited a strong and seemingly irrational tendency
to keep poor options viable — a phenomenon that the authors
attributed to an aversion to the loss of options.
An analysis of the original study reveals an extremely demanding task even when options are constantly available.
Sequential decision environments involving payoff functions
that must be estimated on the basis of limited experience transcend the realms of risky choice and require decision making under uncertainty (Sims, Neth, Jacobs, & Gray, 2013).
Formally, the simultaneous availability of three rooms constitutes a multi-armed bandit problem (Banks, Olson, & Porter,
1997) in which participants must trade-off the exploration of
unfamiliar choices with the exploitation of familiar ones to
maximize the gain from probabilistic payoff functions (see
Lee, Zhang, Munro, & Steyvers, 2011; Steyvers, Lee, & Wagenmakers, 2009; Sutton & Barto, 1998, for formal models).
In the present paradigm, this dilemma is aggravated by implicit but substantial switch costs that are paid by forgoing
one payoff whenever entering another room. A further difficulty of the original study was that the payoffs of all three
rooms were sampled randomly from extremely similar payoff
distributions. In fact, for the first 3 of 4 experiments the options’ payoffs differed merely in their distributional form and
type, but were equal in expected value. By contrast, the availability of three separate doors suggested that people actually
had a choice. If participants erroneously expected that the options differed in some relevant aspect, the high similarity and
overlap of experienced payoffs rendered the exploration task
even more demanding. Thus, the threat of losing options was
added to a non-trivial array of challenging task components.
In a follow-up study that manipulated the difference
between the payoff distributions of nine options, Ejova,
Navarro, and Perfors (2009) showed that people are more
willing to walk away from inferior options when the discriminability between options increases. This suggests that the
dysfunctional aversion to option loss occurs mostly in situations that are difficult to explore, whereas people are willing
and able to sacrifice options when superior ones are available
and identifiable.

1078

An Ecological Approach
The main intuition behind our approach is that it sometimes
makes perfect sense to keep options open. Precisely when this
is the case depends not only on the number and discriminability of options, but also on the environment in which an organism is pursuing its goals. A fundamental axiom of cognitive
science states that the rationality of an organism’s behavior
can only be evaluated in relation to the goals and environment in which it occurs (Simon, 1956). Adaptive behavior
is characterized by the degree of fit between an organism’s
goals, strategies, and the structure of the environment. Behavior exhibiting this fit is called ecologically rational (Todd,
Gigerenzer, & the ABC Research Group, 2012).
The dilemma between the benefits and costs of having
choices is not restricted to human life. In fact, nature routinely confronts organisms with options that are in danger of
disappearing if they are not seized in time. For instance, foraging animals may have to consume or defend some patch of
food against competitors, or harvest some resource before it
deteriorates or withers away.
A crucial link between the need to keep options open and
the structure of environments is provided by foraging theory
(FT, Stephens & Krebs, 1986). FT studies animal behavior as an economic resource allocation problem and assumes
that animals inhabit a patchy environment in which resource
gains within patches must be weighed against the costs of
energy expenditure by moving between patches. The analogy between animal foraging and human cognition has been
productive in modeling external information search (e.g., in
libraries or on the web, Pirolli & Card, 1999), discretionary
interleaving between tasks (Payne, Duggan, & Neth, 2007),
and internal search processes like free recall of items from
memory (Hills, Jones, & Todd, 2012).
To study the threat of vanishing options as a function of environmental characteristics, we distinguish between two basic
types of environments:1
1. In exhaustive environments, patches deteriorate with use
as some resource is consumed and depleted. When not attended to, resources remain stable or regenerate.
2. In progressive environments, patches improve with use as
some resource is developed and enriched. When not attended to, resources remain stable or deteriorate.
As the energetic quality of patches declines as food is being harvested, FT mostly considers exhaustive environments.
However, many options in human life tend to grow better or
more satisfying with additional investments, i.e., they are of
the progressive type. For instance, consider tasks that improve with practice (like playing a musical instrument), the
acquisition of new skills (learning a language), or deepening
social ties (fostering friend- and relationships).
1 A complete taxonomy would need to consider the functional
forms of the dynamics of a patch’s usage and non-usage, as well as
the causes and triggers of resource depletion and recovery.

In this paper, we extend and qualify previous results on the
willingness to preserve and abandon options by investigating the impact of different environments on such decisions.
Specifically, investing large efforts into the preservation of
multiple options only seems dysfunctional in progressive environments, as it prevents any individual option from reaching a high level. By contrast, abandoning options only seems
dysfunctional in exhaustive environments, as any depletion
of a current option increases the need for alternatives. Expressed positively, our distinction provides a tentative answer
to the introductory question by The Clash : Staying with the
current option (and abandoning alternative options) is adaptive in progressive environments, and going (and pursuing
alternative options) is adaptive in exhaustive environments.
Consequently, ecologically rational organisms should invest
more effort into preserving options in exhaustive than in progressive environments.

Experiment
Do people invest irrational amounts of effort into keeping
options viable, or do they manage available and threatened
options adaptively? To examine people’s investments into
threatened options as a function of environmental factors, we
manipulated their expectations about the environment.
Participants 63 students (44 female; mean age of 23.7
years) of the University of Göttingen, Germany, participated
in this experiment and either received course credit or were
paid e 8 (approx. US-$ 10.80) per hour. As two participants
did not engage in any exploration behavior in the last two environments, they were excluded from all analyses.
Apparatus Participants were seated individually in front of
a 19”-screen and played a virtual door game that was implemented in MS PowerPointTM with Visual Basic extensions.
To remedy some of the difficulties mentioned above and
render an abstract task more intuitive and engaging, we
couched our study in a Las Vegas narrative involving different
types of casinos. Each casino contained three rooms in which
a slot machine could be played to gain points (see Figure 1).
Within a casino, participants’ goal was to gain as many points
as possible with 100 clicks. This budget constraint was operationalized by an initial allocation of 100 jetons. Both playing
on the current room’s slot machine and switching to a different room incurred a cost of one jeton. To make the costs of
playing and switching equally salient, every click caused one
jeton to roll off the stack of remaining jetons.
Design Our study used a mixed 2×3 design that included
Shin and Ariely’s (2004) original threat to the availability
of options as a between-subjects manipulation. In a constant condition, all three rooms were always available. In
the threatened condition, participants were instructed that a
casino would close a room whenever it had not been visited
on the last 15 clicks. A colored progress bar above every door
signalled the availability level of the corresponding room.
Our environmental manipulation was varied as a within-

1079

Hypotheses The basic rationale of combining a multi-arm
bandit problem with switch costs and an additional manipulation of option availability is the following: All participants
are confronted with a learning task that poses a dilemma between exploration and exploitation. But whereas participants
with constant availability of options only switch rooms to explore (i.e., learn the payoff functions in the other rooms), participants in with threatened availability of options may also
switch rooms to avoid the loss of options.
Our first prediction concerns a replication of the main effect found in previous studies (Shin & Ariely, 2004; Ejova et
al., 2009):
• Participants in the threatened condition will switch rooms
more frequently than those in the constant condition.

!
Figure 1: View of a casino in the threatened condition.
!
A click on room 2’s slot machine just yielded a payoff of
70 points. Clicking on doors 1 or 3 (in the upper part of the
screen) would allow switching into the corresponding rooms.
The horizontal bars above the doors signal the rooms’ availability. (Here, room 1 would disappear soon.) Two counters
(on the top left and right) denote the current budget of jetons
(81 clicks remaining) and the accumulated payoff in the current casino (892 points).
subject factor. Every participant consecutively visited three
casinos (in randomized order), which were rumored to employ different policies: Casino “Cresco” was reported to increase the average payoffs of its slot machines slightly as
more jetons are inserted on a single room visit (a progressive
environment). By contrast, casino “Consumo” was reported
to gradually decrease the average payoffs of its slot machines
(an exhaustive environment). Casino “Firmitas” was reported
to maintain the average payoffs at the same levels (a stable environment). The instructions further emphasized that the payoffs of all machines were sampled from variable but mutually
independent distributions, and that all casinos would reset the
payoff levels of a machine whenever rooms are switched.
As the actual payoff functions of all casinos were not varied, the rumored casino policies merely changed participants’
expectations about them. To obscure this fact and convey a
true benefit from successful exploration of the three rooms,
the payoffs were sampled from normal distributions with different means and large overlaps in values. To replicate previous results but avoid negative payoffs, we used the distributions of Shin and Ariely’s (2004) Exp. 4, but linearly
transformed all values to obtain mean payoffs of 50, 55, and
60 points for the worst, medium, and best rooms, respectively.
To prevent transfer effects between environments, payoff values were linearly transformed for the 2nd and 3rd casino.
Participants were randomly assigned to one availability
condition and the sequence of casinos and room positions was
randomized for every participant. On average, an experimental session lasted for 43 minutes (with a range from 26 to
81 minutes).

Beyond this basic effect of option availability, we suggest
that both the basic need to explore alternatives and the additional reason to switch to preserve options are moderated by
participants’ perceived decision environment. Specifically,
we hypothesize two environmental effects:
• Relative to a stable environment, exploration will be reduced in a progressive environment and increased in an exhaustive environment (i.e., a main effect of environment on
switching).
• This effect will be stronger in the threatened condition than
in the constant condition (i.e., an interaction between environment and option availability on switching).
Our main dependent variable to assess these hypotheses is
the number of room switches. However, the hypothesized effects also have interesting consequences for participants’ accumulation of gains and the speed with which environmental
properties (i.e., the switch costs and rooms’ different payoff
functions) can be learned and exploited.
Under the specific constraints of the paradigm the relationship between exploration and accumulated payoffs is a
complex one. To maximize profits, participants need to negotiate two types of costs: (a) exploration costs that occur
by forgoing payoffs when switching to another room, and
(b) opportunity costs that occur when exploiting suboptimal
rooms. Thus, there are two corresponding ways of increasing gains: (a) reducing the number of costly room switches,
and (b) learning the environmental payoff functions to discriminate between better and worse rooms. Our background
assumption that people tend to master such challenges in an
adaptive manner motivates two temporal hypotheses:
• Participants will learn to reduce their number of switches
with more experience.
• Participants will learn to increase their average payoffs
with more experience.
In principle, these latter two hypotheses concern both availability conditions. However, it is possible that the additional
need to switch rooms to keep options viable in the threatened
condition may affect the learning process.

1080

Figure 2: Mean number of room switches by environment.
(Error bars in all figures indicate 95% confidence intervals.)

Figure 3: Mean number of room switches by block (of 25
clicks) and environments.

Results

ability conditions reached a floor between 0 and 2 switches
on the 2nd or 3rd block of stable and progressive environments, they continued to explore rooms for much longer in
the exhaustive environment.

We first consider participants’ switching behavior, before investigating effects on gains and potential effects of learning.

Switching between Options
The mean number of room switches per availability condition and environment type is displayed in Figure 2. As predicted, the number of room switches was influenced by availability condition, F1,61 = 20.3, p < .001, η2 = .25. In the
stable environment, an increase in average room switches—
from 5.5 in the constant condition to 8.9 in the threatened
condition—replicates the basic result of previous studies.
However, this basic main effect is accompanied by two environmental effects: A significant main effect of environment
type, F2,122 = 44.6, p < .001, η2 = .42, and a significant
interaction between availability condition and environment,
F2,122 = 8.8, p < .001, η2 = .13. Figure 2 illustrates that the
increase in room switches due to threatened options is particularly large in the exhaustive environment, but does not fully
disappear in the progressive environment. When switching
behavior is analyzed separately without the exhaustive environment, both main effects of threat condition, F1,61 = 10.7,
p < .01, η2 = .15, and environment type, F1,61 = 8.4, p < .01,
η2 = .12, still remain significant, but do no longer interact,
F1,61 < 1.
Did participants reduce room switches with more experience? An ANOVA that included blocks of 25 clicks as
an additional within-subject factor revealed a systematic decrease in switches across blocks, F3,183 = 100.9, p < .001,
η2 = .62. This main effect interacted with option availability,
F3,183 = 4.5, p < .01, η2 = .07, and the type of environment,
F6,366 = 7.3, p < .001, η2 = .11, but the three-way interaction was not significant, F6,366 < 1, p = .97. Figure 3 shows
that the mean number of switches decreased in both availability conditions and in all three environments. Given a higher
initial number of switches, this reduction was steeper in the
threatened condition. Whereas the participants in both avail-

Learning to Distinguish Better from Worse Options
From a participants’ perspective, our analysis of room
switches only concerns a by-product of the explicit goal of
maximizing profits. With respect to gains there are two candidate measures to consider: participants’ cumulative payoffs Xtotal and their mean payoff per option choice Xmean .
Given the paradigm’s budget constraint, both measures are
related as follows:
Xtotal = (99 − Nswitches ) · Xmean
i.e., the cumulative payoff Xtotal depends on the mean payoff
per choice Xmean and is negatively related to the number of
room switches Nswitches . As the three rooms’ expected payoffs are 50, 55, and 60 points, a switch costs 55 points on
average. This magnitude and the negative relationship between Xtotal and Nswitches implies that the paradigm punishes
switching so heavily that the pattern of participants’ cumulative payoffs Xtotal tends to be a mirror image of their switching behavior. (As the correlation between Xtotal and Nswitches
is r = −.90 a complete analysis of Xtotal is omitted here.)
Despite its high costs, switching could still be worthwhile
if exploration enabled participants to increase Xmean by learning to distinguish better from worse options. If participants
never explored their Xmean would approximate 50, 55, or 60,
depending on which room they happened to select on their
first choice. Any systematic increase of Xmean beyond the expected value of 55 would indicate successful learning; a value
of 60 would indicate perfect learning.
Figure 4 shows the values of Xmean per environment and
condition. Importantly, participants in both availability conditions succeeded in learning payoff functions beyond baseline in all three environments. A corresponding ANOVA

1081

Figure 4: Mean payoffs Xmean by environment. (Values of 55
and 60 would indicate no and perfect learning, respectively.)

Figure 5: Mean payoffs Xmean by block (of 25 clicks) and
environments.

yielded a small but significant effect of environment, F2,122 =
3.5, p < .05, η2 = .05, but neither an effect of availability
condition, F1,61 < 1, p = .47, nor an interaction, F2,122 < 1,
p = .47.
To interpret this pattern and study the time course of learning, we also conducted an ANOVA that included blocks of
25 clicks as an additional within-subject factor (see Figure 5).
This yielded a significant main effect of block, F3,183 = 9.2,
p < .001, η2 = .13, but no additional two-way (all Fs< 1) or
three-way interactions (F3,366 = 1.8, p = .10).
When only considering the fourth block (i.e., the final
25 clicks), this revealed no influence of availability condition,
F1,61 < 1, p = .60, but a small main effect of environment,
F2,122 = 3.2, p < .05, η2 = .05, and a significant interaction
between environment and option availability, F2,122 = 4.3,
p < .05, η2 = .06. This interaction can be interpreted when
comparing Block 4 of Figure 5 in both availability conditions:
Whereas the average payoffs Xmean on the final 25 clicks
did not vary between environments in the constant condition,
they did vary in the threatened condition. Specifically, an average payoff of 56.2 in the exhaustive environment was systematically lower than the average payoffs of 58.6 and 58.2
in the stable and progressive environments.

options are threatened is emphasized in exhaustive environments.
Our participants’ balance between exploration and exploitation also showed clear evidence of learning. With more
experience in the task environment, they rapidly reduced the
number of costly switches. At the same time, participants
learned to discriminate between better and worse options and
used this insight to increase their average payoffs over time.
Overall, this pattern of results suggests that people adapt to
both an environmental manipulation and to a threat of option
availability in a sensible and highly sensitive fashion.
Nonetheless, two possible challenges to our participants’
ecological rationality remain: First, the possibility of losing
options in the threatened condition led to an increased number of switches even in our progressive environment. This
indicates that—in line with Shin and Ariely’s (2004) original
results—the mere threat of disappearing options encouraged
participants to invest additional effort into their preservation
even when their loss would no longer be problematical. The
robustness of this phenomenon could indicate that people did
not fully trust our instructions about casino policies, or were
able to detect that the actual payoffs did not change as a function of option exploitation. At the same time, it is encouraging that increasing the number of switches in the threatened
condition only involved a small, but non-significant loss of
overall profit in the progressive environment.
Second, the combination of threatened options and an
exhaustive environment led to a much higher number of
switches and substantially lower average and overall profits.
But rather than demonstrating a lack of rationality, participants in deteriorating environments are fully justified in preserving threatened options. Our study highlights that people
who are forced to keep options open under such conditions
generally suffer from two distinct disadvantages: Not only do
they have to pay high switch costs to preserve necessary options, but their reduced experience with any particular option
interferes with the learning of payoff functions.

Discussion
The observed pattern of results supports most of our hypotheses. As expected, participants switched rooms more frequently when the availability of options was threatened. This
replicates the original main effect of availability condition by
Shin and Ariely (2004) that was also observed by Ejova et al.
(2009).
The main contribution of our study is a demonstration that
this effect is modulated by people’s expectations about the
choice environment. Specifically, people invest additional
effort into exploration in exhaustive environments and tend
to indulge in more exploitation in progressive environments.
As predicted, the push towards increased exploration when

1082

Conclusion

References

The original results by Shin and Ariely (2004) suggested that
the human tendency of keeping threatened options viable may
constitute a form of irrational behavior. Despite replicating
the original effect, our analysis and findings support the opposite conclusion.
Our basic premise was the intuition that any question about
an organism’s rationality can only be asked and answered in
reference to properties of the decision environment in which
some behavior is taking place (Simon, 1956). By adopting
an ecological approach, we proposed that—depending on the
dynamic properties of decision environments—both preserving and abandoning options can be adaptive and ecologically
rational in real-world contexts. By extending the original
bandit-problem with threatened options to different types of
decision environments, we suggested that people should stay
in progressive environments, but leave and seek alternatives
in exhaustive environments.
Overall, our ecological stance predicted and explained a
rich pattern of findings as a function of environmental expectations. As a result, an apparently irrational tendency to invest
effort into the preservation of options can be re-interpreted as
an ecologically rational adaptation to different types of environments. However, the results reported here are silent about
the underlying mechanisms that govern the preservation and
abandonment of options. In addition to Shin and Ariely’s
(2004) proposal of a general aversion against the “loss of
options,” we would not want to discard the possibility that
some “desire for flexibility” may boost the attractiveness of
threatened options. For instance, research on learning theory
suggests that the mere restriction of a stimulus may convey
reinforcing qualities (e.g., Timberlake & Allison, 1974).
In our findings, a basic bias to preserve threatened options
prevailed even in progressive environments. Although this
contradicted our original intuitions about the people’s willingness to sacrifice options under such conditions, even this
result can be considered rational under an additional assumption. In real environments, organisms are rarely guaranteed
that a single option will never get worse. Consequently, a basic desire for keeping some options open may not be an irrational bias, but rather a sensible adaptation to a fundamentally
uncertain world.

Banks, J., Olson, M., & Porter, D. (1997). An experimental
analysis of the bandit problem. Economic Theory, 10(1),
55–77.
Ejova, A., Navarro, D. J., & Perfors, A. F. (2009). When
to walk away: The effect of variability on keeping options
viable. In N. A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1258–1263). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Hills, T. T., Jones, M. N., & Todd, P. M. (2012). Optimal foraging in semantic memory. Psychological Review, 119(2),
431–440.
Lee, M. D., Zhang, S., Munro, M., & Steyvers, M. (2011).
Psychological models of human and optimal performance
in bandit problems. Cognitive Systems Research, 12(2),
164–174.
Payne, S., Duggan, G., & Neth, H. (2007). Discretionary
task interleaving: Heuristics for time allocation in cognitive
foraging. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
136(3), 370–380.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (1999). Information foraging. Psychological Review, 106, 643–675.
Shin, J., & Ariely, D. (2004). Keeping doors open: The
effect of unavailability on incentives to keep options viable.
Management Science, 575–586.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of the
environment. Psychological Review, 63(2), 129–138.
Sims, C. R., Neth, H., Jacobs, R. A., & Gray, W. D. (2013).
Melioration as rational choice: Sequential decision making
in uncertain environments. Psychological Review, 120(1),
139–154.
Stephens, D. W., & Krebs, J. R. (1986). Foraging theory.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Steyvers, M., Lee, M., & Wagenmakers, E. (2009). A
Bayesian analysis of human decision-making on bandit
problems. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53(3),
168–179.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning:
An introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Timberlake, W., & Allison, J. (1974). Response deprivation:
An empirical approach to instrumental performance. Psychological Review, 81(2), 146–164.
Todd, P. M., Gigerenzer, G., & the ABC Research Group.
(2012). Ecological rationality: Intelligence in the world.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

1083

