UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Formalizing the Pragmatics of Metaphor Understanding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09h3p4cz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kao, Justine
Bergen, Leon
Goodman, Noah

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Formalizing the Pragmatics of Metaphor Understanding
Justine T. Kao1 (justinek@stanford.edu), Leon Bergen2 (bergen@mit.edu), Noah D. Goodman1 (ngoodman@stanford.edu)
1 Department

of Psychology, Stanford University. 2 Department of Brain and Cognitive Science, MIT.
Abstract

theorists argue that this principle explains how listeners infer the meaning of a novel metaphor as well as other forms of
loose talk where the meaning of an utterance is underspecified
(Sperber & Wilson, 1985). When interpreting the metaphor
“My lawyer is a shark,” for example, the listener assumes that
the speaker aims to communicate features of “a shark” that
are relevant to the person under discussion (“my lawyer”) and
do not make use of other shark features—vicious but not has
fins or swims.

While the ubiquity and importance of nonliteral language are
clear, people’s ability to use and understand it remains a mystery. Metaphor in particular has been studied extensively
across many disciplines in cognitive science. One approach focuses on the pragmatic principles that listeners utilize to infer
meaning from metaphorical utterances. While this approach
has generated a number of insights about how people understand metaphor, to our knowledge there is no formal model
showing that effects in metaphor understanding can arise from
basic principles of communication. Building upon recent advances in formal models of pragmatics, we describe a computational model that uses pragmatic reasoning to interpret
metaphorical utterances. We conduct behavioral experiments
to evaluate the model’s performance and show that our model
produces metaphorical interpretations that closely fit behavioral data. We discuss implications of the model for metaphor
understanding, principles of communication, and formal models of language understanding.

While many linguists and psychologists have argued for
the benefits of studying metaphor using a pragmatics framework, to our knowledge there is no formal model showing
that effects in metaphor understanding may arise from basic
principles of communication. On the other hand, a recent
body of work presents a series of computational models for
pragmatic reasoning, where speaker and listener reason about
each other to communicate effectively (Frank & Goodman,
2012; Jäger & Ebert, 2009). By formalizing principles of
communication, these models are able to make quantitative
predictions about a range of phenomena in language understanding, such as scalar implicature and the effect of alternative utterances (Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2013; Bergen,
Goodman, & Levy, 2012). However, a limitation of these
models is that they are unable to explain the use of utterances
which are known to have false literal interpretations. More recent work extends these models to consider affective goals in
communication that may be optimally satisfied by nonliteral
utterances such as hyperbole (under review). In this paper, we
will be considering the role of communicative goals in the interpretation of metaphorical utterances. In our formalization,
a listener assumes that the speaker chooses an utterance to
maximize informativeness about a subject along dimensions
that are relevant to the conversation and consistent with the
speaker’s communicative goal. This makes it possible for a
literally false utterance to be optimal as long as it is informative along the target dimension. Our framework closely aligns
with the relevance-theoretic view that a listener considers the
relevance of a potential meaning to the speaker’s goal in order
to infer what the speaker intended to communicate.

Keywords: language understanding; metaphor; pragmatics;
computational models

Introduction
From “Juliet is the sun” to “That woman is a bombshell,” nonliteral language is, quite literally, everywhere. Metaphor, hyperbole, and sarcasm are ubiquitous features of human communication, often creating poetic or humorous effects that
add rich dimensions to language (Glucksberg, 2001; Pilkington, 2000; Lakoff & Turner, 2009; Roberts & Kreuz, 1994).
Metaphor has inspired a particularly large amount of research
in cognitive science, spanning topics such as how metaphors
structure and shape our thoughts (Ortony, 1993; Lakoff et
al., 1993; Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011), whether metaphor
processing recruits the same strategies as standard language
processing (Giora, 1997; Gibbs, 2002; Glucksberg & Keysar,
1993) and what factors determine people’s interpretation a
novel metaphor (Gentner & Wolff, 1997; Blasko & Connine,
1993; Tourangeau & Sternberg, 1981; Kintsch & Bowles,
2002). This overwhelming interest in metaphor research is
due to both the ubiquity of metaphor in everyday language
and the potential role of metaphor for helping us understand
how the mind creates meaning.
One approach to studying metaphor focuses on the pragmatic principles that listeners utilize to infer meaning from
metaphorical utterances (Tendahl & Gibbs, 2008). Rather
than view metaphor as a separate mode of communication
that requires specialized language processing strategies, this
approach argues that basic principles of communication drive
the meaning that a listener infers from a metaphor (Sperber
& Wilson, 2008; Wilson & Carston, 2006). Relevance theory, in particular, posits that listeners interpret utterances with
the assumption that speakers produced them because they are
maximally relevant (Wilson & Sperber, 2002). Relevance

To reasonably limit the scope of our work, we focus on
metaphors of the classic form “X is a Y .” We describe a computational model that can interpret such sentences metaphorically and conduct behavioral experiments to evaluate the
model’s performance. We show that peoples’ interpretations
of metaphors are driven by conversational context and that
our model captures this effect. Finally, we show that our
model predictions correlate significantly with people’s finegrained interpretations of metaphorical utterances.

719

Computational Model

speaker S1 :

In the basic Rational Speech Act model of (Frank & Goodman, 2012; Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2013), a listener and a
speaker recursively reason about each other to arrive at pragmatically enriched meanings. Given an intended meaning,
a speaker reasons about a literal listener and chooses an utterance based on its informativeness. A pragmatic listener
then reasons about the speaker and uses Bayes’ rule to infer
the meaning given the utterance. To account for nonliteral
interpretation, we extend this model by considering the idea
that a speaker may have a range of different communicative
goals. Intuitively, an utterance is optimally informative and
relevant if it satisfies the speaker’s communicative goal. Since
the speaker’s precise communicative goal may be unknown to
the listener, the listener performs joint inference on the goal
as well as the intended meaning. By introducing multiple
potential goals for communication, we open up the possibility for a speaker to produce an utterance that is literally false
but still satisfies her goal. The speaker achieves this in part
by exploiting her own and the listener’s prior knowledge—
their common ground (Clark, 1996)—to reason about what
information the listener would gain if he takes the utterance
literally.
To illustrate this idea more concretely and demonstrate
how it is implemented in our model, we will use the metaphor
“John is a shark” as an example. For simplicity, in this model
we restrict the number of possible categories to which a member may belong to ca and c p , denoting an animal category or
a person category, respectively. We also restrict the possible features of John under consideration to a vector of size
three: ~f = [ f1 , f2 , f3 ], where fi is either 0 or 1 (for example,
the three features could be scary, sleek, and finned).1 The literal listener L0 will interpret the utterance “John is a shark”
as meaning that John is literally a member of the category
“shark” and has corresponding features. Formally, if u is the
uttered category:

P(~f |c)
if c = u
~
L0 (c, f |u) =
0
otherwise
where P(~f |c) is the prior probability that a member of category c (in this case “shark” or “person”) has feature vector
~f .
We assume that the speaker’s goal is to communicate the
value of a particular feature—a goal is thus a projection from
the full feature space to the subset of interest to the speaker.
Formally, the goal to communicate about feature i ∈ {1, 2, 3}
is the function gi (~f ) = fi . Following the Rational Speech
Act model, we define the speaker’s utility as the negative surprisal of the true state under the listener’s distribution, given
an utterance. However, here we consider only the surprisal
along the goal dimension. To do so we project along the goal
dimension, which leads to the following utility function for

U(u|g, ~f ) = log ∑ δg(~f )=g(~f 0 ) L0 (c, ~f 0 |u)

(1)

c,~f 0

Given this utility function, the speaker chooses an utterance
according to a softmax decision rule that describes an approximately rational planner (Sutton & Barto, 1998):
~
S1 (u|g, ~f ) ∝ eλU(u|g, f ) ,

(2)

where λ is an optimality parameter.
Imagine that S1 had the goal to convey f1 , scariness, about
John. Based on S1 ’s understanding of L0 ’s prior knowledge,
she knows that if she produces the utterance “John is a shark,”
L0 will believe that John is literally a shark and hence very
likely to be scary. Since S1 ’s goal is satisfied if the listener believes that John is scary, S1 is motivated to produce
such a metaphorical utterance. A pragmatic listener, however, should be able to leverage this pattern to infer that John
is scary without inferring that John is actually a shark.
The listener L1 performs Bayesian inference to guess the
intended meaning given prior knowledge and his internal
model of the speaker. To determine the speaker’s intended
meaning, Ln will marginalize over the possible speaker goals
under consideration:
L1 (c, ~f |u) ∝ P(c)P(~f |c) ∑ P(g)S1 (u|g, ~f )
g

While speaker and listener could continue to reason about
each other recursively, resulting in Ln , we restrict ourselves
to L1 for present purposes. Past work has shown that this first
level of pragmatic reasoning is often a good model of human
comprehension.2 If listener L1 thinks it is likely that speaker
S1 ’s goal is to convey scariness but believes it is a priori very
unlikely that John is actually a shark, she will determine that
S1 is using shark metaphorically—that John is a scary person.
Based on this formulation, the listener needs to consider
the following prior probabilities to arrive at an interpretation:
(1) P(c): the prior probability that the entity discussed belongings to category c. We assume that the listener is extremely
confident that the person under discussion (e.g. John) is a
person, but that there is a non-zero probability that John is
actually a non-human animal. We fit P(ca ) to data with the
assumption that 10−4 ≤ P(ca ) ≤ 10−1 .
(2) P(~f |c): the prior probability that a member of category
c has feature values ~f . This is empirically estimated in
Experiment 1.
(3) P(g): the probability a speaker has goal g. This prior can
change based on the conversational context that a question
2 The

current model does not robustly predict metaphorical interpretations at recursion depths greater than 1. Future work will
investigate which features of the model lead to this prediction, and
whether this remains true under alternative model definitions.

1 In principle the model can be extended to accommodate more
categories and features.

720

Animal
f1 = 1
f2 = 1 f3 = 1
f1 = 0
ant
small
strong
busy
large
bat
scary
blind nocturnal unalarming
bear
scary
big
fierce unalarming
bee
busy
small
angry
idle
bird
free
graceful small
unfree
buffalo
big
strong
wild
small
cat independent lazy
soft
dependent
cow
fat
dumb
lazy
thin
dog
loyal
friendly happy
disloyal
dolphin
smart
friendly playful
stupid
duck
loud
cute quacking
quiet
elephant
huge
smart
heavy
small
fish
scaly
wet
smelly
smooth
fox
sly
smart
pretty
artless
frog
slimy
noisy
jumpy nonslippery
goat
funny
hungry
loud
humorless

f2 = 0
f3 = 0
weak
idle
sighted
diurnal
small
nonviolent
large
unangry
awkward
large
weak
tame
fast
hard
smart
fast
unfriendly
unhappy
unfriendly unplayful
unattractive non-quacking
stupid
light
dry
fragrant
stupid
ugly
quiet
relaxed
full
quiet

Animal
goose
horse
kangaroo
lion
monkey
owl
ox
penguin
pig
rabbit
shark
sheep
tiger
whale
wolf
zebra

f1 = 1
f2 = 1
f3 = 1
f1 = 0
f2 = 0
loud
mean annoying
quiet
nice
fast
strong beautiful
slow
weak
jumpy
bouncy
cute
relaxed
inelastic
ferocious scary
strong nonviolent unalarming
funny
smart
playful humorless
stupid
wise
quiet nocturnal foolish
loud
strong
big
slow
weak
small
cold
cute
funny
hot
unattractive
dirty
fat
smelly
clean
thin
fast
furry
cute
slow
hairless
scary dangerous mean unalarming
safe
wooly
fluffy
dumb
hairless
hard
striped
fierce
scary unpatterned nonviolent
large
graceful majestic
small
awkward
scary
mean
angry unalarming
nice
striped
exotic
fast
unpatterned native

f3 = 0
agreeable
ugly
unattractive
weak
unplayful
diurnal
fast
humorless
fragrant
unattractive
nice
smart
unalarming
inferior
unangry
slow

Table 1: 32 animal categories, feature adjectives, and their antonyms. Feature adjectives were elicited from Experiment 1a and
indicate when a feature is present ( fi = 1). Antonyms were generated using WordNet and indicate when a feature is not present
( fi = 0). Feature sets shown in Experiment 1b were created with this table, where ~f = [1, 0, 0] for category “ant” is represented
by the words {small, weak, idle}. There are 23 = 8 possible feature combinations for each animal category.
popular adjective among a set of synonyms. We then took the
three most popular adjectives for each animal category and
used them as the set of features. In what follows, f1 is the
most popular adjective, f2 the second, and f3 the third. Table
1 shows the animal categories and their respective features.

sets up. For example, if the speaker is responding to a
vague question about John, e.g. “What is John like?”, the
prior over goals is uniform. If the question targets a specific
features, such as “Is John scary?”, then she is much more
likely to have the goal of communicating John’s scariness.
However, she may still want to communicate other features about John that were not asked about. We assume
that when the question is specific, the prior probability that
Sn ’s goal is to answer the specific question is greater than
0.5, fitting the value to data below.

Experiment 1b: Feature Prior Elicitation
Materials Using the features collected from Experiment
1a, we elicit the prior probability of a feature vector given
an animal or person category (i.e. P(~f |c)). We assume that
the adjective corresponding to a feature (e.g. scary) indicates
that the value of that feature is 1 (present), while the adjective’s antonym indicates that the value of that feature is 0 (not
present). We used WordNet to construct antonyms for each of
the adjective features produced in Experiment 1a. When multiple antonyms existed or when no antonym could be found
on WordNet, the first author used her judgment to choose
the appropriate antonym. Table 1 shows the resulting list of
antonyms. For each animal category, eight possible feature
combinations were constructed from the three features and
their antonyms. For example, the possible feature combinations for a member of the category “ant” are {small, strong,
busy}, {small, strong, idle}, {small, weak, busy}, and so on.

Behavioral Experiments
To evaluate our model’s interpretation of metaphorical utterances, we focused on a set of 32 metaphors comparing human
males to different non-human animals. We conducted Experiment 1a and 1b to elicit feature probabilities for the categories
of interest. We then conducted Experiment 2 to measure people’s interpretations of the set of metaphors.

Experiment 1a: Feature Elicitation
Materials We selected 32 common non-human animal categories from an online resource for learning English (www
.englishclub.com). The full list is shown in Table 1.
Methods 100 native English speakers with IP addresses in
the United States were recruited on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk. Each participant read 32 animal category names presented in random order, e.g. “whale”, “ant”, “sheep”. For
each animal category, participants were asked to type the first
adjective that came to mind in a text box.

Methods 60 native English speakers with IP addresses in
the United States were recruited on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk. Each participant completed 16 trials in random order. Each trial consisted of the eight feature combinations
for a particular animal category. Using slider bars with ends
marked by “Impossible” and “Absolutely certain,” participants were asked to rate how likely it is for a member of the
animal category to have each of the eight feature combinations. Participants also rated the probabilities of the feature
combinations for a male person. We only elicited priors for
males to minimize gender variation and to maintain consistency with Experiment 2.

Results Using participants’ responses, we constructed a list
of adjectives for each animal category and ordered them by
the number of times they were given by a different subject
(i.e. their popularity). We removed all color adjectives, such
as “white” and “black,” to eliminate the possibility of interpreting these adjectives as racial descriptions. To avoid redundancy in the feature set, we used WordNet (Miller, 1995)
to identify synonymous adjectives and only kept the most

Results We normalized each participant’s ratings for the
eight feature combinations in a trial to sum up to 1 based

721

on the assumption that the feature combinations exhaustively describe a member of a particular category. Using
the Spearman-Brown prediction equation, reliability of the
ratings was 0.941 (95% CI = [0.9408, 0.9414]). Averaging across participants’ normalized ratings, we obtained feature priors P(~f |c) for c = ca (animal) and c = c p (person).
Since the features were created using the animal categories
in Experiment 1a, by construction features are rated as significantly more likely to be present in the animal category
than in the person category (F(1, 190) = 207.1, p < 0.0001).
These results confirm that participants are fairly confident
that each animal category has certain distinguishing features
(mean= 0.61, sd= 0.06), while those same features are rated
as appearing in people less often (mean= 0.48, sd= 0.06).

Literal utterance

Metaphorical utterance

Probability of feature given utterance

1.00

Feature
f1
f2

0.75
f3

0.50

0.25

0.00
Vague goal

Specific goal

Vague goal

Specific goal

Experiment 2: Metaphor Understanding
Materials We created 32 scenarios based on the animal categories and results from Experiment 1. In each scenario, a
person (e.g. Bob) is having a conversation with his friend
about a person that he recently met. Since we are interested in how the communicative goals set up by context affect metaphor interpretation as well as the effectiveness of
metaphorical versus literal utterances, we created four conditions for each scenario by crossing vague/specific goals
and literal/metaphorical utterances. In vague goal conditions,
Bob’s friend asks a vague question about the person Bob recently met: “What is he like?” In specific goal conditions,
Bob’s friend targets f1 and asks a specific question about the
person: “Is he f1 ?,” where f1 is the most popular adjective
for a given animal category ca . In literal conditions, Bob
replies with a literal utterance, either by saying “He is f1 .”
to the question “What is he like?” or “Yes.” to the question
“Is he f1 ?”. In Metaphorical conditions, Bob replies with a
metaphorical statement, e.g. “He is a ca .” where ca is an animal category. See Table 2 for examples of each condition.

Figure 1: Average probability ratings for the three features
given a vague/specific goal and a literal/metaphorical utterance. Error bars are standard error over the 32 items.

Goal

Utterance

Example question

Example utterance

Vague
Specific
Vague
Specific

Literal
Literal
Metaphorical
Metaphorical

“What is he like?”
“Is he scary?”
“What is he like?”
“Is he scary?”

“He is scary.”
“Yes.”
“He is a shark.”
“He is a shark.”

Table 2: Example scenarios given the four experimental conditions in Experiment 2.
Methods 49 native English speakers with IP addresses in
the United States were recruited on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk. Each participant completed 32 trials in random order.
The 32 trials were randomly and evenly assigned to one of the
four conditions, i.e. each participant read 8 scenarios for each
condition. For each trial, participants used sliders to indicate
the probabilities that the person described has features f1 , f2 ,
and f3 , respectively.
Results For each condition of each scenario, we obtained
the average probability ratings for the three features. Fig-

722

ure 1 shows the average ratings for each feature across animal categories given a vague or specific goal and a literal or metaphorical utterance. When the speaker gives a
literal statement directly affirming the presence of f1 , participants rate f1 as significantly more likely than when the
speaker gives a metaphorical statement (F(1, 126) = 52.6,
p < 0.00001). However, participants rate f2 and f3 as significantly more likely when the speaker produces a metaphorical
utterance than when the utterance is literal (F(1, 126) = 23.7,
p < 0.0001; F(1, 126) = 13.66, p < 0.0005). Comparing feature probability ratings in Experiment 2 to the feature priors
obtained in Experiment 1b, we can measure how literal and
metaphorical utterances change listeners’ inferences about a
person’s features. Given a literal utterance that directly confirms the existence of f1 , probability ratings for f1 are significantly higher than the prior probabilities of f1 for a person
(t(63) = 59.19, p < 0.00001). However, probability ratings
for f2 and f3 are not significantly different from their prior
probabilities (t(63) = −0.13, p = 0.89; t(63) = 0.03, p =
0.97). Given a metaphorical utterance, probability ratings for
all three features are significantly higher than the prior probabilities (t(63) = 15.74, p < 0.0001; t(63) = 7.29, p < 0.0001;
t(63) = 5.91, p < 0.0001). While preliminary, this analysis suggests that metaphorical utterances may convey richer
information and update listeners’ beliefs along more dimensions than literal utterances.
We now analyze the effect of the speaker’s communicative goal on the interpretation of literal or metaphorical utterances. When the speaker’s utterance is literal, the probability ratings for f1 , f2 , and f3 are not significantly different
given a vague or a specific question ((F(1, 62) = 2.73, p =
0.1; F(1, 62) = 0.0001, p = 0.99; F(1, 62) < 0.0001, p =
0.99). For metaphorical utterances, however, the question
type has an effect on participants’ interpretations: partici-

pants rate the probability of f1 as significantly higher when
the question is specifically about f1 than when it is vague
(F(1, 62) = 10.16, p < 0.005). The probabilities of f2 and
f3 are not significantly different given a vague question or
a specific question about f1 (F(1, 62) = 0.04, p > 0.05;
F(1, 62) = 0.8285, p > 0.05). This suggests that people’s
interpretation of metaphor may be more sensitive to the communicative goals set up by context than their interpretation of
literal utterances.

Goal

0.8

Vague

Human

Specific
0.6

Feature
f1
f2

0.4

f3

Model Evaluation
We used the feature priors obtained in Experiment 1b to compute model interpretations of the 32 metaphors. As discussed
in the previous section, the behavioral results in Experiment
2 show evidence that the context set up by a question changes
participants’ interpretation of a metaphor. Our model naturally accounts for this using the speaker’s prior over communicative goals P(g). When a speaker is responding to a
vague question, we set the prior distribution for P(g) as uniform. When the speaker is responding to a question specifically about f1 , we assume that P(g1 ) > 0.5 and equal between
P(g2 ) = P(g3 ). Fitting the goal prior parameter to data yields
a prior of P(g1 ) = 0.6 when responding to a specific question about f1 . We fit the category prior P(ca ) = 0.01 and the
speaker optimality parameter λ = 3.
Using these parameters, we obtained interpretation probabilities for each of the 32 metaphors under both vague
and specific goal conditions. For each metaphor and goal
condition, the model produces a joint posterior distribution
P(c, ~f |u). We first show a basic but important qualitative result, which is that the model is able to interpret utterances
metaphorically. Marginalized over values of ~f , the probability of the person category given the utterance is close to
one (P(c p |u) = 0.994), indicating that the pragmatic listener
successfully infers that the person described as an animal is
actually a person and not an animal. This shows that the
model is able to combine prior knowledge and reason about
the speaker’s communicative goal to arrive at nonliteral interpretations of utterances.
We now turn to the second component of the interpretation,
P(~f |u). To quantitatively evaluate the model’s performance,
we correlated model predictions with human interpretations
of the metaphorical utterances. Given a metaphorical utterance and a vague or specific goal condition, we computed the
model’s marginal posterior probabilities for f1 , f2 , and f3 . We
then correlate these posterior probabilities with participants’
probability ratings from Experiment 2. Figure 2 plots model
interpretations for all metaphors, features, and goal conditions against human judgments. Correlation across the 192
items (32 metaphors × 3 features × 2 goal conditions) is 0.6
(p < 0.001). The predicted reliability of participants’ ratings
using the Spearman-Brown prediction formula is 0.828 (95%
CI = [0.827, 0.829]), suggesting first that people do not agree
perfectly on metaphorical interpretations, and second that our
model captures a significant amount of the reliable variance in

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Model

Figure 2: Model predictions (x axis) vs participants’ probability ratings (y axis) for 192 items (32 metaphors × 3 features
× 2 goal conditions). Shape of points indicates goal condition
and color indicates feature number.
the behavioral data. In particular, our model does especially
well at predicting participants’ judgments of f1 , which are
the most salient features of the animal categories and were
targeted by specific questions in Experiment 2. Correlation
between model predictions and human judgments for f1 is 0.7
(p < 0.0001), while the predicted reliability of participants’
ratings for f1 is 0.82 (95% CI = [0.818, 0.823]).
We now compare our model’s performance to a baseline
model that also considers the feature priors and the conversational context. We constructed a linear regression model
that takes the marginal feature priors for the animal category,
the marginal feature priors for the person category, and the
vague or specific goal as predictors of participants’ ratings.
With four parameters, this model produced a fit of r = 0.45,
which is significantly worse than our model (p < 0.0001 on
a Cox test). This suggests that our computational model adequately combines people’s prior knowledge as well as principles of pragmatics to produce metaphorical interpretations
that closely fit behavioral data.
While our model predictions provide a close fit to behavioral data, some residual variance can be further addressed.
Previous work has shown that alternative utterances—what
the speaker could have said—can strongly affect listeners’ interpretation of what the speaker did say (Bergen et al., 2012).
Our model currently does not take into account the range of
alternative utterances (both literal and metaphorical) that a
listener considers when interpreting a speaker’s utterance. We
posit that this may account for some of the variance in the data
that our model does not capture. Consider the metaphor “He
is an ant” and the corresponding features small, strong, and
busy. Our model currently assigns a high probability to the
feature strong given the metaphor, while participants assign
it a lower probability. Indeed, this data point has the highest residual in our model fit. To demonstrate that alternative

723

utterances may account for this discrepancy, we construct a
model that has “He is an ox” as an alternative utterance. “Ox”
has features that roughly align with the features of “ant”:
strong, big, and slow. Since strong is a higher probability
feature for “ox” than for “ant,” the listener reasons that if the
speaker had intended to communicate the feature strong, she
would have said “He is an ox” since it optimally satisfies that
goal. Since the speaker did not produce the utterance “He is
an ox,” the listener infers that strong is a less probable feature.
Adding this alternative utterance to the model indeed lowers
the marginal posterior probability of strong given the utterance “He is an ant.” As a result, we posit that adding alternative utterances across all animal categories may significantly
improve model performance. Constructing a complete set of
alternative utterances using our current set of metaphors is not
possible because feature combinations are not aligned across
animal categories (i.e., different animal categories have different feature sets, and not all features are shared by multiple
animals). We aim to address the role of alternative utterances
more specifically in future work.

generally, and we hope that it will continue to shed metaphorical light on related questions.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NSF Graduate Research
Fellowships to JTK and LB and by a John S. McDonnell
Foundation Scholar Award and grants from the ONR to NDG.

References
Bergen, L., Goodman, N. D., & Levy, R. (2012). Thats what she
(could have) said: How alternative utterances affect language use.
In Proceedings of the thirty-fourth annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Blasko, D. G., & Connine, C. M. (1993). Effects of familiarity and
aptness on metaphor processing. Journal of experimental psychology: Learning, memory, and cognition, 19(2), 295.
Bowdle, B. F., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of metaphor. Psychological review, 112(1), 193.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language (Vol. 4). Cambridge University
Press Cambridge.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic
reasoning in language games. Science, 336(6084), 998–998.
Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (1997). Alignment in the processing of
metaphor. Journal of memory and language, 37(3), 331–355.
Gibbs, R. (2002). A new look at literal meaning in understanding
what is said and implicated. Journal of Pragmatics, 34(4), 457–
486.
Giora, R. (1997). Understanding figurative and literal language: The
graded salience hypothesis. Cognitive Linguistics, 8, 183–206.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language: From
metaphors to idioms. Oxford University Press.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1993). How metaphors work.
Goodman, N. D., & Stuhlmüller, A. (2013). Knowledge and implicature: Modeling language understanding as social cognition.
Topics in cognitive science, 5(1), 173–184.
Jäger, G., & Ebert, C. (2009). Pragmatic rationalizability. In Proceedings of sinn und bedeutung (Vol. 13, pp. 1–15).
Kintsch, W., & Bowles, A. R. (2002). Metaphor comprehension:
What makes a metaphor difficult to understand? Metaphor and
symbol, 17(4), 249–262.
Lakoff, G., et al. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor.
Metaphor and thought, 2, 202–251.
Lakoff, G., & Turner, M. (2009). More than cool reason: A field
guide to poetic metaphor. University of Chicago Press.
Miller, G. A. (1995). Wordnet: A lexical database for english.
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM, 38, 39–41.
Ortony, A. (1993). Metaphor and thought. Cambridge University
Press.
Pilkington, A. (2000). Poetic effects: A revelance theory perspective
(Vol. 75). John Benjamins.
Roberts, R. M., & Kreuz, R. J. (1994). Why do people use figurative
language? Psychological Science, 5(3), 159–163.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1985). Loose talk. In Proceedings of the
aristotelian society (Vol. 86, pp. 153–171).
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (2008). A deflationary account of
metaphors. The Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought,
84–105.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An
introduction (Vol. 1) (No. 1). Cambridge Univ Press.
Tendahl, M., & Gibbs, R. W. (2008). Complementary perspectives
on metaphor: Cognitive linguistics and relevance theory. Journal
of Pragmatics, 40(11), 1823–1864.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we think
with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS One, 6(2),
e16782.
Tourangeau, R., & Sternberg, R. J. (1981). Aptness in metaphor.
Cognitive psychology, 13(1), 27–55.
Wilson, D., & Carston, R. (2006). Metaphor, relevance and the
emergent propertyissue. Mind & Language, 21(3), 404–433.
Wilson, D., & Sperber, D. (2002). Relevance theory. Handbook of
pragmatics.

Discussion
We have presented a computational model that predicts rich
metaphorical interpretations using general communicative
principles. Besides going beyond the literal meaning of an
utterance to infer non-literal interpretations (e.g., John is a
person and not a shark), our model provides quantitative judgments about the person’s features (e.g., John is very likely
scary, dangerous, and mean). Furthermore, behavioral results
show that the interpretation of a metaphor is shaped in part
by the conversational context, which our model naturally accounts for using communicative goals. Together these results
suggest that basic principles of communication may be an important driver of metaphor understanding.
Our model captures several intuitions about communication, including the importance of common ground between
listener and speaker, the context-dependence of communicative goals, and the idea that speakers choose to produce utterances that maximize informativeness about features relevant
to their communicative goal. Each of these components inspire research questions that can be further investigated using
both our modeling framework and experimental paradigm.
For example, are listeners less likely to interpret an utterance metaphorically when there is little common ground between speaker and listener? What additional communicative
goals are metaphors able to satisfy more effectively than literal utterances? We aim to address these questions in future
research to further clarify how communication principles interact to produce metaphorical meaning. In addition, previous work has shown that conventional metaphors such as “He
is a pig” may be processed differently from novel metaphors
(Bowdle & Gentner, 2005), which introduces a set of interesting questions to investigate with our model. We believe that
our computational framework advances understanding of the
computational basis of metaphor and of communication more

724

