UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gesturing May Not Always Make Learning Last

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0cr5f1jz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Byrd, Caroline
McNeil, Nicole
D'Mello, Sidney
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gesturing May Not Always Make Learning Last
Caroline E. Byrd (cbyrd@nd.edu)
Nicole M. McNeil (nmcneil@nd.edu)
Sidney K. D’Mello (sdmello@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame

Susan Wagner Cook (susan-cook@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa

Abstract
Studies suggest that mimicking specific gestures prior to math
instruction facilitates learning. However, benefits could be
due to the eye movements that accompany gesture, rather than
to gesture per se. Children (M age = 8 yrs, 9 mos) who solved
pretest equations incorrectly were taught a correct strategy for
solving equations. They were randomly assigned to mimic
gestures instantiating the strategy, the eye movements that
accompany those gestures, or speech only prior to and during
instruction. Children completed an immediate posttest and a
4-week follow-up test. We hypothesized that children in the
eye movement and gesture conditions would retain more from
instruction when compared to children in the speech only
condition. Posttest performance was similar across conditions.
Contrary to hypotheses, children in the gesture condition
retained less from instruction when compared to children in
the other conditions. Results suggest that there may not
always be benefits of gesture during instruction.
Keywords: cognitive development; embodied cognition;
mathematics learning; gesture; problem solving

Algebra is a ―disaster‖ for most students in the United
States (National Research Council, 1998, p.1). Lack of
readiness for algebra can be traced back to
misunderstandings of pre-algebra concepts in elementary
school (Carpenter, Franke, & Levi, 2003; Knuth, Stephens,
McNeil, & Alibali, 2006). For example, most children (ages
7 to 11) in the U.S. do not understand how to solve math
equivalence problems, which are equations that have
operations on both sides of the equal sign (e.g., 3 + 4 + 5 = 3
+ __; Alibali, 1999; McNeil & Alibali, 2005b; Perry, 1991;
Perry, Church, & Goldin-Meadow, 1988, Rittle-Johnson &
Alibali, 1999). Difficulties with these problems are not
easily ―fixed‖ by instruction, as children often revert back to
old, incorrect strategies a few weeks after being taught a
correct strategy (Cook, Mitchell, & Goldin-Meadow, 2008).
Given the importance of understanding math equivalence to
future success and the apparent difficulties in helping
children achieve this understanding, it is important to
investigate the mechanisms that facilitate learning of this
fundamental concept.
Research suggests that gesture may be a particularly
powerful mechanism for creating new knowledge in the
domain of mathematics (Alibali & Goldin-Meadow, 1993;
Cook & Goldin-Meadow, 2006). For example, Cook and
Goldin-Meadow (2006) successfully increased the rate at
which children gestured when explaining their solutions to

math equivalence problems by exposing children to
teachers’ gestures during a lesson on math equivalence. The
researchers then examined the relation between children’s
gesture production and learning. Children who produced
gestures of their own after viewing the teachers’ gestures
were more likely than those who did not produce gestures to
both retain and generalize the knowledge gained during
instruction. These results suggest gesturing, particularly
gesturing a correct strategy as demonstrated by the
instructor, can help children benefit from a lesson. However,
because not all of the children who observed the teachers’
gestures actually produced those same gestures themselves,
the gestures children produced could have possibly been a
reflection of their ―readiness to learn,‖ rather than a causal
factor in the learning process. To address this concern,
Broaders, Cook, Mitchell, and Goldin-Meadow (2007)
performed a more direct experimental manipulation of
gesture. They found that children who were simply told to
gesture during their explanations of their solutions to math
equivalence problems added more new strategies to their
repertoires through gesturing and showed a greater benefit
from instruction compared to children told not to gesture.
Researchers have begun to investigate the role of gesture
in learning by asking children to mimic gestures
instantiating particular strategies for solving math
equivalence problems prior to instruction. Cook, Mitchell,
and Goldin-Meadow (2008) tested the hypothesis that
gestures play a role in the creation and retention of
knowledge by comparing posttest performance among
children told to mimic a gesture instantiating a correct,
―equalize‖ strategy for solving math equivalence problems,
children told to mimic speech describing that strategy, and
children told to mimic both speech and gesture. Prior to
instruction, children mimicked their assigned behavior three
times (either in speech, gesture, or both), and children also
mimicked that behavior before and after solving problems
on their own during instruction on the problems. Children in
all three groups performed similarly on an immediate
posttest; however, the mimicked behavior affected how well
children retained the knowledge gained from instruction.
Children who mimicked an equalize gesture (i.e., moving
the L hand from L to R under the L side of the problem,
pausing, and then moving the R hand from L to R under the
R side of the problem) performed better on a delayed
follow-up test than those who did not mimic the gesture.
Interestingly, there were no differences between the gesture

1982

and ―both‖ groups, suggesting that there was something
about mimicking the gesture per se—with or without
speech—that led to more robust learning or consolidation of
what was learned.
The results from Cook et al. (2008) suggest that gesture
plays a role in conceptual change by ―making learning last.‖
Goldin-Meadow, Cook, and Mitchell (2009) extended these
findings by showing that mimicking specific gestures prior
to instruction on math equivalence problems not only helps
children maintain a correct, learned strategy, but also helps
them generate a correct strategy on their own. Children were
taught to mimic gestures that instantiated a different strategy
than the strategy teachers taught in the lesson, in order to
examine whether children’s gestures alone prior to
instruction can create new ideas. Children who were told to
mimic a grouping gesture before and during instruction on
the equalize strategy performed better on a posttest than
children who were not told to mimic the grouping gesture.
Although these findings support the idea that gesturing
facilitates learning, the gestures children have mimicked in
these studies have all been relational gestures that move
children’s attention back and forth across the equal sign. It
is, therefore, unclear how the gestures facilitate learning.
We posited that the benefits of these gestures could be due
to the relational eye movements that accompany the
gestures, rather than to the gestures themselves.
Many researchers have investigated associations between
eye movements and cognition. Grant and Spivey (2003)
showed that participants’ eye movements predict correct
problem solving. In their study, they used animation (visual
pulsing) to induce problem solvers to fixate on the critical
feature of a problem (as previously revealed in successful
participants’ eye movements). Results indicated that
drawing problem solvers’ attention in this way can help
solvers
develop
problem-solving
insights.
Thus,
participants’ eye movements may serve as an embodied
physical mechanism that stimulates new ways of thinking
about a problem (Grant & Spivey, 2003; but see van Gog,
Jarodzka, Scheiter, Gerjets, & Paas, 2009 for an alternative
view). Thomas and Lleras (2007) provided additional
evidence for the link between eye movements and cognition
in a study that manipulated participants’ eye movements.
They showed that directing eye movements on a tracking
task in a pattern that embodies a correct solution leads to
successful problem solving (Thomas & Lleras, 2007).
Additionally, research conducted with adults indicates that
looking back and forth across the equal sign is correlated
with correct strategies to solve math equivalence problems
(Chesney, McNeil, Brockmole, & Kelley, 2013). Thus, we
theorized that the beneficial effects of gesture on learning of
math equivalence could be driven, in part, by eye
movements that embody relational thinking.
The present study was designed to directly compare the
effects of mimicking gestures to the effects of mimicking
the eye movements that accompany those gestures. It built
off of Cook et al.’s (2008) design by using both ―speech
only‖ and ―gesture‖ conditions and comparing them to an

eye movement condition. We hypothesized that children in
the eye movement condition would perform better than
children in the speech only condition and similarly to
children in the gesture condition, thus demonstrating that
the beneficial effects of gesture may not depend on the hand
movements themselves, but rather on a more general
attentional-guidance mechanism that co-occurs with gesture.
We also hypothesized that the number of times children’s
eyes moved back and forth across the equal sign (coded
from video) would be an important predictor of learning.

Method
Participants
Participants were 70 children (34 boys, 36 girls; M age = 8
years, 9 months). The race/ethnicity of the sample was 17%
African-American or black, 4% Asian, 7% Hispanic or
Latino, 6% Other, and 66% white. Sessions were conducted
in a quiet room in a research lab, a local school, and a local
afterschool program.

Design
The study was a pretest-intervention-posttest design, with a
4-week follow-up, akin to the design used by Cook and
colleagues (2008). The first session consisted of a pretest,
pre-instruction, instruction, and a posttest. The second
session consisted of a follow-up test and a brief lesson on
math equivalence tailored specifically to the child’s needs.
Both sessions were videotaped, so that we could study the
strategies children used when solving the problems.

Experimental Conditions
Children were randomly assigned to one of three conditions:
speech only (n = 23), gesture (n = 24), or eye movement (n
= 23). Each child received the same instruction on math
equivalence and the same assessments; the only aspect that
varied was the behavior children were asked to mimic
during pre-instruction and instruction. One experimenter
served as the lesson facilitator during pre-instruction and
instruction, and a different experimenter, who was blind to
the child’s condition, served as the tester, administering the
pretest, posttest, and follow-up test. The lesson facilitator
also taught the brief lesson at the end of the second session.
In the speech only condition, children were shown a video
of a teacher standing in front of a problem saying the phrase
―I want to make one side equal to the other side.‖
In the gesture condition, children were shown a video of a
teacher standing in front of a problem saying the same
phrase while simultaneously producing a relational, equalize
gesture (moving the L hand from L to R under the L side of
the problem, pausing, and then moving the R hand from L
to R under the R side of the problem).
In the eye movement condition, children were shown a
video of a teacher standing in front of a problem saying the
same phrase while simultaneously moving their eyes across
the problem in a way that simulated the eye movements that
would co-occur with gesture. To encourage eye movements,

1983

Figure 1: Overview of Procedure.
an arrow moved underneath each side of the problem during
the video (from L to R under the L side of the problem,
disappearing briefly, and then from L to R under the R side
of the problem). Thus, this condition emulated all aspects of
the gesture condition except the actual hand gestures.

Procedure
Pretest Children solved four equations with equivalent
addends on each side of the equal sign (5 + 4 + 6 = __ + 6, 3
+ 5 + 9 = __ + 9, 8 + 4 + 3 = 8 + __, 7 + 5 + 8 = 7 + __) and
explained how they solved each problem (cf. Alibali, 1999).
Because our goal was to examine how different instructional
conditions affect children’s learning from a lesson on math
equivalence, analyses were limited to children who solved
all pretest problems incorrectly (N = 70).
Pre-instruction The lesson facilitator showed children a
video of a teacher demonstrating a behavior and asked the
children to mimic that behavior for three problems of the
format a + b + c = __ + c. The behavior a given child was
asked to mimic depended on which condition he or she was
in (as described above). In all conditions, the facilitator
showed the video twice to ensure that all children
understood the procedure. Children were shown the videos
on a laptop, and then children were presented with two
additional math equivalence problems alone on the laptop
screen for them to practice doing the behavior on their own.
Videos of children’s faces and laptop screens in all
conditions were recorded during pre-instruction and
instruction using customized software and the laptop’s builtin camera. The videos of children’s faces (including eye
movements) and what they were seeing on the laptop (e.g., a
particular problem) were temporally aligned so that eye
movements (coded from videos) could be connected to
every point during pre-instruction and instruction.
Instruction Even though conditions differed in terms of
what they saw during pre-instruction, all children saw the
same instruction (cf. Cook et al., 2008). Children watched a
video of a teacher explaining how to use the equalize
strategy to solve six more problems of the same type (a + b
+ c = __ + c). For each problem, the teacher described the
strategy ―I want to make one side equal to the other side‖
both before and after solving the problem. Each time the
teacher said that phrase, an arrow moved underneath each
side of the problem while the teacher made the relational,

―equalize‖ gesture (moving the L hand from L to R under
the L side of the problem, pausing, and then moving the R
hand from L to R under the R side of the problem). Thus,
children in all conditions were exposed to the equalize
strategy 12 times in speech, gesture, and eye movements
(encouraged by the arrows). This ensured that all children
were exposed to the same representations of equivalence.
After each of the teacher videos, children saw another
problem (presented alone on the laptop screen). First,
children were asked to reproduce the behavior they
practiced during pre-instruction. Next, the lesson facilitator
placed a transparency sheet over the laptop screen and asked
children to solve the problem using a transparency marker.
Children were not given any feedback about correctness.
Finally, children were asked to reproduce their behavior
they practiced during pre-instruction again. Children who
produced behaviors other than what they had practiced
during pre-instruction were reminded to only produce the
behaviors they were instructed to mimic.
Posttest Immediately after instruction, children completed a
posttest administered by the tester that included the pretest
equations (see above) along with transfer equations that
differed in surface features (7 + 4 + 6 = __ + 3, 6 + 2 + 8 = 5
+ __, 1 + 5 = __ + 2, 6 – 1 = 3 + __). Problem-solving
strategies were coded as correct or incorrect based on a
system used in previous research (e.g., McNeil & Alibali,
2004; Perry et al., 1988). For most problems, correctness
could be inferred from the solution itself (e.g., for 7 + 5 + 8
= 7 + __, a solution of 27 indicated an incorrect ―add all‖
strategy and a solution of 13 indicated a correct strategy). If
the solution was ambiguous, then strategy correctness was
coded based on children’s verbal explanation (e.g., for 7 + 5
+ 8 = 7 + __, the explanation ―I added 7 plus 5‖ indicated an
incorrect strategy and the explanation ―I added 5 plus 8‖
indicated a correct strategy). Agreement between coders for
a randomly selected 20% subsample was 100%.
Follow-up test Approximately four weeks after the first
session, children completed a follow-up test identical to the
posttest. Agreement between coders was 99%.

Results
The learning rate was high, with a majority (60%) solving
at least one of the first four posttest equations correctly. This
learning rate was comparable to the 52% learning rate in
Cook et al.’s (2008) study. As in Cook et al., there was no

1984

8

Mean Number Correct

evidence of significant differences in performance solving
equations among conditions during instruction, F (2, 67) =
0.30, p = .74, or on the immediate posttest, F(2, 67) = 0.02,
p = .98.
Following Cook et al. (2008), we tested if children across
conditions differed in how well they maintained the
knowledge gained during instruction over the 4-week delay.
We conducted an ANCOVA with condition as the
independent variable, number of posttest equations correct
(out of 8) as the covariate, and number of follow-up
equations correct (out of 8) as the dependent variable. Not
surprisingly, posttest performance significantly predicted
follow-up performance, F(1, 66) = 52.93, p < .001, with
higher posttest equation solving performance associated
with higher follow-up equation solving performance. The
effect of condition was also significant, F(2, 66) = 3.90, p =
.025, ηp2 = .11. Contrary to our hypothesis, it was children
in the gesture condition who did not retain the knowledge
they had gained during instruction (see Figure 2). Simple
contrasts indicated that children in the gesture condition had
significantly lower retention scores than children in both the
eye movement condition, p = .035, Cohen’s d = .63, and the
speech only condition, p = .011, Cohen’s d = .76. Children
in the eye movement condition did not differ from children
in the speech only condition, p = .66.
Findings were robust, even when we varied aspects of the
analysis. For example, conclusions were unchanged when
we limited the analysis to the four equations that matched
the pretest equations, when we limited the analysis to only
the four transfer equations, when we excluded the children
who did not show evidence of learning from instruction
(i.e., children who did not solve at least one posttest
equation correctly), and when we excluded the children who
demonstrated a correct strategy in gesture at the pretest.
To further probe these unexpected effects of the gesture
condition, we coded children’s level of adherence to the
modeled equalize gestures during pre-instruction and
instruction. Equalize gestures were coded using a system
established in previous work (cf. Alibali & Goldin-Meadow,
1993). Children were given a score of ―1‖ on each equation
if they ever completed the full equalize gesture with two
different hands as demonstrated, ―0.5‖ if they made a
different equalize gesture (equalize gestures are gestures
that distinguish the two sides of the equation, for example
changing hand shape in between the left and right sides of
the equation), and ―0‖ if their gesture was not an equalize
gesture. Children’s scores across all nine problems were
added together for a total level of adherence score.
Children’s adherence in the gesture condition was far from
perfect, with a mean level of adherence of 4.88 (SD = 3.16).
However, 54% of children made an equalize gesture on at
least half of the problems, and only 8% of children never
made an equalize gesture. There was no evidence that the
degree of adherence was associated with retention. We
conducted a multiple regression with level of adherence (out
of 9) as the independent variable, number of posttest
equations correct (out of 8) as the covariate, and number of

Speech Only

7

Gesture

6

Eye Movement

5
4
3
2
1
0
Posttest

Follow-up

Figure 2: Equation Solving Performance at Posttest and
Follow-up test by Condition.
follow-up equations correct (out of 8) as the dependent
variable. Level of adherence was not a significant predictor
of follow-up performance, after controlling for posttest
performance, b = .22, t(23) = 1.08, p = .29.
Adherence in the speech only and eye movement
conditions was coded in a similar manner as the gesture
condition for each equation seen during pre-instruction and
instruction. For the speech only condition, children were
given a score of ―1‖ on each equation if their phrase ever
indicated one side ―equal to‖ another side, ―0.5‖ if they used
―equal,‖ ―equals,‖ or ―equal as‖ in the phrase instead of
―equal to,‖ and ―0‖ if they did not indicate one side and
another. For the eye movement condition, children were
given a score of ―1‖ on each equation if they ever directly
switched between looking to one side and looking to the
other side, ―0.5‖ if they switched directions while looking
above the problem, and ―0‖ if they did not switch directions.
Agreement between coders for a 20% random subsample
was 98% for speech only, 100% for gesture, and 91% for
the eye movement condition. Children’s scores across all
nine problems were added together for a total level of
adherence score. One child in the eye movement condition
was excluded from this analysis because his eye movements
were not properly recorded; thus, the final sample for this
analysis included 69 children.
We first conducted an ANOVA with condition as the
independent variable and level of adherence (out of 9) as the
dependent variable. The effect of condition was significant,
F(2, 66) = 16.26, p < .001, ηp2 = .33. Simple contrasts
indicated that children in the gesture condition had
significantly lower level of adherence scores (M = 4.88, SD
= 3.16) than children in both the speech only condition, p <
.001 (M = 7.91, SD = 1.79), and the eye movement
condition, p < .001 (M = 8.34, SD = 1.36). Children in the
speech only condition did not differ from children in the eye
movement condition, p = .84. Next, we conducted a
multiple regression analysis with level of adherence (out of
9) as the independent variable, condition as the covariate,
and number of posttest equations correct (out of 8) as the
dependent variable. After controlling for condition, level of

1985

adherence significantly predicted posttest performance, b =
.38, t(65) = 2.17, p = .033. Thus, level of adherence to the
exact behavior predicted immediate learning.
A final step-wise regression analysis was conducted with
number of follow-up equations correct (out of 8) as the
dependent variable. In the first step, condition and number
of posttest equations correct (out of 8) were entered as the
covariates. In the second step, level of adherence (out of 9)
was entered as an independent variable. In the third step, the
interaction between condition and level of adherence was
entered as another independent variable to test for a
moderation effect. The R2 change for the second model
including level of adherence (R2 Δ= .003) was not
significant, p = .52, and the R2 change for the third model
including the level of adherence by condition interaction (R 2
Δ = .011) was also not significant, p = .52. Thus, although
level of adherence was a significant predictor of posttest
performance, level of adherence was not a significant
predictor of maintenance of learning in the long-term, and
neither was the level of adherence by condition interaction.

Eye Movement Analyses
The primary rationale for conducting the present study was
related to participants’ eye movements. We hypothesized
that participants’ eye movements back and forth across the
equal sign during instruction would be an important
predictor of learning. Thus, we calculated the number of
times children looked back and forth across the equal sign
on each problem (i.e., related the two sides), and then
averaged across all problems seen during instruction.
We first tested if eye movements during instruction
differed across conditions. We conducted an ANOVA with
condition as the between-subjects factor and average
number of relational eye movements as the dependent
variable. There was a significant effect of condition, F(2,
66) = 26.75, p < .001, ηp2 = .45. Simple contrasts indicated
that, as predicted, children in the speech only condition
made significantly fewer relational eye movements than did
children in the eye movement condition, p < .001, and the
gesture condition, p < .001. Children in the eye movement
condition did not differ from children in the gesture
condition, p = .78. There were no significant differences
across conditions for relational eye movements while
solving problems during instruction.
Next, we considered whether children’s relational eye
movements while solving problems predicted their
performance. The average number of eye movements back
and forth across the equal sign during instruction was a
marginally significant predictor of performance on the
instruction problems, b = .40, t(67) = 1.96, p = .054, but it
did not predict performance at posttest or follow-up.

Discussion
We hypothesized that children in the eye movement and
gesture conditions would learn and retain more from
instruction on math equivalence when compared to children
in the speech only condition. However, contrary to our

expectations, children in the gesture condition actually
retained less of the knowledge they had gained during
instruction when compared to children in the other two
conditions. Overall, these results suggest that there may be
some limits to the benefits of gesture during instruction. At
the same time, however, results provide some support for
the hypothesis that relational eye movements back and forth
across the equal sign are associated with learning.
Specifically, children who produced more relational eye
movements while solving problems during instruction, on
average, solved more problems correctly during instruction.
Previous research has detailed the benefits of gesture in
various contexts – spontaneous gesture during a lesson
(Cook & Goldin-Meadow, 2006), being told to gesture
(Broaders et al., 2007), and self-producing gestures of
correct strategies (Cook et al., 2008, Goldin-Meadow et al.,
2009). Thus, it is important to determine what it was about
the present study that reversed these benefits.
There are several potential reasons why the expected
benefits of gesture (on both learning and retention) were not
found in this study, and each provides fodder for future
research. First, the physical presence of the teacher may
moderate the effects of gesture on learning and retention.
Perhaps watching a video of a teacher gesturing and
mimicking that gesture may be experienced differently than
watching a teacher gesture in real life and mimicking that
gesture. Children may have felt uncomfortable mimicking
the gestures of someone who was not there to see them.
Second, redundancy of information during the instruction
video may moderate the effects of gesture on learning and
retention. In the present study, aspects of each condition
were included in the instruction (i.e., an arrow moved under
the problem while the teacher spoke and gestured). Cook et
al.’s (2008) study did not include an eye movement
condition, so the instruction only included speech and
gesture, without an arrow. Perhaps the arrow that appeared
underneath the problem attracted attention away from the
teacher’s gestures (which were lower on the screen, below
the arrow) and interfered with children’s mimicry of the
behavior in the gesture condition. Redundancy during the
instruction video may have resulted in a weaker
instantiation of the physical gesture in memory for children
in the gesture condition, and thus, a weaker connection to
and embodiment of the strategy when performing the
behavior themselves (Kalyuga, Chandler, & Sweller, 1999).
Beyond being a detriment to retention in the gesture
condition, the arrow during instruction may have provided
additional benefit for children in the speech only condition.
Indeed, children in the speech only condition in this study
solved a greater number of problems correctly on average
during instruction (3.4 out of 6) than did children in the
speech condition in Cook et al.’s (2008) study (1.8 out of 6).
Third, the space in which children learn and produce
gestures may moderate the effects of gesture on learning and
retention. In the present study, children gestured to a
problem presented on a laptop after watching a video of a
teacher gesturing. In Cook et al.’s (2008) study, the

1986

teacher’s gestures, the children’s gestures, and the problems
children solved during instruction were all in the exact same
space (at a board). Perhaps children in Cook et al.’s (2008)
study anticipated being imitated by the teacher again after
their turn, which may have resulted in deeper encoding of
the strategy in memory. Also, children in the present study
were sitting down and making fairly small hand movements
compared to the Cook et al. (2008) study in which children
were standing and making larger gestures.
Finally, the act of gesturing towards a laptop screen may
have been unnatural or awkward, thus adding extraneous
cognitive load to the learning task. Extraneous cognitive
load makes processing information during learning more
difficult. Students who are burdened by this extraneous load
are not able to construct the depth of knowledge that other
students may be able to because they cannot devote all of
their cognitive resources to the learning process (Sweller,
van Merrienboer, & Paas, 1998). Children found it difficult
to mimic the exact gesture (recall that children in the gesture
condition had significantly lower scores on the level of
adherence scale than did children in the other conditions),
and some voiced these difficulties (e.g., ―This is hard.‖).
Producing unnatural gestures in instructional settings may
increase cognitive load and have a negative effect on
children with low expertise in a content area (like in the
present study) (e.g., Post, van Gog, Paas, & Zwaan, 2013).
Overall, results provide important data regarding potential
limits to the benefits of gesture during instruction. These
findings not only advance theory and provide future avenues
of study, but also provide educators with an important
caveat when designing lessons and learning materials for
teaching children the concept of mathematical equivalence.

Acknowledgments
This paper is based on a master’s thesis conducted by Byrd
under the direction of McNeil, funded by a National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. Thanks to Jill
Lany, James Brockmole, and members of the Cognition
Learning and Development Lab at Notre Dame. Thanks also
to the students, parents, teachers, and administrators at the
participating school and afterschool programs.

References
Alibali, M. W. (1999). How children change their minds:
Strategy change can be gradual or abrupt. Developmental
Psychology, 35, 127-145.
Alibali, M. W., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1993). Transitions in
learning: What the hands reveal about a child’s state of
mind. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 468-523.
Broaders, S., Cook, S. W., Mitchell, Z., Goldin-Meadow, S.
(2007). Making children gesture brings out implicit
knowledge and leads to learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136, 539-550.
Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., & Levi, L. (2003). Thinking
mathematically: Integrating arithmetic and algebra in
elementary school. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Chesney, D. L., McNeil, N. M, Brockmole, J. R., & Kelley,
K. (2013). An eye for relations: Eye tracking indicates
long-term negative effects of operational thinking on
understanding of math equivalence. Memory & Cognition,
41, 1079-1095.
Cook, S. W., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2006). The role of
gesture in learning: Do children use their hands to change
their minds? Journal of Cognition and Development, 7,
211-232.
Cook, S. W., Mitchell, Z., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008).
Gesturing makes learning last. Cognition, 106, 10471058.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Cook, S. W., & Mitchell, Z. A. (2009).
Gesturing gives children new ideas about math.
Psychological Science, 20, 267-272.
Grant, E. R., & Spivey, M. J. (2003). Eye movements and
problem solving: Guiding attention guides thought.
Psychological Science, 14, 462-466.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1999). Managing
split-attention and redundancy in multimedia instruction.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 351-371.
Knuth, E. J., Stephens, A. C., McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M.
W. (2006). Does understanding the equal sign matter?
Evidence from solving equations. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 37, 297-312.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2004). You'll see what
you mean: Students encode equations based on their
knowledge of arithmetic. Cognitive Science, 28, 451-466.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2005b). Why won't you
change your mind? Knowledge of operational patterns
hinders learning and performance on equations. Child
Development, 76, 883-899.
National Research Council. (1998). The nature and role of
algebra in the K-14 curriculum. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Perry, M. (1991). Learning and transfer: Instructional
conditions
and
conceptual
change.
Cognitive
Development, 6, 449-468.
Perry, M., Church, R. B., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1988).
Transitional knowledge in the acquisition of concepts.
Cognitive Development, 3, 359-400.
Post, L. S., van Gog, T., Paas, F., & Zwaan, R. A. (2013).
Effects of simultaneously observing and making gestures
while studying grammar animations on cognitive load and
learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 1450-1455.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M. W. (1999). Conceptual
and procedural knowledge of mathematics: Does one lead
to the other? Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 175189.
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Thomas, L. E., & Lleras, A. (2007). Moving eyes and
moving thought: On the spatial compatibility between eye
movements and cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14, 663-668.

1987

