UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gestalt Effects in Planning: Rush-Hour as an example

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8458c8hj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bennati, Stefano
Brussow, Sven
Ragni, Marco
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gestalt Effects in Planning:
Rush-Hour as an example
Stefano Bennati (bennati@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Sven Brüssow (sven@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Marco Ragni (ragni@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg
Abstract
Planning problems have been extensively studied with regard
to graph theoretical properties such as the number of steps necessary to reach a specific goal state or the size of the problem
space. These structural properties, however, do not completely
characterize a problem. In the presented eye-tracking study
we also investigated the influence of perceptual factors on the
solution to a planning problem. While not affecting the correctness of a solution, the results suggest that certain Gestalt
properties are responsible for the deviation from optimal plans.
Keywords: Move planning; Rush-Hour; Gestalt

Introduction
Planning problems can be characterized by structural properties, such as the number of steps necessary to reach a specific
goal state or the size of the problem space, and perceptual
properties, such as colors and spatial relations between elements. While structural elements have been widely studied,
the latter have not receive as much attention. The reason may
be that structural properties are easier to manipulate than perceptual properties. The problem of our choice, Rush-Hour,
can be easily manipulated with regard to perceptual properties.
Rush-Hour schematizes a crowded parking lot on a 6 × 6
grid (cf. Fig. 1) and the task is to clear the way for the player’s
car which is blocked by some other vehicles. The player’s
car is always red, horizontally aligned and placed in the third
row, the same row where the exit is. There are two types of
vehicles: cars (length two) and trucks (length three). Each
vehicle has an orientation–vertical or horizontal–and a color.
All vehicles can only be moved forward and backward along
their longitudinal axes. The game rules forbid moving a vehicle over or through another vehicle or breaking the walls that
surround the parking lot. The goal is to clear the way to the
exit by sequentially moving the vehicles that block the way,
which are in turn blocked by others.
The game is well-defined, decomposable, non dynamic and
has only one goal. It is also PSPACE-complete (Flake &
Baum, 2002). There is normally more than one possible solution, but only few of them are optimal. We define an optimal
solution as the solution that involves the least possible number of moves.
Planning problems are often characterized by permutation
problems. From a cognitive perspective planning can be defined as the anticipation of action steps or “a procedure for
achieving a particular goal or desired outcome” (Morris &
Ward, 2005).

Figure 1: Rush-Hour sample configurations. The task is to
rearrange the vehicles such that the red car can be moved out.
Only the board on the left contains a cluster.

Insights from different domains, such as Tower of London,
indicate that difficulties arise from static properties such as
planning depth, i.e., the number of moves necessary to transform the initial state into a goal state (Kaller, Unterrainer,
Rahm, & Halsband, 2004; Kaller, Rahm, Köstering, & Unterrainer, 2011).
A relevant property of Rush-Hour is the number of vehicles
on the grid, as it increases the search tree. Dynamic properties, such as the number of counter-intuitive moves and the
number of circular move sequences have an influence on difficulty as well (Ragni, Steffenhagen, & Fangmeier, 2011). A
move is counter-intuitive if it results in a higher distance to
the goal state, for example when the goal car has to be moved
away from the exit or into an exit-blocking position. A move
sequence is circular if one of its vehicles is blocked by another vehicle that is part of the same move sequence.
Human performance on two different boards with the same
structural properties may differ. We propose that this difference results from perceptual properties that affect problem
solving and planning processes in a way that deserves deeper
investigation.
Gestalt Theory asserts that under certain conditions people
perceive a group of distinct objects as a holistic unit. For
example, when objects are aligned to each other or are in
close proximity to each other, they will be perceived as parts
of a bigger object (Koffka, 1935; Köhler, 1959; Wertheimer,
1938). With respect to the Rush-Hour domain, a cluster represents a meta-object that groups together adjacent objects on
the board: It is defined as a group of two or more vehicles that
are next to each other such that their major axes are parallel
(cf. Fig. 2). In this context, the Gestalt laws of proximity and

1234

0

1

2

Figure 2: Gestalt levels. A cluster of two cars can be categorized based on how many of their endings are aligned.

nents have to be separated. It seems reasonable to assume
that players split up the distracting cluster only if necessary,
therefore they more often arrive at a suboptimal solution that
moves the cluster as a unique entity and requires a greater
number of moves. Our hypothesis is that participants do not
solve the game by a simple depth search rather, they are influenced by the visual representation of the game, especially
by distracting clusters, meta-objects that attract attention and
require mental effort when they are separated into their components.

Methods
continuity can be applied. Continuity states that elements of
objects tend to be grouped together if they are aligned within
a object.

Participants
Thirty participants (15 female, M = 28.27 years, SD = 7.69)
recruited at the University of Freiburg, Germany, took part
in this study. Participants gave informed consent and were
either paid or received course credit for their participation.

Procedure, materials, and design

Figure 3: Examples of clusters containing two adjacent cars
forming a Level 2 (left, blue and white) and a Level 1 distracting cluster (right, black and white).
An example configuration is shown in Fig. 3 (left) that
contains two adjacent cars forming a cluster (Level 2). Both
elements cross the axis of the black car, which is indirectly
occluding the exit. The black car needs to be moved one step
left to unblock the previous element of the move sequence.
The closest element of the cluster, the white car, is just beside it, the other element one cell farther away. To solve the
problem, only the white car needs to be shifted to make room
for the black one, the other car can stay at its place. The peculiarity of such a configuration is that choosing to shift both
elements of the cluster does not preclude the goal state, it only
requires one more step. The example in Fig. 3 (right) shows
a distracting cluster (Level 1). In this case the cluster (bottom
right) must be separated to solve the problem optimally: The
black car in the cluster has to be moved to the right and the
white truck on the bottom has to be moved to the left. Another
possible solution would allow to move it left as well and keep
the cluster together, at the price of an extra solution step.
A distracting cluster must be split-up in order to optimally
solve the board: At least one vehicle (the distracting element)
must be moved in a different direction or by a different distance than the others (possibly zero). A suboptimal solution
might involve uniform movement of all elements in the cluster; as a result the configuration of the cluster will remain
unchanged. The distracting cluster forms a meta-object that
attracts attention and requires mental effort when its compo-

Participants were seated in front of a 20-inch flat screen with
a resolution of 1600×1200 pixels. Eye movements were
recorded using an EyeLink 1000 remote system (SR Research), sampling corneal reflection and pupil position at a
rate of 1000 Hz. Viewing was binocular but only the dominant eye was tracked. Participants first completed the eye
tracker’s standard calibration procedure. Between each stimulus presentation a drift correction was performed. The distance between eyes and screen varied between 50 and 70 cm
depending on each participant’s natural posture. To familiarize participants with the experiment, they were first exposed
to six randomized trials from the training set after which they
had to complete 24 randomized trials from a different set.
Rush-Hour problems differed with respect to the arrangement
of vehicles. In particular, problems were manipulated with
respect to the factor has cluster using a repeated measure design. A distracting cluster was present in 13 configurations.
We designed the experiment to being separable into two
distinct stages: planning phase and execution phase. Planning takes place first, as soon as the participant receives the
visual input of the board. Participants play the game through
mentally and identify a solution: no interaction with the board
is possible; they must therefore imagine all of the planning.
An interactive experiment would give feedback to the participant on the validity of his moves and allow him to plan by
trial and error. We want to avoid that to capture all the possible planning errors that a person can make.
Participants were unaware of the optimal solution’s length,
so they had no feedback that could tell them if the solution
they found was optimal or not. This circumstance offered
them the choice of keeping together or separating the clusters
and, in turn, allowed us to determine their preferred strategy.
After finishing planning, participant signaled this by a button
press. This action represents the end of the first and beginning
of the second phase.
During the execution phase participants were requested to

1235

board states leaves length correct (%)
left
457
214
6
83
right 432
235
6
77

optimal (%)
83
0

Figure 4: Two configurations that have similar algorithmic
properties but show a great difference in complexity

To test our assumptions that a cluster constitutes a Gestalt
entity that effects solution optimality, boards were classified
with respect to the property has cluster. The effect of the
gestalt type of has cluster on the correctness and on the optimality of the solution, the latter only within the correct responses, was then tested in logistic mixed-effects models. As
optimal implies correct, statistics on optimality have been
computed on the subset of correct solutions. We included
by-participant and by-item random intercepts to account for
inter-individual differences among participants and items.
Table 2: Logistic mixed-effects model results for solution optimality and correctness.
Optimality
(Intercept)
Gestalt L1
Gestalt L2

convey the planned solution by clicking on the individual cars
in the image. The solution is recorded as an ordered list of
color names that represent the order in which the vehicles
have been moved. We cannot exclude that participants used
the execution time to plan further, but it is unlikely given the
short time recorded between clicks.

(Intercept)
Gestalt L1
Gestalt L2

Behavioral data

Table 1: Solution quality by configuration type (in %).
Cluster
Yes
No

Correct
85.4
80.6

Solution
Optimal
31.3
77.0

We present an illustrative example in Fig. 4, where the
two types of configurations show similar algorithmic properties but a huge gap in performance when played by human
players: The rightmost configuration was optimally solved
by the 83% of the participants, while the leftmost configuration was not optimally solved by any participant. Another interesting property is that in both configurations participants find a correct, suboptimal solution around 80% of the
time. This finding indicates that participants have difficulties finding the optimal solution in the second board, while
the difficulty of solving the game remains constant. The
only difference that we could find between the two boards
in Fig. 4 is the presence of a cluster in the right one.

SE b
0.47
0.63
0.60

z
7.58
-5.66
-7.87

pz
.00
.00
.00

b
2.06
0.59
0.38

SE b
0.42
0.53
0.45

z
4.92
1.12
0.84

pz
.00
.26
.40

Correctness

Results and discussion
Table 1 reveals that the average correctness of the data collected from the execution phase is very similar for both types
of configurations. In configurations lacking a cluster almost
every correct solution is the optimal solution, while the optimality drops almost two thirds when the board presents one
distracting cluster. Among the “difficult” problems the optimality drops considerably but the overall correctness remains
largely constant.

b
3.57
-3.57
-4.69

The gestalt type of clusters had a significant effect on the
optimality of the solution with respect to correctly solved
problems, χ2 (2)=37.54, p < .001. Table 2 (top) shows the
respective results of a logistic mixed-effects model fitted to
solution optimality indicating that giving an optimal response
was less likely for problems that contained any type of cluster compared to those that contained no distracting cluster.
Gestalt type, however, had no significant effect on correctness, χ2 (2)=1.38, p = .50 (cf. the bottom of Table 2). This
result was expected as the average correctness rate remains
constant across all configurations.
Furthermore Type L2 had a stronger effect than Type L1.
This effect was also expected as Gestalt Type L2 clusters
show a higher degree of symmetry as both ends are aligned,
therefore they form a stronger gestalt meta-object.
In sum, the results indicate that apart from algorithmic
properties, such as branching factor or number of possible
solutions, spatial properties also have a strong effect upon the
performance, i.e. the optimality of a solution. In particular, we investigated the effect of the relative positioning of
vehicles, i.e. the grouping principle of ‘proximity’ in classical Gestalt theory. Our hypothesis is that embodied processes create a bias towards the suboptimal solution whenever
a cluster, a group of vehicles with specific reciprocal spatial
relations, is present.
The first hypothesis is based on Gestalt theory: People
tend to perceive certain clusters of objects as single entities,
i.e. meta-objects that are then used in the planning phase.
In the execution phase, however, the single components are

1236

also realize that there is a better solution and change their
strategies accordingly.
Given these results we cannot draw a definite conclusion
about which strategy is preferred by the participants. Our
conclusion is that the two strategies are concurrent and are
chosen depending on some criteria. From our current data we
could deduce that people often change their strategies during
the experiment and very few stick to the same strategy for
the entire game. Unfortunately we cannot make any hypothesis on why and when people change their strategies because
in our data participants seem to change strategies casually,
without any dependence on board or time.

Figure 5: The cluster is first created in the planning phase and
then separated into its components in the execution phase

Eye-tracking data
perceived again as a result of actually moving these single
components, i.e. vehicles in Rush Hour, to execute the just
developed plan. Another possible explanation is the use of
what we called longest move strategy: people avoid calculating exactly how long the vehicles are and what minimum
distance they need to be moved to free the blocked car. Instead, they try to move them as far as possible; in this process
each component of the cluster is seen as a separate entity but
is an obstacle to the goal of sliding the blocked car as far as it
can go.
It is well known that humans tend to solve computationally complex problems by chunking information in order to
simplify the problem’s representation (Ellis & Siegler, 1994;
Kotovsky, Hayes, & Simon, 1985; Ohlsson, 1992).
Both explanations seem to be cognitively plausible because
both remove some amount of complexity from the game. The
Gestalt strategy reduces the number of vehicles that participants must consider to plan the solution by grouping them as
meta-objects that are treated as single entities. On the other
hand, the longest move strategy reduces the complexity due to
distance calculations; participants do not need to check prior
to every move if the space in the direction in which the vehicle
has to be moved is enough to unblock the previous one in the
move sequence. Participants can assume that, once a vehicle
reaches the border in the other half of the board, the previous
one will be automatically unblocked. The two theories lead
to the same result and are difficult to distinguish from one
another while observing participants performing the experiment. We have found evidence to support both theories, so
we cannot say conclusively which one is correct.
Not only are the components moved individually, but
sometimes their movements are even separated by other cars’
movements, such as in Fig. 5.
In this example 40% of the participants, 70% of who solved
the game by moving the cluster, freed the way for the leftmost
car. To do so they moved in order one element of the cluster,
the goal car and then the second element of the cluster. The
solution that we expected, namely moving the goal car first
and then sliding the cluster upwards, was performed by only
17% of the participants.
The objection here is that if participants must split the cluster while still in the planning phase, at the time they should

Eye movement behavior for optimal and suboptimal solutions. In order to understand the underlying mental processes and the effect of Gestalt properties, we analyzed the
eye-tracking data that were recorded while participants were
planning their moves. We found differences in the eyetracking patterns depending on whether or not a board was
solved optimally.

Figure 6: The importance of Gestalt in planning. The images
have been post-processed for the sake of understandability

Figure 7: Average fixation per participant, coming from or
going to the cluster, of the board presented in Fig. 6 left
The configuration in Fig. 6 (left) has one distracting cluster
(white and black vehicles). We isolated all the fixations that
fall inside the cluster. We found that participants’ attention
was concentrated on the white car, in particular on the cell B4.
This finding suggests that participants recognize the white car
as being crucial in planning.
To prove if the cluster is perceived as such, we took in
consideration the immediately preceding and subsequent fixations. Players who perceive the cluster will try to move both

1237

elements in the same direction. If so they should look at the
cells outside the cluster in the direction in which they want
to move the vehicles, in our example upwards. As predicted
(see Fig. 7) cells A5 and B5 attract the majority of preceding and subsequent fixations outside the cluster. The results
support our hypothesis that the players want to move both elements of the cluster upwards, despite the fact that only the
white car must be moved for an optimal solution. Moreover,
if we discriminate between trials that have been solved optimally and those that have been solved suboptimally, we get
more validation: in the optimal cases this effect is completely
gone, as participants almost never looked at these cells. They
instead fixated more often cell B2 which suggests the intention of moving the white car downwards therefore breaking
the cluster. The black truck (A3 and A4) is fixated twice as
often in case of a suboptimal solution, while the number of
fixations on the white car (B3 and B4) does not vary much
with solution quality.

Table 3: Logistic mixed-effects model results for the probability of fixating a field in the moving direction given by the
optimal solution path.
Gestalt
(Intercept)
Gestalt L1
Gestalt L2
Cluster type (same dir)
L1 × same.dir
L2 × same.dir

b
-2.99
0.16
0.70
0.97
0.30
-1.22

SE b
0.59
0.21
0.19
0.40
0.39
0.39

z
-5.10
0.76
3.75
2.40
0.77
-3.11

pz
.00
.45
.00
.02
.44
.00

Effect of Gestalt on the perception of clusters. To prove
the general validity of our findings, we analyzed fixations on
clusters in all boards. Our analysis was restricted to clusters
formed by only two vehicles. The focus was on those fixations that fall on elements of a cluster, and in particular on
the landing position of their next fixation. Specifically, we
looked at the probability of next fixations falling in the direction given by the optimal solution path.
Table 3 shows the results of a logistic mixed effects model
that reveals that Gestalt level (see Fig. 2) has a reliable effect
on the fixation behavior and interacts with Gestalt type.

Figure 8: Average fixation per participant, coming from or
going to the cluster, of the board presented in Fig. 6 right

Another interesting scenario is given by Fig. 6 (right). This
configuration is special because both elements of the cluster
have a distracting effect: The optimal solution does not require moving any of them. Nonetheless the solutions were
biased towards the movement of the cluster. The fixation patterns show a difference between the data recorded for optimal and suboptimal performances: In optimal cases, only at
the upper truck in the cluster was fixated, with the most fixations in cell E3. The behavioral data shown that this truck
has not been moved, therefore it must have been considered
only as blocking element for the white car and then excluded
from the plan. In suboptimal cases, when the block has been
moved, we found an increased interest for the black bottom
truck (D2, E2 and F2). This time the cells with the most fixations are D3 and D2 (cf. Fig.8). This indicates an interest in
the moving both trucks leftwards.

Figure 9: The probability of the next fixation landing on a
field in moving direction according to the optimal solution
path, as a function of Gestalt level and cluster type (same.dir:
both cars must be moved in the same direction; only.current:
only currently fixated car must be moved).

This is also supported by preceding and subsequent fixations. In optimal cases cell left of the trucks were never fixated, while in the suboptimal cases we recorded several fixations left of the black truck (C2 and B2).

As illustrated in Fig. 9, the probability of fixating a field
in moving direction increased with Gestalt level, but only
for clusters in which the currently fixated vehicle had to be
moved. This indicates that even when the second vehicle did

1238

not have to be moved, but was part of a cluster, it interfered
with the perception of the currently fixated vehicle. By contrast, for clusters where both vehicles had to be moved in the
same direction, a higher Gestalt level reduced the attention on
fields in the moving direction. This result might indicate that
less attention in moving direction is needed for the currently
fixated vehicle when it shares the moving direction with the
other vehicle of a well-formed cluster (Level 2).
This result shows that apart from structural properties of
the problem, perceptual properties such as Gestalt of clusters
can interfere with planning behavior.

sible. Both heuristics are compatible with the majority of the
empirical results, but both are also disproved in a few situations, suggesting that these two strategies are complementary
and concurrent and might both be present in human planning.
Future work will have to clarify the conditions in which
one strategy is preferred over the other. To this end we are
studying new boards that will concentrate on single interesting configurations and try to give more information about
their complexity. Also a more thorough investigation of the
eye-tracking data is needed to improve our understanding of
how participants interpret the board representation and take
advantage of it while planning.

Summary
In this article we studied how the spatial configuration of a
board influences planning behavior. The novelty of our approach is that we did not study perception and planning separately, instead we looked for an interdependence between the
two. We found a significant effect of the presence of clusters
on the optimality of the solution: the presence of a cluster
modifies the behavior of participants from an optimal to a
suboptimal solution that involves moving the cluster even if
only one vehicle must be moved. This suggests that visual
perception, like Gestalt principles, can interfere with planning.
The experiment was divided in two separate stages: the
planning and the execution phase. During the whole experiment participants were presented with a static image of the
board. The absence of a visual feedback while solving the
game might be seen as a limitation but is a feature instead:
it excludes external memory and allows to capture all errors
made during the planning phase to be captured. On the contrary, participants of an interactive experiment would have realized many incongruities of their plan during the execution
phase. The experiment confirmed the substantial difference
of performance with regards to optimality, strongly related to
the presence of a cluster. This difference is not considered
by any automatic planning algorithm, suggesting that human
planning is influenced by factors that are not found in formal
representation of the problem. On the other hand no substantial influence of clusters has been found on solution correctness or response time.
The lack of dependency for these parameters suggests that
clusters need no cognitive effort to be processed, because
the processing is done in a subsymbolic manner, and this
points once again to Gestalt Theory. Two plausible heuristics
have been introduced that could explain how these differences
arise. The first heuristic is based on Gestalt principles: Clusters are seen as unique entities, following the Gestalt principles of proximity and continuity, and treated as atomic objects
in planning. This reduces the cognitive load by decreasing the
number of objects that need to be considered in planning. The
second heuristic does not consider Gestalt effects but simplifies the planning phase by removing unnecessary spatial calculations while moving the cars: Vehicles are not moved the
minimal sufficient distance but instead moved as far as pos-

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the DFG (German National
Research Foundation) in the Transregional Collaborative Research Center, SFB/TR 8 within project R8-[CSPACE]. Many
thanks to Matthias Frorath and Corinna Blum for their assistance in data acquisition and preparation.

References
Ellis, S., & Siegler, R. S. (1994). Development of Problem
Solving. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), (2nd ed., pp. 333–367).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Flake, G. W., & Baum, E. B. (2002). Rush Hour is PSPACEcomplete, or ”Why you should generously tip parking lot
attendants”. Theor. Comput. Sci., 270(1-2), 895–911.
Kaller, C., Rahm, B., Köstering, L., & Unterrainer, J. (2011).
Reviewing the impact of problem structure on planning: A
software tool for analyzing tower tasks. Behavioural brain
research, 216.
Kaller, C., Unterrainer, J., Rahm, B., & Halsband, U. (2004).
The impact of problem structure on planning: Insights from
the Tower of London task. Cognitive Brain Research,
20(3), 462–472.
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of Gestalt psychology. New
York: Harcourt, Brace.
Köhler, W. (1959). Gestalt psychology today. American
Psychologist, 14(12), 727–734.
Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). Why
are some problems hard? Evidence from Tower of Hanoi.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 248–294.
Morris, R., & Ward, G. (2005). The cognitive psychology
of planning (K. J. Gilhooly, Ed.). New York: Psychology
Press.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. Advances in the Psychology of Thinking, Vol.1, 1-44.
Ragni, M., Steffenhagen, F., & Fangmeier, T. (2011).
A Structural Complexity Measure for Predicting Human
Planning Performance. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, &
T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society. Austin, TX.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Laws of organization in perceptual
forms. A source book of Gestalt psychology, 71–88.

1239

