UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Holistic Processing in Speech Perception: Experts’ and Novices’ Processing of Isolated
Cantonese Syllables

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6sv7j3gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Liu, Tianyin
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Holistic Processing in Speech Perception: Experts’ and Novices’ Processing of
Isolated Cantonese Syllables
Tianyin Liu (kanalty@hku.hk)
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
627 Jockey Club Tower, Centennial Campus, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
Abstract

recognized as a whole (Gauthier & Tanaka, 2002), and the
more holistic they are, the better they can
recognize/individualize faces or objects of expertise
(Richler, Cheung, & Gauthier, 2011).

Holistic processing is an expertise marker in visual perception.
Here we tested participants’ perception of Cantonese syllables
through composite paradigm commonly used for measuring
holistic processing in vision research. We found that
participants were more holistic in processing syllable initials
than finals, possibly because initials are shorter and more
easily combined with neighboring segments. More
importantly, experts’ perception of syllable initials was
strongly affected by finals (i.e., holistic processing), even
when the initials were separated or disconnected from finals;
whereas in novices, holistic processing gradually decreased
with segment separation and disconnection. As for syllable
final perception, experts were strongly influenced by initials,
yet not when the segments were separated/disconnected. In
contrast, novices showed little holistic processing in all
conditions. These results showed that experts’ perception of
syllable parts were more influenced by neighboring segments,
suggesting that holistic processing may also be an expertise
marker in auditory perception.

Figure 1. The composite face illusion: a) 5 physically
identical top face halves are perceived as different when
aligned with 5 different bottom halves; but b) are perceived
as the same when misaligned (images taken from Rossion,
2013).

Keywords: holistic processing, speech perception, isolated
Cantonese syllable processing.

In contrast to the abundant literature on holistic
processing in visual perception, it remains unclear whether a
similar phenomenon also exists in auditory perception, and
whether it is a hallmark in expert auditory processing. Our
sense of hearing begins to develop since infancy or even the
fetal period, much earlier than vision (Hepper &
Shahidullah, 1994). The auditory system enables us not only
to hear, but also to perceive and interpret sound information.
The ability to recognize a caregiver’s voice and understand
what he/she says is as important as the ability to recognize
his/her face in the early years of development. It is also an
essential tool for later learning, language development, and
social interaction (Bellis, 2003; Clark, 2008; Sharma, Purdy,
& Kelly, 2009). Hence, it is important to investigate what
signals the expertise of auditory processing, especially in the
perception of speech. Past research in speech perception has
been focusing on phonological awareness, i.e., explicit
awareness of the phonological structure of the language, and
revealed its critical role in children’s acquisition of reading,
in both alphabetic languages (Goswami & Mead, 1992), and
logographic languages such as Chinese (Shu, Peng, &
McBride-Chang, 2008; although it remains controversial;
see Huang & Hanley, 1995). However the maturation of
phonological awareness with age and training does not
necessarily lead to a better ability to selectively attend to
parts in speech perception without being interfered by
irrelevant parts; in other words, phonological awareness
does not necessarily signal analytical processing (reduced

Introduction
Holistic processing, i.e., gluing features into a gestalt and
perceive them as a whole, has been identified as a hallmark
of expertise in the perception of faces (Tanaka & Farah,
1993). The most prominent demonstration of holistic face
processing is the composite illusion. Participants were
shown two composite faces and asked to do same/different
judgments about the top halves of the faces and ignore the
irrelevant bottom halves. People reported two identical top
halves to look different when they were aligned with two
different bottom halves. This illusion disappeared when the
top and bottom halves were misaligned (Hole, 1994; Fig. 1).
Presumably, holistic processing binds the two halves of the
faces together so that experts’ flexibility to access the
information of individual parts is attenuated (Maurer,
LeGrand, & Mondloch, 2002). Thus, they get interference
from the irrelevant halves in the same/different judgments
of the attended halves, and the amount of interference
indicates holistic processing. The same paradigm has been
applied to the recognition of many other non-face objects,
such as cars (Gauthier, Curran, Curby, & Collins, 2003),
fingerprints (Busey & Vanderkolk, 2005), and greebles (an
artificial stimulus type, Gauthier & Tarr, 1997), and holistic
processing has been found to indicate perceptual expertise
with these objects. In experts’ eyes, parts are integrated and

869

holistic processing) defined according to the composite
paradigm.
To investigate whether holistic processing also exists in
auditory processing, here we examine the perception of
Cantonese base syllables (controlled for tonal information)
in expert and novice Cantonese listeners. Cantonese is the
most commonly spoken Chinese language in Southern
China and Hong Kong. There is a one-to-one mapping
between written characters and spoken Cantonese syllables
(i.e., a logographic language; Ho & Bryant, 1997), and
components of a written character do not map to
components in the pronunciation, in contrast to words in
alphabetic languages. The basic speech unit in Cantonese is
the base syllable with a tone, and it is conventional to divide
a Cantonese syllable into two parts: the initial and the final
segments (Yue-Hashimoto, 1972). The initial segment refers
to the beginning consonant, whereas the final segment refers
to the ending vowel(s) or vowel(s) plus an ending consonant.
There are in total 19 initial segments and 51 final segments
in Cantonese, together with nine tones attached to the final
segments. In Hong Kong, the majority of children learn to
read Chinese characters without the aid of an alphabetic
phonetic system, e.g., Pinyin used in Mainland China and
Zhu-Yin-Fu-Hao (or Bopomofo, a phonetic notation system
consisted of 37 characters and four tone marks) used in
Taiwan. Thus, this examination with Cantonese speakers in
Hong Kong provides a unique opportunity to examine the
perceptual expertise of Cantonese speech without explicit
knowledge about the constituent (phonemic) structure of the
syllables. Here we aim to examine how native Cantonese
speakers process base Cantonese syllables in terms of
holistic processing in comparison with novices whose native
language is English.
Here we hypothesize that in speech perception/syllable
processing, similar to the literature on visual recognition,
experts of Cantonese will demonstrate stronger holistic
processing than novices. More specifically, Hong Kong
Cantonese speakers’ perception of Cantonese initial or final
segments may be more influenced by neighboring segments
as compared with novices who speak alphabetic languages.
This study is the first attempt to apply the composite
paradigm to auditory perception and identify the hallmark of
expertise in speech processing.

Methods
Participants
20 native Cantonese speakers (12 male, 8 female) and 20
novices of Cantonese (12 male, 8 female) were recruited
from the University of Hong Kong. All expert Cantonese
speakers were born and grew up in Hong Kong and had
limited or no experience with Pinyin or Zhu-Yin-Fu-Hao.
All novice participants were native English speakers who
were exchange students or freshmen at the University of
Hong Kong. By the time they were recruited, they had
resided in Hong Kong for less than six months, and received
no formal education of Cantonese or any other Chinese

languages1. The two groups were matched in gender, age
(novice: mean = 22.15, S.E = .72; expert: mean = 20.75, S.E
= .50, F(1, 38) = 2.57, p = .12 ) and years of education
(novice: mean = 15.25, S.E = .35; expert: mean = 14.65, S.E
= .40, F(1, 38) = 1.26, p = .27).

Materials
Baseline Auditory Temporal Processing To make sure
that participants did not differ in baseline temporal
processing of auditory information, a birdsong
discrimination task was used. 60 sound clips of birdsongs
were downloaded from New Zealand bird songs and calls
corpus (Te Papa Atawhai, 2013), and each clip was trimmed
to 1.5s from the beginning of the birdsong using GoldWave.
Holistic Processing of Cantonese Syllables The complete
composite paradigm (Gauthier & Bukach, 2007) commonly
used in vision research was adopted to examine holistic
processing in the perception of isolated Cantonese syllables.
In each trial, participants were presented with a pair of
Cantonese syllables sequentially, and told to attend only to a
particular segment of the syllables (either the initial or the
final), and judge whether they were the same or different. In
congruent trials, the attended and irrelevant segments led to
the same response, i.e., both were “same” or both were
“different” (i.e., no interference from irrelevant segments;
see Table 2 and Fig.1 for examples); whereas in incongruent
trials, they led to different responses (i.e., there was
interference from irrelevant segments). Holistic processing
was assessed by the performance difference between the
congruent and the incongruent trials.
240 pairs of original Cantonese syllables recorded from
a native female Cantonese speaker from a sound corpus
Chinese Character Database (Kwan, 2001) were used.
They all had the same tone (first tone), and were equally
divided into four trial types: same congruent, different
congruent, same incongruent, and different incongruent (see
Table 1 and Fig. 2a for examples). Note that in a Cantonese
syllable, the initial and final segments can influence each
other due to co-articulation, and thus the same initial may
sound a little different when combined with different finals.
In other words, the segments in an original syllable are
already integrated to form a holistic representation. To
examine how participants perceived Cantonese segments
when they were not integrated, we created artificial syllables
by concatenating standardized isolated initials and finals
corresponding to the original syllables with no time delay
(separated syllables; Fig. 2b). All standardized isolated
initials and finals were downloaded from the same database
(Kwan, 2001) recorded by the same female. In addition, we
created disconnected syllables (Fig.2c) by adding a 0.5s gap
between the initial and the final of the separated syllables.
This disconnected condition is analogous to the misaligned
1
Note that the official language for instruction at University of
Hong Kong is English; all our native Cantonese speaker
participants were Chinese-English bilinguals.

870

condition in the composite paradigm used in vision research.
The original and separated stimuli were about 1s long,
whereas the disconnected stimuli were about 1.5s long.

holistic processing was indicated by the performance
difference between congruent and incongruent trials.

Procedure
Attend to Initial
Congruent
Incongruent

Same

[p]in(1) – [p]in(1)

m[aau(1)] – m[aau(1)]

Different

[j]in(1) – [t]eng(1)

h[ang(1)] – s[ing(1)]

Same
Different

(1)

(1)

[p]an – [p]ou
(1)

(1)

[j]yun – [t]yun

Baseline Auditory Temporal Processing 30 trials of
birdsong discrimination were carried out before the holistic
processing tasks. In each trial, participants first saw a
fixation cross for 500 ms at the center of the screen to signal
the start of the trial. They then heard two birdsongs
sequentially, each of which lasted for 1.5s, with a 1s interval
between the two stimuli. They were asked to judge whether
the two birdsongs were the same or different with a
response box. Half of the trials were “same” trials, and the
other half were “different” trials. All birdsongs were drawn
from the 60 birdsong clips; the presentation of a birdsong in
a “same” or “different” trial was counterbalanced across
participants.

Attend to Final

l[aau(1)] – ng[aau(1)]
gw[ang(1)] – gw[ing(1)]

Table 1. Examples of the Cantonese syllable stimuli. The
number in the small bracket indicates the tone of the
syllable.

Figure 3. Procedure of the holistic processing task
Holistic Processing of Cantonese Syllables There were
720 trials in total, evenly divided into the original, separated,
and disconnected conditions. For each condition, there were
six blocks, two for syllable initial discrimination and four
for final discrimination; each block contained 40 trials. The
sequence of presenting the initial and final discrimination
blocks was counterbalanced across participants. In each trial,
after a 500 ms central fixation, they listened to two
sequentially presented Cantonese syllables with a 1s interval
in between, and then judge whether the initials (or the finals
in the final discrimination blocks) of the two syllables were
the same or different with a response box (Fig. 3). They
performed a practice session with 24 trials consisting of all
types of stimuli (8 trials for each type shown in Figure 2,
with 4 initial and 4 final discriminations respectively) not
used in the materials before the experiment.

Figure 2. a) Complete composite paradigm with original
Cantonese syllables in the initial judgment task, and
examples of b) separated and c) disconnected syllables.
Design
The design had three within-subject variables: congruency
(congruent vs. incongruent), stimulus type (original vs.
separated vs. disconnected), and attended syllable segment
(initial vs. final); and a between-subject variable: group
(expert vs. novice). The dependent variable was
discrimination sensitivity measured by A’, which is a biasfree nonparametric measure of sensitivity2. The degree of

Results
Bird Song
In the birdsong discrimination task, the expert and novice
groups had similar performance in both accuracy (experts,
mean = .89, S.E = .03; novices, mean = .92, S.E = .02) and
response time (experts, mean = 1.72sec, S.E = .13sec;
novices, mean = 1.83sec, S.E = .23sec), suggesting that they

2

, where H and
F present hit rate and false alarm rate respectively. Better
performance is indicated by a higher A’. Here we used A’ instead
of D’ because it can be calculated when the hit rate or the false
alarm rate is 1 or 0, which was present in the data we collected.

871

generally could discriminate sounds accurately and there
was no difference in discrimination ability of auditory
information between the two groups (accuracy, F (1,38)
= .35, p = .56; response time, F (1, 38) = .17, p = .68).

separated (t(19) = 2.94, p <.01) syllables, but not in the
disconnected condition (Fig. 4)3.

Holistic Processing
The assumption of sphericity was met for all independent
variables, and repeated measures ANOVA revealed main
effects of stimulus type (F(2, 76) = 3.01, p < .05, ηp2 = .08),
congruency (F(1, 38) = 41.45, p < .001, ηp2 = .52), and
attended syllable segment (F(1, 38) = 28.86, p < .001, ηp2
= .43) in A’. Participants performed the worst in perceiving
original Cantonese syllables (original vs. separated: t(39) =
2.85, p < .01; original vs. disconnected, t(39) = 4.11, p
< .001), and had similar performance in the separated and
disconnected conditions (t(39) = 1.54, p = .13). They were
better in congruent than incongruent trials, and in processing
finals than initials. There was a significant two-way
interaction between stimulus type and congruency (F(2, 76)
= 9.52, p < .001, ηp2 = .20), a significant three-way
interaction between stimulus type, congruency and attended
segment (F(2, 76) = 3.30, p < .05, ηp2 = .08), and a marginal
four-way interaction between stimulus type, congruency,
attended segment, and group (F(2, 76) = 2.74, p = .07, ηp2
= .08). The marginal four-way interaction indicated that the
level of holistic processing in the perception of the syllable
initials and finals might differ between the two groups. To
further investigate this effect, we examined the data in the
syllable initial and syllable final discrimination tasks
separately.

Figure 4: Performance of novices and experts of Cantonese
in the holistic processing task with Cantonese syllable
initials (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01)

Syllable Initials A significant main effect of congruency
was found (F(1, 38) = 34.77, p < .001, ηp2 = .48):
participants showed holistic processing in syllable initial
perception. There was a significant interaction between
congruency and stimulus type (F(2, 76) = 6.99, p < .01, ηp2
= .16), indicating that the level of holistic processing
differed across different types of stimuli. The three-way
interaction between congruency, stimulus type, and group
was not significant (F(2, 76) = 1.81, p = .17, n.s.). However,
when we separated the data by groups, we found that among
experts, there was no significant interaction between
congruency and stimulus type (F(2, 38) = .96, p = .40, n.s.):
experts showed a similar level of holistic processing in the
original (t(19) = 3.78, p < .01), separated (t(19) = 4.08, p
< .01), and disconnected (t(19) = 2.17, p < .05) conditions.
In contrast, there was a significant interaction between
congruency and stimulus type in novices (F(2, 38) = 7.94, p
< .05, ηp2 = .30): the holistic processing effect decreased
gradually as the initial and final segments were separated
and then disconnected; a significant congruency effect was
observed only in the original (t(19) = 3.77, p <.01) and

Figure 5: Performance of experts and novices of Cantonese
in the holistic processing task with Cantonese syllable finals
(** p < 0.01)
Syllable Finals A main effect of congruency was observed
(F(1, 38) = 30.68, p < .001, ηp2 = .45), suggesting that
participants showed holistic processing in perceiving
syllable finals. A significant interaction between congruency
and stimulus type (F(2, 76) = 9.23, p < .001, ηp2 = .20)
indicated different levels of holistic processing across
different stimulus types. A significant three-way interaction
between congruency, stimulus type, and group (F(2, 76) =
4.03, p < .05, ηp2 = .10) further revealed a between group
difference in the level of holistic processing across stimulus
types. We then examined their performance separately by
groups. Experts exhibited a significant interaction between
3

Note however that in the response time data, both groups showed
decreased congruency effects in the separated and disconnected
conditions as compared with the original condition.

872

congruency and stimulus type (F(2, 38) = 13.68, p < .01, ηp2
= .42): they showed a strong congruency effect only in the
original condition (t(19) = 4.51, p < .01) but not in the
separated or disconnected conditions. In contrast, there was
no interaction between congruency and stimulus type in
novices (F(2, 30) = .52, p = .60, n.s.): they showed a small
congruency effect, which was unaffected by separating or
disconnecting the segments (Fig. 5)4.

even when the continuity between the segments is disrupted
due to their experience with Cantonese syllables. We
speculate that this effect might be because initials are short
and difficult to be recognized alone, and thus through
experience expert Cantonese speakers have learned to
combine them with finals for processing, even when there is
a gap between the initial and the final in a syllable.
In syllable final perception, experts showed strong holistic
processing in the original condition but not in the separated
or disconnected conditions, suggesting that experts were
able to perceive the final as an isolated segment when it was
separated/disconnected from the initial. In contrast, novices
showed a small holistic processing effect in the original
condition, and separation/disconnection did not change this
effect. Taken together, these results suggest that experts’
experience with original Cantonese syllables may have
encouraged them to integrate the initial into the perception
of the final. However, in contrast to their perception of the
initials, separation/disconnection was able to disrupt this
integration. This difference between syllable initial and final
perception may be due to the longer duration in the final
segment, making it easier to be perceived alone when being
separated/disconnected from the initial segment.
Thus, our results suggest that experts’ perception of
Cantonese syllable initials and finals seems to be more
influenced by neighboring segments than novices’. This
result is consistent with the perceptual expertise literature in
vision research, which shows that experts in visual
recognition tends to combine features together to form a
holistic representation, resulting in an inability to selectively
attend to parts (Maurer, LeGrand, & Mondloch, 2002).
Note that in the literature on auditory perception, the term
“holistic processing” has often been defined as processing at
the level of syllable or a global unit of speech (Charles-Luce
& Luce, 1990; Walley, 1988). This is in contrast to the
definition used in vision research with the composite
paradigm, in which holistic processing refers to feature
combination that results in an inability to selectively attend
to parts. In the development of speech recognition,
processing at the syllable level is considered as a less
efficient and immature form of speech processing. On the
contrary, incremental/analytic processing, i.e., processing a
word as a combination of individual sounds from the
beginning to the end (Byrd, Conture, & Ohde, 2007),
emerges at a later stage and marks the maturation of
phonological encoding. The typical developmental trend of
syllable perception from the syllable level to incremental
processing (e.g., Brooks & MacWhinney, 2000; Bryd,
Conture, & Ohde, 2007) has been demonstrated through a
series of tasks such as onset/rhyme detection or deletion,
phoneme deletion, etc. Note however that being aware of
the internal structure of a syllable does not necessarily mean
a better ability to selectively attend to parts in syllable
perception. Indeed, Ho and Bryant (1997) found that
Cantonese children in Hong Kong have developed
awareness of onset/rhyme, and can perform onset/rhyme
detection tasks by age eight, suggesting that sensitivity to

Discussion
In the current study, we adopted the composite paradigm to
examine the perception of Cantonese base syllables in
native (expert) Cantonese speakers and novices of
Cantonese who speak only English.
First, the results showed that both participant groups
processed syllable initials more holistically than syllable
finals. In Cantonese, syllable initials are single consonants,
while syllable finals are composed of vowel(s) or vowel(s)
with an ending consonant. As can be visualized in Fig. 2,
the duration of syllable initials are significantly shorter than
that of syllable finals, and thus syllable initials may be more
easily perceived as combined with other segments than
syllable finals. Indeed, developmental studies showed that
children develop awareness of large sound segments first
and gradually become sensitive to smaller ones at later
stages (Goswami & Mead, 1992; Ho, & Bryant, 1997),
suggesting that the awareness of syllable initials is harder
than finals and emerges at a later stage. Hence, when asked
to identify initials while disregarding finals, participants had
larger interference from irrelevant finals, as compared with
the interference from the irrelevant initials when identifying
syllable finals. In addition, Cantonese syllable initials and
finals also differ in acoustic properties due to the
fundamental differences between consonants and vowels.
For example, consonants typically have lower amplitude
and more high frequency energy than vowels (Ladefoged &
Disner, 2012). These acoustic differences may also be
related to the observed differences between initial and final
syllable perception.
Secondly, we found that Cantonese experts were in
general more holistic than novices in Cantonese syllable
perception, yet the manifestation differed between syllable
initial and final perception. In perceiving Cantonese syllable
initials, novices showed decreased holistic processing when
the final segment was separated or disconnected from the
initial segment, reflecting the baseline behavior in which
features were less likely to be perceived as a whole when
they were separate/disconnected (note that the initial and
final segments in an original syllable already formed a
holistic representation due to co-articulation). In contrast,
experts’ holistic processing was uninfluenced by segment
separation or disconnection; their perception of syllable
initials was affected by syllable finals even when the finals
were separated or disconnected from the initials. This effect
suggests that experts combine syllable initials with finals
4

Similar effects were observed in the response time data.

873

the internal structure of syllables can emerge without
explicit teaching. Nevertheless, our results using the
composite paradigm suggest that their perception of onset
(initial) and rhymes (final) seems to be more influenced by
neighboring segments than novices’, regardless of their
awareness of the internal structure of the syllables. Future
work will investigate whether similar effects can also be
observed in Chinese speakers who learned speech sounds
through a phonetic alphabet such as Pinyin, or in expert
processing of speech sounds in alphabetic languages.
In conclusion, the current study revealed that experts
demonstrated stronger holistic processing over novices in
Cantonese syllable perception as assessed by the composite
paradigm. The results mirrored the findings in vision
research, indicating that holistic processing may be an
expertise marker in the recognition of both visual and
auditory stimuli.

Gauthier, I., & Tanaka, J. W. (2002). Configural and holistic
face processing: The Whole story. Journal of Vision, 2 (7),
616.
Goswami, U., & Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological skills and
learning to read. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Goswami, U., & Mead, F. (1992). Onset and rime
awareness and analogies in reading. Reading Research
Quarterly, 27 (2), 153-162.
Hepper, P. G., & Shahidullah, B. S. (1994). Development of
fetal hearing. Archives of Disease in Childhood – Fetal
and Neonatal Edition, 71 (2), F81 – F87.
Ho, C. S-H., & Bryant, P. (1997). Development of
Phonological Awareness of Chinese Children in Hong
Kong. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 26 (1), 109 –
126.
Hole, G. J. (1994). Configurational factors in the perception
of unfamiliar faces. Perception, 23, 65–74.
Huang, H. S., & Hanley, J. R. (1995). Phonological
awareness and visual skills in learning to read Chinese
and English. Cognition, 54(1), 73-98.
Kwan, T. W. (2001). A Chinese Character Database: With
Word-formations
phonologically
disambiguated
according to the Cantonese Dialect. Retrieved on October
1st,
2012
from
http://humanum.arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Lexis/lexi-can/.
Ladefoged, P., & Disner, S. F. (2012). Vowels and
Consonants, 3rd Edition. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Publishing.
Maurer, D., Le Grand, R., & Mondloch, C. J. (2002). The
many faces of configural processing. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 255–260.
Richler, J. J., Cheung, O. S., & Gauthier, I. (2011). Holistic
Processing Predicts Face Recognition. Psychological
Science, 22 (4), 464-471.
Rossion, B. (2013). The composite face illusion: A whole
window into our understanding of holistic face perception.
Visual Cognition, 21 (2), 139 - 253.
Sharma, M., Purdy, S., & Kelly, A. (2009). Comorbidity of
auditory processing, language, and reading disorders.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 52,
706–722.
Shu, H., Peng, H. & McBride-Chang (2008). Phonological
awareness in young Chinese children. Developmental
Science, 11(1), 171–181.
Tanaka, J., & Farah, M. (1993). Parts and wholes in face
recognition. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 46, 225–245.
Te Papa Atawhai. (2013). New Zealand bird songs and calls.
Retrieved
on
February
27th,
2013
from
http://www.doc.govt.nz/conservation/nativeanimals/birds/new-zealand-bird-songs-and-calls/..
Walley, A. C. (1988). Spoken word recognition by young
children and adults. Cognitive Development, 3, 137 - 165.
Yue-Hashimoto, A. O.-K. (1972). Studies in Yue Dialects:
Phonology of Cantonese. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code: HKU 745210H to J.H. Hsiao), and the
help from our research assistant Masaya Okamoto.

References
Bellis, T. J. (2003). Assessment and management of central
auditory processing disorders in the educational setting:
From science to practice (2nd ed.). Clifton Park, NY:
Delmar Learning.
Brooks, P. J., & MacWhinney, B. (2000). Phonological
priming in children’s picture naming. Journal of Child
Language, 27, 335 - 366.
Busey, T. A. & Vanderkolk, J. R. (2005). Behavioral and
electrophysiological evidence for configural processing in
fingerprint experts. Vision Research, 45, 431-448.
Byrd, C. T., Conture, E. G., & Ohde, R. N. (2007).
Phonological Priming in Young Children Who Stutter:
Holistic Versus Incremental Processing. American
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 16, 43-53.
Charles-Luce, J., & Luce, P. A. (1990). Similarity
neighborhoods of words in young children’s lexicon.
Journal of Child Language, 17, 205 - 215.
Clark, J. G. (1980). Central auditory dysfunction in school
children. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 11, 208–213.
de Heering, A., Houthuys, S., & Rossion, B. (2007).
Holistic face processing is mature at 4 years of age:
Evidence from the composite face effect. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 96, 57–70.
Gauthier, I., & Bukach, C. (2007). Should we reject the
expertise hypothesis? Cognition, 103, 322-330.
Gauthier, I., Curran, T., Curby, K.M., & Collins, D. (2003).
Perceptual interference supports a non-modular account of
face processing. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 428–432.
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M.J. (1997). Becoming a ‘Greeble’
expert: Exploring the face recognition mechanism. Vision
Research, 37, 1673–1682.

874

