UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implications of Stimulus Sampling on the Attraction Effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/32p4g13f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Nandy, Shaurabh

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implications of Stimulus Sampling on the Attraction Effect
Shaurabh Nandy (shaurabh@utdallas.edu)
School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 800 W. Campbell Road
Richardson, TX 75080 USA

Abstract
Context effects in multi-attribute decision making are
important findings that challenge large classes of rational
choice theories, while also providing innovative consumer
product strategies. Trueblood (2012) is the first demonstration
of the attraction, similarity and compromise context effects
using the same experimental paradigm. A closer examination
of the attraction effect experiment reveals that the choice
probability estimation procedure gives rise to systematic
properties in the choice sets, which in this paper are
collectively termed as the sum-highest property. Conducting a
simulation study reveals that the sum-highest property can
affect a large number of choice sets. This is followed by an
experiment that shows that people are biased towards options
which satisfy the sum-highest property. These results provide
a plausible alternate explanation to the attraction effect in
studies which use similar estimation procedures, while also
highlighting choice behavior under the sum-highest property
as a potential principle of multi-attribute decision making.
Keywords: choice probability estimation; context effects;
attraction effect; multi-attribute choice; stimuli generation.

Introduction
Context effects are a class of observations in the preferential
choice literature where the preference between options can
be altered by a change in context such as the addition of
alternatives to the choice set. The three most widely studied
context effects are the attraction effect (Huber & Puto,
1983), the compromise effect (Simonson, 1989), and the
similarity effect (Tversky, 1972).
Multi-alternative decision making refers to any situation
where there is a choice between more than two options. For
example, a simple question such as “What is your favorite
number between 1 and 10?” is a choice between 10
alternatives. When each alternative is further characterized
by additional information, the common nomenclature is
multi-attribute decision making. For example, in a choice
between cars, each car may be characterized by attributes
such as “Mileage”, “Horsepower”, “Price” etc. Taken
together, the term multi-alternative multi-attribute decision
making refers to any choice where there are more than two
alternatives and each alternative is described by at least two
attributes.
The attraction effect is a context effect where given a twoalternative multi-attribute choice set, the addition of a third
alternative, the decoy, which is inferior to one of the initial
alternatives, the target, increases the preference for the
target. In the similarity effect, the addition of a third option
which is similar to one of the initial options in a two
alternative choice set, results in an increase in preference for

the dissimilar option. In the compromise effect, the addition
of an intermediate option, to a choice set consisting of two
extreme options, alters the preference towards the
intermediate option, which is a compromise between the
two extreme options.
Context effects allow for manipulation of choice
probabilities by clever addition of alternatives to a choice
set and hence are of practical importance in consumer
product placement. Additionally, these context effects also
provide significant insight into theoretical endeavors of
human decision making. To illustrate this point, let's
consider the violation of the simple scalability property of
choice. The simple scalability property states that each
option in a complete choice set can be assigned a single
scaled value, u, independent of other options in the choice
set. For example, u can be a utility function which assigns
each member of the choice set {a1, a2) to a real number.
The choice probability for any option is then determined by
a function, F, which for option {a1} is given by
P(a1| {a1,a2}) = F(u(a1), u(a2)) and for option {a2} is given
by P(a2| {a1,a2}) = F(u(a2), u(a1)), where F is always
strictly increasing in the first argument and strictly
decreasing in the rest.
To see why the three context effects violate the simple
scalability property via a single demonstration, let us narrow
our focus by considering the case where the three context
effects result in a change in preference order in the complete
choice set. It is important to note that a change in preference
order is a sufficient but not necessary condition for these
context effects to hold 1. A change of preference order is a
violation of the simple scalability property because theories
which assume the simple scalability property start with
defining fixed utilities over the entire choice set. For
example, let us consider a choice set {A, B} where A is
slightly more preferable than B. This implies that P(A | {A,
B}) = F(u(A), u(B)) > P(B | {A, B}) = F(u(B), u(A)), which
in turn implies that u(A) > u(B). However, in the case of the
attraction effect, the addition of option C can result in
option B becoming the most preferred option in the
complete choice set {A, B, C}. This implies that P(B | {A,
B, C}) = F(u(B), u(A), u(C)) > P(A | {A, B, C}) = F(u(A),
u(B), u(C)), which in turn implies that u(B) > u(A), which is
a contradiction. Similar arguments can be used to show how
the compromise and similarity effects violate the simple
scalability property.
1

A more general treatment is to show the attraction effect as a
violation of the regularity property of choice, which is not
discussed in this paper.

2687

Context Effects: Unified Theoretical and
Experimental Accounts
As the study of human decision making has advanced, there
has been a proliferation of theoretical models of decision
making (see Rieskamp, Busemeyer, & Mellers (2006) for
details). With respect to context effects in multi-attribute
decision making, cognitive models such as the
Multialternative Decision Field Theory (MDFT) model
(Roe, Busemeyer & Townsend, 2001) are especially
important because they predict violations of properties such
as simple scalability, while also modeling the dynamics of
the decision making process.
Trueblood (2012), via three separate experiments,
demonstrated the attraction effect, the similarity effect, and
the compromise effect within one experimental paradigm.
The paradigm was an inference task where subjects were
asked to choose between three criminal suspects, based on
eyewitness testimony strength from two independent
eyewitnesses. The three suspects corresponded to the three
alternatives, and the eyewitness testimonies corresponded to
the two attributes. The eye witness testimony strengths
ranged between 0-100. Subjects were asked to choose the
suspect they think is most likely to have committed the
crime. This paper is of profound importance because it is the
first time that someone has shown the three context effects
in the same experimental paradigm, which in turn adds to
the validity of single modeling accounts such as MDFT.
Moreover, since the context effects were induced in an
inference task where the stimuli have no affective value as
compared to tasks based on consumer preferences, these
results question models such as the Leaky Competing
Accumulator model (Usher & McClelland, 2004), which
assume loss-aversion asymmetry (Tversky & Simonson,
1993) as a fundamental principle of context effects.

other. The addition of {D} to the initial choice set {T, C}
results in an increase in preference for {T}, and this is called
the attraction effect.
The attribute on which an option is superior to another
option is called its stronger attribute, while the attribute on
which an option is inferior to another option is called its
weaker attribute. The decoy {D} can be further
distinguished into three types based on its position in the
two dimensional attribute space: range decoy (R), frequency
decoy (F), and range-frequency decoy (RF). Range decoys
are options that are equal on the target's stronger attribute
but inferior on the target's weaker attribute. Frequency
decoys are options that are equal on the target's weaker
attribute but inferior on the target's stronger attribute.
Range-frequency decoys are options that are inferior to the
target on both the attributes. The different decoy types have
previously been shown to produce variable effect sizes
(Huber, Payne, & Puto, 1982).

T
R
RF
Attribute 2

F
C

Attribute 1

Figure 1: Two dimensional attribute space showing
the positions of the range decoy (R), frequency
decoy (D), and the range-frequency decoy (RF)
relative to the Target (T) option

Attraction Effect
The attraction effect is an important theoretical finding
because it challenges decision making theories which
assume the simple scalability property. It is robust across
task type and has been demonstrated in various domains
including choices between political candidates (Sue O'Curry
& Pitts, 1995), an episodic memory task (Maylor & Roberts,
2007), and a perceptual decision making task (Trueblood,
Brown, Heathcote, & Busemeyer, 2013).
The attraction effect is general enough to have multiple
formulations, but for the purposes of this paper it is
explicitly defined as a context effect where given a twoalternative two-attribute choice set {target, competitor}, the
addition of a third alternative, {decoy}, which is dominated
by {target}, increases the preference for {target}. The
nomenclature of referring to the three alternatives as the
target {T}, the competitor {C}, and the decoy {D} is
followed. As one example, let's assume people are
indifferent to the choice between {T} and {C}, where {T} is
superior (has a higher value) to {C} on one attribute and
inferior (has a lower value) on the other. Option {D} is
inferior to {T} on one attribute and equal or inferior on the

Figure 1 is a representation of the various options in a two
dimensional attribute space. T and C denote the target and
competitor options respectively. T is inferior to C on
attribute value 1, while being superior to C on attribute
value 2. Hence, attribute 1 is called the target’s weaker
attribute and attribute 2 is called its stronger attribute. R, F
and RF denote the three types of decoys. The decoys are all
hovering around T because they are trying to increase the
preference for the target option. R is equal on T’s stronger
attribute, i.e. attribute 2, and inferior on T’s weaker
attribute, i.e. attribute 1. F is equal on T’s weaker attribute,
i.e. attribute 1, and inferior on T’s stronger attribute, i.e.
attribute 2. RF is inferior on both of T’s attributes. The
positions of T and C can be switched, in which case the
decoys will also move along with T.

Sum-Highest Property
Choices are inherently probabilistic and to elicit people's
preferences, choice probabilities of options need to be
estimated. The estimate is usually a frequentist estimation of
probability, where the same choice set is presented to the

2688

subject multiple times. Since this procedure is somewhat
artificial, two common methods are often used to overcome
this problem. The first method involves presenting the same
choice set to a subject on multiple occasions, interwoven
with other tasks in between. In the second method, which is
the focus in this paper, data is drawn from probability
distributions with enough noise added to introduce variation
in the task, without fundamentally changing the original
choice set. Drawing from probability distributions solves the
problem of estimating choice probabilities, but comes with
the risk of inducing properties in the data which one might
not be aware of, which then may lead to confounds in the
results. One such candidate condition is the sum-highest
property which in this paper is defined as follows.
1. One attribute of the target option has the highest value
amongst all attributes across all options.
2. The sum of attribute values for the target is greater than
the sum of attribute values for the competitor and the sum of
attribute values for the decoy.

is the effect that stimuli generation, using probability
distributions, has on estimation of choice probabilities. In
this paper, a type of stimuli generation effect, collectively
called the sum-highest property, is introduced, and its
implications are investigated in the context of the attraction
effect, which is a representative multi-alternative multiattribute decision phenomenon. The paper is divided into
two main parts: a simulation study followed by a simple
experiment. Having decided upon the sum-highest property
as a candidate condition under which the attraction effect
might not hold, it is important to ascertain what proportion
of the stimuli can be affected by this property. For this
purpose, in the simulation study, empirical distributions of
target options satisfying the sum-highest property, using the
stimuli generation scheme from Trueblood (2012), were
constructed, to check how often it can be expected that the
target option satisfies the sum-highest property. This was
followed by an experiment which tested the consequence of
this property being satisfied.
To presage the results, the simulation study reveals that a
large proportion of target options satisfying the sum-highest
property can be expected. Furthermore, the results from the
experiment suggest a possible alternative explanation to the
attraction effect in experiments which use similar
probabilistic stimuli generation schemes for choice
probability estimation.

Simulation Study
To gain understanding of how likely is it that target options
will satisfy the sum-highest property in actual experiments,
empirical distributions were constructed by replicating the
probabilistic stimuli generation scheme for the inference
task from Trueblood (2012).

Method
Figure 2: An example of a choice set where the
target option satisfies the sum-highest property
Figure 2 is an example of a choice set where the sumhighest property is satisfied. The graphical user interface is
similar to the one used for stimuli presentation in the
experiment which follows, although the numbers are
simplified for exposition. In this example, Convict A is the
target option, Convict B is the competitor option, and
Convict C is the decoy option. Convict A satisfies the sumhighest property because 1) one of its attribute values
(Eyewitness Testimony Strength 1 = 65) is greater than all
the other 5 attribute values (35, 36, 63, 62, 33) and 2) its
sum of attribute values (65 + 35 = 100) is greater than sum
of attribute values for Convict B (36 + 63 = 99) and sum of
attribute values for Convict C (62 + 33 = 95).

Current Study
One line of investigation which has not received much
discussion in the multi-attribute decision making literature,

A total of six distributions, two for each decoy type, were
constructed using the stimuli generation scheme specified
below, sample size of 20, and (n=10,000). The sample size
was 20 to remain faithful to the Trueblood study where
there were 40 decisions for each decoy type, with each
decoy type being represented by two ternary choice sets. All
the means and variances were the same as Trueblood's
study. The initial options were drawn from bivariate
Gaussians with means (33.6, 66.55) and (66.1, 34.05)
respectively. Range decoys were drawn from a bivariate
Gaussian with mean (28.55, 66.55) for one half of the cases
and (66.1, 28.35) for the other half. Frequency decoys were
drawn from a bivariate Gaussian with mean (33.6, 61.3) for
one half of the cases and (60.45, 34.05) for the other half.
Range-Frequency decoys were drawn from a bivariate
Gaussian with mean (28.1, 60.9) for one half of the cases
and (60.25, 28.75) for the other half. For each option, the
bivariate Gaussians had a variance of 1 on each dimension
with no correlation, to introduce variation in the task.
Dividing the decoys into two halves, of 20 each, ensured
that both possible positions in the two dimensional attribute

2689

space were chosen as the target option an equal number of
times.

Results and Discussion
The empirical distribution of target options which satisfy the
sum-highest property, drawn from the bivariate Gaussians
specified above, sample size of 20, and (n = 10,000) are
presented in Figures 3.1 - 3.3.

Figure 3.3: Empirical distributions of target options
which satisfy the sum-highest property in rangefrequency decoy choice sets (sample size = 20, n =
10,000)

Figure 3.1: Empirical distributions of target options
which satisfy the sum-highest property in range decoy
choice sets (sample size = 20, n = 10,000)

Clearly, a large proportion of target options are expected
to satisfy the sum-highest property, which supports its
relevance and justifies further examination of choice
behavior when this property is satisfied. The consequences
of the sum-highest property are explored in the experiment
that follows.

Experiment
The goal of this experiment was to test the hypothesis that
people are strongly biased towards the target option when it
satisfies the sum-highest property, even before the addition
of the decoy option.

Method
Participants 14 undergraduate students from the University
of Texas at Dallas participated in this experiment for course
credit.

Figure 3.2: Empirical distributions of target options
which satisfy the sum-highest property in frequency
decoy choice sets (sample size = 20, n = 10,000)

Stimuli The options in the “control scheme” group were
drawn from bivariate Gaussians with means (33.6, 66.55)
and (66.1, 34.05) respectively, and a variance of 2 on each
dimension with no correlation. The options in the “sumhighest scheme” group were chosen similarly with the
added constraint that target options satisfy the sum-highest
property. Both possible positions in the two-dimensional
attribute space were chosen as the target an equal number of
times. Each subject made a total of 144 decisions. They
encountered these decisions in two blocks of 72 decisions
each. The inter-stimulus interval was 1 second. The order of
choice sets within each block was randomized across

2690

subjects. The order of option types (target and competitor)
in choice sets was completely counterbalanced within
experimental blocks.
The stimuli generation scheme for the “control scheme”
was purposely chosen to strongly mimic the stimuli
generation scheme from Trueblood's study. As shown in the
simulation study, such a probabilistic stimuli generation
scheme will give rise to a certain number of target options
satisfying the sum-highest property, which if the hypothesis
that subjects are biased towards the target option when it
satisfies the sum-highest property holds, makes it more
difficult for the results to reach statistical significance.
Furthermore, by using a stimuli generation scheme for the
control that has been tested in a previous study, the risk of
inducing additional unknown properties in the data was also
mitigated.
Procedure Subjects were instructed that their task
requirement was to select, from a binary choice set, the most
likely crime suspect based on the strength of two eyewitness
testimonies. They were told that the testimonies are reported
on a scale of 0-100, where 0 implies very weak evidence of
guilt and 100 implies a very strong evidence of guilt.
Subjects were also informed that the strength of testimonies
from both witnesses are equally valid and important. The
presentation of choices and the registration of subject
responses were carried out via a graphical user interface
programmed in MATLAB. To avoid fatigue, subjects were
encouraged to take breaks between experimental blocks.

target option satisfies the sum-highest property, then an
increase in the probability of the target option will be
detected, and this can be misattributed to the attraction
effect. For the less drastic case, where there indeed is an
increase in probability of the target option after the addition
of the decoy, the above reasoning still holds. This is because
in this case it is not possible to tease apart the increase due
to the attraction effect and the effect of the sum-highest
property.

Figure 4: Mean with standard error bars for choice
probability of target option

General Discussion

Results and Discussion
A 1 factor-within subjects ANOVA was used to analyze the
data. “Stimuli generation scheme” was the independent
variable with two levels (“sum-highest scheme” and
“control scheme”). The dependent variable was the
proportion of times a participant chose the target option,
which was the estimate of the probability of choosing the
target option. As shown in Figure 4, the mean choice
probability for the target option in the “sum-highest
scheme” (M = 0.92, S = 0.09) was greater than the “control
scheme” (M = 0.50, S = 0.03) group, R2 = 0.91, F(1, 13) =
301.37, MSe = 0.004, p < 0.01.
The overwhelming bias towards the target option when it
satisfies the sum-highest property, before the addition of a
decoy option, opens up the possibility of alternate
explanations to the attraction effect. For example, let’s
assume we start with an initial choice set {target,
competitor}, where the known probabilities are P(target) =
0.5 and P(competitor) = 0.5. Let’s also assume that the
addition of the {decoy} option, unknown to the
experimenter, makes no difference to the choice
probabilities. The experimenter is interested in estimating
the unknown probabilities of the complete choice set, i.e.
P(target) = 0.5, P(competitor) = 0.5 and P(decoy) = 0. They
present the complete choice set 20 times to a subject, with
data drawn from the noise added probability distribution
discussed earlier. If say, in 8 out of 20 of the choice sets, the

Whenever choice probabilities of a choice set are estimated
by presenting the same choice set to a subject multiple
times, with the attribute values of the alternatives drawn
from probability distributions with noise added to introduce
variation in the task, there is a risk of introducing properties
in the stimuli which can covertly alter behavior. In this
paper, a type of stimuli generation effect, called the sumhighest property, was introduced in the context of the
attraction effect, which is a representative multi-attribute
decision phenomenon. To gain understanding of the impact
of this condition, two main results were presented in this
paper. First, it was shown that the stimuli generation scheme
for a previously conducted attraction effect study, can give
rise to a large proportion of target options satisfying the
sum-highest property. This was followed by an experiment
which supports the hypothesis that people are strongly
biased towards the target option when it satisfies the sumhighest property even before the addition of the decoy
option.
One problem with the current study is that it establishes
that people are biased towards the target option when it
satisfies the sum-highest property, but the demonstration is
in the absence of a decoy. Although the bias is very strong,
one needs further evidence to be convinced that this bias
transfers over in the presence of a decoy. Nandy (2014, in
preparation), replicated the experiment from this paper in
the presence of a decoy, and found that the bias also holds
in the presence of a decoy. Taken together, the experiments
strongly suggest that the choice sets which satisfy the sumhighest property are immune to the attraction effect.

2691

The choice sets with options which satisfy the sumhighest property can lie concealed, surrounded by other
choice sets which do not suffer from artifacts, and can
covertly drive experimental results. Hence, studies which
induce the attraction effect, but do not control for the sumhighest property may have inflated effect sizes. Hence, by
bringing attention to this problem which may slip an
experimenter's awareness, the results in this paper can guide
researchers towards better experimental/stimuli design
choices, and also towards identification of a potential pitfall
in their experimental results.
In addition to the experimental implications, the results of
this paper are also informative to theorists interested in
process models of decision making. For example, the bias
towards an option when it satisfies the sum-highest property
gives an insight into the decision process, where people
might be solving the decision problem by initially searching
for the highest attribute value across all alternatives,
followed by a second calculation process where attribute
values are summed for each alternative and then compared.
Post-experiment verbal feedback from participants strongly
hinted at such a strategy.
In conclusion, the attraction effect continues to be an
important phenomenon both experimentally and as a tool to
further theoretical undertakings. While tackling the question
of how stimuli generation can impact choice probability
estimation, a condition called the sum-highest property was
introduced, and it was shown that this property is not
desirable for the purpose of investigating the presence of the
attraction effect. Additionally, the sum-highest property is
interesting in and by itself, providing an insight into the
decision process.

connectionst model of decision making. Psychological
review, 108(2), 370.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of
attraction and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer
Research, 158-174.
Sue O’Curry, Y. P., & Pitts, R. (1995). The attraction effect
and political choice in two elections. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 4(1), 85-101.
Trueblood, J. (2012). Multialternative context effects
obtained using an inference task. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 19, 962-968.
Trueblood, J. S., Brown, S. D., Heathcote, A., &
Busemeyer, J. R. (2013). Not just for consumers context
effects are fundamental to decision making.
Psychological Science, 24(6), 901 908.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of
choice. Psychological Review, 79(4), 281.
Tversky, A., & Simonson, I. (1993). Context-dependent
preferences. Management Science, 39(10), 1179-1189.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. (2004). Loss aversion and
inhibition in dynamical models of multialternative choice.
Psychological Review, 111(3), 757.

Acknowledgments
Gracious thanks to Dr. Jennifer Trueblood for providing
details about the design of her experiment.

References
Huber, J., Payne, J., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding
asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of
Consumer Research, 90-98.
Huber, J., & Puto, C. (1983). Market boundaries and
product choice: Illustrating attraction and substitution
effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 31-44.
Maylor, E., & Roberts, M. (2007). Similarity and attraction
effects in episodic memory judgments. Cognition, 105(3),
715-723.
Nandy, S. (2014).
Implications of Random Stimuli
Generation on the Attraction Effect. Manuscript in
preparation.
Rieskamp, J., Busemeyer, J., & Mellers, B. (2006).
Extending the bounds of rationality: evidence and theories
of preferential choice. Journal of Economic Literature,
631-661.
Roe, R., Busemeyer, J., & Townsend, J. (2001).
Multialternative decision field theory: A dynamic

2692

