UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Improving children’s spelling ability with a morphology-based intervention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9194c8mc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kolne, Kendall
Gonnerman, Laura

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Improving children’s spelling ability with a morphology-based intervention
Kendall L.D. Kolne (kendall.kolne@mail.mcgill.ca)
Laura M. Gonnerman (laura.gonnerman@mcgill.ca)
School of Communication Science and Disorders, McGill University, 1266 Pine Ave W
Montreal, QC, H3G 1A8 CAN

represented in the written form. As such, morphological
processing (e.g., recognizing that the word reheatable is
made up of three sub-parts, the prefix re-, the stem heat, and
the suffix -able) is an important part of reading in these
languages.
The importance of morphological processing to literacy
skill is supported by studies reporting that increased
morphological awareness is associated with better spelling
performance in English and French (Deacon, Kirby, &
Casselman-Bell, 2009; Sénéchal, 2000). Additionally,
teaching typically developing children explicitly about the
relationship between morphological structure and spelling
has been shown to improve their reading and spelling skill
(see Bowers, Kirby, & Deacon, 2010, for a review).
Importantly, research indicates that morphological
processing skills remain intact for dyslexic readers (Fowler
& Liberman, 1995), so morphological awareness training
may provide a powerful tool for children with dyslexia to
overcome their phonological processing difficulties.
Despite this evidence, only a small number of studies
have tested the use of morphological training to improve the
literacy skills of poor readers. Elbro and Arnback (1996)
conducted one of the first investigations of a morphology
intervention for reading, examining the effects of an
intervention targeting morphological skills for improving
word decoding and text reading in dyslexic adolescents.
While the differential benefits were modest, the authors
report that the children who took part in the
morphologically-focused intervention were significantly
better able to spell compound words than the control group,
suggesting that morphological processing may be used as a
compensatory strategy for children with reading difficulties.
Elbro and Arnback’s seminal study shifted the focus of
remedial reading research, leading other researchers to
examine the benefits of morphological training for children
with literacy difficulties (see Goodwin and Ahn, 2010 for
review). Although small in number, studies that have done
so suggest that morphological processing can be used as a
compensatory strategy for reading (Elbro & Arnback, 1996;
Tsesmeli & Seymour 2009). However, the evidence remains
limited and the benefit of a morphologically-focused
intervention for dyslexia remains uncertain (Nagy, Carlisle,
& Goodwin, 2013).
Studies investigating the use of morphological instruction
to improve literacy have used a diverse range of teaching
methods, making it difficult to disentangle which methods
produce the most substantial gains, and for which literacy
outcomes these gains occur. This problem is particularly

Abstract
Children who have difficulty with literacy development often
experience pervasive and enduring trouble with spelling, even
after receiving remedial instruction. Our study tests a new
approach to improving the spelling of these children. We
designed an instructional program emphasizing the
morphological structure of words, and directly contrast its
benefits to instruction that focuses on word meanings,
avoiding any discussion of morphology. The intervention was
conducted with French-speaking children in Grades 3 and 5
with varying literacy abilities. The results reveal that our
intervention improved the spelling of all children in the study,
but it was especially effective for children who displayed low
spelling performance. Moreover, low-performing spellers
who received the morphology instruction showed a greater
improvement in their spelling of suffixes than children who
participated in the vocabulary instruction. Our findings
suggest that spelling instruction concentrated on
morphological structure may be a powerful tool for
improving children’s spelling ability.
Keywords: morphology; spelling; literacy; vocabulary;
intervention; French

Introduction
Learning to spell is an essential component necessary for
gaining a complete command of written language. While
literacy research traditionally concentrates on reading
development, recently, a shift in focus to the development of
spelling skill has emerged (cf. Griva & Anastasiou, 2009).
This shift in emphasis is particularly important for studies of
poor reading and dyslexia, as spelling difficulties are closely
entwined with reading impairment. For example, spelling
difficulties observed in dyslexic children are often more
profound than problems with reading (e.g., Bodor, 1973).
Additionally, Egan and Taintier (2011) indicate that it is
rare to find children who experience reading difficulty but
have typical spelling ability, while it is much more common
for children who have typical reading levels to have poor
spelling ability. An increased understanding of the processes
that underlie spelling development will have direct and
substantial consequences for children experiencing reading
difficulty.
Traditional interventions for reading impairment target
children’s phonological awareness skills, as phonological
processing is an instrumental cognitive process for reading
in an alphabetic language (for reviews, see Adams, 1990;
Goswami & Bryant, 1990). However, certain languages,
including French, are morpho-phonological. This means that
in addition to phonology, morphological information is also

755

evident when considering the distinction between the effects
of morphology and vocabulary instruction on literacy
outcomes. Morphologically related words share similar form
and meaning, so teaching morphological structure also
involves discussion of word meaning. Due to this inherent
association, literacy interventions incorporating the teaching
of morphological knowledge tend to confound this
instruction with teaching of vocabulary knowledge (e.g., StPierre & Dubé, 2012). As such, it is not clear whether the
literacy gains reported in morphological intervention studies
are a direct result of the training of morphological structure,
the vocabulary knowledge that is taught concomitantly with
morphological instruction, or some combination of these
two.
The data examined in the present study are derived from a
previous intervention where we disambiguated the potential
benefit of morphological knowledge from the benefits of
word meaning instruction. We isolated the teaching of
morphological structure and compared its effects on spelling
outcomes to that of vocabulary training for French-speaking
children (Kolne, Hill, & Gonnerman, 2013). We found that
morphological training provided a differential improvement
over vocabulary training for spelling complex words.
Specifically, our study showed that children who received
instruction focused on morphological structure improved
more on spelling than children whose instruction focused on
word meaning. Our results suggest that a morphological
instruction method improves children’s spelling of complex
words.
The morphologically-focused intervention may provide a
compensatory tool for children who have difficulty with
spelling, allowing them to overcome the reduced
phonological processing abilities associated with reading
and spelling difficulties. As such, the morphology
intervention used in our previous study may be especially
beneficial for children with lower spelling performance, as
compared to those with typical spelling ability. However,
our previous analysis did not differentiate the effects of the
intervention based on children’s literacy abilities, so the
unique benefit of a morphological intervention has yet to be
identified for children who struggle with spelling.
The present study revisits the data collected in our
previous intervention study, this time dividing our sample
into groups based on the children's spelling performance
prior to starting of the intervention. In this way, we are able
to assess the relative benefit of our intervention for children
with higher and lower spelling performance. We will focus
on the children’s spelling of suffixes taught in the
intervention, as this is where the differential benefit of the
morphological intervention was strongest in our previous
study. We hypothesize that our intervention will produce
greater spelling gains for children who show difficulty with
spelling, as compared to children with typical spelling
performance, irrespective of instruction type. Additionally,
we predict that both teaching methods are likely to benefit
children with low spelling accuracy; but that the benefit of

instruction focused on morphological structure will be
greater than instruction focused on word meaning.

Methods
Participants
Eighty-four French-speaking children from Montreal, aged
8-to10- years old took part in the study. 36 children from
Grade 3 participated (23 girls and 13 boys), as well as 48
children from Grade 5 (27 girls and 21 boys).
Children’s spelling ability was assessed using a modified
version of the Test Ortho3 from the Batterie d’Évaluation du
Langage Écrit et de ses troubles (BELEC) (Mousty,
Leybaert, Alegria, Content, & Morais, 1994). Children’s
scores on this test were ranked, and those falling below the
50th percentile were considered poor spellers. This
identification was used for data analysis only, and both high
and low ability spellers were combined in the intervention
groups. Children were assigned to one of two intervention
groups, based on their general spelling performance, such
that good and poor spellers were equally represented in both
treatment groups. In addition, the children in the two
intervention groups were matched on language background
(monolingual Francophone, or multilingual), and gender,
with approximately equal ratios of boys to girls in each
intervention group.

The intervention
All of the children took part in one of two interventions.
The same 30 words were taught in each intervention,
differing only in the emphasis of instruction. The first
intervention provided spelling instruction that explicitly
discussed the morphological structure of words
(Morphology group), while the other provided instruction
that focused solely on the meanings of the words
(Vocabulary group), intentionally avoiding any discussion
of morphological structure. For example, the Morphology
group was taught that there are two parts to the word
finlandais, namely the stem finland and the suffix -ais,
while the Vocabulary group was taught that the word
finlandais describes ‘something or someone that comes
from the country, Finland.’ For a complete list of the words
taught in the intervention each week, see Table 1.

756

Table 1: Target words taught each week of the intervention
in the Morphology and the Vocabulary intervention groups.

Morphology Group
eux

Week

Morphology Group

Vocabulary Group

1

finlandais, japonais,
camerounais

ogresse, huileux,
galanterie

2

ogresse, délicatesse,
hardiesse

finlandais, luthier,
délicatesse

3

laiteux, huileux,
duveteux

porcherie, laiteux,
gaufrier

4

porcherie, mutinerie,
galanterie

5

abricotier, luthier,
gaufrier

hardiesse, japonais,
duveteux

6

profondeur, puanteur,
propulseur

sportif, beuglement,
profondeur

7

alpiniste, portraitiste,
miniaturiste

propulseur,
parrainage, alpiniste

8

sportif, tardif, craintif

sournoisement,
vagabondage, tardif

9

10

duvet

Vocabulary Group

camerounais,
mutinerie, abricotier

pèlerinage,
vagabondage,
parrainage

portraitiste, puanteur,
pèlerinage

prodigieusement,
sournoisement,
beuglement

craintif, miniaturiste,
prodigieusement

duveteux

Qui a des
poils fins ou
des plumes
légères

.
Figure 1: Sample ‘Game of the Week’: Concentration
Game, shown for the Morphology and Vocabulary
intervention groups
Materials for assessing intervention effectiveness
The effectiveness of the intervention for improving
children’s spelling ability was assessed using a spelling test
that we designed to target specific outcomes. The children
took the test before starting the intervention (preintervention) as well as just after (post-intervention). The
test required children to spell complex and simple words,
and to generalize the spelling of stems and suffixes taught in
the intervention to new words not taught in the intervention.
The items on the test were either the exact complex word
taught in the intervention (i.e., a taught stem and a suffix), a
taught or an untaught stem without a suffix, or a
combination of a taught/untaught stem and suffix in a
complex word (i.e., a taught stem with a new suffix, or a
new stem with a suffix, for examples, see Table 2).

The words taught in the intervention contained one of a
set of 10 suffixes. These suffixes are relatively frequent and
productive in Quebec French, such that they are
preferentially used to form new words. For each of the 10
suffixes, three different stems were chosen, resulting in the
30 complex words to be taught. These words were relatively
infrequent, so it would be unlikely that the children would
already be familiar with their spellings or meanings.
The intervention was taught in 10 one-hour, weekly
sessions, with 3 words taught in each session. Each week
the Morphology group focused on the three words with the
same suffix. However, for the Vocabulary group, words
with the same suffix were never taught in the same session.
For example, in one week the Morphology group worked
with the words finlandais, japonais, and camerounais,
whereas the Vocabulary group learned ogresse, huileux, and
galanterie. In each session, the children played a ‘Game of
the Week’ with the new target words for that week. While
children in each group played similar games, these games
were adjusted depending the focus of the intervention (See
Figure 1 for a sample ‘Game of the Week’). Over the course
of the ten weeks, each group ultimately learned the same set
of 30 complex words.

Table 2: Sample items on the spelling test.
Word taught in the
intervention
profond-eur

Word on the
spelling test
profond-eur

Taught stem, no
suffix

duvet-eux

duvet

Taught stem,
untaught suffix

gaufr-ier

gaufr-ette

Untaught stem,
taught suffix

propuls-eur

institut-eur

Exact word

757

Procedure

115

The spelling test was administered to all of the children
simultaneously. The words were presented within a sentence
read by a native speaker of Quebec French. Words were
repeated as many times as needed for all students to fill in
the blanks with the appropriate word.

105
95
85
75
65
55

Results and Discussion

Low performing
spellers
High performing
spellers

45

We predicted that the intervention, regardless of the focus of
instruction, would lead to greater improvements in spelling
for the lower ability spellers, than for the children with
higher spelling ability, so we compared the overall change
in spelling scores from pre- to post-intervention of high
performing and low performing spellers. Moreover we
predicted a differential benefit of morphological instruction
for the spelling of suffixes when considering only children
with spelling difficulty. Thus, we also analyzed the relative
effects of the two instruction types for children who
displayed lower spelling ability before the intervention
began.
Three children were absent from either the pre- or postintervention assessment, and these children were excluded
from the following analyses.
The spelling test was scored based on whether the whole
words were spelled correctly, as well as whether the stems
and suffixes of complex words were spelled correctly. Thus,
each complex word received three scores, one for the whole
word, one for the stem, and one for the suffix. Mean percent
correct scores on the whole words, stems, and suffixes were
calculated for the following analyses.

35
25
Pre-intervention

Post-intervention

Figure 2: Overall mean percent correct on the spelling test
items for high and low performing spellers at pre- and post
intervention

Differential effects of instruction type for low
performing spellers
The primary purpose of this investigation was to
differentiate the effects of a morphology intervention from
vocabulary instruction for children with low spelling ability.
Thus, we contrasted the effects of our two instruction types
on children’s spelling ability. We specifically focused on the
performance on suffixes taught in the intervention, as this is
where the differential benefit was found when considering
all children together.
The differential benefit of the instruction type for low
performing spellers on suffixes was assessed with a twoway ANOVA, with the factors Test Time (pre- and postintervention) and Instruction Type (morphology or
vocabulary. The results of this analysis show that all
children improved from pre- to post-intervention, F(1,31) =
36.06, p < .001. The interaction of Test Time and
Instruction type was also significant, indicating that children
in the morphology group showed a greater improvement on
the spelling of suffixes from pre- to post-intervention than
children in the vocabulary group, F(1,31) = 4.77, p = .04
(see Figure 3). This finding suggests that a morphologically
focused intervention is beneficial for children experiencing
difficulty with spelling.

Effectiveness of the intervention for high and low
performing spellers
To determine whether our intervention was differentially
effective for high or low performing spellers, we compared
the changes in overall spelling accuracy for all the words on
our test. A two-way ANOVA was conducted with the
factors Test Time (pre- and post-intervention) and Spelling
Ability (high and low performing spellers). The results
showed a main effect of Test Time (pre- and postintervention), such that all children improved postintervention F(1,64) = 26.24, p < .001. Moreover, the
interaction of Test Time and Spelling Ability (high and low
performing spellers) was significant, such that low
performing spellers benefited more than high performing
spellers F(1,64) = 10.83, p = .002 (See Figure 2). These
findings support our hypothesis, suggesting that the
intervention, irrespective of instruction type, was successful
for all children, and children with spelling difficulty were
aided most by the intervention.

758

Conclusion

100

Morphology
group

95
90

Problems with spelling are pervasive for children who face
literacy difficulties. Our study demonstrates that an
intervention exposing children who struggle with spelling to
morphologically complex words improves the spelling
performance of these children. A teaching method focused
exclusively on morphological structure is especially
beneficial for low performing spellers. Such an intervention
provides struggling spellers with a tool that makes use of
their strengths and that is not limited to the context of the
intervention.
The goal of this study was to isolate the benefit of
morphological instruction from vocabulary instruction for
low performing spellers. However combining the teaching
of morphological structure and word meaning may provide
the greatest improvements, and will be investigated in future
studies. Additionally, we have chosen to focus only on the
effects of our intervention for spelling outcomes, but a
morphologically-based intervention may influence many
other literacy outcomes, including word decoding, reading
fluency, and reading comprehension, all of which require
further exploration. Thus, this study constitutes an important
initial step in the on-going pursuit to help children who
struggle with literacy.

Vocabulary
group

85
80
75
70
65
60
55
Pre-intervention

Post-intervention

Figure 3: Mean percent correct on the suffixes for low
performing spellers in the Morphology and Vocabulary
groups at pre- and post intervention.

General Discussion
We have provided support for a beneficial role of
morphological instruction for improving the spelling ability
of children who are experiencing literacy difficulties. Our
intervention taught children using complex words composed
of stems and suffixes. Regardless of the method of
instruction, children gained exposure to these words orally,
and in print, and they gained practice writing them. The
present findings suggest that this experience working with
complex words leads to spelling improvement for children
of all spelling abilities. Moreover, our intervention was
especially helpful for children who scored low on a general
spelling measure, as compared to children who scored
higher. If morphological processing skills remain in tact for
struggling readers, as evidence suggests (Fowler &
Liberman, 1995), than instruction that exposes children to
morphologically complex words seems to allow these
children to take advantage of this strength and overcome
their difficulty.
Importantly, this study provides novel evidence for the
unique benefit of morphologically-focused instruction for
children with spelling difficulty, independent from any
concomitant vocabulary gains. Previously we reported that
children of undifferentiated spelling ability show a greater
improvement on their spelling of suffixes when they
participate in an intervention using a morphology-based
instruction method as opposed to a vocabulary-based
method. The present findings indicate that morphology
instruction is also differentially beneficial for improving
spelling for low performing spellers. Not only does learning
these suffixes help children spell the words taught in the
intervention, it also assists them with spelling these suffixes
in any context. Given that 60-80% of new words that
school-aged children must acquire are morphologically
complex (thus they contain suffixes) (Nagy and Anderson
(1984), an intervention that improves spelling of
morphemes is valuable for children struggling with spelling.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant awarded to the
third author from the Fonds de recherche du Québec Société et culture (FRQSC). We would also like to thank
Eve Bergeron and Rebecca Amzallag for their help with
testing. Finally, a huge debt of gratitude goes to the school
director, teachers, and students for their enthusiastic
participation in the intervention study.

References
Adams, M. J. (1990). Beginning to read: Thinking and
learning about print. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Berko, J. (1958). The child’s learning of English
morphology, Word, 14, 150-177.
Boder, E. (1973). Developmental dyslexia: A diagnostic
approach based on three atypical reading-spelling
patterns. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology,
15, 663-687.
Bowers, P.N., Kirby, J.R., & Deacon, S.H. (2010). The
effects of morphological instruction on literacy skills: A
systematic review of the literature. Review of Educational
Research, 80, 144-179.
Carlisle, J.F. (2010). Effects of instruction in morphological
awareness on literacy achievement: An integrative
review. Reading Research Quarterly, 45, 464-487.
Carlisle, J.F., & Stone, C.A. (2005). Exploring the role of
morphemes in word reading. Reading Research
Quarterly, 40, 428-449.
Clark (1993). The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

759

Deacon, S.H., & Kirby, J.R. (2004). Morphological
awareness: Just “more phonological”? The roles of
morphological and phonological awareness in reading
development. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 223-238.
Deacon, S.H., Kirby, J.R., & Casselman-Bell, M. (2009).
How robust is the contribution of morphological
awareness to general spelling outcomes? Reading
Psychology, 30, 301-318.
Egan, J., Tainturier, M-J. (2011). Inflectional spelling
deficits in developmental dyslexia. Cortex, 47, 11791196.
Elbro, C., & Arnbak, E (1996). The role of morpheme
recognition and morphological awareness in dyslexia.
Annals of Dyslexia, 46, 209–240.
Fowler, A. E., & Liberman, I. Y. (1995). The role of
phonology and orthography in morphological awareness.
In L. B. Feldman (Ed.), Morphological aspects of
language processing (pp. 157–188). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Griva, E., & Anastasiou, D. (2009). Morphological
strategies training: The effectiveness and feasibility of
morphological strategies training for students of English
as a foreign language. Journal of Writing Research, 1,
199-223.
Gonnerman, L.M. (2007). Children’s recognition of novel
derived words. In H. Caunt-Nulton, S. Kulatiake, & I.
Woo (Eds.). Proceedings of the 31 st Annual Boston
University.
Goodwin, A., & Ahn, S. (2010). A meta-analysis of
morphological interventions: Effects on literacy
achievement of children with literacy difficulties. Annals
of Dyslexia, 60, 183–208.
Goswami, U., & Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological skills and
learning to read. London: Erlbaum.
Jalbert, P (2007). L’épreuve obligatoire d’écriture de la fin
du troisième cycle du primaire en français,
langue
d’enseignement: Comparaison des résultats de 2000 et
2005. Ministère de l’Éducation, du Loisir et du Sport
http://www.mels.gouv.qc.ca/lancement/TablePilotage_Pro
gFormation/Ecriture3eCyclePri mFLE.pdf.
Kirby, J.R., Deacon, S.H., Bowers, P.N., Izenberg, L.,
Wade-Woolley, L., & Parrila, R. (2012). Children’s
morphological awareness and reading ability, Reading
and Writing, 25, 389- 410.
Kolne, K.L.D., Hill, K.H., & Gonnerman, L.M. (2013). The
role of morphology in spelling: Long-term effects of
training. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mousty, P, Leybaert, J., Alegria, J., Content, A., & Morais,
J. (1994). BELEC: Une batterie d'évaluation du langage
écrit et de ses troubles. In J. Grégoire & B. Piérart
(Eds.),Evaluer les troubles de la lecture: Les nouveaux
modèles
théoriques
et
leurs
implications
diagnostiques (pp. 127-145). Bruxelles: De Boeck.
Nagy, W.E., & Anderson, R.C. (1984). How many words
are there in printed school English? Reading Research
Quarterly, 19, 304-330.

Nagy, W.E., Carlisle, J.F., Goodwin, A.P. (2013).
Morphological knowledge and literacy acquisition.
Journal of learning disabilities, 47(1), 3-12.
Pacton, S., & Deacon, S. H. (2008). The timing and
mechanisms of children’s use of morphological
information in spelling: A review of evidence from
English and French. Cognitive Development, 23, 339-359.
Sénéchal, M. (2000). Morphological effects in children’s
spelling of French words. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 54, 76-86.
Sénéchal, M., Basque, M.T., & Leclaire, T. (2006).
Morphological knowledge as revealed in children’s
spelling accuracy and reports of spelling strategies.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 95, 231-254.
Singson, M., Mahony, D., & Mann, V. (2000). The relation
between reading ability and morphological
skills:
Evidence from derivational suffixes. Reading and
Writing, 12, 219- 252.
St-Pierre, M-C., & Dubé, J-F. (2012). Morphological
awareness intervention: Does severity play a role in
spelling/reading improvement? Aula Abierta, 40, 15-22.
Tsesmeli, S.N., & Seymour, P.H. (2009). The effects of
training of morphological structure on spelling derived
words by dyslexic adolescents. British Journal of
Psychology, 100, 465-493.

760

