UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inferred Evidence in Latent Scope Explanations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wm2j3hq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Johnson, Samuel
Rajeev-Kumar, Greeshma
Keil, Frank

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inferred Evidence in Latent Scope Explanations
Samuel G. B. Johnson (samuel.johnson@yale.edu)
Greeshma Rajeev-Kumar (greeshma.rajeev-kumar@yale.edu)
Frank C. Keil (frank.keil@yale.edu)

Department of Psychology, Yale University
2 Hillhouse Ave., New Haven, CT 06520 USA
Abstract

not know whether E2 is true, then what can we say about
the relative likelihood that Mustard or Plum is the culprit?
Normative probability theory tells us that we have no
evidence either way. The posterior odds in favor of C1
over C2 simply are the ratio of the prior probability of
each hypothesis, P(C1)/P(C2), if we assume that the
likelihoods are equal (i.e., P(E1|C1) = P(E1|C2); for the
deterministic causal networks used in this paper, both
likelihoods are equal to 1). That is, if we had no reason to
think Mustard or Plum was the more likely culprit before
gathering evidence, then we still have no reason after
learning that E1 occurred but not knowing about E2.
Nonetheless, Khemlani, Sussman, and Oppenheimer
(2011) have documented a striking effect: People prefer
explanations with narrower latent scope, that is,
explanations consistent with fewer potential observations
not known to be true or false. In the above example, E1 is
observed, and is predicted by both C1 and C2, so E1 is part
of the manifest scope of both explanations. However, we
do not know whether E2 is true, so E2 is part of the latent
scope of C2 (see Figure 1). Using a variety of stimulus
materials and tasks, Khemlani et al. (2011; see also
Sussman, Khemlani, & Oppenheimer, 2014) showed that
people consistently prefer narrow latent scope
explanations
in
diagnostic
reasoning
and
in
categorization. In our example, people would infer that
Colonel Mustard is the more likely culprit because this
explanation can account for all of the evidence (the
broken glass) but makes no additional commitments about
unknown evidence (the dented candlestick). The Colonel
Mustard explanation has the narrower latent scope
because it makes no additional predictions, whereas the
Professor Plum explanation has the broader latent scope
because it makes an additional (unverified) prediction.
One possible explanation of this effect is that people
prefer explanations that are representative of the available
evidence (Kahneman & Tversky, 1972; Sussman et al.,
2014). According to this account, people reason only on
the basis of the observed evidence, which is more similar
to the prediction of the narrow latent scope explanation.
People might reason that E1 is the evidence that would be
most consistent with hypothesis C1, but {E1,E2} would be
the evidence most consistent with C2. Since the observed
evidence is most similar or most representative of the
evidence that would be generated by C1, participants infer
that C1 is the more likely explanation. That is, people may
discount the relevance of evidence that is unavailable.

Explanations frequently lead to predictions that we do not
have the time or resources to fully assess or test, yet we
must often decide between potential explanations with
incomplete evidence. Previous research has documented a
latent scope bias, wherein explanations consistent with
fewer predictions of unknown truth are preferred to those
consistent with more such predictions. In the present
studies, we evaluate an account of this bias in terms of
inferred evidence: That people attempt to infer what would
be observed if those predictions were tested, and then
reason on the basis of this inferred evidence. We test
several predictions of this account, including whether and
how explanatory preferences depend on the reason why the
truth of the effect is unknown (Experiment 1) and on the
base rates of the known and unknown effects (Experiment
2), and what evidence people see as relevant to deciding
between explanations (Experiment 3). These results help to
reveal the cognitive processes underlying latent scope
biases and highlight boundary conditions on these effects.
Keywords: Explanation; causal reasoning; uncertainty;
inferred evidence; latent scope.

Introduction
We often must make inferences in the face of incomplete
evidence. For example, two trial attorneys may present
two competing theories of a case to the jury (see Figure
1). If Colonel Mustard did it (call this hypothesis C1), then
there would be broken glass in the billiard room (call this
evidence E1); if Professor Plum did it (C2), then there
would be broken glass in the billiard room (E1) and a dent
in the candlestick (E2). If we know that E1 is true but do

Figure 1: Causal structure used in all experiments.
The white circle indicates an observed prediction and
the gray circle indicates a latent (unknown) prediction.

707

Another possibility, however, is that people do see the
unavailable evidence as relevant—so relevant, in fact, that
they attempt to infer what they would have observed had
observation been possible. On the basis of this inferred
evidence, they may then reason about the relative
plausibility of the explanations given their inferences
about the unknown effects—that is, inferences about E2.
Inferred evidence can be distinguished from evidence that
is gathered from the world: Sometimes we can infer
whether an effect is likely to have occurred from base
rates or other plausibility metrics even when this inferred
knowledge is irrelevant for distinguishing the hypotheses.
Let’s consider how this would work in the case of
Mustard or Plum. We know that there was broken glass in
the billiard room (E1), which does not help us to decide
between Mustard or Plum because this is equally
consistent with either explanation. We also know that it
would be useful to know whether there was a dent in the
candlestick (E2); if this were observed, then the evidence
would favor Plum’s guilt, and if it were not observed,
then the evidence would favor Mustard’s guilt. If we
stopped here, we would come to the (correct) conclusion
that Mustard and Plum are equally likely culprits.
However, according to the inferred evidence account, we
do not settle for ignorance, but instead attempt to infer
whether E2 happened: Since candlesticks do not usually
have dents (i.e., this effect has a low base rate), one might
conjecture that if we found the candlestick, we would be
unlikely to see a dent. If we assume that E2 is false, then
we would infer that Mustard is probably guilty—the
narrow latent scope explanation (C1).
This logic, however, is flawed: Only the ratio of the
base rates P(C1)/P(C2) affects the posterior odds, and
P(E2) has no influence once P(C1)/P(C2) is set. Intuitively,
this is because two opposing forces balance each other:
As P(E2) becomes increasingly high, it becomes more and
more likely that E2 would be observed, but E2 also
becomes less and less diagnostic evidence for the broad
latent scope explanation. For example, if P(E2) = 1, then
observing E2 would be completely non-diagnostic because
it would be observed regardless of whether C1 or C2 were
the correct explanation. In contrast to this normative fact,
the inferred evidence account predicts an effect of P(E2).
Here, we test two different sorts of evidence that people
might use for inferring the whether the unknown effect
occurred. First, we test whether the reason why E2’s value
is unknown affects the size of the latent scope bias
(Experiment 1). We anticipated that when a reason for our
ignorance about E2 made it relatively easy to imagine
observing E2, then participants would infer that E2 was
more likely, and would therefore be more favorable to the
broad latent scope explanation (which predicts E2).
Second, we test whether the base rates of E1 and E2 affect
the size and direction of the latent scope bias (Experiment
2). In most cases investigated in the literature, E2 has been
a relatively unusual event (such as an abnormal test result
or a magical misfortune), and our account is consistent

with a narrow latent scope bias in such cases where E2 is
relatively rare. But when E2 is very common, people
might infer that E2 would be likely to be observed. This
could lead to a reversal of the latent scope bias, such that
broad latent scope explanations are preferred. Finally, we
examine beliefs about the relevance of the base rates of
C1, C2, E1, and E2 for determining the best explanation
(Experiment 3). We anticipated that P(E2) would be seen
as more relevant than P(E1) because the base rate of E2
but not of E1 would be seen as relevant for inferring
evidence. We also predicted that P(C2) would be seen as
more relevant than P(C1), because C2 causes E2 and high
base rates of C2 would therefore be accompanied by high
base rates of E2.

Experiment 1
Other things being equal, possibilities that are more easily
imagined are judged more likely to be true (Koehler,
1991). Thus, we expected that we could manipulate the
epistemic distance to the unknown effect (E2) by giving
different reasons for our ignorance about E2, and observe
downstream consequences for explanatory preferences.
According to the inferred evidence account, we would
expect a stronger preference for the narrow latent scope
cause (C1) when it is difficult to imagine observing E2
(i.e., E2 is more epistemically distant) because people
would infer that E2 is unlikely. But when the reason for
not knowing about E2 makes it relatively easy to imagine
later finding out that E2 is true, then we would expect a
weaker preference for the narrow latent scope explanation
(C1) because E2 would be thought more likely to have
occurred. This inference that E2 is relatively likely should
push people more toward choosing the explanation (C2)
that would be consistent with observing E2.
For example, suppose a doctor knew that a patient had
symptom E1 but did not know about symptom E2, and had
to decide between two potential diagnoses: C1, which
causes only E1, or C2, which causes both E1 and E2 (see
Figure 1). A more epistemically proximal reason for the
doctor’s ignorance about E2 would be the lab technician’s
illegible handwriting, making the doctor unable to tell
whether a blood test was positive or negative. Because it
is easy to imagine later learning that E2 occurred, this
would lead to a more modest narrow latent scope
preference (i.e., for C1). In contrast, a more epistemically
distant reason would be that no blood test exists for
detecting whether E2 is true. In that case, it would be
more difficult to imagine later observing E2, leading to a
stronger narrow latent scope bias.

Method
Participants We recruited 100 participants from Amazon
Mechanical Turk; 19 were excluded from data analysis
because they failed more than 30% of a set of check
questions.
Procedure Participants completed seven items in each of
two scenarios (magical and medical diagnosis). For

708

example, in the medical scenario, participants diagnosed
seven patients, each with a different name, set of
symptoms (fictitious names for E1 and E2), and diagnosis
options (fictitious names for C1 and C2). Five of the items
consisted of an “excerpt from a medical reference book,”
stating that one disease (C1) always caused one
biochemical to have abnormal levels (E1), while a second
disease (C2) always caused two biochemicals to have
abnormal levels (E1 and E2) but that nothing else was
known to lead to those abnormal biochemical levels.
Participants then read a “note from the lab,” confirming
result E1 but giving various reasons why the value of E2
was unknown. These reasons were (in order of
hypothesized epistemic distance): (1) the lab technician’s
handwriting was illegible; (2) the results were misplaced;
(3) the test could not be conducted due to equipment
failure; (4) a blood test for that biochemical has not been
developed; or (5) that biochemical is too small to be
detected in principle. Parallel reasons were given for the
magic scenario (i.e., illegible handwriting; misplaced
results; wand failure; a detector spell for that trace has not
been developed; no spell could ever detect that trace due
to special magical properties). Two additional problems
were used as check questions, where both E1 and E2 were
either observed or disconfirmed. Additional check
questions were included at the end of every experiment.
For each scenario, a Latin square was used to assign the
seven different patients to the seven different problem
structures, consisting of the five latent scope problems
varying the reason for ignorance, and the two check
questions. For each item, participants were asked which
explanation they found most satisfying on a scale from 0
(“Definitely [C1]”) to 10 (“Definitely [C2]”). The order in
which participants completed the medical and magic
scenarios was counterbalanced, and the order of the seven
items was randomized within each scenario.

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 1.
differ among the possible reasons, ts < 1.8, ps > .075, nor
between the two impossible reasons, t(81) = 0.38, p = .71.
However, the narrow latent scope bias was significantly
smaller for the possible reasons (M = −0.42, SD = 0.85)
than for the impossible reasons (M = −0.89, SD = 1.27),
t(81) = 3.75, p < .001, d = 0.41.
This sensitivity to epistemic distance is consistent with
the inferred evidence account—the idea that people prefer
narrow latent scope explanations because they attempt to
‘fill in’ whether the latent effect (E2) occurred. When E2 is
unobserved and unobservable, it is more difficult to
imagine that E2 is true (see Koehler, 1991), causing an
aversion to the broad latent scope explanation (C2) that
predicts E2. In contrast, when E2 is unobserved but
potentially observable, it is easier to imagine observing E2
in the future, shifting people relatively more toward the
broad latent scope explanation (C1) that predicts E2.
However, this result alone may be interpretable in other
ways. For example, perhaps participants find diseases
with unobservable symptoms to be implausible, making
those explanations less satisfying. Similarly, participants
might infer that a diagnostic test does not exist for a
symptom because the symptom itself does not exist.
Although these accounts would be more strained for the
more fantastical magic items, which patterned similarly to
the medical items, we nonetheless sought converging
evidence using a different manipulation in Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
In reporting the results of Experiments 1 and 2, scores
were centered so that 0 indicates no preference (the scale
midpoint), and oriented so that positive scores (between 0
and 5) indicate a broad latent scope preference and
negative scores (between 0 and −5) indicate a narrow
latent scope preference. In this experiment, there was no
main effect or interaction with scenario (Fs < 1, ps > .80),
so we collapsed across this variable.
As shown in Figure 1, participants preferred the narrow
latent scope explanations for each reason (ts > 2.4, ps <
.02). However, the size of the latent scope effect differed
depending on the reason, F(4,324) = 5.03, p = .001, ηp2 =
.06. To probe this main effect, we divided the reasons into
two groups: those for which it would eventually be
possible to observe the unknown effect (i.e., illegible
handwriting, misplaced results, and equipment failure),
and those for which it would be impossible to observe the
unknown effect (i.e., no diagnostic test and unobservable
in principle). Explanatory preference did not significantly

Experiments 2A and 2B
A more direct test of the inferred evidence account would
be to vary the base rates of the observed and unknown
effects—P(E1) and P(E2), respectively. For small values
of P(E2), people would infer that E2 probably did not
occur, and therefore would choose the narrow latent scope
explanation. This would be consistent with previous
demonstrations of latent scope biases (Khemlani et al.,
2011, as well as Experiment 1 here) that used stimuli
involving effects with low base rates and few plausible

709

alternative causes (such as magical changes and
biochemical abnormalities). However, as P(E2) increases,
people would be increasingly likely to infer that E2
occurred and therefore to choose the broad latent scope
explanation; indeed, when P(E2) > 50%, they would have
a broad latent scope preference because they would infer
that E2 probably did occur. On the other hand,
manipulating P(E1) would have relatively little effect,
because E1 has already been observed, and therefore the
base rate is not needed to infer whether E1 occurred.
In addition, we specified that P(C1) = P(C2), because
the posterior odds favoring C1 over C2 equal P(C1)/P(C2)
for deterministic causes. As explained in the introduction,
a dependence of explanatory preference on P(E1) or P(E2)
would be non-normative, and uniquely predicted by the
inferred evidence account.
Figure 3: Results of Experiment 2.

Method
Participants We recruited 50 participants from Amazon
Mechanical Turk for Experiment 2A, and another 50
participants for Experiment 2B; 17 participants from
Experiment 2A and 14 participants from Experiment 2B
were excluded because they failed more than 30% of the
check questions. One additional participant from
Experiment 2B was excluded due to missing data.
Procedure Participants completed four problems
(diagnosing a robot’s hardware problem, a spaceship’s
malfunction, a patient’s disease, and a tree’s condition), in
a random order. For each item, two possible explanations
were given: C1, which always leads to E1, and C2, which
always leads to E1 and E2. For example:
Generator shock always causes reverbitial sonic.
Pulsator damage always causes reverbitial sonic and
thermal tear.
The order in which the two causes were listed was
randomized for each problem. Participants were told that
the base rates of C1 and C2 were equal, but the base rates
of E2 (in Experiment 2A) and of E1 (in Experiment 2B)
were varied across problems at 5%, 35%, 65%, and 95%
using a Latin square. These probabilities were presented
in frequency format (e.g., “A study of 200 spaceships
found that 70 of them had thermal tear”), and the
denominator of the frequency ratio (e.g., 200 in the
previous example) was varied across problems in order to
make the manipulation less transparent. In contrast to
Experiment 1, where participants were told that no other
causes led to E1 and E2, this instruction was omitted for
Experiment 2 so that participants could infer alternative
causes to explain the base rates of E1 and E2.
Then, participants were told that E1 was observed but
that we did not know whether E2 had occurred (e.g.,
“Spaceship #53 was found to have [E1]. We do not know
whether or not it has [E2].”). Participants rated how
satisfying explanations C1 and C2 would be on the same
scale used in Experiment 1, except that the left/right order
of C1 and C2 on the scale was counterbalanced to match
the order in which C1 and C2 were listed in the problem.

Results and Discussion
As shown in Figure 2, manipulating the base rate of E2 in
Experiment 2A had a large effect on explanatory
preferences, F(3,96) = 44.36, p < .001, ηp2 = .58, with a
strong preference for the narrow latent scope explanation
(C1) when the base rate of E2 was 5% (M = −1.95, SD =
2.01), a weaker preference when the base rate was 35%
(M = −1.25, SD = 1.87), a weak preference for the broad
latent scope explanation (C2) when the base rate of E2 was
65% (M = 0.86, SD = 2.07), and a strong preference for
the broad latent scope explanation when the base rate was
95% (M = 2.80, SD = 1.96). These means all differed
from the scale midpoint, ts > 2.3, ps < .03. Thus, the base
rate of E2 not only modulates the size of the latent scope
bias, but reverses it when the base rate of E2 is very high.
In contrast, manipulating the base rate of E1 in
Experiment 2B had little effect, F(3,99) = 2.44, p = .069,
ηp2 = .07, and preferences in every condition were in the
direction of a narrow latent scope preference (see Figure
2). This is consistent with the inferred evidence account,
since E1 was already observed and its base rate cannot be
used to infer additional evidence. However, this null
effect does show that scaling biases or demand effects are
unlikely to account for the results of Experiment 2A,
because the manipulation was identical in each
experiment, differing only in whether C1 or C2 was varied.

Experiment 3
Finally, we tested information-seeking preferences to look
for converging evidence. According to the inferred
evidence account, when faced with a latent scope
explanation, people try to infer whether or not E2 occurred
in the case at hand. Because P(E2) can be used in making
this inference, people should find P(E2) more relevant
than P(E1). To test this possibility, participants were told
about structurally similar situations to Experiments 1 and
2 (see Figure 1), where they knew about one effect (E1)
but not another (E2), and were deciding between a narrow

710

latent scope explanation (C1, which would only account
for the observed E1) and a broad latent scope explanation
(C2, which would account for both the observed E1 and
the unknown E2). Participants were asked to rank the base
rates of each cause and effect in terms of “how useful”
they would be for determining the best explanation—that
is, to rank the relevance of P(E1), P(E2), P(C1), and P(C2).
We anticipated that P(E2) would be seen as more
relevant for determining the best explanation compared to
P(E1), since this information may be seen as relevant to
determining whether E2 occurred in the case at hand. In
addition, we anticipated that P(C2) would be seen as more
diagnostic than P(C1). This is because P(C2) is
informative about the base rates of both E2 and of E1,
whereas C1 is informative about the base rate only of E1.
That is, if C2 is very prevalent, then both E1 and E2 must
also be very prevalent because C2 causes both effects. But
if C1 is very prevalent, this implies only that E1 must be
very prevalent but is not informative about the prevalence
of E2. Since we anticipate that P(E2) will be seen as more
relevant than P(E1), we would anticipate that likewise
P(C2) will be seen as more relevant than P(C1). Both of
these predictions stand in contrast to normative
responding, since it is the ratio [P(C1)/P(C2)] that is equal
to the posterior odds favoring C1 over C2.

Table 1: Results of Experiment 3.

First ranked
Second ranked
Third ranked
Fourth ranked

P(C1)
15%
29%
33%
23%

P(C2)
29%
27%
28%
16%

P(E1)
25%
19%
19%
38%

P(E2)
32%
24%
21%
23%

Note: Entries indicate the total proportion of times each
base rate was ranked in each position across the four
problems completed by each participant.
In addition, P(C2) was ranked first much more frequently
than P(C1) (29% vs. 15%) and was ranked last less
frequently (16% vs. 23%). Again, this is qualitatively
consistent with our prediction that P(C2) would be seen as
more relevant than P(C1).
Statistical analyses confirmed these patterns. We
calculated the mean rank of C1, C2, E1, and E2 across all
four items for each participant, with ‘1’ representing the
first ranked choice and ‘4’ representing the last ranked
choice for each item. The mean rank for E2 (M = 2.36, SD
= 0.91) was higher than for E1 (M = 2.69, SD = 0.99),
t(157) = 2.55, p = .012, d = 0.20 and the mean rank for C2
(M = 2.32, SD = 0.81) was higher than for C1 (M = 2.63,
SD = 0.70), t(157) = 3.43, p < .001, d = 0.27.
Taken together, these results underscore Experiment 2,
where the base rates relevant to inferences about the
unknown effect (i.e., E2) were used more strongly than
base rates that were not (E1). In Experiment 3, these base
rates were also sought out more readily when determining
the best explanation. This shows that people actively seek
the information needed to infer the data thought to be
necessary for inferring evidence when reasoning about
latent scope explanations. In addition, Experiment 3
confirmed an additional, novel prediction of the inferred
evidence account—that the base rate of the broad latent
scope cause (C2) would be seen as more relevant than the
base rate of the narrow latent scope cause (C1). We made
this prediction because C2 (but not C1) causes E2, meaning
that C2’s base rate is relevant to estimating P(E2) but C1’s
base rate is not. This overall response pattern—ranking
P(C1) and P(C2) differentially and P(E2) highest most
often—stands in stark contrast to normative responding,
since only the ratio of P(C1) to P(C2) is relevant to
assessing the probability of each explanation.

Method
Participants We recruited 200 participants from Amazon
Mechanical Turk; 18 were excluded from analysis
because they failed more than 30% of the check
questions, and 24 were excluded due to missing data.
Procedure Participants completed four problems in a
random order, similar to those used in Experiment 2, but
modified to elicit rankings of how useful each base rate
would be for deciding between the explanations.
For example, for the robot item, participants read the
same causal information as in Experiments 2 (with the
causes listed in a random order), and were told that
“Spaceship #53 was found to have [E1]. We do not know
whether or not it has [E2]” and that “A study of 200 other
spaceships was recently conducted, in which researchers
collected measurements of several properties.” They then
ranked each base rate in terms of how useful it “would be
for determining what malfunction Spaceship #53 has,
where ‘1’ is the most useful and ‘4’ is the least useful.”
The base rates were listed in a random order and worded
in the format, “How many out of the 200 spaceships had
[X],” where [X] was replaced with C1, C2, E1, or E2.

General Discussion
Under a wide variety of circumstances, people prefer
explanations that do not make predictions of unknown
truth—that is, they prefer explanations with narrow latent
scope (Khemlani et al., 2011; Sussman et al., 2014). Here,
we tested four predictions of the inferred evidence
account—that this bias results because people try to infer
whether or not the latent effects occurred. First, the size of
the latent scope bias depended on epistemic distance:
When it was relatively difficult to imagine the effect

Results and Discussion
The proportion of times that participants ranked C1, C2,
E1, and E2 in each position are shown in Table 1. In
absolute terms, the base rate of E2 was ranked first more
frequently (32%) than any other base rate, and the base
rate of E1 was ranked last more frequently (38%) than any
other base rate. Thus, our prediction that P(E2) would be
seen as more relevant than P(E1) has qualitative support.

711

being observed, people had a greater preference for
narrow latent scope explanations (Experiment 1). Second,
manipulating the base rate of the unknown effect led to
large differences in explanatory preferences, with a strong
narrow latent scope preference when the unknown effect
had a low base rate and a strong broad latent scope
preference when the unknown effect had a high base rate
(Experiment 2A); in contrast, manipulating the base rate
of the observed effect had little effect (Experiment 2B).
Finally, in deciding what information to use, people found
the base rate of the latent effect more relevant than the
base rate of the observed effect, and the base rate of the
broad latent scope cause more relevant than the base rate
of the narrow latent scope cause (Experiment 3).
These results are all predicted by the inferred evidence
account, but are difficult to account for on other accounts
of the latent scope bias, such as representativeness
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1972; Sussman et al., 2014). If
people prefer narrow latent scope explanations simply
because the predictions of narrow latent scope
explanations are more similar to the actually observed
evidence, then the manipulations we used in Experiments
1 and 2 should have had little effect. The reason for our
ignorance seems irrelevant to judgments of the similarity
of the observed evidence to the scope of each explanation,
yet people robustly used these reasons in Experiment 1.
Most strikingly, in Experiment 2, we found a preference
for the explanation with the more dissimilar scope (the
broader latent scope) when the base rate of the unknown
effect was high. Our inferred evidence account predicted
this result, but it is otherwise difficult to explain.
These results add to the growing literature on
explanatory preferences (Lombrozo, 2007; Read &
Marcus-Newhall, 1993). We often form our beliefs by
engaging in inference to the best explanation (Lipton,
2004)—generating multiple candidate explanations,
evaluating these candidates, and adopting the best of these
competing explanations as a belief. We have shown here
that latent scope explanations lead to a process in which
additional evidence is inferred rather than gathered,
which can lead either to a narrow or a broad latent scope
bias depending on the epistemic distance, base rates, and
perhaps other features,affecting how readily the additional
evidence is inferred. Since relatively little is known about
explanatory preferences under uncertainty, future research
might look for further applications of inferred evidence.
Indeed, this strategy may be used more widely than
explanatory reasoning. For example, inferred evidence
may be used in category-based reasoning: Sussman et al.
(2014) showed latent scope effects in categorization,
which could be modulated by the manipulations we used
here. Evidence for a related strategy can be found in
studies of feature inferences from uncertain
categorizations (e.g., Murphy & Ross, 1994). When asked
to infer the value of a feature for an individual belonging
to an unknown category, people attempt to infer the
category membership of the individual, and respond

according to the properties of the most likely category
rather than integrating the properties in a weighted
fashion across all possible category assignments. Our
participants’ strategy was in some ways reverse of this:
Whereas Murphy and Ross’s (1994) participants gave the
most likely feature based on the inferred category
membership, our participants gave the most likely cause
(category membership) based on the inferred value of the
unknown effect (feature).

Conclusion
Both in science and in everyday life, we must weigh
explanations consistent with untested predictions, and we
often cannot verify more than a small subset of these
predictions. In this sense, most explanations are latent
scope explanations. Here, we showed that rather than
going out into the world to look for these signature
predictions of competing explanations, people sometimes
attempt to infer what they would observe if they did look.
Although it may often be possible to make educated
guesses from background knowledge, the present results
show that people will also use irrelevant information in
the service of inferring evidence: We do not settle for
ignorance when apparent truth is within reach.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the National
Institutes of Health to F.C. Keil. We thank the members
of the Cognition and Development Lab for helpful
feedback.

References
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective
probability: A judgment of representativeness.
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 430–454.
Khemlani, S.S., Sussman, A.B., & Oppenheimer, D.M.
(2011). Harry Potter and the sorcerer’s scope: Latent
scope biases in explanatory reasoning. Memory &
Cognition, 39, 527–535.
Koehler, D.J. (1991). Explanation, imagination, and
confidence in judgment. Psychological Bulletin, 110,
499–519.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the best explanation (2nd
Ed.). London: Routledge.
Lombrozo, T. (2007). Simplicity and probability in causal
explanation. Cognitive Psychology, 55, 232–257.
Murphy, G.L., & Ross, B.H. (1994). Predictions from
uncertain categorizations. Cognitive Psychology, 27,
148–193.
Read, S.J., & Marcus-Newhall, A. (1993). Explanatory
coherence in social explanations: A parallel distributed
processing account. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 429–447.
Sussman, A.B., Khemlani, S.S., & Oppenheimer, D.M.
(2014). Latent scope bias in categorization. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 52, 1–8.

712

