UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Causal Direction from Transitions with Continuous and Noisy Variables

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wx0c3kr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Soo, Kevin
Rottman, Benjamin

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Causal Direction from Transitions with Continuous and Noisy Variables
Kevin W. Soo (kws10@pitt.edu)
Benjamin M. Rottman (rottman@pitt.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh
3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
Abstract

two friends, Friend X and Friend Y over time, and to try to
infer whether Friend X’s mood influences Friend Y’s mood,
or vice versa. The X and Y columns in Table 1 show the
kind of data presented to participants in their experiments.
Each person could either be in a positive (1) or negative (0)
mood. In order to explain this reasoning process, it is easiest
to first think about how a particular causal structure tends to
produce certain types of transitions given “shocks” to X or
Y. A shock is an economic term that means an exogenous
event that produces a change in an observed variable.

Previous work has found that one way people infer the
direction of causal relationships involves identifying an
asymmetry in how causes and effects change over time. In the
current research we test the generalizability of this reasoning
strategy in more complex environments involving ordinal and
continuous variables and with noise. Participants were still
able to use the strategy with ordinal and continuous variables.
However, when noise made it difficult to identify the
asymmetry participants were no longer able to infer the causal
direction.
Keywords: causal reasoning; causal structure; time

Table 1: Transition-based Learning with Binary Variables.
“S(X)” means a shock to X.

Introduction
Knowing the direction of causal relations is critical for an
agent to be able to act effectively in the world. For example,
knowing that James gossips to Julie but not vice versa
would allow one to selectively share a secret. Knowing that
energy prices influence the price of produce (due to
shipping costs) but not vice versa would allow one to
predict the prices of energy and produce after an oil
embargo or after a poor harvest.
There are four known strategies that lay people use to
infer causal direction between two variables, X and Y. The
first strategy is intervention. Imagine that one intervenes and
sets the value of X to either 1 or 0. If the distribution of Y is
different when X is set to 1 vs. 0, it implies that X causes Y
(e.g. Steyvers et al., 2003)
The remaining three strategies apply to “observational”
data, when a learner observes the states of X and Y.
Inferring causal direction from observational data is
notoriously tricky, and these strategies are usually viewed as
heuristics. The next strategy is causal sufficiency. In some
situations learners have a strong belief that when a cause is
present its effect would also be present. In this case,
observing [x = 0, y = 1] is consistent with inferring X→Y
but not X←Y (Mayrhofer & Waldmann, 2011; cf. Deverett
& Kemp, 2012). Another strategy is to reason using
temporal “delay” or “order”. If one observes that X
usually occurs before Y (e.g., X changes from 0 to 1, and
subsequently Y changes from 0 to 1, or Event X occurs and
then Event Y occurs) people infer that X→Y instead of
X←Y (e.g. Lagnado & Sloman, 2006).

Learning Causal Direction from Transitions
Rottman & Keil (2012) proposed that people also learn
causal direction in a fourth way, by reasoning about changes
or “transitions” in variables over time. For example,
Rottman & Keil asked participants to observe the moods of

Time

X

Y

Transition
Type

Is transition consistent with causal
structure?
X→Y
X←Y

1
2

1
0

1
0

ΔXΔY

Yes: S(X)

Yes: S(Y)

3

0

1

ΔY

Yes: S(Y)

4

0

1

No Δ

Yes: No S

No: S(Y) would
change X
Yes: No S

Assume that X→Y is the true causal structure. When
something produces a change in X’s mood (a shock to X),
the change in X’s mood will generally produce a change in
Y’s mood. Transitions in which both X and Y change are
labeled as “ΔXΔY”. Now consider what would happen
given a shock that changes Person Y’s mood. If there is
reason to believe that the states of X and Y are “temporally
dependent” or autocorrelated, that people’s moods are fairly
stable over time, then when there is a change in Y’s mood
X’s mood would usually remain stable (i.e. in the same state
as it was before). Transitions in which there is a change in Y
but no change in X are labeled as “ΔY”. Finally, transitions
in which both X and Y stay the same are labeled “No Δ” for
no change. No Δ transitions are common under both X→Y
and X←Y assuming that X and Y are autocorrelated.
This logic implies that if X→Y is the true causal
direction, then ΔXΔY and ΔY transitions would be
common; however, ΔX transitions would be rare because if
X’s mood changes then there would typically be a change in
Y as well (ΔXΔY instead of ΔX). Alternatively, if the true
causal structure is X←Y, then ΔXΔY and ΔX would be
common, but ΔY would be rare. Given this logic, one can
reason backwards to infer the direction of the causal
relation. For example, in Table 1, there is a ΔXΔY and a ΔY
transition but no ΔX transitions, implying that X→Y is
more likely to be the true causal structure than X←Y. The

1485

reason is that during the ΔY transition there must have been
a shock that changed the value of Y, but this shock did not
carry over to X, implying that Y does not influence X. Both
adults and children learn causal direction using this
inference process (Rottman & Keil 2012; Rottman,
Kominsky & Keil, 2013).

Transition-based learning with continuous and
noisy variables
In the previous example with binary variables it may seem
possible that people would spontaneously categorize the
transitions as ΔX, ΔY, ΔXΔY, or No Δ. However, real
world data (e.g., stock market graphs) contain a number of
features that may make the categorization and interpretation
process harder, which could make it much more difficult to
infer the causal direction. Here we focus on two features,
variables with multiple levels opposed to binary, and noise.
Table 2: Examples of Transitions in Experiments 1-3.
Time

1
2
3
4

Transition
Type

ΔXΔY
ΔY
No Δ

Exp 1:
No Noise
X
6
4
4
4

Y
4
2
7
7

Exp 2:
Noise in
ΔXΔY
X
Y
6
4
4
3
4
7
4
7

Exp. 3:
Noise in all
transitions
X
Y
6.3
4.5
4.4
3.2
4.5
7.6
4.3
7.7

using continuous variables (X changes by -1.9, Y by -1.4).
If the noise applied to the variables results in ΔX and ΔY
being sufficiently different in magnitude, that transition may
not be easily categorized as a ΔXΔY transition.
ΔY Finally, consider the ΔY transitions (Time 2-3), when
there is a shock to Y that does not carry over to X. The crux
of transition-based learning is that people notice an
asymmetry in the number of ΔX and ΔY transitions, and
this asymmetry implies the causal direction. In Experiments
1 and 2, X stays exactly the same as in the previous trial,
which is similar to the binary case. This should highlight the
fact that the change in Y does not have any effect on X.
Experiment 3 adds some noise into X during ΔY
transitions (from Time 2-3, X increases by 0.1). We still call
this a ΔY transition even though X changes because the
change in X due to noise will usually be smaller than the
change in Y due to a shock. Being able to attribute small
changes in X as due to noise vs. large changes in Y as due to
a ‘shock’ is critical for being able to identify ΔY as ΔY as
opposed to ΔXΔY. However, if the difference between the
magnitudes of shocks and noise is sufficiently small on a
particular transition, that transition may not be easily
categorized as ΔY.
In sum, Experiments 1-3 test how progressively more
complex environments make the transitions more difficult to
categorize and disrupt the ability to infer causal direction.

Experiment 1

Table 2 displays sample data for three experiments that
involve progressively more complex environments (noisy
and multi-level variables). Next we describe how these
environments may obscure the transition types.
No Δ First, consider the No Δ transitions from Times 3 to
4. Experiments 1 and 2 are similar to the binary case in that
variables stay in exactly the same state as in the previous
trial. In Experiment 3, there is a bit of noise added so that
even when there is no shock (No Δ) there will still be slight
changes in both X and Y (X changes by -0.2 and Y by
+0.1). However, we still consider this a No Δ transition
because these variations are small and attributed to ‘noise’
in the variables. We will contrast this with ‘shocks’ in the
other transition types.
ΔXΔY Next, consider the ΔXΔY transition from Times 1
to 2 when there is a shock to X that carries over to Y. In the
binary case, transitions where both variables change in the
same direction always result in both variables in the same
state, implying a positive relationship. In Experiment 1,
during ΔXΔY transitions X and Y change the same amount
(e.g., -2). But because their starting and finishing states are
not necessarily the same (e.g., X changes from 6 to 4, Y
changes from 4 to 2) it may not be as obvious evidence for a
causal relation or as or easy to detect as the binary change.
In ΔXΔY transitions in Experiment 2, X and Y do not
necessarily change the same amount (e.g., from Time 1-2, X
decreases by 2 and Y decreases by 1). Presumably, this
would make it even less obvious that there is a causal
relation between X and Y. Experiment 3 takes this further

Experiment 1 tests whether people are able to learn causal
direction by observing a pair of ordinal variables over time.
This experiment is similar to the binary case because 1)
when both variables change, ΔXΔY, they change by the
same amount (ΔX = ΔY), 2) during ΔY transitions X
remains the same as the previous trial, and 3) during No Δ
transitions X and Y stay the same as the previous trial.
These aspects of Experiment 1 (relative to the following
experiments) should make it easier for reasoners to
categorize each transition into the four transition types..
However, ordinal variables add an additional layer of
complexity into the categorization and interpretation process
compared to binary variables (Table 1). For example, during
ΔXΔY transitions one could focus on how the variables
change with different magnitudes (e.g., sometimes by +3 or
by -2). Categorizing all of these transitions as ΔXΔY may
not be quite so automatic as with binary variables. The same
argument applies in ΔY transitions. During one ΔY
transition Y may change by +1, and in another Y may
change by -6. It is not obvious that people would
spontaneously interpret both these transitions in the same
way. During all transitions, even during No Δ transitions,
one could focus on the absolute magnitude at a given time
rather than the change in the magnitudes. For example, if X
is high and Y is low during a No Δ transition, it could imply
that they are not causally related. In sum, the ordinal
variables introduce a number of layers of complexity into
the reasoning process.

1486

Our main question of interest is whether people are able
to learn the causal direction in longitudinal sequences of
data with ordinal values similar to Table 2 Experiment 1.
We call this condition “temporally dependent” because X
and Y often remain in the same state from trial to trial.
However, in creating the sequences of learning data, since
there are ΔY transitions but no ΔX transitions, in the long
run, Y has higher variance than X. Restated, there is a
confound in that there are two differences between X and Y.
One difference is that there are ΔY but there are no ΔX
transitions, and the other is that the variance of Y is often
greater than the variance of X.
In order to ensure that the causal direction inference is
due to the asymmetry in ΔX and ΔY, we also ran a
“temporally independent” condition using the exact same
trials as the dependent condition, but with a randomized trial
order. The randomization destroys the temporal dependence,
so participants would not be able to infer causal direction
from transitions. Table 3 shows a sample comparing the
temporally dependent and independent conditions.
Randomizing the trials results in a very high number of
ΔXΔY transitions, thus there is no longer an asymmetry
between ΔX and ΔY, so it is impossible to infer causal
direction according to the transitions. However, in both
conditions Y still has higher variance than X. If the
difference in variances explains the effect then it would still
occur in the temporally independent condition.
Table 3: Example of Corresponding Temporally Dependent
and Independent Conditions in Experiments 1 and 2.
Time
1
2
3
4

Temporally dependent
Transition X
Y
7
5
No Δ
7
5
ΔXΔY
5
3
ΔY
5
6

Temporally independent
Transition X
Y
5
6
ΔXΔY
7
5
ΔXΔY
5
3
ΔXΔY
7
5

Methods
Participants 103 participants were recruited using Amazon
Mechanical Turk (MTurk) and the experiment was
conducted online. The experiment lasted between 10-15
minutes and participants were paid $1.50 for participation.
We intended to recruit 100 participants, but three
participants started the study and subsequently returned the
HIT before completion; we analyzed all the data.
Stimuli and Design Data was presented to participants in
the form of graphs depicting the states of two variables on a
1-9 scale for a period of 25 time points (resulting in 24
transitions). In the temporally dependent condition there
were 12 No Δ transitions, 6 ΔXΔY transitions, and 6 ΔY
transitions, randomly ordered. See Figure 1 for a sample
graph of the temporally dependent condition.
We generated 1000 temporally dependent graphs in the
following way. The initial states for X and Y were each
sampled from a normal distribution (M = 5.0, SD = 1.5),
rounded to the closest integer. Every subsequent trial was

ΔY

ΔXΔY

Figure 1: Sample stimuli for Experiment 1. Note: actual
stimuli spanned 25 time points. In this graph, A = X (cause)
and B = Y (effect). The ΔXΔY and ΔY transitions are
marked for easy identification above, but were not denoted
in any special way in the experiment.
determined in the following way. If the transition was
supposed to be a ΔXΔY transition (a shock to X), then a
new state for X was sampled from the same rounded normal
distribution as above. If the sampled value of X happened to
be the same as its prior state, a new sample was drawn. The
new value for Y was determined by the change in X; Y1 =
X1 - X0 + Y0. For the ΔY transitions (a shock to Y that does
not carry over to X), the new value for Y was chosen from
the same rounded normal distribution as above, with the
same caveat that Y1 could not equal Y0. X stayed exactly the
same as in the previous trial.
We wanted to present data on a 1-9 point scale. However,
the generative process explained above sometimes produced
data outside the bounds of 1-9. For example, on a ΔXΔY
transition, if X changed from 4 to 7, and Y started at 7, it
would change to 10. Because we did not want to test
reasoning about ceiling effects in this experiment, we
eliminated data where X or Y exceeded the bounds of 1-9.
For all 1000 temporally dependent sequences of data we
created a corresponding temporally independent sequence
by randomizing the order of the trials. Each participant in
the temporally dependent condition viewed a block of eight
graphs chosen randomly from the 1000 sequences. For each
participant in the temporally dependent condition, another
participant in the temporally independent condition received
the 8 corresponding graphs.
Procedure Participants read the following cover story:
“Please imagine you are a psychologist studying the
moods of married couples. You are trying to figure out
how one spouse's mood influences the other. You might
find that Spouse A's mood may influence Spouse B's
mood, that Spouse B's mood may influence Spouse A's
mood, or that neither influences the other. You will
observe the moods of married couples, each over a period
of 25 consecutive days. On each day, please consider
possible events that influenced their moods. For example,
Spouse A may have had a good day at work, which put

1487

them into a good mood and spread to Spouse B. Or
Spouse B may have had a bad day at work, but their bad
mood did not spread to Spouse A. Please remember that
moods influence one another on the same day. For
example, if Spouse A is in a bad mood on Monday, and if
Spouse A's mood affects Spouse B's mood, then Spouse
B's mood will also be affected on Monday.”
Participants were randomly assigned (between-subjects)
to view graphs of the temporally dependent or temporally
independent data. At the start of the scenario, the graph
showed the data points for Spouse A and Spouse B visible
for Day 1. Participants clicked a button to gradually reveal
each subsequent day with a 1 second delay between clicks.
The delay was to encourage participants to reason about the
data sequentially, rather than clicking through the graph and
retrospectively inspecting the data. After the entire graph
was revealed, participants were prompted to respond on a
scale of 1 (“Confident that Spouse A’s mood influenced
Spouse B’s mood”) to 9 (“Confident that Spouse B’s mood
influenced Spouse A’s mood”). The midpoint 5 was labeled
“Not sure about the direction of the relationship”.
Each participant worked with 8 graphs and made 8
judgments. For each graph, Spouse A and B were randomly
assigned to the roles of X (which we predict will be
interpreted as the cause) or Y (which we predict will be
interpreted as the effect).

Results
We recoded the inferences so that 9 meant a participant
strongly inferred that X→Y and 1 meant that participants
strongly inferred X←Y; 5 meant that a participant did not
infer a causal direction. For each participant we took the
average of his or her eight judgments. The transition-based
learning hypothesis predicts that participants will in general
tend to infer X→Y; so their scores should be greater than 5.
Indeed, participants in the temporally dependent condition
had scores that were, on average, significantly higher than 5
(M = 5.83, SE = .20), t(49) = 4.10, p < .001.
An unequal variances t-test also revealed that participants
in the temporally dependent condition scored higher than
the temporally independent condition (M = 4.72, SE = .11),
t(77.5) = 4.75, p < .001. This ensures that the inferences of
causal direction were not due to differences in the variance
of X and Y but rather the transitions in the data.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 was intended to be as similar as possible to
the previous experiments with binary variables. Experiment
2 takes the next step in testing the generalizability of
transition-based learning by adding noise into the
transitions. In Experiment 2, during ΔXΔY transitions, X
and Y sometimes changed the same amount and sometimes
by different amounts.

Methods
Participants A new group of 129 participants were
recruited on MTurk. We intended to recruit 100 participants;
however, due to a programming error after the main part of
the study was over, 29 participants returned the HIT even
though they completed the study. We analyzed all the data.
The experiment lasted between 10-15 minutes and
participants were paid $1.50.
Stimuli and procedure Data was presented to participants
in the same form as Experiment 1. The transition
characteristics were the same as in Experiment 1, except in
the following ways. First, during the ΔXΔY transitions, the
change in Y would be within +/-1 of the change in X. For
example, if X changed by +3, Y could change by +2, +3, or
+4, with equal probability. Thus, during ΔXΔY transitions
X and Y always changed in the same direction.
Additionally, during ΔXΔY transitions X was required to
change by at least 2 points in either direction. We eliminated
the possibility of X changing by only 1 point, because then
it would be possible for X to change by +1 and Y to not
change at all (i.e., the noise in Y could cancel out the change
in X). As in Experiment 1, 1000 graphs were generated and
for each graph a temporally independent version was
created by randomizing the trials. All other stimuli and
procedural characteristics were similar to Experiment 1.

Results
As in Experiment 1, participants in the temporally
dependent condition continued to infer that X→Y was more
likely than X←Y (M = 5.74, SE = .185), t(64) = 3.99, p <
.001. Participants were more likely to infer X→Y in the
temporally dependent than independent condition (M =
4.79, SE = .11), t(106.34) = 4.35, p < .001.

Experiment 3
The purpose of Experiment 3 was to test whether people
continue to infer causal direction with even more noise in
the transitions so that it was not always clear what type of
transition had occurred. Similar to Experiment 2, during
ΔXΔY transitions X and Y change to varying degrees. In
addition, now during No Δ transitions both X and Y change
slightly from their previous states. Additionally, during ΔY
transitions (a shock to Y), X changes slightly from its
previous state. In sum, X and Y are still highly (but not
perfectly) dependent on their previous states.
The added noise meant that it was much harder to
determine what type of transition had occurred (ΔXΔY, ΔY
or No Δ). Or equivalently, it was much harder to identify if
any change in a variable was due to a shock that transferred,
a shock that did not transfer, or noise (with no shock).
First, consider what would happen with a shock to X,
S(X). If S(X) is large, then it would also produce a large
change in Y leading to a clear ΔXΔY transition. However,
suppose there is a small shock increasing X while the noise
to Y is negative, cancelling out the increase in Y that would
have been produced by S(X). In this case it would appear as

1488

if a ΔX transition had occurred. Because the asymmetry
between ΔX vs. ΔY is critical to inferring causal direction,
such transitions would make it harder to identify X→Y as
the true direction.
Next, consider what happens when there are shocks to Y.
With a large S(Y), Y would change significantly more than
X (which changes a fairly small amount due to noise)
leading to a clear ΔY transition. This can be seen in the first
transition (from Time 1-2) in Figure 2. However, suppose
that S(Y) produces a small increase in Y and the noise to X
is positive. This would make it appear that a ΔXΔY
transition had occurred because X and Y both increase by
similar magnitudes (see the final transition from Time 11-12
in Figure 2). If a shock to Y appears as ΔXΔY instead of
ΔY it would make inferring causal direction harder because
the asymmetry between ΔX and ΔY is reduced.
ΔY

ΔXΔY

Figure 2: Sample stimuli for Experiment 3, in which shocks
do not need to be at least +/-2. Note: true stimuli spanned 25
time points. In this graph, A = X and B = Y. ΔXΔY and ΔY
transitions are marked by the boxes, No Δ transitions are
unmarked (no markings were present in the experiment).
Finally, consider transitions without any shocks. Without
any noise these transitions would be interpreted as No Δ
transitions. However, when there is noise they would not
necessarily be interpreted as No Δ. If either X or Y changes
significantly more than the other the transition could be
interpreted as ΔX or ΔY. If X and Y both happen to change
a fairly large amount in the same direction, it might appear
that a ΔXΔY transition has occurred.
In sum, when trying to determine what kind of transition
just occurred participants needed to distinguish shocks from
noise. We propose that larger differences in the magnitudes
of shocks vs. noise will enable participants to better
distinguish the transition types that enable inferences of
causal direction. To test this, we created two conditions. In
the “big shock” condition, the shocks to X and the shocks to
Y were at least 2 points in either direction, similar to
Experiment 2, which ensured that their magnitudes were
appreciably greater than the variations expected from noise.
In the “any size shock” condition, there was no minimum

magnitude for shocks. Sometimes small shocks occurred
which could be confused with noise, making it more
difficult to track what kinds of transitions had occurred and
infer a causal direction. This manipulation sought to
investigate the boundary conditions of transition-based
learning by asking three questions: 1) Would people still be
able to infer causal direction in the “big shock condition”?
This condition is considerably harder than Experiments 1
and 2 which involved considerably less noise. 2) Is it harder
to infer causal direction in the “any size shock” condition
than the “big shock” condition? 3) Are people still able to
infer causal direction in the “any size shock” condition?

Methods
Participants 100 new participants were recruited on MTurk
but 3 returned the HIT; we analyzed data for all 103
participants. Similar to Experiments 1 and 2, participants
were paid $1.50 for the 10-15 minute experiment.
Stimuli. Data were presented to participants in graphs
similar to Experiments 1 and 2, but with several differences
in how they were generated. Firstly, the states of variables
were continuous (there was no rounding to the closest
integer). Secondly, on each transition noise was introduced
to variables that did not undergo shocks. Noise, the change
from the prior state, was sampled from a normal distribution
(M = 0, SD = 0.2). This ‘noise distribution’ generally led to
smaller changes than those produced by shocks to X and Y.
For No Δ transitions, the new states X1 and Y1 were each
equal to their prior states plus noise sampled from the noise
distribution (i.e. X1 = X0 + noise, Y1 = Y0 + noise)
For ΔXΔY transitions, a new state was sampled for X (a
shock to X). In the “big shock” condition, the magnitude of
the change was always greater than 2 in either direction. In
practice, the state was sampled from the normal distribution
(M = 5, SD = 1.5), and resampled if the change was less
than 2. In the “any size shock” condition, this requirement
was dropped, so the shock to X could result in a change of
less than 2. The new state of Y was equal to the change in X
plus noise sampled from the noise distribution.
For ΔY transitions, a new state for Y was sampled from
the (M = 5, SD = 1.5) normal distribution. In the “big
shock” condition, similar to the ΔXΔY transitions, the new
state had to differ from the prior state by at least 2. This
requirement was dropped for the “any size shock”
condition”. The new state of X would be equal to its prior
state plus noise from the noise distribution (i.e. X0 + noise).
Figure 2 shows an example from the “any size shock”
condition. The first ΔY transition (Time 1-2) shows a shock
to Y that produces a change of roughly -2. The second ΔY
transition (Time 11-12) shows a shock to Y that produces a
change of roughly +1. Because X happens to increase
slightly at the same time the transition from Time 11-12
might appear as a ΔXΔY transition. In the “big shock”
condition, all shocks would appear similar to the former.
Participants were randomly assigned (between-subjects)
to either the “big shock” or “any shock” condition and

1489

worked with eight graphs. Experiment 3’s procedures were
otherwise identical to the previous experiments.

Results
Participants in the “big shock” condition were still able to
infer causal direction above chance; the scores were higher
than 5 on average (M = 5.34, SE = .19), t(50) = 1.77, p <
.05. However, participants in the in the “any size shock”
condition did not score significantly higher than 5 (M =
5.05, SE = .15), t(51) = .363, p > .05. An unequal variances
t-test comparing the two conditions was not significant,
t(93.467) = 1.19, p > .05. In sum, with big shocks relative to
noise participants were still able to infer causal direction;
however, compared to previous experiments this ability was
reduced.

General Discussion
Previous work has shown that people infer causal direction
by how two variables, X and Y change over time. In series
where Y changes but X does not (a ‘shock’ to Y but stable
X), people tend to infer that Y does not influence X. If there
are other transitions in which both X and Y change
simultaneously, people tend to infer that X causes Y.
However, the previous research only used simple cases with
binary variables (Rottman & Keil, 2012).
Across three experiments we systematically made the
inference more complicated by using ordinal and continuous
variables and adding noise in how X and Y change.
Participants were still able to use this transition-based
learning process for inferring causal direction with ordinal
variables with no noise (Experiment 1) and with ordinal
variables with some noise in the ‘shocks’ (Experiment 2).
Experiment 3 involved noise in both ‘shocks’ and in ‘stable’
periods. When the shocks were large and could be
distinguished from the stable periods people still inferred
causal direction above chance, but when the shocks were
small and could be confused with the stable periods people
were not able to reliably infer the causal direction.

Implications and Questions for Causal Inference
This research raises a number of implications and open
questions for causal inference. Relatively little causal
learning research has investigated ordinal and continuous
variables, especially for inferring causal direction. In the
current research the explanation of how people inferred
causal direction relied upon categorizing transitions as ΔX,
ΔY, ΔXΔY, or No Δ, reducing continuous stimuli to
categorical transition types. It will be important to validate
the use of these categories, to understand if and how people
spontaneously categorize transitions in these types, and to
understand more specifically how noise makes the
categorization process harder. In addition, it will be
important to understand how people infer the direction of
positive vs. negative causal relations; with noise in a
positive relation X and Y can sometimes change in opposite
directions.

Another question is whether the general type of learning
process in this manuscript can be viewed as a normative or
rational inference. There is a growing field of machine
learning and econometrics devoted to identifying causal
direction from time-series data (e.g., Moneta & Spirtes,
2006; also see Rottman & Keil, 2012).
More broadly, this research underscores that people are
highly sensitive to transitions in how variables change over
time, not just the states of the variables. This was
demonstrated by the difference between the temporally
dependent vs. independent conditions in Experiments 1 and
2 as well as the explanation for how people learn causal
direction. Many theories of causal inference focus
exclusively on the states of variables within individual
trials, not how the variables change over time, thus ignoring
an important part of causal learning.
In conclusion, being able to infer causal direction is a
critical ability that allows us to effectively navigate and
manipulate the world. There are a variety of ways that
people learn causal direction. Manipulation and observing a
delay between a cause and effect are very strong cues to
causal direction. But presumably there are a host of other
more subtle cues that people use in environments in which
manipulation is not possible and delays are not present.
Uncovering when various cues to causal direction are used
and the boundaries of these cues will be vital for a fuller
understanding of the breadth of human causal inference.

References
Deverett, B., & Kemp, C. (2012). Learning Deterministic
Causal Networks from Observational Data.
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Mayrhofer, R., & Waldmann, M. R. (2011). Heuristics in
Covariation-based Induction of Causal Models  :
Sufficiency and Necessity Priors. Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Moneta, A., & Spirtes, P. (2006). Graphical Models for the
Identification of Causal Structures in Multivariate
Time Series Models. Proceedings of the 9th Joint
Conference on Information Sciences, 1, 1–4.
Lagnado, D. A., & Sloman, S. A. (2006). Time as a guide to
cause. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 32(3), 451–60.
Rottman, B. M., & Keil, F. C. (2012). Causal structure
learning over time: observations and interventions.
Cognitive Psychology, 64(1-2), 93–125.
Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., Wagenmakers, E.-J., &
Blum, B. (2003). Inferring causal networks from
observations and interventions. Cognitive Science,
27(3), 453–489.

1490

