UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning By Asking: How Children Ask Questions To Achieve Efficient Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/32c734r9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Ruggeri, Azzurra
Lombrozo, Tania

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning By Asking: How Children Ask Questions To Achieve Efficient Search
Azzurra Ruggeri (a.ruggeri@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, USA
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany

Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, USA

Abstract
One way to learn about the world is by asking questions. We
investigate how children (n= 287, 7- to 11-year olds) and
young adults (n=160 17- to 18-year olds) ask questions to
identify the cause of an event. We find a developmental shift
in children’s reliance on hypothesis-scanning questions
(which test hypotheses directly) versus constraint-seeking
questions (which reduce the space of hypotheses), but also
that all age groups ask more constraint-seeking questions
when hypothesis-scanning questions are unlikely to pay off:
when the problem is difficult (Studies 1 and 2) or the solution
is one among equally likely alternatives (Study 2). These
findings are the first to demonstrate that even young children
adapt their strategies for inquiry to increase the efficiency of
information search.
Keywords: information search, active learning, 20-questions
game, cognitive development.

Introduction
Yesterday, a man was late for work. Why?
In everyday life, we constantly encounter events that
require explanation. An observation, such as a man being
late for work, can prompt us to seek underlying causes,
either out of curiosity or because our future actions depend
on them. For example, if the man was late because there is a
public transportation strike, we might do well to rethink our
own travel plans.
Although the process of generating and evaluating
explanatory hypotheses plays a crucial role in learning and
development (Lombrozo, 2006), little is known about how
children test hypotheses by seeking novel information from
knowledgeable informants, or how this ability changes over
the course of development. In particular, how do children
ask questions to arrive at the correct hypothesis?
In this paper we investigate children’s ability to flexibly
adapt the kinds of questions that they ask, and whether the
way in which they do so is responsive to task characteristics
that affect the efficiency of different strategies. Specifically,
we investigate how children (7- to 8-year-olds and 9- to 11year-olds) and young adults (17- to 18-year-olds) identify
the cause of an event by asking yes-or-no questions.
Building on a classic study by Mosher and Hornsby (1966),
which used a task like the game of “20-questions,” we
differentiate between constraint-seeking questions and
hypothesis-scanning questions. Constraint-seeking questions
attempt to reduce the space of the possible solutions by
asking about features that could apply to multiple solutions

(e.g., “Was the man late because of something related to his
means of transport?” or “Did something happen at home?”).
In contrast, hypothesis-scanning questions are tentative
solutions (e.g., “Was he late because he missed the bus?” or
“Was he late because he overslept?”). Mosher and Hornsby
found a large developmental change from age 6 to age 11,
which has since been replicated (e.g., Denney, 1975;
Denney & Denney, 1973), with younger children
overwhelmingly asking hypothesis-scanning questions, and
constraint-seeking questions becoming more frequent in the
course of development.
Subsequent research using the 20-questions paradigm has
found that different task features can influence children’s
and adults’ reliance on constraint-seeking questions. For
example, Siegler (1977) found that 13- and 14-year-old
adolescents were strongly influenced by the order in which
two isomorphic 20-questions problems were presented (see
also Nelson, Divjak, Martignon, Gudmundsdottir, & Meder,
2013), and Ruggeri and Feufel (2013) found that describing
objects at a basic level (e.g., “dog” as opposed to
“retriever”) increased the proportion of constraint-seeking
questions in all age groups, suggesting that the basic-level
representations facilitated children’s ability to identify
object-general features on which to base their questions.
However, few studies have investigated children’s ability to
adapt their search for information as a function of task
features that influence the efficacy—as opposed to the ease
of implementation—of different questions. One exception is
Nelson et al. (2013), who found that 4th grade children were
reasonably effective at asking constraint-seeking questions
that partitioned a space of alternatives into equal subgroups,
especially when the statistics of the possible solutions
matched those of the real world.
While several factors seem to influence children’s general
ability to ask constraint-seeking questions, it remains an
open question whether their strategies for inquiry are
responsive to the anticipated efficiency of a given strategy
(i.e., constraint seeking versus hypothesis scanning) in the
task at hand. One possibility is that children's strategies for
inquiry, compared to those of young adults, are quite
inflexible. If this is the case, young children will
overwhelmingly rely on hypothesis-scanning questions and
will do so regardless of how effective the strategy is for a
given instantiation of the task. This possibility is broadly
consistent with the findings to date that have used the 20questions paradigm: hypothesis scanning appears to robustly

1335

dominate in early childhood, with shifts towards constraint
seeking induced by factors that reduce the strategy’s
cognitive demands rather than those that increase its
efficiency relative to hypothesis scanning.
Another possibility is that, despite a general tendency to
rely on hypothesis-scanning questions, children will
appropriately modify their strategies for inquiry, engaging
in less hypothesis scanning when it’s less likely to pay off.
Such flexibility is broadly consistent with previous research
on how children seek information in the process of decisionmaking, such as deciding which story a fictitious character
would like the most (Davidson, 1991b). Moreover, even
young children’s predecisional information search is
influenced by some task characteristics, such as the amount
of information available (Davidson, 1991a), and by age 10
children become more likely to use relevant information to
guide their search (Davidson, 1991b).
To investigate the flexibility of children’s strategies for
inquiry, we examined whether children are more inclined
toward constraint-seeking questions when encountering an
unfamiliar domain (Study 1), a difficult problem (Studies 1
and 2), or a set of possibilities that are equally likely in light
of prior beliefs (Study 2). Overall, we predicted that both
children’s and young adults’ questions would be responsive
to these task characteristics. Specifically, we tested the
following three predictions. First, familiarity with a scenario
suggests richer prior knowledge about the possible causes of
the situation described. For example, one might know that it
is more likely that a man would be late for work because he
was caught in a traffic jam than because his house was
flooded during the night. This background knowledge
could, in turn, influence the attractiveness of a hypothesisscanning strategy that first tests the most likely hypotheses,
because this strategy has the reasonable potential for a
“quick win.” We therefore hypothesized, in Study 1, that
participants would be more likely to adopt a hypothesisscanning strategy for scenarios that were familiar to them
(e.g., a man being late for work, or a boy being late for
school) than for those that were unfamiliar (e.g., an alien
arriving late for a reunion).
Second, in both Study 1 and Study 2 we varied the prior
probability of the task solution: it was either unlikely (e.g.,
the man was late because he had to wait for a plumber to
repair a water leak) or likely (e.g., the man was late due to
traffic). We expected that children might be more likely to
adopt a constraint-seeking strategy after a hypothesisscanning strategy failed to deliver a “quick win,” and that
this would occur more often when the solution designated as
correct was a priori unlikely than a priori likely.
Third, we hypothesized that children (in Study 2) would
be more likely to adopt a constraint-seeking strategy when
trying to differentiate between candidate hypotheses that
were all equally likely (such that a hypothesis-scanning
approach would require selecting the hypotheses to test
arbitrarily) than when aiming to differentiate hypotheses
that varied in probability (such that a hypothesis-scanning
strategy could begin with the most likely options). Finally,

from a more developmental perspective and in keeping with
previous results (e.g., Mosher & Hornsby, 1966), we
hypothesized a general linear developmental improvement
in participants’ performances, with an increase in the
efficiency of the question-asking strategies adopted and a
corresponding decrease in the number of questions needed
to reach the solution.

Study 1
Method
Participants Participants were 96 children in second or
third grade (66 female, Mage = 7.51 years; SD = .50), 87
children in fifth grade (56 female, Mage = 9.83 years; SD =
.77), and 90 young adults (35 female, Mage = 17.62 years;
SD = 1.07) from three schools in Livorno, Italy. The
students represented a variety of social classes.
Design and procedure The experiment consisted of
individual interviews. At the beginning the experimenter
read the participant the task instructions, ensuring they were
completely understood. Participants were presented with a
short description of an event (e.g., “Yesterday, a boy was
late for school”) and asked why it occurred (“Why?”), after
which they were expected to ask questions. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of six possible experimental
conditions, a 3 × 2 matrix resulting from the cross between
two independent between-subjects variables, scenario and
solution type (likely, unlikely), which we explain below.
Scenario. There were three possible scenarios: (1)
“Yesterday, a man was late for work”; (2) “Yesterday, a boy
was late for school”; and (3) “Yesterday, an alien was late
for the supreme reunion.” These scenarios were designed to
vary in familiarity, with Scenario 1 being more familiar to
young adults than to children, Scenario 2 familiar to all
participants, and Scenario 3 unfamiliar to all participants.
Solution. There were two possible solutions for each
scenario: (a) a likely solution, and (b) an unlikely solution
(where anticipated perceived probabilities were confirmed
on a post-test). Each solution was structured into three
levels of causal detail. In the likely solution, the
car/spaceship taken by the man/boy/alien to go to
work/school/the reunion was caught in a traffic jam (level 1)
due to a car accident (level 2) that was caused by a driver
who ran a red light (level 3). In the unlikely solution, the
man/boy’s father/alien had to wait for the plumber (level 1),
whom he had called because the house flooded during the
night (level 2) because a pipe had broken (level 3).

Results
Success rate In total, 105 participants did not finish the
game: 70 younger children, 27 older children, and 8 young
adults.
Number of questions needed to reach the solution For
this analysis we considered only those participants who
reached the complete solution (all three levels). We

1336

performed a univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
the number of questions needed to reach the solution as the
dependent variable and age group, scenario, and solution
type as independent variables. This analysis revealed a main
effect of age group, F(2,167) = 4.22, p = .016, η2 = .05. A
Bonferroni post hoc analysis revealed that older children
asked more questions prior to reaching the complete
solution (Mold_child = 19.73, SD = 14.82) than did either
younger children (Myoung_child = 11.58, SD = 9.11, p < .001)
or young adults (Myoung_adults = 15.74, SD = 9.48, p = .029).
We found no difference between younger children and
young adults (p = .122). We also found a main effect of
solution type, F(1,167) = 60.65, p < .001, η2 = .29:
Participants assigned to the version of the game with the
unlikely solution needed more questions to reach the
solution than those who were assigned the likely solution.
There were no additional significant effects.
Type of questions We coded questions as either hypothesis
scanning or constraint seeking. The experimenter, an Italian
student assistant blind to the experimental hypotheses, wrote
down all the questions asked during the experiment. In
addition, the experimental session was audio recorded, and
based on notes and recordings, the experimenter coded all
questions immediately after the session was over. All
questions were additionally and independently coded
following the session by a second Italian student assistant,
blind to the experimental hypotheses, resulting in total
agreement of Kappa = .993, p < .001. In the few cases
where the two raters did not agree, a third Italian rater, blind
to the experimental hypotheses and procedure, was
consulted.

17.08, p < .001, η2= .18. A Bonferroni post hoc analysis
confirmed that young adults asked a higher proportion of
constraint-seeking questions (Myoung_adult = 30%, SD = 19%)
than older children (Mold_child = 16%, SD = 15%, p < .001),
who in turn asked a higher proportion of constraint-seeking
questions than younger children (Myoung_child = 5%, SD =
10%, p = .009). We also found a main effect of solution
type, F(1,167) = 19.86, p < .001, η2= .12. Participants asked
a higher proportion of constraint-seeking questions in the
game with an unlikely solution (Munlikely = 33%, SD = 19%)
compared to the game with a likely solution (Mlikely = 15%,
SD = 16%). Notably, we found no main effect of scenario
on the type of questions asked, nor an interaction between
age and solution.
First question To analyze the type of question that was
asked first—hypothesis scanning versus constraint
seeking—we conducted a logistic regression using age
group, scenario, and solution type as predictors. For this
analysis we included all participants, even those who did not
succeed in finishing the game. The Wald criterion
demonstrated that only age group (p < .001) made a
significant contribution to predicting initial question type,
whereas scenario and solution type were not significant
predictors. The exp(B) value indicates that older age groups
(older children compared to younger children, and young
adults compared to older children) had a decreased
likelihood of generating an initial hypothesis-scanning
question (by .22 times), after controlling for the other
factors in the model.

Study 2
Study 1 found that the proportion of constraint-seeking
questions asked increased with age, replicating prior results,
and additionally obtained the new result that the proportion
of constraint-seeking questions increased when the solution
was unlikely. Surprisingly, however, we did not find an
effect of scenario, suggesting that familiarity did not
influence participants’ performances or search for
information. However, this could be because participants
judged some hypotheses to be more plausible than others,
even in the unfamiliar cases. Study 2 revisits the question of
whether prior knowledge about which hypotheses are more
likely influences reliance on constraint-seeking versus
hypothesis-scanning questions and does so with a more
controlled experimental manipulation.

Figure 1. Study 1: Percentage of constraint-seeking
questions, displayed by age group and solution type. Error
bars represent one SEM in each direction.
For participants who reached the complete solution, we
calculated the percentage of total questions that were
constraint seeking (Figure 1). This percentage was analyzed
as the dependent variable in a univariate ANOVA with age
group, scenario, and solution type as independent variables.
The analysis revealed a main effect of age, F(2,167) =

Method
Participants Participants were 58 children in second or
third grade (30 female, Mage = 7.0 years; SD = .59), 46
children in fifth grade (23 female, Mage = 10.2 years; SD =
.73), and 70 young adults (39 female, Mage = 17.5 years; SD
= .79) from two schools in Livorno, Italy. The students
belonged to various social classes.
Design and procedure Like Study 1, Study 2 consisted of
individual interviews. The instructions presented to the

1337

participants by the experimenter were identical to those used
in Study 1. After being read the instructions, the participants
were presented with the following situation: “Yesterday, a
man was late for work. Why? The solution is one of the
following.” The experimenter then took out 10 cards. On
each card was displayed a different hypothesis, as well as its
probability, both as a label (i.e., high, moderate or low
probability) and in natural frequencies (10, 4 or 2 out of 40
times). The experimenter read each card aloud, in random
order, then put it down on a table. The cards were left on the
table until the end of the session. Participants were told that
the correct solution was among these 10 and to begin asking
yes-or-no questions to find out which one it was.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four
experimental conditions in a 2 × 2 design that crossed two
independent variables: hypothesis distribution (uniform,
mixed) and solution type (likely, unlikely).
Distribution. In the two uniform distribution conditions,
the alternative hypotheses (i.e., possible solutions) provided
to participants were designed to appear equally likely. In
these conditions, the experimenter explicitly told
participants that “all the alternatives are equally likely to be
the correct solution.” In the two mixed distribution
conditions, the hypotheses were designed such that two
would be judged very likely to happen, four moderately
likely to happen, and four very unlikely to happen. In these
conditions, the experimenter presented the probability of
each hypothesis in a natural frequency format: “Out of 40
times a man is late, 10 times [very likely]/4 times
[moderately likely]/1 time [very unlikely] it is because…”.
To select hypotheses that would be perceived as equally
likely (in the uniform conditions) or very likely/moderately
likely/very unlikely (in the mixed conditions), we pretested
20 statements on an independent sample of 25 adults.
Participants in the pretest were asked to rate the probability
of the described 20 events on a 10-point scale, from 0
(extremely unlikely) to 10 (extremely likely). Using these
data, we were able to identify five statements that were
judged very likely, five that were judged very unlikely, and
two that were judged moderately likely. For each pretested
statement, we constructed a “matched” item that was similar
but distinct. For example, for the statement “He wasn’t
feeling well when he woke up,” which was judged very
unlikely, we constructed a second statement, “He hadn’t felt
well during the night.” This allowed us to increase the total
number of statements for the experiment and also ensured
that pairs of statements involved common features that
could provide a basis for asking constraint-seeking
questions (e.g., “Did he not feel well at some point?”).
Solution. In the two likely conditions, the correct solution
was very likely and was the same solution for both the
uniform and mixed distribution conditions. For the
uniform/likely condition, this meant that all of the candidate
solutions provided were equally likely. For the mixed/likely
condition, the candidate solutions varied in probability. In
the two unlikely conditions, the correct solution was
unlikely, and was the same solution for both the uniform

and mixed distribution cases. For the uniform/unlikely
condition, this meant that all of the candidate solutions
provided were equally unlikely. For the mixed/unlikely
condition, the candidate solutions varied in probability and
were identical to those in the mixed/likely condition.

Results
Success rate All participants completed the task. Unlike
Study 1, Study 2 involved 10 pre-specified candidate
solutions; even a hypothesis-scanning strategy that involved
selecting hypotheses to test at random would reach the
solution with a maximum of 10 questions.
Number of questions needed to reach the solution We
analyzed the number of questions required to reach the
complete solution as the dependent variable in a univariate
ANOVA with age group, distribution, and solution type as
independent variables. This analysis found no main effects
but did reveal a significant interaction between distribution
and solution type, F(2,173) = 12.58, p = .001, η2= .07. For
participants in the mixed distribution conditions, those with
the unlikely solution needed more questions to reach the
solution (Mmixed_unlikely = 5.91; SD = 2.36) than those with the
likely solution (Mmixed_likely = 4.16; SD = 2.10), t(86) =
3.673, p < .000. However, for participants in the uniform
distribution conditions, those with the unlikely solution
(Muniform_unlikely = 4.23; SD = 2.03) did not need more
questions than those with the likely solution (Muniform_likely =
5.05; SD = 2.85), t(84) = 1.541, p = .127. Notably, we did
not find interactions between age and other variables.
Type of questions As in Study 1, questions were coded as
either hypothesis scanning or constraint seeking. As in
Study 1, all questions were independently coded by the
experimenter and a second student assistant, both blind to
the experimental hypotheses, resulting in total agreement of
Kappa = .953 with p < .001. In the few cases where the two
raters did not agree, a third Italian rater, blind to the
experimental hypotheses and procedure, was consulted.
We performed a univariate ANOVA with the percentage
of constraint-seeking questions asked by each participant as
the dependent variable and age group, distribution, and
solution type as independent variables. The analysis
revealed a main effect of age group, F(2,173) = 17.13, p <
.001, η2= .18. A Bonferroni post hoc analysis found that
younger and older children asked a similar proportion of
constraint-seeking questions (Myoung_child = 23%; SD = 37%;
Mold_child = 20%; SD = 31%, p = 1.00), which was lower than
the proportion of constraint-seeking questions asked by
young adults (Myoung_adults = 51%; SD = 31%, p < .001). The
analysis also revealed a main effect of distribution, F(1,173)
= 9.29, p = .003, η2= .06. Participants assigned to the mixed
distribution conditions asked a lower proportion of
constraint-seeking questions (Mmixed = 26%; SD = 32%) than
the participants assigned to the uniform distribution
conditions (Muniform = 41%; SD = 39%), see Figure 2.
Interestingly, this effect did not interact with age (p = .977).

1338

Even younger children asked a higher proportion of
constraint-seeking questions when confronted with a
uniform distribution (Muniform = 32%; SD = 41%) as opposed
to a mixed distribution (Mmixed = 15%; SD = 31%), F(1,57)
= 3.20, p = .079, η2= .05. We did not find any effect of
solution type.

Figure 2. Study 2: Percentage of constraint-seeking
questions, displayed by age group and solution type. Error
bars represent one SEM in each direction.
First question We conducted a logistic regression with age
group, distribution, and solution type as predictors. The
Wald criterion demonstrated that both age group (p < .001)
and distribution (p = .011) made a significant contribution to
prediction, whereas solution type was not a significant
predictor. The exp(B) value indicates that older age groups
had an increased likelihood of generating an initial
constraint-seeking question (by 2.94 times), after the other
factors in the model were controlled for. Indeed, younger
and older children asked a similar proportion of constraintseeking questions (Myoung_child = 28%; SD = 45%; Mold_child =
29%; SD = 46%, p = 1.00), which was lower than the
proportion of constraint-seeking questions asked by young
adults (Myoung_adults = 73%; SD = 45%, p < .001). The exp(B)
value also indicates that participants assigned to the mixed
distribution had a decreased likelihood of generating an
initial constraint-seeking question (by .42 times).
Participants in the mixed distribution conditions asked a
lower proportion of constraint-seeking questions (Mmixed =
38%; SD = 49%) than the participants assigned to the
uniform distribution conditions (Muniform = 55%; SD = 50%).

Discussion
Our findings replicate prior research in documenting a
developmental shift from a strong tendency to ask
hypothesis-scanning questions to greater reliance on
constraint-seeking questions. Our findings also go beyond
prior work to show, for the first time, that even young
children appropriately modulate their reliance on different

question types: constraint-seeking questions become more
prevalent when they yield a higher information gain and are
therefore more likely to pay-off.
Studies 1 and 2 showed that both children and young
adults responded to the more difficult (unlikely) version of
the task by asking a higher proportion of constraint-seeking
questions than they did for the easier (likely) version. While
Study 1 did not find anticipated effects of scenario
familiarity, in Study 2, participants asked more constraintseeking questions when provided with alternative
hypotheses that were equally likely compared to when they
were given alternative hypotheses differing in probability
(see Figure 2). This finding suggests that when prior
knowledge (strongly) favors some hypotheses over others,
participants of all ages are more likely to pursue a
hypothesis-scanning strategy, possibly in the hope of
achieving a quick win. However, we did find a
developmental shift in participants’ ability to use such prior
knowledge effectively: In Study 2, young adults most often
tested highly or moderately likely hypotheses first, with
younger and older children significantly less likely to do so.
Study 1 confirmed the expected developmental increase
in success rates. However, among participants who reached
the solution, neither study found a consistent age-related
boost in overall performance (assessed as the number of
questions required to reach the solution). In particular,
young adults’ more frequent use of constraint-seeking
questions did not yield a reliable advantage over younger
groups, although performance was numerically (if not
statistically) better for older groups when the solution was
unlikely (in Study 1 and 2) or when the hypotheses provided
were all equally likely (in Study 2). Adopting a constraintseeking strategy in other conditions required giving up on
the chance of obtaining a quick win by correctly guessing
the solution, suggesting that a constraint-seeking strategy is
not always the most efficient approach.
The rationality or optimality of a given strategy for
inquiry can be defined in ecological terms (Todd et al.,
2012) as the match between the structure of the task and the
abilities, knowledge, experiences, and biases of the agent
who has to perform the task. Our results go beyond previous
demonstrations that contextual factors can influence
children’s strategies for inquiry by investigating the match
between children’s strategies and the informational structure
of the problem being solved. Specifically, our design
manipulated the relative effectiveness of different questionasking strategies, not the cognitive demands required to
enact them, and our results reveal that participants did not
differ in their sensitivity to these manipulations across age
groups; even young children asked fewer hypothesisscanning questions when doing so was unlikely to pay off.
What underlies children’s strategies for inquiry in the real
world and how do they change in response to context? One
possibility is that children explicitly assess which strategy is
most likely to be efficient in a given context. This seems
unlikely, however, given the difficulty of making such an
assessment in a real world situation, as well as the fact that

1339

cues pointing to the likely effectiveness of a given strategy
are at best indirect. We suggest instead that in real world
problems, children (as well as adults) might rely on a
heuristic procedure that is likely to yield flexible and
efficient behavior in a range of contexts. Specifically, we
propose that people ask themselves a single question: Is one
of the given/self-generated alternative hypotheses
sufficiently more likely than the others? If so, test it directly
(with a hypothesis-scanning question); otherwise, collect
information to reduce the number of alternative hypotheses
(using a constraint-seeking question). This rough rule of
thumb helps identify possible sources of developmental
change: it could be that an important developmental
difference lies in the initial hypothesis-generation phase,
with young children simply generating fewer hypotheses
than young adults, or in the testing phase, with children
adopting a lower threshold for pursuing a hypothesisscanning question. These possibilities, however, are not
incompatible with other proposals: That children have not
yet fully mastered the more complex constraint-seeking
strategy (e.g., Denney, 1975) or that even when children
know that constraint seeking would be more appropriate and
efficient, they are not able to identify good constraints—that
is, to abstract the object-general features that are needed to
ask effective constraint-seeking questions.
More generally, the two strategies for inquiry that we
consider can be seen as lying along a continuum, with
hypothesis-scanning questions partitioning the search space
into two very unequal partitions (the single tested solution
versus everything else), and constraint-seeking questions
achieving higher information gain the more closely they
correspond to two equally-sized partitions. While the former
approach has the potential for arriving at an immediate
solution, the latter will tend to dominate in the long run.
This trade-off might be understood in terms of “exploiting”
versus “exploring” (Cohen, McClure, & Yu, 2007; Hills,
Todd, & Goldstone, 2010), where hypothesis-scanning
strategies exploit prior knowledge in the hopes of a quick
win, while constraint-seeking strategies explore the broader
hypothesis space. Understanding the current findings in
these terms suggests promising directions for new research
and also offers a broader framework within which the
current proposal can be understood.
In sum, the process of asking questions plays a crucial
role in learning and development. Nonetheless, little is
known about children’s strategies for inquiry and how they
change in the course of development. Here we have
provided some first insights into the adaptive flexibility of
children’s strategies for asking questions and proposed a
tentative heuristic model. We hope that these initial steps
help pave the way for additional research involving a
broader range of question types and experimental paradigms
and incorporating strategies for information search beyond
questions, such as direct observation and experimentation.

References
Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M., & Yu, A. J. (2007). Should I
stay or should I go? How the human brain manages the
trade-off between exploitation and exploration.
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Biological sciences, 362(1481), 933–42.
Davidson, D. (1991a). Children’s decision making
examined with an information-board procedure. Cognitive
Development, 6, 77–90.
Davidson, D. (1991b). Developmental differences in
children’s search of predecisional information. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 52, 239–255.
Denney, D. R. (1975). The effects of exemplary and
cognitive models and self-rehearsal on children’s
interrogative strategies. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 19, 476–488.
Denney, D. R., & Denney, N. W. (1973). The use of
classification for problem solving: A comparison of
middle and old age. Developmental Psychology, 9, 275278.
Hills, T. T., Todd, P. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2010). The
central executive as a search process: priming exploration
and exploitation across domains. Journal of experimental
psychology. General, 139(4), 590–609.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of
explanations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 464–470.
Mosher, F. A., & Hornsby, J. R. (1966). On asking
questions. Studies in Cognitive Growth. New York, NY:
Wiley.
Nelson, J. D., Divjak, B., Gudmundsdottir, G., Martignon,
L. F., & Meder, B. (2014). Children’s sequential
information search is sensitive to environmental
probabilities. Cognition, 130(1), 74–80.
Ruggeri, A., & Feufel, M. A. (2013). How the level of
inclusiveness affects object categorization. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Sandberg, E. H., Huttenlocher, J., & Newcombe, N. (1996).
The Development of Hierarchical Representation of TwoDimensional Space. Child Development, 67(3), 721–739.
Siegler, R. S. (1977). The twenty questions game as a form
of problem solving. Child Development, 48, 395–403.
Todd, P. M., Gigerenzer, G., & the ABC Research Group.
(2012). Ecological rationality: Intelligence in the world.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

1340

