UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mind Wandering and Online Learning: How Working Memory, Interest, and Mind Wandering
Impact Learning from Videos

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7q14x97s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hollis, Ben
Was, Christopher

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mind Wandering and Online Learning: How Working Memory, Interest, and
Mind Wandering Impact Learning from Videos
Richard Ben Hollis (rbhollis@kent.edu)
Lifespan Development and Educational Sciences, 405 White Hall
Kent, OH 44242, USA

Christopher A. Was (cwas@kent.edu)
Lifespan Development and Educational Sciences, 405 White Hall
Kent, OH 44242, USA
Abstract
findings: online education. This study evaluated individual
differences in mind wandering while subjects watch video
lectures in an online course and analyzed how these factors
influenced academic performance.

This study investigated mind wandering during video lectures
in an online course. Working memory capacity and interest
were also considered. Higher mind wandering predicted
lower performance. Lower working memory capacity
predicted higher mind wandering. Higher interest predicted
lesser mind wandering. Social media and technology
accounted for 29% of off-task thinking.
Keywords: Mind-wandering;
working memory

task

unrelated

Mind Wandering and Working Memory
The relationship between WMC and mind wandering has
long been researched due to the principle that those with a
higher WMC were less prone to distraction (mind
wandering) during a demanding task. Working memory
refers to attentional control used to maintain a goal and
avoid distraction; greater WMC means greater attentional
capacity used to avoid distraction and maintain a goal
(Engle, 2002; McVay & Kane, 2010). Subjects who
performed poorly on WMC tasks were unable to maintain
task goals and therefor experienced more goal-neglect errors
(McVay & Kane, 2010). WMC predicted performance on
higher-order cognitive tasks, such as reading comprehension
tasks and general fluid intelligence tests (Engle, 2002).
Complex span tasks used to measure WMC were related to
goal maintenance and competition resolution. These
characteristics of assessment lend to evaluating individual
differences in mind wandering, as both referred to
mechanisms that keep access to a primary goal intact when
faced with distracting or irrelevant information (McVay &
Kane, 2010).
Mrazek et al. (2012) evaluated if WMC tests were
confounded by mind wandering; that is, if mind wandering
during WMC tests diminished results on those measures.
They also evaluated mind-wandering correlations to WMC,
general aptitude and SAT scores. In the first experiment,
subjects were probed for on-task or off-task thoughts
(ranging from 1 = completely on-task to 5 = completely on
unrelated concerns) at unpredictable intervals while
completing operation span (OSPAN), reading span
(RSPAN) and spatial span (SSPAN) tasks, as measures of
WMC.
Performance on individual tasks and across tasks was
negatively related with the number of mind wandering
instances, meaning subjects with lower WMC had greater
instances of off-task thoughts. Results were replicated in a
second study; additional measurements of anxiety and task-

thoughts;

Introduction
Wandering minds often lead to performance and accuracy
errors on the primary activity, especially if the activity was
demanding and required concentration (e.g. McVay &
Kane, 2009; McVay & Kane, 2012b; Unsworth &
McMillian, 2012). Given the propensity for the mind to
wander and related performance deficits, investigating
individual differences in mind wandering and the impact on
performance seemed particularly relevant in an educational
setting.
As Unsworth, Brewer and Spillers (2012) and Lindquist
and McLean (2011) provided evidence of mind wandering
in the traditional classroom context. Technology use in the
same setting can also contribute to distraction; interactions
with Facebook, laptop-use and mobile devices during inclass lectures created deficits in academic performance
(Fried, 2008; Junco, 2012; Wood et al., 2012).
Additionally, self-reported, heavy media multitaskers had
difficulty filtering non-essential information and lower taskswitching accuracy than non-multitasking counterparts;
Ophira, Nassb and Wagner (2009) proposed these
multitaskers were also unaware of the determents of
multitasking to attentional accuracy. Interactions with media
and technology multitasking can distract and create deficits
in performance; as such, the current study expanded the
existing set of off-task thinking probes to include: thinking
about or using another technology. (ex) texting; checking
Facebook.
Given the research on mind wandering in a variety of
contexts, steps to advance mind wandering research forward
should be taken at the intersection of these

	  
3084

	  
related interference were not related to WMC. In a third
study, half of the participants were promised financial
incentives to increase performance on the OPSAN task.
The same negative correlation between mind wandering
and WMC was reported. However, those who received
financial incentives were less likely to mind wander than
those without incentives and thereby improve performance
on the OSPAN task; in this regard, it seemed that mind
wandering disrupted performance on WM memory tasks. In
the final study, subjects received thought probes during a
Raven’s Progressive Matrices test and an OPSAN task; those
results were related to the predictability of SAT scores to
investigate the generality of TUTs disrupting performance.
Mind wandering was negatively related to WMC and gF
performance. Mind wandering during these lab studies was
also predictive of SAT scores; nearly half of the shared
variance among WMC, gF and SAT scores was accounted
for by mind wandering.

Interest
Benefits of interest and learning have long been studied.
Schiefle and Krapp (1996) noted that in 30 years of
research, it is well documented that topic interest and
learning from text were significantly related. In their study,
subjects interested in the text experienced increases in free
recall and also increases in elaborative propositions and
main ideas, which indicates in increased depth of learning.
An association between interest and online video may share
a similar relationship to merit the investigation in the
present study.
Unsworth and McMillan (2012) examined individual
differences in mind wandering, WMC, interest, motivation,
topic experience and their relationship with reading
comprehension. Subjects completed OSPAN, RSPAN and
SSPAN tasks, read the half of one textbook chapter and
received six mind-wandering probes during the reading task.
Subjects then completed a reading comprehension test.
Following the comprehension test, subjects answered two
questions on interest (How interested were you in the topic
of the text? and How interested are you in this topic in
general?), two questions on motivation (How motivated
were you to do well on the task? and How much did your
overall motivation influence your performance on the test?),
and three questions on prior knowledge. Subjects with low
WMC reported more mind wandering while reading than
those with high WMC. Less interested and less motivated
subjects mind wandered more than interested, motivated
subjects. Motivation mediated the relationship between
interest and mind wandering – individuals who were not
interested were also not motivated and had higher rates of
MW. WMC was unrelated to interest.

The Present Study
In this study, we investigated the relationship among mind
wandering, working memory capacity and interest in online
learning, and we examined how these factors influenced

class performance.
As reviewed, previous research
indicated that during demanding tasks, mind wandering had
a negative impact on performance. But the current study
extended the scope of inquiry to evaluate mind wandering
and interest in a fully online classroom, while also
considering working memory capacity as a latent variable.
If McVay and Kane (2010) are correct in stating that
“whatever mechanisms are responsible for lapses of
attention, then, they appear to be stable across people, tasks,
contexts and time” (p. 326), then the same relationships
presented in previous research should be consistent with the
findings in the current study. Higher levels of mind
wandering should predict lower levels of WMC and lower
levels of academic performance. Unsworth and McMillan
(2012) did not report a direct effect of interest on mind
wandering, but the present study re-evaluated this
relationship. Perhaps the varying context (watching a video
in an online classroom vs. reading a text chapter in a lab
setting) will influence the relationship between interest and
mind wandering in a novel way.
Participants completed three complex span tasks,
responded to mind-wandering probes while watching two
online video lectures (introductions to advertising and
public relations) and rated interest in the presented topics.
Structural equation modeling was used to explore these
relationships and their influence on academic performance.
In addition, the current set of mind wandering probes was
expanded to examine reports of distractions related to social
media (e.g. Facebook) and technology (e.g. texting).
In the context of online learning, three novel research
questions were evaluated in this study: (1) Does mind
wandering mediate the relationship between WMC and
academic performance? (2) Does interest influence mind
wandering? and (3) Do interactions with social media and
technology distract on-task thinking?

Methods
Participants
153 undergraduates at a large Midwestern state university
received extra course credit to participate in the study. Four
participants were missing data and eight participants
experienced technical problems with a complex span task
and submitted incomplete data; these incomplete sets were
removed from the analysis.
After completing each span task, participants were asked
if they wrote down any letters and how many letters they
wrote down (to help complete the span task with greater
accuracy). If a participant reported any letters or failed to
answer the question, that span task was removed from the
analysis. Maximum likelihood estimates of means and
intercepts were used to complete missing span task data.
Any subject missing more than one span task was
eliminated from the study. The percent of total missing data
was 4.76% in span task scores. In total, 126 subjects were
included in the final analysis.

	  
3085

	  
Mind Wandering Probes While watching the video,
participants received four mind wandering probes that asked
them to classify thoughts from the last five seconds.
Response 1 was evaluated as on-task.

Materials and Procedure
Interest Participants were asked an adapted version of the
interest measures presented in Unsworth and McMillan
(2012). Participants responded 1 (Not at all interested) -5
(Very interested) to the following questions before and after
video 1 and video 2:
Video 1: How interested are you in Public Relations?
Video 2: How interested are you in Advertising?

In the last 5 seconds, what were you just thinking about?
1. The video.
2. How well I’m understanding the video.
3. A memory from the past.
4. Something in the future.
5. Current state of being. (ex) I’m feeling hungry
6. Thinking about or using another technology.
(ex) texting; checking Facebook.
7. Other.

Complex Span Tasks Participants downloaded and
completed three complex span (RSPAN, OSPAN and
SSPAN) tasks modified from Bailey (2012). All WMC
measures were collected via Mac and PC desktop
applications authored in Revolution LiveCode. Data was
stored in a MySQL database. WM span scores were
calculated using partial-credit scoring (see Conway et al.,
2005; Was, Rawson, Bailey and Dunlosky, 2011).
Mind Wandering: Video 1 and Video 2 Videos used in
this study were actual course videos featured in a fully
online course. Both videos were filmed in an HD studio
with the same production setup. Video 1 was a 13:08
minute introduction to Public Relations. Video 2 was a
12:49 minute introduction to Advertising. Both videos
featured the same lecturer delivering the lecture directly to
the camera.
Videos were streamed online. After starting the videos,
participants could not pause, restart or stop playback.
Participants were informed that they would be asked
questions throughout the video. They were encouraged to
set aside 15 minutes and complete a video in one sitting.
Participants were also informed that they would receive a
quiz immediately after the video.
Mind-wandering probes were programmed to appear four
times during playback. During a probe, the video stopped
and a sound beeped to alert a prompt on the screen. After
responding to the probe, the video automatically resumed
playback. Interest was collected before and after each
video. Following the last interest measure, participants
answered a four-question quiz. After completing the quiz,
participants were asked if they would like to rewatch the
video or close the window and exit. See Table 1 for the
video playback schedule.

TUT4

3:15
MW
Probe
1

6:30
MW
Probe
2

9:45
MW
Probe
3

13:08
MNW
Probe
4

Pause

Pause

Pause

Pause

Rewatch
Prompt

TUT3

Quiz1

TUT2

Interest 2

TUT1

End Video

Start Video

Interest 1

Table 1: Mind Wandering Probe Schedule

Academic Performance Academic performance was
measured using two post-video quaizzes. Quiz1 and Quiz 2
scores represent percent accurate across a four-item,
multiple-choice quiz given immediately after video 1 and
video 2. Total Points indicate the total points earned in the
course.

Results
Descriptive Statistics
Table 2 displays the descriptive statistics for the 12
observed variables. RSPAN displays the partial-credit score
on the reading complex span task; OSPAN, the operation
span task; and SSPAN, the spatial span task.
TUT1 and TUT2 represent mean scores from 0 – 1 based on
self-reported responses to four mind wandering probes on
video 1 and video 2 respectively.
Using the same
classifications as previous research (McVay & Kane, 2012a;
Unsworth & McMillian, 2012), response 1 (the video) was
coded as on-task; response 2 (how well I’m understanding
the video) was coded as task-related interference (TRI);
responses 3-7 (off-task / task unrelated thoughts) were
coded as task-unrelated thoughts (TUTs). The higher a
TUT1 or TUT2 score, the more a subject experienced task
unrelated thoughts.
Interest1 and Interest2 represent the sum of interest
measures before and after video 1 and video 2. Higher
scores represent greater levels of interest.
Quiz1 and Quiz 2 scores represent percent accurate across
a four-item, multiple-choice quiz given immediately after
video 1 and video 2. Total_Points indicate the total points
earned in the course.
TRI1 and TRI2 represent the sum of responses (how well
I’m understanding the video) to the mind wandering probes
across video1 and video2 respectively.

TUT and Interest Scores Across Measures
In terms of interest measured before and after watching
videos 1 and 2, results of a paired-samples t-test indicated
that there was no significant difference between

	  
3086

	  
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of 16 Observed Variables
Variable

M

SD

Range

RSPAN

.81

.16

.11 – 1

OSPAN

.77

.24

.03 – 1

SSPAN

.90

.14

.21 – 1

TUT1

.44

.27

0–1

TUT2

.42

.33

0–1

TRI1

.91

.97

0–4

TRI2
Interest1
Interest2
Quiz1
Quiz2

.70
6.62
6.77
.74
.78

.93
1.75
1.88
.27
.27

0–4
2 – 10
2 – 10
0–1
0–1

Total_Points

1257.9

285.51

78 – 1562

Interest1 before (M = 3.34, SD = .87) and after (M = 3.28,
SD =1.00),
t(125) = 1.05, p = .30. In addition, there was no significant
difference between Interest2 before (M = 3.42, SD = .96)
and after (M = 3.35, SD = 1.08), t(125) = 1.00, p = .32.
A paired-samples t-test indicated that there was no
significant difference between TUT1 (M = .44, SD = .27)
and TUT2 (M = .42, SD = .33), t(125) = .99, p = .32.
However, there was a significant difference between TaskRelated Interference TRI1 (M = .91, SD = .97) and TRI2 (M
= .70, SD = .93), t(125) = 2.37, p = .02.

Figure 1. Structural equation model predicting academic
performance with mind wandering and WMC.
48.41, p = .024; RMSEA = .067; CFI = .938. In the tested
model, the estimated standardized direct effects of mind
wandering (TUTs) on academic performance were β = -.45.
The estimated standardized direct effects of WMC on
academic performance were β = .40. And the estimated
standardized direct effects of WMC on mind wandering
(TUTs) were β = -.26. The estimated standardized direct
effects of topic interest on mind wandering (TUTs) were β =
-.66.

Mind Wandering Frequencies
Subjects reported on-task thinking 36.9% of the time, taskrelated interference 20.1% of the time and experienced offtask thinking 43.0% of time. Technology-related thoughts
represented the highest level of off-task thinking at 12.5%.
Structural Equation Modeling
The primary interest in the study was the relationship among
WMC, mind wandering (TUTs) and academic performance.
The hypothesized model shown in Figure 1 provided a good
fit to the data, χ2 (17, N = 126) = 22.38, p = .137; RMSEA
= .055; CFI = .973. In the tested model, the estimated
standardized direct effects of mind wandering (TUTs) on
academic performance were β = -.43. The estimated
standardized direct effects of WMC on academic
performance were β = .41. The estimated standardized
direct effects of WMC on mind wandering (TUTs) were β =
-.27.
SEM: Topic Interest A second focus on this study
examines influence of topic interest on mind wandering in
the relationships among WMC, mind wandering (TUTs) and
academic performance. The hypothesized model shown in
Figure 2 provided a good fit to the data, χ2 (31, N = 126) =

	  
Figure 2. Structural equation model predicting academic
performance with mind wandering and WMC with the
effect of topic interest on mind wandering.

Discussion
The current study replicated existing research by predicting
the deficits in performance related to higher mindwandering rates and extended the literature to the context of
online learning, topic interest (in digital media),
achievement goal orientations, real-world academic
performance and new considerations for task-related
interference. At a baseline, the current findings were in line
with previous findings in which WMC modestly predicted
mind wandering with correlations around -.20 or about 5%

	  
3087

	  
of the unique variance in self-reported TUTs (Kane &
McVay, 2012); in the present study, the estimated
standardized effects of WMC on mind wandering ranged
from β = -.26 to β = -.29 across models. Overall, higher
rates of mind wandering were related to lower academic
performance, lower WMC, lower topic interest and lower
mastery approach goal orientations.	  
In terms of consistency across measures, there was no
significant difference between topic interest before and after
each video, and there was no significant difference in selfreported TUT rates across videos. No significant difference
in TUT rates was consistent with previous findings and
supported the claim that “whatever mechanisms are
responsible for lapses of attention, then, they appear to be
stable across people, tasks, contexts and time” (McVay &
Kane, 2010, p. 326).
Subjects reported on-task thinking 36.9% of the time,
task-related interference 20.1% of the time and experienced
off-task thinking 43% of time, which was consistent with
reported findings that individuals mind wander 30-50% of
the time in daily life (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010;
McVay & Kane, 2012b; Levinson, Smallwood, &
Davidson, 2012). Subjects categorized probed responses in
the provided categories 91.9% of the time, only responding
other in 8.1% of all responses. The information in probed
self-reports may also be advantageous over a scaled
response in terms of identifying the cause of distraction; for
example, this study introduced a new off-task probe,
thinking about or using another technology. These
technology-related thoughts represented the highest level of
off-task thinking; 29.1% of off-task thoughts were thinking
about or using another technology, which represented
12.5% of all responses. As a result, including this probe
should be considered in future mind-wandering research and
inform treatments designed to reduce mind-wandering
behaviors.
The structural equation model of most critical focus and
importance, illustrated in Figure 1, replicated previous
research with nearly equal estimated standardized effects of
WMC on mind wandering and estimated standardized
effects of WMC on performance (Kane & McVay, 2012;
McVay & Kane, 2012a; McVay & Kane, 2012b; Unsworth
& McMillan, 2012). In this case, the literature can be
extended from mind-wandering during reading and reading
comprehension to include mind wandering during online
learning and academic performance. Higher levels of mind
wandering created deficits (lower levels) of academic
performance. And higher levels of WMC predicted lower
levels of mind wandering. The amount of mind wandering
variance accounted in the two models was 35% and 46%
respectively. A similar percentage of performance explained
was presented in previous findings;	   other factors, such as
mood, stress, mindfulness and topic experience may also
influence mind wandering and performance (Kane et al.,
2007; Smallwood, Fitzgerald, Miles & Phillips, 2009;
Mrazek, Smallwood & Schooler, 2012; Kane & McVay,
2012; Unsworth & McMillan, 2012).

Topic interest in the present study extended the existing
literature beyond text reading to new findings in digital
media. Unsworth and McMillan (2012) proposed that topic
interest did not directly predict mind wandering; however,
interest predicted mind wandering. Lindquist and McLean
(2011) presented only a marginal (r = -.14, p < .01) negative
correlation between course interest and mind-wandering
rates during a 40-minute, traditional lecture. However, in the
present study, the estimated standardized total effects of
interest on TUTs were (β = -.66) or 44% of the variance in
mind wandering. Higher interest in the video topics was
significantly related to lower rates in mind wandering.
Interest in the topics presented in the videos was measured
before and after two video trials; whereas, interest in the
Unsworth and McMillan (2012) study was only measured
after reading with considerations for the topic of the text and
the topic in general. Perhaps the difference in findings is
related to the method of measuring topic interest or
expectations in interest are different for digital media,
compared to reading or traditional lectures.
Conclusion
As reported in previous findings, increased mind wandering
was associated with lower WMC and deficits in
performance. The current study extended the existing
literature from reading comprehension to real-world online
learning and academic performance. Measurements of topic
interest in digital media and achievement goal orientations
may also be evaluated in future research.
References
Bailey, H. (2012). Computer-paced versus experimenterpaced working memory span tasks: Are they equally
reliable and valid?. Learning and Individual Differences,
22, 875-881.
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick,
D. Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working
memory span tasks: A methodological review and user's
guide. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 769–786.
Engle, R. W. (2002). WMC as executive attention.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 1923.
Fried, C. B. (2008). In-class laptop use and its effects on
student learning. Computers & Education, 50, 906- 914.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J. MyinGermeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the
mind wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study
of working memory and executive control in
daily
life. Psychological Science, 18(7), 614-621.
Kane, M. J., & McVay, J. C. (2010). Does mind wandering
reflect executive function or executive failure?
Comment on Smallwood and Schooler (2006) and
Watkins (2008), Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 188197.
Kane, M. J., & McVay, J. C. (2012). What mind
wandering reveals about executive-control abilities and

	  
3088

	  
failures. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
21, 348-354.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A
wandering mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330, 932.
Levinson, D. B., Smallwood, J., & Davidson, R. J. (2012).
The persistence of thought: Evidence for a role of
working memory in the maintenance of task-unrelated
thinking. Psychological Science, 23(4), 375-380.
Lindquist, S. I., & McLean, J. P. (2011). Daydreaming and
its correlates in an educational environment. Learning
and Individual Differences, 21, 158-167.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2010). Adrift in the stream
of thought: The effects of Mind wandering on executive
control and WMC. In A. Gruszka, G. Matthews, & B.
Szymura (Eds.), Handbook of Individual Differences
in Cognition: Attention, Memory, and Executive
Control. (321-334). New York, NY: Springer.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train
of thought: WMC, goal neglect, and
mind
wandering in executive-control task. Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 35(1). 196-204.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2012a). Drifting from slow
to “d’oh!”: WMC and mind wandering predict
extreme reaction times and executive control
errors.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 38(3). 196-204.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2012b). Why does working
memory capacity predict variation in reading
comprehension? on the influence of mind wandering
and executive attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 141(2). 302-320.
McVay, J.C., Unsworth, N., McMillan, B.D., & Kane,
M.J. (2013). WMC does not always support futureoriented mind wandering. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology. 67(1). 41-50.
Mrazek, M. D., Smallwood, J., Franklin, M. S., Chin, M.
J., Baird, B., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). The role of mindwandering in measurements of general aptitude.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
141(4).
Ophira E., Nassb C., & Wagnerc A. D. (2009). Cognitive
control in media multitaskers.
Psychological and
Cognitive Sciences, 106(37), 15583-15587.
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T.
C., Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Metaawareness, perceptual decoupling and the wandering
mind. Trends in Cognitive Science, 15(7), 319-326.
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2012). Mind
wandering and readingcomprehension: Examining the
roles of WMC, interest, motivation, andtopic
experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition. Advance online
publication.
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D., & Spillers, G. J.
(2012). Everyday attention failures: an
individual
differences investigation. Journal of Experimental

Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 38(6),
1765-1772.
Unsworth, N., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, G. J. (2012).
Variation in cognitive failures: An individual
differences investigation of everyday attention and
memory failures. Journal of Memory and Language,
67, 1-16.
Was, C. A., Rawson, K. A., Bailey, H., & Dunlosky, J.
(2011). Content-embedded tasks beat complex span
for predicting comprehension. Behavior Research
Methods, 43, 910-915.

	  
3089

