UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Moral Judgments and Emotions: Exploring the Role of ‘Inevitability of death’ and
‘Instrumentality of harm’

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5pk2r64t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hristova, Evgeniya
Kadreva, Veselina
Grinberg, Maurice

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Moral Judgments and Emotions: Exploring the Role of ‘Inevitability of Death’ and
‘Instrumentality of Harm’
Evgeniya Hristova (ehristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Veselina Kadreva (vkadreva@cogs.nbu.bg)
Maurice Grinberg (mgrinberg@nbu.bg)
Center for Cognitive Science,
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract
In the current study, strictly controlled moral dilemmas are
used to study intuitions in moral judgments concerning
situations in which one human life has to be sacrificed in
order to save more human lives. The influence of two factors
(inevitability of death and instrumentality of harm) is
explored. Both of them are found to influence moral
judgments. To study the emotional processing in judgments,
response times and skin-conductance reactions are analyzed.
It is found that responses to dilemmas involving incidental
harm produce longer response times and are accompanied by
higher arousal (as indexed by the skin conductance reactions).
Reported results imply that when instrumentality of harm is
considered, judgment is influenced by emotional reactions.
Keywords: moral dilemmas, moral judgments, emotional
engagement, skin conductance response

Introduction
Moral Dilemmas
Moral judgments (the judgments of what is right and what is
wrong) have been of great interest to philosophers,
psychologists and other scientists for centuries. Are there
universal laws that should be applied in such judgments?
Are they innate? How in fact do people decide what is right
and what is wrong? What is the role of reasoning and what
is the role of the emotions in making such judgments? These
are some of the questions that have been considered for
many years and still provoke the interest of the researchers.
These questions don’t have an easy answer especially when
we are presented with a moral dilemma – situations in
which there is a conflict between moral values, rules, rights.
Philosophers study moral judgments by looking for
general principles that should be followed by humans. Some
philosophers (e.g. Kant, 1785/1983) propose the
deontological view stating that the rightness or wrongness
of an act depends on the principle that this act is
representing (and not on the good or bad consequences of
that act). In this view, an action could be considered moral
if it could represent a universal law that should be
mandatory to follow. On the other hand, the utilitarian view
on morality states that actions achieving greater good and
maximizing utility are the moral ones.

Apart from these normative theories, psychologists are
interested in the actual moral judgments made by people. To
explore the judgments in moral dilemmas, very often the
famous ‘Trolley problem’ (Foot, 1978) is used (e.g.
Petrinovich et al., 1993; O’Neill and Petrinovich, 1998;
Mikhail, 2007; Greene et al., 2001; Greene et al., 2004 ).
Usually, the dilemma is presented as follows: “A runaway
trolley is headed for five people who will be killed if it
proceeds on its present course. The only way to save them is
to hit a switch that will turn the trolley onto an alternate set
of tracks where it will kill one person instead of five. Is it
morally appropriate to turn the trolley in order to save five
people at the expense of one?” (Greene et al., 2001). Most
of the participants, exposed to this dilemma in experiments,
find the proposed action to be morally permissible.
However, if they are presented with the ‘Footbridge
dilemma’ (it describes the same situation but suggests that a
bystander is pushed from a footbridge in front of the trolley
in order to save the other people present) most participants
find the action to be not morally permissible (Greene et al.,
2001).
Different theoretical explanations, emphasizing the role of
several factors, have been proposed in order to interpret the
behavioral dissociation. The most important ones are
summarized below.

Factors Affecting Moral Judgments
The ‘personal vs. impersonal’ distinction is proposed as
one of the factors affecting moral judgment (Greene et al.,
2001; Moore et al., 2008). The idea is that when the harm is
inflicted ‘up close and personal’ (as in the ‘Footbridge
dilemma’) the action is seen as less permissible compared to
the cases in which the harm is caused by using mediating
mechanical means from a distance (as in the ‘Trolley
problem’).
The ‘instrumentality of harm’ is also considered a factor
that could shape judgment (e.g. Borg et al., 2006; Hauser et
al., 2007; Moore et al., 2008). The harm could be either
inflicted intentionally as a ‘mean to an end’ (instrumental
harm) or it could be a ‘side effect’ from saving more people
endangered (incidental harm). It is found that the unintended
incidental harm (foreseen but unintended) was judged as
more permissible compared to intended instrumental harm
(Hauser et al., 2007; Moore et al., 2008).

2381

The ‘inevitability of death’ was also found to be a
significant factor when moral dilemmas are deliberated.
Some moral scenarios suggest a situation where all of the
people in a scene are threatened and would be killed if
nothing is done – i.e. inevitable dilemmas. In other
scenarios, one of the persons in the scene is not threatened
by the situation and would die only in case of intervention
aiming to save the other threatened persons – i.e. death is
avoidable. According to the study of Moore et al. (2008),
judgment differed among scenarios where the hypothetical
victim would die regardless of subjects’ intervention
(inevitable death) or will not die (avoidable death).
Inevitable scenarios were considered to be more permissible
compared to avoidable scenarios. That distinction is thought
to be rationally processed and taken into account while
making moral judgments.
The ‘magnitude of the consequences’ is another very
important factor, recognized by many researchers in the
field. This magnitude of the consequences is represented by
the number of people that are endangered (and possibly
rescued through intervention): e.g. they could be one, five, a
hundred, a whole city, etc. Bartels (2008) demonstrated that
sensitivity to magnitude of consequences is present when
trolley-like moral dilemmas are evaluated. Approval of
harmful action increased with the number of lives that could
possibly be saved through intervention (Bartels, 2008).

Role of Emotions in Moral Judgment
Another important stream in studying moral judgments is
devoted to exploring the role of emotions in such
judgments. A tradition starting with Hume (1978) suggests
that emotions and intuitions are the driving forces of moral
judgments and that reason is ‘a slave of the passions’.
A contemporary theory in such direction is the one
proposed by Haidt (2001) – a social intuitionist theory that
also states that morality is based on emotions rather than
logical reasoning. According to that theory, the moral
judgments are automatic, intuitive, and guided by emotion.
Conscious reasoning serves just as a post-hoc justification
(Haidt, 2001). In support of social intuitionism, Haidt
(2001)
provides
some
evidence
from
“moral
dumbfounding” studies – when asked to judge a certain
behavior (e.g. incest) people are confident that it is not
appropriate, but find it difficult to logically justify their
judgment.
One of the most influential studies in the field is the one by
Greene et al. (2001) that studies the neurological basis of
emotional processing in moral judgments. In Greene et al.
(2001) the dual-process theory is introduced. According to this
theory both emotions and reason play a role in moral
judgments but their role differs according to the personalimpersonal distinction. More precisely, the authors suggest that
‘personal’ moral problems (e.g. ‘Footbridge dilemma’) evoke
fast emotional response that interferes with rational, utilitarian
reasoning; while ‘impersonal’ dilemmas (e.g. ‘Trolley
dilemma’) fail to provoke emotionally salient response and a

utilitarian resolution is preferred. Researchers hypothesized that
different brain systems are engaged when processing both
types of dilemmas. Using fMRI data they found that personal
moral dilemmas elicit brain activation in regions previously
identified as being involved in emotional processing, while
judgment of impersonal moral dilemmas activate regions
underlying working memory and cognitive control. The authors
also reported longer response times when personal harm is
judged as appropriate, speculating that automatic emotional
response interfered with utilitarian reasoning.
However, closer examination of the stimulus material used in
Greene et al. (2001) reveals that the dilemmas used in the study
differ not only with regard to the personal-impersonal
distinction, but they also differ with respect to other factors that
are possible confounds (e.g. personal dilemmas involved more
severe consequences, they involved babies, etc.). Further
reanalysis of the data (McGuire et al., 2009) revealed that the
results of Greene et al. (2001) are due to the strong effects
elicited by few items in the stimulus material. In the study of
Moore et al. (2008), the authors eliminated the possible
confounds made in Greene et al. (2001) and failed to replicate
their response time findings: there was no significant difference
between responses “permissible” and “not permissible” to
personal dilemmas. What they found is that overall personal
dilemmas are judged faster than impersonal ones.
Although Moore et al. (2008) severely criticized the
design of Greene et al. (2001), in their study, the authors
themselves still did not control for a number of potential
confounds. Some of their scenarios implied responsibilities
or duties towards potential victims; others suggested
causing harm to relatives or children. These factors, as well
as the number of persons to be saved, were neither strictly
controlled across the other conditions.

Goals and Hypothesis
The current study aims to explore the role of emotions in
moral judgments. Greene et al. (2001) put forward the idea
about the role of emotions in making utilitarian judgments
in personal dilemmas. Here, we want to study the emotions
in moral dilemmas taking into account two other factors that
are not considered by Greene et al. (2001) but which have
been identified as significant in moral judgment (see e.g.
Moore et al., 2008) as described above:
• inevitability of death – deathful harm needs to be
inflicted either to a person that is going to die
anyway (inevitable death), or to a person that is not
endangered by the situation described in the
scenario (avoidable death);
• instrumentality of harm – harm is inflicted
intentionally as an instrument to save other
endangered people (instrumental harm) or is a
byproduct of another act, aiming to save more
people threatened (incidental harm).
For that purpose, hypothetical, artificial moral dilemmas are
constructed while controlling for possible confounds

2382

unaccounted for in previous research (see the description of
the stimuli below).
To study moral judgments, responses about the moral
permissibility of the hypothetical resolutions to the
dilemmas are elicited.
Response time data is collected to identify potential
interference between emotional processing and rational
deliberation (interference is supposed to produce longer
reaction times).
Skin conductance response (SCR) is used as a measure of
emotional involvement in moral judgment. Being a non–
invasive and reliable method to identify sympathetic
arousal, electrodermal activity measures are widely used to
detect emotional engagement in judgment and decision
making (Naqvi & Bechara, 2006; Figner & Murphy, 2010).
Another significant advantage of the method is that it is
sensitive to emotional responses that might not be
consciously processed and therefore can not be reported by
participants. The SCR is found to be positively correlated
with emotional arousal (Dawson, Schell, & Filion, 2007).
It is hypothesized in this paper that killing one person to
save more people will be judged as more permissible when
death is inevitable (compared to avoidable). When harm is
inflicted as an “instrument” to save other people, we expect
it to be evaluated as less permissible compared to incidental
harm.
It is also hypothesized that moral judgments evoke
emotional response that influences the process of moral
judgment. However, we think that emotions are important
not only in personal dilemmas (as suggested by Greene et
al. 2001) but are present in all situations in which difficult
decisions involving harm to other persons are made (as
suggested also by Moore et al., 2008).

Experiment
Stimuli
As stated above, the stimuli are constructed with the aim to
control for possible confounding identified in previous
research:
1) All of the stimuli are homogenously structured:
introductory paragraph describes the situation, followed by one
sentence that introduces the one and only means of escape;
finally, a resolution is suggested in a third paragraph. 2) Two
avoidable and two inevitable situations are used. In order to
manipulate instrumentality of harm only the resolution
paragraphs are modified. 3) All dilemmas are impersonal in
order to control for the influence of the personal-impersonal
factor. 4) In all situations, there is a dilemma between killing
one person and saving five other people. 4) In all dilemmas
participants are assigned to the role of a protagonist who is not
endangered by the situation. 5) The introductory paragraph
describes simply the presence of the protagonist in some
working environment without explicitly assigning a specific
role or any responsibilities. 6) All of the six endangered
persons are identified with equal roles in the described working
environment (one and the same for all six persons – workmen,

miners, or crew-members) thus suggesting equal
responsibilities. 7) The endangered and potentially to be
sacrificed persons are adults only. 8) All situations are designed
to illustrate artificial scenarios in order to avoid potential
confounding effects, e.g. familiarity with a specific situation or
readily available personal opinion on resolutions. 9) The
presentation of each situation is followed by one and the same
question: ‘Is it permissible to act as described?’ with two
possible responses – ‘Yes’ and ‘No’.
An example of avoidable dilemma with 2 possible
resolutions (instrumental and incidental) is the following:
Scenario: You are in a factory. You are standing on a
platform above a railway track. Some loaded trolleys
are moving along the rails. One heavy-loaded trolley is
speeding towards five workmen as its breaks had
suddenly stopped working. There is no time for them to
run away and they are going to die. The trolley could be
stopped only if a heavy object is set on its way.
Instrumental resolution: The only thing that you can do
is to push a control button and to release the safety belt
of a workman who is hanging from the platform. He is
going to fall down on the rails. The workman and the
instruments that are attached to his uniform, together,
are heavy enough to stop the speeding trolley. He is
going to die but the other five persons will be saved.
Incidental resolution: The only thing that you can do is
to push a control button and to release a heavy
container that is hanging from the platform. It is going
to fall down on the rails. The container is heavy enough
to stop the speeding trolley. There is another workman
on the container, who is going to fall down on the
ground. He is going to die but the other five persons will
be saved.
An example of inevitable dilemma dilemma with 2 possible
resolutions (instrumental and incidental) is presented below:
Scenario: You are in a mine. Some trolleys are attached
to a rope that moves them upward the exit of the mine.
Two trolleys are headed upwards. In the upper one,
there are five miners and in the bottom one, there is one
miner. The rope that brings the trolleys toward the exit
is destroyed and in a few seconds, the five miners in the
upper trolley and the one that is in the bottom trolley
are going to die. In order for the rope not to be totally
destroyed, the weight of the trolleys needs to be
reduced.
Instrumental resolution: The only thing that you could
do is to push a control button so that the bottom trolley
would be tilted. The miner who is in the trolley is going
to fall and the weight would be reduced enough. He is
going to die but the other five persons will be saved.
Incidental resolution: The only thing that you could do
is to push a control button so that the bottom trolley
would be tilted. The load that is inside the trolley is
going to fall down and the weight would be reduced
enough. In the second trolley there is another person
who is going to fall as well. He is going to die but the
other five persons will be saved.

2383

the task. We use these markers to select portions of the
signal that are related to the response selection process.
Following Naqvi & Bechara (2006), for each such period an
integral corresponding to the area defined by the differenced
skin conductance signal and the line connecting the end
points of the signal for the analyzed period is calculated.
Then, the resulting value is divided by the measurement
interval (in seconds) so the final measure used for the SCR
is in µS/s.

Method
Design and Procedure Instrumentality of harm
(instrumental vs. incidental) and inevitability of death
(avoidable vs. inevitable) are investigated in a withinsubjects design.
Each participant is presented with 8 dilemmas in a
randomized order – 4 scenarios (2 avoidable and 2
inevitable) each presented twice – once with an instrumental
resolution and once with an incidental resolution.
For each dilemma the following measures are analyzed:
number of responses ‘permissible’, response times, skinconductance reaction (SCR) during the response period. The
calculation of the measures is described below.
Procedure Participants are tested individually. First, the
electrodes for recording skin conductance are attached. Next,
the experimenter reads the instructions. In the instructions it is
emphasized that participants have to imagine that the action
described is the only possible action; that they have to disregard
legality and have to consider only moral appropriateness of
judgment. Each participant is asked to remain relatively still in
order to avoid artifacts in the recordings.
First, three practice dilemmas are shown. Next, the eight
stimuli are presented in random order using the E-Prime 1.2
software. Each dilemma is presented on a single screen.
Participants give self-paced confirmation for reading
completion and comprehension of the presented dilemma by
pressing a key. After the key press the screen is changed –
the description of the dilemma disappears and the following
question appears: ‘Is it permissible to act as described?’.
Participants respond either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ using the computer
keyboard. The response is followed by 8 seconds inter-trial
interval.

Participants A total of 32 participants (14 male, 18 female)
took part in the experiment. The age range was from 19 to
40 (M = 23.3). The participants took part in the experiment
in exchange for partial credit toward undergraduate course
requirements. SCR data from 4 participants were discarded
due to technical difficulties.

Results
Responses to the Dilemmas The percentage of affirmative
responses is presented at Figure 1. Mean number of
responses ‘permissible’ is analyzed in a repeated-measures
ANOVA with 2 within-subjects factors – Instrumentality of
harm (instrumental vs. incidental) and inevitability of death
(avoidable vs. inevitable).
The analysis revealed main effects of instrumentality of
harm (F(1, 31) = 9.27, p = 0.005, ηρ² = 0.23) and
inevitability of death (F(1, 31) = 25.53, p < 0.001, ηρ² =
0.45). The two factors interacted significantly (F(1, 31) =
8.86, p = 0.006, ηρ² = 0.22).

Responses and Response Time Data Recordings
Responses and response time data are collected via E-Prime
1.2. The response time is considered the interval between
the question onset and the YES/NO response.
Skin Conductance Recordings Skin conductance is
recorded using the Biopac, Inc. MP 150 system and the
GSR100C amplifier with a sampling rate of 200 samples/s.
Constant voltage (0.5 V) is used to measure skin
conductance. The amplifier is connected to TSD203 AgAgCl, unpolarizable finger electrodes. The electrodes are
placed on the left hand of the participants and they used
their right hand to select choices with the computer
keyboard.
As the skin-galvanic reaction is developing slowly after a
stimulus presentation, skin conductance signal (SCR) is shifted
by 200 samples (1 s). In order to remove the high frequency
noise and the tonic component the SCR signal is smoothed
(smoothing interval of 200 samples) and then a movingdifference function (10 samples difference interval) is applied,
leaving only the phasic changes (Naqvi & Bechara, 2006).
The markers generated by the presentation software are
used to synchronize the skin conductance recordings with

Figure 1: Percentage of responses ‘permissible’ .
The results from the analysis confirmed that incidental
harm was judged to be more appropriate than instrumental
harm (69.5% vs. 55.5% responses ‘permissible’ ). Killing
someone whose death was inevitable was judged to be more
permissible than killing a person whose death was avoidable
(75.8% vs. 49.2 %).
Further analysis of the interaction shows that for
inevitable dilemmas there was no significant difference
between instrumental and incidental resolutions (75% vs.
76.6%). For avoidable dilemmas, incidental resolutions
were judged as more permissible than instrumental ones
(62.5% vs. 35.9%, p<0.001).
Response times Average response times in each of the
experimental conditions are presented in Figure 2. Response
times were analyzed using a 2 (instrumental vs. incidental)

2384

x 2 (avoidable vs. inevitable) repeated measures ANOVA.
There was no significant effect of inevitability of death (F(1,
31) = 0.3, p=0.59) and factors did not interact (F(1, 31) =
1.28, p = 0.27). Only instrumentality of harm demonstrated
main effect (F(1, 31) = 4.64, p = 0.04, ηρ² = 0.13).

Figure 3: Average SCR during response selection.

Figure 2: Average response time by condition.
Participants needed more time to respond to dilemmas
that suggested incidental harm compared to instrumental
one (1494 ms vs. 1211 ms).
It could be speculated that the greater proportion of
responses ‘permissible’ for incidental dilemmas is
responsible for the longer deliberation time in incidental
dilemmas. So, it is considered important to check what is
the influence of the response given (‘permissible’ or ‘not
permissible’) on response times. It was not possible to
include this additional factor in the repeated measures
ANOVA, as most of the participants’ data had at least one
empty cell. Therefore, response times for ‘permissible’ and
‘not permissible’ responses were collapsed (regardless of
the experimental condition) for each participant that has
given both responses (25 participants).
Repeated-measures ANOVA failed to demonstrate
significant effect of response type on response times (F(1,
24) = 2.88, p = 0.102) although the mean values were in the
expected direction – ‘permissible’ responses were given
more slowly (1612 ms) compared to ‘not permissible’
responses (1294 ms).
Integral SCR Average SCR data is presented in Figure 3. SCR
data were analyzed using a 2 (instrumental vs. incidental) x
2 (avoidable vs. inevitable) repeated measures ANOVA. 4
subjects were excluded because of empty cells. Data from
28 subjects were analyzed.
There was no significant effect of inevitability of death
(F(1, 27) = 0.01, p = 0.94), and factors did not interact (F(1,
27) = 0.82, p = 0.37). Instrumentality of harm demonstrated
marginally significant main effect (F(1, 27) = 3.32, p = 0.08,
ηρ2 = 0.11).
Incidental dilemmas yielded higher SCR compared to
instrumental dilemmas (0.52 µS/s vs. 0.36 µS/s).

Again, it could be suggested that ‘permissible’ responses
induced the observed arousal. The next step was to analyze
SCR for ‘permissible’ and ‘not permissible’ responses in
order to test this assumption. It was not possible to include
this additional factor in the repeated-measures ANOVA, as
most of the participants’ data had at least one empty cell.
So, response times for ‘permissible’ and ‘not permissible’
responses were collapsed (regardless of the experimental
condition) for each participant that has given both responses
(22 participants). SCR for ‘permissible’ responses (0.36
µS/s) and for ‘not permissible’ responses (0.56 µS/s) was
not significantly different (F(1, 21) = 2.19, p = 0.15).

Summary of the Results
The importance of inevitability of death factor was
confirmed. Inevitable scenarios were judged as more
permissible compared to avoidable. As hypothesized,
deciding to kill one to save five is judged to be more
permissible when the death of the person to be killed is
inevitable.
In agreement with previous research (Moore et al., 2008;
Hauser et al., 2007), it was found that incidental harm is
considered as more permissible compared to instrumental.
Instrumentality was found to interact with inevitability.
For inevitable dilemmas, there was no significant difference
between instrumental and incidental resolutions – in both
cases the judgments are in favor of the proposed sacrifice of
one person in order to save five others. For avoidable
dilemmas incidental resolutions were judged as more
‘permissible’ than instrumental ones.
When the resolution involved incidental death, the
response time was longer than when the resolution involved
instrumental death. Also, the arousal (as measured by SCR)
was higher when the resolution was incidental (compared to
instrumental). It is possible that this pattern of results is due
to the higher proportion of responses ‘permissible’ for the
incidental resolutions.

2385

Summary and Discussion
In the current study, strictly controlled moral dilemmas are
used to study intuitions in moral judgments concerning
situations in which one human life has to be sacrificed in
order to save more human lives.
The results showed that judgment of hypothetical moral
dilemmas are influenced by instrumentality of harm, as well
as by the inevitability of death. Similar to previous research,
experiments demonstrated that harm is judged as more
permissible when death is inevitable compared to avoidable.
Incidental harm is judged as more permissible than the
instrumental harm when the situation involves avoidable
death (and there is no difference for the inevitable
scenarios).
To study the emotional processing in judgments, response
times and skin-conductance reactions are analyzed.
Incidental dilemmas took more time for consideration and
participants exhibited higher arousal while making a
response compared to instrumental dilemmas.
While Greene et al. (2001) propose that emotional
processing interferes with utilitarian responses only for
personal dilemmas, by using more controlled situations we
propose that emotional engagement varies with other
factors. Based on both SCR and response time data, it could
be speculated that when instrumentality of harm is
considered, judgment is influenced by emotional reactions,
as well.
On the other hand, it is important to note that the observed
difference could be due to the greater number of utilitarian
judgments in favor of incidental dilemmas. What actually
provoked emotional engagement (indexed by SCR) and thus
longer reaction time could be the utilitarian judgments
themselves. Such explanation is in contrast with the theories
proposing that moral judgments are intuitive and guided by
emotions and that reasoning serves just as post-hoc
justification. It is possible that in moral judgments people
use utilitarian reasoning that requires a person to be
sacrificed in the name of greater good, still this judgment
provokes emotional arousal.	  
Further experiments that explore the timing and causal
relationship between emotions and moral judgments would
be of use to look more clearly at this issue.

References
Bartels, D. (2008). Principled moral sentiment and the
flexibility of moral judgment and decision making.
Cognition, 108, 381-417.
Borg, J., Hynes, C., Van Horn, J., Grafton, S., Sinnott-­‐
Armstrong, W. (2006). Consequences, action, and
intention as factors in moral judgments: an fMRI
investigation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18,
803-837.
Dawson M. E., Schell A. M., Filion D. L. (2007). The
electrodermal system. Handbook of Psychophysiology,

3rd edition, J. T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary, G. G.
Berntson (editors), Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 159-181.
Figner, B., Murphy R. O. (2010). Using skin conductance in
judgment and decision making research. A handbook of
process tracing methods for decision research, SchulteMecklenbeck M., Kuehberger A., Ranyard R. (editors),
Psychology Press, NY.
Foot Ph. (1978). The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine
of the Double Effect. Virtues and Vices, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Greene, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Engell, A. D., Darley, J. M., &
Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural bases of cognitive conﬂict
and control in moral judgment. Neuron, 44, 389-400.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley,
J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293,
2105-2108.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment.
Psychological Review, 108, 814-834.
Hauser, M., Cushman, F., Young, L., Jin, R., & Mikhail, J.
(2007). A dissociation between moral judgment and
justification. Mind and Language, 22, 1-21.
Hume, D. (1739/1978). A Treatise of Human Nature, SelbyBigge, L. A. & Nidditch, P. H. (editors), Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Kant, I. [1785] (1983). Grounding for the metaphysics of
morals. Ethical Philosophy (J. W. Ellington, Trans.).
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.
McGuire, J., Langdon, R., Coltheart, M., & Mackenzie, C.
(2009). A reanalysis of the personal/impersonal
distinction in moral psychology research. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 577-580.
Mikhail, J. (2007). Universal moral grammar: theory,
evidence and the future. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
114, 143-152.
Moore, A., Clark, B., & Kane, M. (2008). Who shalt not
kill?: Individual differences in working memory capacity,
executive control, and moral judgment. Psychological
Science, 19, 549-557.
Naqvi N. H., Bechara A., (2006). Skin conductance: A
psychophysiological approach to the study of decision
making. Methods in mind, C. Senior, T. Russell, M. S.
Gazzaniga (editors), The MIT Press.
O’Neill, P. & Petrinovich, L. (1998). A Preliminary Cross-­‐
Cultural Study of Moral Intuitions. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 19, 349-367.
Petrinovich, P., O’Neil, P., & Jorgensen M. (1993). An
Empirical Study of Moral Intuitions: Towards an
Evolutionary Ethics. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 64, 467-478.

2386

