UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Moral Rhetoric in Twitter: A Case Study of the U.S. Federal Shutdown of 2013

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9sw937kk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Sagi, Eyal
Dehghani, Morteza

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Moral Rhetoric in Twitter: A Case Study of the U.S. Federal Shutdown of 2013
Eyal Sagi (eyal@u.northwestern.edu)
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Morteza Dehghani (mdehghan@usc.edu)
Brain Creativity Institute, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA
Abstract
In this paper we apply a computational text analysis technique
used for measuring moral rhetoric in text to analyze the moral
loadings of tweets. We focus our analysis on tweets regarding
the 2013 federal government shutdown; a topic that was at the
forefront of U.S. politics in late 2013. Our results demonstrate
that the positions of the members of the two major political
parties are mirrored by the positions taken by the Twitter
communities that are aligned with them. We also analyze
retweeting behavior by examining the differences in the moral
loadings of intra-community and inter-community retweets.
We find that retweets in our corpus favor rhetoric that
enhances the cohesion of the community, and emphasize
content over moral rhetoric. We argue that the method
proposed in this paper contributes to the general study of
moral cognition and social behavior.
Keywords: Twitter; Moral Reasoning; Social Networking;
Political Science; Corpus Statistics.

Introduction
Social networks now play a major role in the dissemination
of opinions and news in the U.S., and Twitter plays a
prominent role in this domain. In this paper, we explore the
moral rhetoric expressed by tweets. Our analysis focuses on
two questions: (1) do different communities of users show
different patterns of moral rhetoric, and (2) are tweets that
users choose to repeat on their feed (“retweet”)
characterized by specific aspects of moral rhetoric that
separate them from other tweets. We focus our analysis on
tweets relating to a topic that was at the forefront of the U.S.
news during October 2013 – The federal government
shutdown.
Almost since its founding, Twitter.com has been of
interest to researchers from a variety of domains. Among
others, researchers have investigated Twitter’s community
structure (e.g., Java, Song, Finin, & Tseng, 2007), the
platform’s potential for data mining (e.g., Sakaki, Okazaki,
& Matsuo, 2010) and as a tool for collaboration (e.g., Honey
& Herring, 2009). There has also been research on
identifying the topics of tweets (e.g., Hong & Davison,
2010) and predicting which tweets will be retweeted (e.g.,
Hong, Dan, & Davison, 2011).
In the present paper, we are concerned with the
identifying the moral content of tweets and how such moral
rhetoric might relate to the community to which the user
belongs and to the likelihood that it will be repeated by
other users. We chose to analyze tweets regarding a political
issue because prior research has demonstrated that moral

rhetoric is prevalent in political debates (e.g., Marietta,
2009).
Our investigation contributes to the general study of
moral cognition by providing an alternative method for
measuring moral concerns in a more naturalistic setting
compared to self-report survey method and artificial
paradigms used in traditional judgment and decision-making
experiments.
Following Sagi and Dehghani (2013), we define moral
rhetoric as “the language used for advocating or taking a
moral stance towards an issue by invoking or making salient
various moral concerns”. Our analysis of moral rhetoric is
grounded in Moral Foundations Theory (Graham et al.,
2013; Haidt & Joseph, 2004), which distinguishes between
five psychological systems, also thought of as moral
intuitions or concerns, which account for various aspects of
our moral cognition. Each moral concern is associated with
both virtues and vices, as shown below:
1. Care/harm: Caring and protecting individuals from
harm.
2. Fairness/cheating: Concerns regarding acts of
cooperation, reciprocity and cheating.
3. Loyalty/betrayal: Characterized by expressions of
patriotism, self-sacrifice, etc. as well as their vice
counterparts such as betrayal, and unfaithfulness to
the group.
4. Authority/subversion: Concerns regarding topics
such as respect and insubordination.
5. Purity/degradation: Related to sanctity as a virtue and
disgust, degradation, and pollution as vices.
These five concerns serve separate, but related, social
functions. Moreover, it has been shown that the degree of
sensitivity to various concerns varies across cultures
(Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009). Likewise, Moral
Foundations Theory suggests that the sensitivity towards
these concerns can change over time and across contexts.
Various lines of research have demonstrated differences
between liberals and conservatives in the U.S. on the degree
to which they attend to the various moral concerns (e.g.,
Graham et al., 2009; Koleva, Graham, Iyer, Ditto, & Haidt,
2012). Moreover, endorsement of the various foundations
are strong predictors of support for political issues such as
abortion, immigration, and same-sex marriage (Koleva et
al., 2012). Koleva et al. (2012) show that moral foundations
are better predictors of such support than more traditional
predictors such as ideology and religiosity.

1347

Since the topic of the analysis we chose is political, we
expected that the majority of users will be politically active,
which, due to the bipartisan nature of U.S. politics, means
that they will likely identify with one of the two major
parties – the Republican party or the Democratic party.
Because the government shutdown was characterized by a
struggle between these two parties we hypothesized that this
will be reflected in the tweets on the subject. That is, the
positions of the two parties in the political struggle will be
mirrored by the positions taken by the Twitter communities
that are aligned with them. We further hypothesized that this
“culture war” is a reflection of the differences in the moral
preferences between the two parties. Therefore, the moral
rhetoric used by the two communities will be more similar
following the crisis than during it. However, it is important
to note that showing a similar moral concern does not
necessarily mean that the particular topics underlying this
concern are the same. For instance, while both parties might
be concerned with loyalty, one party might show a concern
regarding patriotism while the other might be more
concerned with self-sacrifice. Nevertheless, focusing
concerns on the same dimension indicates that qualitatively
similar types of representations and reasoning are used.
This, in turn, provides some common ground for the two
sides, which is crucial for resolving differences.
Consequently, it is more likely that the two communities
would share concern regarding some moral dimensions after
reaching an agreement than before.
In addition to examining how communities differ from
one another, our analysis of moral rhetoric also allows us to
test whether tweets that users consider important enough to
repeat show patterns of moral rhetoric that differentiate
them from other tweets. Moreover, because the topic we
chose involves two well-established communities, it is
possible to also compare retweets that cross from one
community to another with those that remain within a single
community. Differences in the rhetoric between such interand intra- community retweets are important because intercommunity retweets are one of the main channels through
which information crosses from one community to the
other. Likewise, intra-community retweets are important to
the cohesiveness of the community – they let one
community member show support for other members of
their community. This latter hypothesis leads to a fairly
direct prediction: That intra-community retweets, more than
inter-community ones, should show rhetoric that is
associated with loyalty dimension because that dimension is
directly related to group cohesiveness – a sense of
community is based on notions such as loyalty, and ‘us’.

Method
In this section, we will describe our data collection
method and the techniques we used for community
detection and for measuring moral rhetoric in text. We used
a community detection method to find the most dominant
communities in our corpus – a conservative community,
associated with the Republican party, and a liberal

community, associated with the Democratic party. We
hypothesize that these two communities will show different
moral concerns for the duration of the government
shutdown (October 1st through 16th), but that this difference
will be diminished after the crisis concludes. Finally, we
hypothesize that retweets will show a pattern of moral
rhetoric that is distinctive from that of general tweets.
Specifically, we predict that intra-community retweets will
show a higher than average loading on the loyalty moral
concern.

Data Collection
We used the public Twitter stream, which provides random
samples of the data flowing throw the network, to collect
tweets, and network information, about the government
shutdown. The Tweepy API 1 was used for this purpose. We
started by collecting data on the first day of the shutdown
(October 1st). Using the API described above, we searched
the public stream for a list of hashtags and pages that were
collected independently and agreed upon before we began
collecting data (see Appendix A for the list of hashtags we
used). We stopped data collection on October 24th, about a
week after the end of the government shutdown. We
collected the following information about every tweet: the
date and time the tweet was published, the ID of the user
who published the tweet, and the tweet itself. Following the
period in which we collected the tweets, we gathered
information about the network structure within the corpus
using the Tweepy API. Specifically, we collected the list of
followers and friends for every user in the corpus and used
this information to map the network structure.

Language Detection
We used Chromium’s Compact Language Detector to detect
the language of each tweet and limited our analysis to
Tweets that were identified as English. Specifically, we
used the R API made available through the Chromium
browser via the Chromium Compact Language Detector
library 2.

Community Detection
One of our goals in this paper is to investigate whether there
are differences in the use of moral rhetoric between different
groups of users. Because of the political nature of the topic,
we assumed that the majority of users were politically
active. Given the bipartisan politics spectrum in the U.S., we
expected that most of the users would identify as either
Democrats or Republicans.
In order to identify the various communities in our data,
we formed a network based on ‘follower’ information. That
is, we connected two nodes (users) on the social graph if
one node was the follower of the other. This resulted in
9,601,660 edges connecting the 167,041 nodes in the graph.
1

https://github.com/tweepy/tweepy
https://code.google.com/p/chromium-compact-languagedetector/

1348

2

Liberal Tweets

Conservative Tweets
After Shutdown

During Shutdown
0.025

0.02

0.02

Mean loading

Mean loading

During Shutdown
0.025

0.015
0.01
0.005
0

0.01
0.005
0

Authority Harm Loyalty Purity Fairness
Figure 2 - Mean moral concern loadings for liberal tweets
during and after the shutdown. Error bars represent standard
error of the mean.

Authority Harm Loyalty Purity Fairness
Figure 1 - Mean moral concern loadings for conservative
tweets during and after the shutdown. Error bars represent
standard error of the mean.
We then used a greedy community detection algorithm
developed by Clauset, Newman, and Moore (2004). This
algorithm works especially well for large graphs. It starts in
an unclustered state by assuming that all the nodes in the
graph form singleton communities. Then, it iteratively
calculates likely improvements of modularity when two
adjacent communities are merged. Two communities are
then merged if this likelihood is higher than a threshold.
This process is repeated until there are no more
communities left to be merged. We used the implementation
of this algorithm available in the R igraph package 3.

Measuring Moral Rhetoric
We based our measure of moral rhetoric on the method
described in Sagi and Dehghani (2013). At the core of this
measure is the notion of word co-occurrence patterns as
used by methods such as Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA;
Deerwester, Dumais, Furnas, Landauer, & Harshman, 1990;
Landauer & Dumais, 1997). Specifically, we constructed a
semantic vector space by applying singular value
decomposition to a matrix of word co-occurrence
frequencies. The distance between two words in this space
is inversely related to the probability that they will co-occur
in the text. A common measure used for the distance is the
angle between the vectors representing the words, where,
for normalized vectors, the cosine of the angle is equivalent
to the correlation between the vectors. Furthermore, these
patterns of co-occurrence are not random and words that
relate to similar topics tend to occur together more
frequently than unrelated words (e.g., moon and earth tend
to occur with each other more frequently than either tends to
occur with gun).
By calculating the distance in this space between a tweet
and a set of terms associated with a particular moral
concern, we can estimate the likelihood that the tweet
expresses the moral concern. This results in a set of moral
concern loadings that are suitable for statistical analysis.
http://igraph.sourceforge.net/

0.015

-0.005

-0.005

3

After Shutdown

Results
In our analysis we were interested in two separate questions.
Firstly, we were interested in analyzing the moral rhetoric
used by conservative and liberal Twitter users over the
course of the government shutdown. Secondly, we wanted
to explore the relationship between tweets and retweets.
The corpus of tweets we used was comprised of 421,778
English language tweets (approx. 9.5 million words) from
167,041 users. We used Infomap (Schütze, 1997, 1998) 4 to
construct a semantic space based on the corpus. Next we
computed the moral loading on the 5 moral concerns for
each tweet by calculating the mean correlation between the
vector representing the tweet and the vectors representing
relevant terms derived from the Moral Foundations
Dictionary (Graham et al., 2009) 5. This results in loading
scores between 1 and -1 which can be interpreted in a
fashion analogous to correlations. However, it is important
to note that the sparsity of morally loaded terms limits the
actual range of loadings. In our corpus, the highest
measured moral loading of any tweet is 0.20, and 75% of
tweets have an overall loading below .03.
Additionally, we computed the network structure of the
corpus and used the community detection algorithm
described above to identify the various communities in the
network. The two biggest communities that emerge from the
connectivity structure of the graph cover 85.6% (143,023)
of the nodes in the graph. Therefore, we focus our analysis
on these two communities. A manual analysis of the 20
most central nodes in each community (closeness centrality
is a measure of how many steps it takes to reach every other
node in the cluster from a given node) revealed that, as we
had predicted, members of the main two clusters in the
network identify with either the Republican or Democratic
parties. This is a further indication of the bipartisan nature
4

http://infomap-nlp.sourceforge.net/
To generate the list of terms we identified all of terms in the
corpus with a frequency greater than 20 that matched entries in the
Moral Foundations Dictionary. This included both regular words
and hashtags.

1349

5

Table 1 - The distribution of tweets and retweets.
Retweets
Original
Conservative
Liberal
Tweets
Source
Source
71,767
9,797
1,025
Conservative
132,647
1,140
18,920
Liberal
of the political spectrum in U.S. politics. We labeled these
communities as conservatives and liberals, respectively.
In order to further validate the nature of these clusters we
examined the proportion of hashtags and references that are
associates with conservatives and liberals. In particular we
looked at the hashtags #obamacare and #aca, and reference
beginning with @fox and @cnn (standing for sources
related to Fox News and CNN, respectively). In all cases we
found that expected results – Mentions of obamacare and
Fox News were more than twice as common in the
community we labeled as conservative, whereas uses of aca
and CNN where twice as common in the liberal community
than the conservative one (p < .001 in all cases).
We grouped the tweets based on their community of
origin and whether they were posted during the shutdown or
after it had concluded. The mean loadings on the various
moral concerns for the conservative community are given in
Figure 1. The mean loadings for the liberal community are
given in Figure 2. Appendix B provides a sample of tweets
with relatively high moral loadings from both communities.

Conservative and Liberal Tweets
A multivariate analysis of variance with the community of
origin and the week as the independent variables and the
loadings on the five moral concerns as the dependent
variables revealed several key results:
1. Conservative tweeters showed a higher overall
moral loading that liberal tweeters, F(5, 182857)
= 53.77, p < .0001.
2. The moral rhetoric used in tweets increased over
time. However, while tweets by conservatives
showed a week-to-week increase, tweets by
liberals only showed an increase in moral
loading in the week following the resolution of
the shutdown, F(5, 182857) = 692.89, p < .0001.
3. Over the course of the shutdown, conservatives
used rhetoric that was most closely associated
with fairness, authority, and loyalty whereas
liberal rhetoric was more concerned with harm
and purity. In the week following the shutdown
tweets from both communities showed increased
concern with fairness (All results, p < .0001).
These results suggest that liberals and conservatives
initially viewed the shutdown differently, liberals focused
on the possible harm the shutdown might cause, whereas
conservatives stressed the ideals of freedom and rights
(fairness). However, as the crisis resolved, both sides appear
to agree that the issue of fairness is an important concern.

Mean loading difference

Intra-Community

Inter-Community

0.005
0
-0.005
-0.01
-0.015
-0.02

Authority Harm

Loyalty

Purity

Fairness

Figure 3 - Mean difference in moral concern loadings
between retweets and normal tweets. Positive numbers
indicate an increase in moral loading for retweets compared
to normal tweets. Negative numbers indicate a decrease in
the moral loading of retweets compared to normal tweets.
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

Comparing Tweets and Retweets
We now turn to examining the relationship between
tweets and retweets. To conduct this analysis we first
identified retweets, following the conventions of Twitter, as
tweets that begin with the term ‘RT’. Next we attempted to
identify the source tweet for each retweet by matching the
retweet (without the ‘RT’ term and the attribution) with its
source. Within our corpus we were able to find the source
for approximately a third of the retweets. In the following
analysis we only used retweets whose source was identified
as being a user in either the conservative or liberal
communities. Table 1 summarizes the distribution of the
tweets and retweets among the communities. Overall, 93%
(28,717) of the retweets were published by users from the
same community as the original tweet. This is expected
because of the way we identified the communities. The
‘follower’ relation that we used to construct our social
network graph also identifies users who are likely to retweet
a particular user’s tweet.
To analyze these results we labeled a retweet as “intracommunity” if its source community was the same as the
community of the retweeting user (e.g., a conservative
retweeting a tweet by another conservative). Retweets
whose source community was different from the community
of the retweeting user were labeled “inter-community”.
Since we are interested in examining the properties of
retweets as they compare to tweets in general, we subtracted
the average loading for original tweets from the source
community from each retweet. The resulting number is an
index of how a particular retweet differs from the average of
its source community. Figure 3 shows the means of these
difference index for each moral concern based on whether it
is intra- or inter-community.
We conducted a multivariate analysis of variance with the
retweet type (intra- or inter- community) as an independent
variable and the moral difference index on the five moral
concerns as the dependent variables. This analysis revealed

1350

that retweets are generally less morally loaded than the
average original tweet (F(5, 235290) = 1649.1, p < .0001)
and that this difference is greater for inter-community
tweets than intra-community ones (F(5, 30876) = 8.73, p <
.0001). In stark contrast with this overall pattern, intracommunity tweets tended to show a higher than average
loading on the loyalty moral concern (p < .001). These
results suggest that users are more likely to retweet
messages that focus on content rather than rhetoric. At the
same time, users also tend to retweet messages that employ
rhetoric that appeals to their sense of community belonging.
The result that tweets that users choose to repeat are less
morally loaded than the average tweet is somewhat
counterintuitive. It might be expected that users will choose
to repeat tweets that they connect with emotionally and that
represent their opinions. Consequently, we might expect
users to repeat tweets that show a high degree of emotional
and moral content. In contrast, the observed result is in the
opposite direction. To further explore this result we
manually examined tweets that showed a high moral
loading, as well as retweets. This analysis revealed two
separate explanations for the observed effect. Firstly, many
of the highly morally loaded tweets involved language that
can be considered inappropriate and inflammatory, using
terms such as “racist”, “stupid”, “gays”. Furthermore, these
tweets show frequent use of religious terms, such as
“Christians” and “Muslims”, in derogatory contexts. This
effect can also be observed by examining the tweets that
were retweeted from those available in Appendix B,
although tweets that are overly inflammatory were
intentionally excluded from the Appendix. Secondly, many
of the least morally loaded tweets come from major media
and news organizations such as NBC, CNN, and Fox News.
These tweets are worded in fairly objective and non-morally
loaded terms and are frequently retweeted, therefore
reducing the overall moral loading of retweets. Both of
these explanations suggest that retweets are chosen based on
the information they convey rather than their emotional
content. Regardless, it is important to note that these
explanations do not explain the difference in moral loading
between intra- and inter- community retweets, only the
general trend that finds that retweets are less morally loaded
than the average tweet.

Discussion
In this paper we explored the moral rhetoric used by Twitter
users during the U.S. Federal Government Shutdown in
October 2013. In accordance with out hypothesis, we found
that conservative and liberal tweets expressed different
moral concerns during the shutdown. Tweets by
conservatives focused on the concerns of fairness, authority,
and loyalty, while liberal tweets showed more concern for
harm and purity. In addition, conservatives showed a higher
overall level of moral rhetoric in their tweets, suggesting a
higher degree of emotional involvement in the debate.
Interestingly, while we hypothesized that the moral
rhetoric of the two communities will become more similar

after the resolution of the crisis, we only observed a trend in
that direction – Both communities converged on fairness as
the most important moral concern, but the remaining four
concerns did not differ much from their levels during the
shutdown.
We also investigated the moral rhetoric exhibited by
retweets. Here we found that, as predicted, retweets showed
an increase in rhetoric involving loyalty when repeating
tweets from their own community, but not when repeated
tweets from other communities. Our analysis also revealed
that retweets tend to exhibit a diminished level of moral
rhetoric overall, suggesting that, with the exception of
rhetoric supporting group cohesiveness, users select tweets
to repeat based on their content rather than emotional and
moral associations.
The research we presented here demonstrates the
feasibility of quantitative moral rhetoric analysis on large
corpora. This type of analysis can provide interesting
insights on the moral reasoning that guides users of Twitter
and other social networks when posting and repeating
information. Moreover, it is likely that the moral reasoning
employed when interacting in social networks is the same as
used elsewhere. Consequently, the wide availability of this
type of data, combined with an efficient, quantitative,
analysis, can be used to study general processes of moral
reasoning.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by AFOSR YIP
(FA9550-12-1-0361) and DARPA N2 (D12AP00069) to
Morteza Dehghani. The content of this publication does not
necessarily reﬂect the position or the policy of the
Government, and no official endorsement should be
inferred.

References
Clauset, A., Newman, M. E., & Moore, C. (2004). Finding
community structure in very large networks. Physical
Review
E,
70(6),
066111.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.70.066111
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T.
K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by latent semantic
analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 41(6), 391–407. doi:10.1002/(SICI)10974571(199009)41:6<391::AID-ASI1>3.0.CO;2-9
Graham, J., Haidt, J., Koleva, S., Motyl, M., Iyer, R.,
Wojcik, S., & Ditto, P. (2013). Moral foundations theory:
The pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 55–130.
doi:10.1177/0963721412456842
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and
conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(5),
1029–1046. doi:10.1037/a0015141
Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2004). Intuitive ethics: How
innately prepared intuitions generate culturally variable
virtues. Daedalus, 133(4), 55–66.

1351

Honey, C., & Herring, S. C. (2009). Beyond Microblogging:
Conversation and Collaboration via Twitter. In 42nd
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
2009. HICSS ’09 (pp. 1–10). doi:10.1109/HICSS.2009.89
Hong, L., Dan, O., & Davison, B. D. (2011). Predicting
popular messages in twitter. In Proceedings of the 20th
international conference companion on World wide web
(pp.
57–58).
ACM.
Retrieved
from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1963222
Hong, L., & Davison, B. D. (2010). Empirical study of topic
modeling in twitter. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Social Media Analytics (pp. 80–88). ACM.
Retrieved
from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1964870
Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., & Tseng, B. (2007). Why we
twitter: understanding microblogging usage and
communities. In Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st
SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and social
network analysis (pp. 56–65). ACM. Retrieved from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1348556
Koleva, S. P., Graham, J., Iyer, R., Ditto, P. H., & Haidt, J.
(2012). Tracing the threads: How five moral concerns
(especially Purity) help explain culture war attitudes.
Journal of Research in Personality, 46(2), 184–194.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological
Review,
104(2),
211–240.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.104.2.211
Marietta, M. (2009). The absolutist advantage: sacred
rhetoric in contemporary presidential debate. Political
Communication, 26(4), 388–411.
Sagi, E., & Dehghani, M. (2013). Measuring Moral Rhetoric
in
Text.
Social
Science
Computer
Review.
doi:10.1177/0894439313506837
Sakaki, T., Okazaki, M., & Matsuo, Y. (2010). Earthquake
shakes Twitter users: real-time event detection by social
sensors. In Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web (pp. 851–860). ACM.
Retrieved
from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1772777
Schütze, H. (1997). Ambiguity resolution in language
learning: computational and cognitive models. Stanford,
Calif.: CSLI Publications.
Schütze, H. (1998). Automatic word sense discrimination.
Computational Linguistics, 24(1), 97–123.

Appendix A
Hashtags used to identify relevant tweets
#boehner
#congress
#conservatives
#dearcongress
#furloughs
#gop
#governmentclosed
#governmentshutdown

#liberals
#medicaldevicetaxrepeal
#obama
#obamacare
#obamacaredelay
#senate
#shutdown
#teaparty

#harryreid
#house
#johnboehner

#tedcruz
#Time4solutions

Appendix B
Sample Tweets with High Moral Loading
Oct 8

th

Oct 13th
Oct 15th
Retweeted

Oct 16th
Retweeted

Oct 17th
Oct 18th

Oct 24th
Retweeted

Oct 8

th

Oct 9th
Oct 12th

Oct 15th
Oct 17th
Retweeted

Oct 18th
Retweeted

Oct 20th

1352

Conservative Tweets
#Teaparty has the same rights as every other
group of Americans in this country no matter
what Obama says or tries to do to us with the
#IRS
Why r you fricking #liberals so stupid? Don't let
your blind hatred of the #TeaParty movement
take the message of freedom away. Please think
So #Liberals, its okay when you protest but
when others do it, it's terrorism, radical or
fringe?!
Everyday the danger of #Obama becomes bigger
He is a tyrannical dictator the media is
complicit in the destruction of America
#Obama hates the Constitution because it
prevents him from doing what he wants .The
same Constitution that guarantees Civil Rights.
We must shift the focus away from #Obama to
Progressives. Make #media defend the
movement NOT the man. #tcot #libertarian
#teaparty
Democrat control at it's finest - #2A #NRA #tcot
#liberty #teaParty #Obamacare #patriots #DNC
#GOP #military
Liberal Tweets
#teaparty -smaller government when it comes to
helping others but enough gov to conserve
hating gays, woman's rights and foreigners
@delong Looking at US from outside, one could
think it's full of gun toting Christian extremists
who don't understand macroeconomics. #GOP
#TeaParty agenda: protect interests of
hardworking ordinary people by privileging
exploitative rich (ie counter own interests)
#zizek #tcot
#POTUS tryin so hard to maintain integrity of
US but #teaparty #gop blinded by hatred racism
Wil b demise of country #msnbc
'Death of an American party'; to be published on
1 1 2016...'A morally bankrupt ideology' #GOP
#teaparty
Why are #TedCruz and his #TeaParty brethren
still proud of what havoc they wreaked?? w
@MarkLevineTalk -- 888-6-LESLIE
Irony: Regular old white people being upset at
realizing the US Constitution isn't about
protecting their rights anymore. #teaparty #GOP

