UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Narrative conjunction’s junction function: A theoretical model of “additive” inference in
visual narratives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2050s18m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Cohn, Neil

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Narrative conjunction’s junction function: A theoretical model of “additive”
inference in visual narratives
Neil Cohn (neilcohn@visuallanguagelab.com)
Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. Dept. 0526, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0526

Abstract
Visual narratives often depict images of individual characters
without showing the larger scene, meaning that this whole spatial
environment must be inferred from these component parts.
However, few theoretical models of narrative or discourse have
attempted to explain the generation of such “additive” inference.
This paper explores the complex interactions between narrative
structure and meaning within these types of discourse phenomena,
situated within the model of Visual Narrative Grammar based on
Jackendoff’s (2002) Parallel Architecture of linguistic structure.
Narrative “Conjunction” repeats a single narrative category within
a broader constituent, allowing for expansion of a sequence beyond
the canonical narrative arc. These conjoined units then correspond
to semantic structures in a variety of ways, allowing an “additive”
inference of actions, scenes, characters, and/or semantic
associative networks. This simple yet powerful architecture
enables us to account for a large variety of phenomena in visual
narratives and other discourse contexts, while providing a structure
that can be tested in empirical research.
Keywords: Narrative; discourse; inference; Kuleshov effect;
situation model; comics; film; visual language.

Introduction
Theories of film editing have long noticed that disparate
images of a scene or individual are understood as “adding
up” a larger conceptualization. Experiments conducted by
filmmaker Lev Kuleshov in the 1920s (Kuleshov, 1974)
combined film shots of moving body parts of different
women (hands, feet, eyes, heads), yet film viewers
interpreted these shots as a single woman in motion. In
another experiment, people responded to different shots of a
scene as if they formed a coherent spatial environment when
each of the shots was actually filmed in different locations.
These experiments nicely showed that people inferentially
construct a coherent representation, in a way that is different
from the linear bridging inferences commonly discussed in
research on discourse and visual narrative (Magliano &
Zacks, 2011; McCloud, 1993).
This issue becomes even more apparent in static visual
narratives, such as those in comics. Consider Figure 1.
These sequences only differ in that information from the
single panel in 1a is dispersed into two panels in 1b. There
is no difference in meaning—just how the panels selectively
create a “window” on the different characters. Because of
this fact, it stands to reason that the two panels in 1b “add
up to” the single panel in 1a. In other words, we must infer
that these characters belong to a single spatial environment,
thereby creating a “virtual” single panel like that in 1a.

Furthermore, in 1b knowledge of both characters within
this inferred environment must connect to the final panel.

Figure 1: Panels providing a “window” on a visual scene.
All of this belies a linear focus on inference in the
understanding of this sequence. First, the inference is
constructed out of the combination of two panels’ content,
not simply from what is left out “between” them. Second,
the additive value of those panels must progress to the third
panel, not simply the linear juxtaposition between the
penultimate and final panels.
In contrast to linear approaches, Visual Narrative
Grammar (VNG) assigns narrative categories to discourse
units like panels, and then organizes them into larger
constituents, analogous to the way that words are organized
into larger phrase structures in syntax (Cohn, 2013b). This
constituent structure can directly address the issue of
“additive inference” at a single narrative state.
VNG is based on Jackendoff’s (2002) Parallel
Architecture for language, meaning narrative structure and
semantics are kept separate, yet interface in specific and
predictable ways. This differs from previous “grammatical”
approaches to narrative structure such as story grammars
from the late 1970s (e.g., Mandler & Johnson, 1977), and
grammars of film (e.g., Carroll, 1980), where the
relationship between structure and meaning remain
ambiguous. In VNG, narrative categories are independent
from semantics, yet they interface in prototypical ways. This
is analogous to how grammatical categories like nouns and
verbs might have prototypical correspondences to objects
and events, though these semantic qualities do not solely
define them.
The canonical narrative arc in VNG starts with an
Establisher, which passively introduces an interaction or
situation. An Initial then begins the events of the interaction
(as in the boxer’s preparation in Figure 1a), which climaxes

2050

in a Peak (the boxer’s punch). Finally a Release dissipates
the tension of the Peak, depicting a coda or response to an
action, as in an ending where the boxer might be knocked
out in the final panel.
Following Jackendoff’s Parallel Architecutre, VNG uses
four main components, as depicted for Figure 1a in Figure
2. Graphic structure is the physical structure of lines and
shapes, which map these physical features to basic meanings
(Cohn, 2013a). Conceptual information is broken up into
two parts: The event structure stores the meaning of the
situations and events that take place in and between images.
Discrete events typically have a preparation, head, and coda,
while continuous processes end in a termination
(Jackendoff, 2007). Spatial structure conveys then a
geometric type of meaning (Jackendoff, 2002) such as how
characters relate to a larger environmental space. Finally,
the narrative structure organizes meaning into a coherent
sequence. Here, the narrative structure is fairly simple: the
preparatory action in the first panel maps to an Initial, while
the completed action maps to a Peak. These are both
canonical mappings of semantics to narrative. Together,
graphic structure and narrative structure provide the way
that meaning is presented (its “textbase”) while the additive
sum of spatial and event structures constitute the meaning
itself (the “situation model”) (e.g., van Dijk & Kintsch,
1983; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998).

first panel in Figure 2. However, this larger environment is
now inferred (notated with epsilon), and the individual
panels map to parts of that spatial structure to highlight
individual characters. This inference is not based on linear
bridging inferences between panels, but rather the two
panels together unite to infer a “virtual” environment.

Figure 3: Parallel architecture for Figure 1b.
This basic narrative schema is a “Conjunction” phase
(Cohn, 2013b), whereby a single node can contain any
number of daughters of the same category:
Conjunction Rule
Given a surface structure where panels do not clearly
belong to separate progressing narrative states, assign
them both the same narrative category and conjoin them
into a superordinate constituent reflecting their shared
narrative role: Constituent X à Conj(X1, X2, …Xn)

Figure 2: Parallel architecture for Figure 1a.

Environmental-Conjunction
Now let’s consider what happens when the first panel is
split apart, as in Figure 1b, now represented in Figure 3. In
this case, the basic event structures remain the same: There
is still a reaching back and punching of agent to patient. The
overall spatial structure also still involves the same two
characters. What has changed is how that spatial structure is
divided by the graphic structure. Now, panels 1 and 2 each
show a single character.
This alteration in spatial structure changes the narrative
structure. According to VNG, the overarching narrative
category remains the same—it is still an Initial—only it is
divided into a node that contains subordinate Initials,
forming a Conjunction node. Here, the higher-level Initial
still maps to the overall environment, just like the single

Figure 3 depicts Environmental-Conjunction (EConjunction), a particular type of conjunction where two
characters combine to form a larger spatial environment. EConjunction here operates to unify the two panels in (1b)
into a virtual structure equated to the single environment of
(1a). The whole environment is not provided, and must be
constructed in the mind in absence of being drawn.
In this approach, E-Conjunction reflects the narrativesemantics interface—the linking of narrative ordering to
semantic information—rather than a purely grammatical
operation (like a phrase structure rule). This might be stated
as a “correspondence rule” between Narrative Structure and
Conceptual Structure (NS-CS Rule):
NS-CS Rule 1: E-Conjunction
1. Given a surface structure that uses the Conjunction
Rule where each panel features different entities of a
broader environment (1,2,…n), map each narrative
category to their corresponding entity in referential
structure.
2. Then interface the whole constituent to a broader
semantic environment consisting of the entities depicted
in the panels of that constituent (ε).

2051

This rule allows for us to map the entities in conjoined
narrative categories into a broader environment in
conceptual and spatial structure. This correspondence is

The narrative Conjunction Rule changes only in how it
maps narrative to conceptual structure: the interface to
semantics connects to entities instead of environments. NConjunction is the type of Kuleshov effect
described at the outset where viewers saw
disparate body parts and understood them to add
up to a single woman.
In Figure 4, the full “Man” entity is both
constructed out of the two Initials, and also
given in full in the Peak—hence a dotted line
around a grey box in the referential/spatial
structure.

Action-Conjunction

Figure 4. Entity-Conjunction in the manga Vagabond
(Takehiko 2004)
diagrammed in Figure 3. Here, boxes with dotted lines
correspond to actual panels (identified by numbers), while
the Greek subscripts correspond to E-Conjunction mappings
between the structures, i.e., the “Mental Environment” (“ε”)
for the scene. That is, they designate the spatial structure
built by the concatenation of multiple entities.

Beyond the construction of referential
information, another type of mapping to
Conjunction involves events, as in Figure 5. The
repetition in this sequence sustains an Initial of
conjuring fire across several panels before the
Peak, where the light extinguishes. The
repetition here does not show parts of an environment or
parts of a single character. Rather, this Action-Conjunction
(A-Conjunction), repeats a narrative category to show the
iterations of a single action. This interface connects to event
structures describing the actions as opposed to referential or
spatial structures describing the entities involved in the
action.

Entity-Conjunction
E-Conjunction is not the only type of interface between
conjoined panels and meaning. Consider the somewhat
gruesome example in Figure 4 from Inoue Takehiko’s
Vagabond. Here, a single character pulls a knife out of
his chest while his friends (panel 2) look on. After
setting up the characters in the first two panels, panels 3
and 4 show Initials that start the action of the man
pulling the knife out of his chest. Though they are
conjoined, these panels do not use E-Conjunction,
because they show a part-whole relationship to construct
the notion of a single entity rather than a whole scene.
Entity-Conjunction (N-Conjunction) thus uses panels
showing parts of a character to build a singular entity.
We can stipulate a correspondence rule to reflect this
difference:
NS-CS Rule 2: N-Conjunction
1. Given a surface structure that uses the Conjunction
Rule where each panel features different aspects of a
single entity, map each narrative category to their
corresponding parts of an entity in semantic structure.
2. Then interface the whole constituent to a broader
semantic entity consisting of the parts contained in the
panels of that constituent (η).

Figure 5. Action-Conjunction in the comic B.P.R.D.
(Mignola, Sook, et al. 2003)
We can state this version of Conjunction in rule form as:

2052

semantic network. Because of this, each panel does not
necessarily play an explicit role, but together they convey
the broader meaning of the sequence.

NS-CS Rule 3: A-Conjunction
1. Given a surface structure that uses the Conjunction
Rule where each panel features different
aspects of a single event or action, map
each narrative category to their
corresponding parts of an event in
semantic structure.
2. Then interface the whole constituent to a
broader event structure consisting of the
parts contained in the panels of that
constituent.
Again, this correspondence rule uses the
general Conjunction Rule, but interfaces the
panels to various aspects of events. In Figure
5, the event of ‘conjuring fire’ maps each
shape onto a different Initial panel, though
the full event maps to the whole upstairs
Initial. That is, the whole constituent is about
conjuring fire, which manifests iteratively in
different representations.

Semantic networks
Another type of Conjunction draws together
related or unrelated panels to form a larger
meaning. Saraceni (2000, 2001) noted that
panels may share broader aspects of a
semantic network, without conveying an
explicit narrative. Consider Figure 6, which shows
Schroeder in a “training montage” in the Initials where he
prepares like an athlete to play the piano in the Peak. With
no coherent narrative progression, these panels are bound
only through a semantic field expressing the concept of
“exercise/training.” These conjoined panels have no
discernable connections to a scene, individual, or actions,
but rather provide disconnected glimpses of a broader
idea—a semantic network—which otherwise has no
inherent spatial or causal connections:

Figure 6. S-Conjunction showing conjoined panels
sharing a common semantic network (Schulz 2004 [1953])

Conjunction and attention structure

NS-CS Rule 4: S-Conjunction
1. Given a surface structure that uses the Conjunction
Rule where each panel features different aspects of a
semantic network or seemingly unconnected panels,
map each panel to various parts of a semantic network.
2. Then, when possible, interface the whole constituent to
a superordinate conceptual structure consisting of the
parts contained in the panels of that constituent.
This rule captures panel connections that may not have a
specified structure, though may be connected through
semantic associations alone. In Figure 6, all of the Initial
panels could be rearranged within this phase without
impacting the felicity of the sequence (they could also be
deleted without much effect). This is because these relative
concepts are also unordered in conceptual structure—
indicated by the curly brackets around the items in the

NS-CS interfaces also connect to the basic representations
of information in individual panels. Panels act as “attention
units” that frame information in ways that can be
categorized (Cohn, 2011; Cohn, Taylor-Weiner, &
Grossman, 2012). Macros depict full scenes, Monos depict
individual entities, and Micros depict less than a single
entity. Polymorphic representation can also alter those
framings, by repeating figures doing an action within a
single panel (such as repeating arms to show movement,
rather than having multiple limbs).
Each of these categories are ways that individual panels
frame information, and essentially, the different types
Conjunction are constructing “virtual” versions of these
categories. For example E-Conjunction depicts the
component parts of a scene (often Monos) while the full
scene is constructed in spatial structure alone—a “virtual”
Macro. Similarly, N-Conjunction uses various panels
depicting less than a single character (usually Micros), and
constructs that character—a virtual Mono. A-Conjunction
unites iterations or repetitions of a single event or action—
just as all that information can be conveyed in a single panel
using polymorphic morphology. Finally, S-Conjunction
depicts disparate information bound through only a common
semantic network or superordinate category. This

2053

Figure 7: Various types of meaning expressed either through an NS-CS interface (such as in Conjunction) or through a
single panel using a particular framing.
information could be conveyed in a single panel as a
“montage”—a blended or layered representation.
As depicted in Figure 7, all of these interfaces provide
options for the ways in which information is framed—either
through individual panels or across sequences of panels.
This highlights that there are numerous options for showing
the same semantic information. If a creator of visual
narratives wanted to covey a whole scene, they then have a
choice: Do they want to show the scene as a whole in a
Macro? Do they want to highlight portions of a scene, and
leave their reader to infer the scene as a “virtual Macro”?
Both options convey similar conceptual information by
highlighting (or muting) aspects of that meaning through the
framing provided either in or across panels.

Comprehension and diversity
Though empirical research has yet to explore the
cognition of Conjunction explicitly, some work has
suggested that the division of characters into individual
panels using E-Conjunction elicits more predictions about
subsequent events than single Macro panels (Kaiser & Li,
2013). In addition, altering the position of panels within a

Conjunction phase has little effect on subsequent panels, but
only if those panels have no distinguishable difference in
their semantic roles. For example, the order of conjoined
Establishers depicting two characters at passive states had
no discernable effect on viewing times to subsequent panels
(Cohn & Paczynski, 2013). However, subsequent Peak
panels were viewed faster when preceding conjoined Initials
were presented in an agent-patient order than in a patientagent order. Nevertheless, these alterations did not impact
felicity ratings of the sequences. These findings suggest that
the ordering of semantic components involved in
Conjunction phases can impact later parts of the sequence,
though the felicity as a whole is not affected.
A recent study also showed that individuals who are
inexperienced with watching films, coming from a remote
village in Turkey, had difficulty understanding that film
shots of individual characters were meant to be understood
simultaneously in a common environment (Schwan &
Ildirar, 2010). In other words, the comprehension of EConjunction may require proficiency in the grammar of the
visual language. Additional evidence has also suggested that
the proportional use of E-Conjunction may differ cross-

2054

culturally. Corpus analyses have revealed that Japanese
manga use substantially more proportions of Monos and
Micros than American comics, which use equal if not
greater amounts of Macros than Monos (Cohn, 2011; Cohn
et al., 2012). This higher proportion of Monos in Japanese
manga suggests that their narrative grammar uses more EConjunction than the system used in American comics, and
thus readers of manga may be more habituated to such
conventions in drawn visual narratives.
Altogether, this research suggests that E-Conjunction as a
facet of narrative grammars may differ across cultures, and
that its comprehension may be tied to familiarity with these
specific conventions. Further research analyzing both corpus
data and psychological measures will be needed to explore
these issues regarding E-Conjunction and other types of
Conjunction in more depth. However, the outlines of this
model provide the necessary structure to make predictions
about such processing with regards to inference and
structure.

Conclusion
Conjunction allows narrative constituents to be composed of
several panels of the same category. However, this simple
narrative structure allows for significant complexity via the
interfaces made by these panels to a conceptual structure.
These interfaces demand inferences in the construction of
even larger meaning beyond the represented panels. In
addition, this complex interface between structure and
meaning helps explain how, as in Figure 7, a series of
panels can play the same functional role while conveying
different semantic information. In these cases, the narrative
structure all uses Conjunction while the meaning changes
based on the interface to semantics. All of this structure
extends beyond the linear connections between panels, and
provides further support for the necessity of a model that
separates narrative structure and meaning, and organizes
that structure into hierarchic constituents.

Graphic References
Mignola, M., R. Sook, et al. 2003. Mike Mignola’s
B.P.R.D.: Hollow Earth & Other Stories. Milwaukie, OR:
Dark Horse Comics.
Schulz, C. M. 2004. The Complete Peanuts: 1953-1954.
Edited by G. Groth. Seattle, WA: Fantagraphics Books.
Takehiko, I. 2004. Vagabond, Vol. 19. Japan: Kodansha

References

Cohn, N. (2013b). Visual narrative structure. Cognitive
Science, 37(3), 413-452. doi: 10.1111/cogs.12016
Cohn, N., & Paczynski, M. (2013). Prediction, events, and
the advantage of Agents: The processing of semantic
roles in visual narrative. Cognitive Psychology, 67(3), 7397. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2013.07.002
Cohn, N., Taylor-Weiner, A., & Grossman, S. (2012).
Framing Attention in Japanese and American Comics:
Cross-cultural Differences in Attentional Structure.
Frontiers in Psychology - Cultural Psychology, 3, 1-12.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00349
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language: Brain,
Meaning, Grammar, Evolution. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2007). Language, Consciousness, Culture:
Essays on Mental Structure (Jean Nicod Lectures).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kaiser, E., & Li, D. C.-H. (2013, March 21-23, 2013).
Visuospatial grouping influences expectations about
upcoming discourse. Paper presented at the 26th Annual
CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing,
Columbia, SC.
Kuleshov, L. (1974). Kuleshov on Film: Writings of Lev
Kuleshov (R. Levaco, Trans.). Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Magliano, J. P., & Zacks, J. M. (2011). The Impact of
Continuity Editing in Narrative Film on Event
Segmentation. Cognitive Science, 35(8), 1489-1517.
Mandler, J. M., & Johnson, N. S. (1977). Remembrance of
things parsed: Story structure and recall. Cognitive
Psychology, 9, 111-151.
McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding Comics: The Invisible
Art. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
Saraceni, M. (2000). Language Beyond Language: Comics
as Verbo-Visual Texts. (Doctoral Dissertation),
University of Nottingham, Nottingham.
Saraceni, M. (2001). Relatedness: Aspects of textual
connectivity in comics. In J. Baetens (Ed.), The Graphic
Novel (pp. 167-179). Leuven: Leuven University Press.
Schwan, S., & Ildirar, S. (2010). Watching Film for the First
Time: How Adult Viewers Interpret Perceptual
Discontinuities in Film. Psychological Science, 21(7),
970-976. doi: 10.1177/0956797610372632
van Dijk, T., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of Discourse
Comprehension. New York: Academic Press.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models
in language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123(2), 162-185.

Carroll, J. M. (1980). Toward a Structural Psychology of
Cinema. The Hague: Mouton
Cohn, N. (2011). A different kind of cultural frame: An
analysis of panels in American comics and Japanese
manga. Image [&] Narrative, 12(1), 120-134.
Cohn, N. (2013a). The visual language of comics:
Introduction to the structure and cognition of sequential
images. London, UK: Bloomsbury.

2055

