UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Navigating Indoor with Maps: Representations and Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/65k057g4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Battles, Andrew
Fu, Wai-Tat

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Navigating Indoor with Maps: Representations and Processes
Andrew Battles and Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@illinois.edu)
Beckman Institute of Science and Technology, 405 N. Mathews Avenue
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Abstract

region containing the target, and only once inside that
region determine the subsequent specific route. Garling and
Garling (1988) reported empirical evidence of the use of this
heuristic by pedestrians in shopping malls.
Holscher et al. (2011) showed how different planning and
navigation conditions lead to different wayfinding strategies
in an urban environment (Freiburg downtown). Through
analysis of verbal data, they found that actual route
navigation (situated planning) is predominantly directionbased and characterized by incremental perception-based
optimization processes. This is in contrast to in-advance
route planning and descriptions (prospective planning),
which draw on memory resources to a higher degree and
accordingly rely more on salient graph-based structures. In
fact, Holscher et al. (2011) found that participants seldom
chose the same route that they planned in advance when
they actually navigated in the city. They interpreted this
finding as evidence supporting that situated route planning
is an incremental process that involves local adjustments on
the basis of perceptual (visual) information. It is not clear,
however, how representations and processes change as local
adjustments are made.

Novice participants were given a schematic map of a multilevel building and performed a series of wayfinding tasks.
Consistent with previous research, we found a mix of
wayfinding strategies adopted by participants. Further
analysis showed that participants incrementally developed
and used mental representations of the building by integrating
perceptual cues and memories of visited locations with salient
features and landmarks represented on the schematic maps.
The formation and use of mental representations was found to
correlate with spatial ability – participants with better spatial
ability would more likely use mental representation to infer
relative locations of landmarks and to derive directional
guidance for navigation. As a result, the routes chosen were
better than those who predominately rely on deictic references
to the schematic maps and environment cues.
Keywords: Wayfinding; indoor navigation; mental
representation of space; navigation strategies.

Introduction
With the increasing popularity of tablet computers and
smartphones, having a map while navigating indoor is
becoming common. In fact, schematic maps of many large
buildings (e.g., shopping malls, airports, or hospitals) are
available online, such that people can access them on their
mobile devices while navigating inside the building.
Previous research on wayfinding has studied how people
perform prospective route planning with a map and situated
route planning without a map (e.g., Holscher, et al., 2006;
2011; Tenbrink, et al., 2011). However, there is still a lack
of research on how mobile schematic maps are used for
situated route planning during indoor navigation. The goal
of this paper is to explore indoor wayfinding strategies by
novices as they navigate in a novel multi-level building
using a schematic map of the environment. In particular, the
current study focuses on how spatial ability impacts the use
of deictic strategies and mental representations of space as
novices perform wayfinding tasks indoor.

Indoor Wayfinding

Wayfinding research
Much evidence shows that humans mentally represent the
structure of an environment as a network graph with
weighted connections (Kuipers, 1978; 200; Meilinger, 2008;
Werner et al., 2000). However, there is also evidence that
humans can adopt direction-based strategies, such as the
least-angle strategy (Hochimair, 2005) or egocentric
representations (Wang & Spelke, 2000)
Many different explanations have been explored over the
years as to how humans break down and execute the process
of wayfinding. Weiner and Mallot (2003) describe the fineto-coarse heuristic, where individuals plan a route to the

Wayfinding research specifically in indoor environments
has not been explored as thoroughly. Tenbrink et al., for
example, pointed out that there were different implications
for outdoor versus indoor wayfinding. Much outdoor
wayfinding research has proved the crucial impact of
landmarks on human understanding of spatial environments:
Humans use landmarks to orient and locate their own
position, to retrace a route, and to find the correct direction
towards a destination. However, the extent to which such
findings can be transferred to indoor scenarios remains
unclear, except for findings highlighting the particular role
of central points (well-known parts of a building) for
orientation as well as wayfinding strategies (Garling et al.,
1983).
In their study of indoor wayfinding, Tenbrink et al. used
verbal think-aloud data from novices and experts, who were
asked to find and describe routes in a complex building. By
analyzing the spatial descriptions of participants, they were
able to relate subjects’ level of knowledge to route
efficiency and to occurrences of particular linguistic
elements. They identified a diversity of wayfinding and
description strategies, ranging from generic methods that do
not rely on specific spatial elements, to strategies that rely
on specific features of the environment (e.g., the staircase)
or salient central landmarks (e.g., the main entrance), and to

2228

strategies that rely on first-person turn-by-turn directional
descriptions (e.g., to the right, then left, straight on, etc).
Holscher et al. (2006) studied how experts and novices
navigated in multi-level buildings. Similar to Tenbrink et
al., think-aloud protocols and performance measures were
collected and analyzed. The analysis identified three
specific strategies for navigation. The central point strategy
used well-known parts of the building; the direction strategy
used routes that first head towards the horizontal position of
the target destination; and the floor strategy used routes that
first head towards the vertical position of the target
destination. Participants in their study, however, did not
have access to a map. It is therefore unclear how
participants would combine the use of a map with
perceptual cues while navigating in a multi-level building.
In a series of pilot testing, we found that, even with a
schematic map of a complex multi-level building, subjects
who had never been to the building before would still have a
lot of trouble finding their ways around. One main challenge
for indoor navigation with a map is to adopt an effective
strategy that allows the person to establish a good mapping
between the allocentric spatial representations of the
multiple floor maps and the actual environment that they
perceive, such that directional judgment can be made to
guide navigation. Following the methodology of previous
research on wayfinding strategies, we conducted an
observational study to focus on how novice participants
adopt different strategies to transform the allocentric
representations in schematic maps to egocentric
representations of the environment that are useful for
navigation.

Method
The Beckman Institute at the University of Illinois was
chosen as the testing ground for the experiment for a
number of reasons: It is one of the largest buildings on the
University of Illinois campus, it does not have a
straightforward layout, and anecdotal evidence shows that
new visitors to the building often get lost. It was also
chosen because, the artificial systems (e.g., numbering)
designed to help people to navigate inside the building were
somehow counterintuitive, making it an interested test bed
for how people utilize various cues to navigate in such
environment.
To assist subjects during the experiment, digital maps
were created for the iPad tablet device, which subjects could
carry with them and use during the experiment. Figure 1
shows the maps that they saw during the experiment.

Subjects
24 subjects aged between 20 and 28 (mean=24,
female=10) participated in the study. Subjects were
recruited from flyers posted in the University of Illinois
campus. None of the subjects had been to the Beckman
Institute before.

Spatial Ability Test
Following Holscher et al. (2006; 2011) and many others,
we used the perspective taking/spatial orientation test
(PTSOT) test (Kozhevnikov et al., 2002; Hegarty & Waller,
2004), which was available online. We used the standard
measurements to use as a spatial ability score for each
subject.

Procedure
When subjects arrived at the building, the experimenter
was waiting for them at the main entrance. After finishing
the informed consent form, the subject was given a pretest
to assess their spatial abilities and given an overview of
what would be asked of them during the experiment. They
were then given the device with the interactive map and
instructed on its use.
With the device in hand, subjects were instructed to
perform a series of wayfinding tasks within the building
using the mobile schematic maps. Before each task the
researcher would take the subject to a start location in the
building, then upon arrival would tell the subject their next
location to find. The researcher would then follow behind
the subject taking notes on the subject’s behavior. Subjects
were instructed to “think aloud,” providing useful
information on their strategies and difficulties, which would
also be recorded. Only when subjects stopped talking, or
when the subjects attempted to go to locations that were not
allowed (e.g., into a bio lab), subjects were prompted by the
experimenter to either talk more, explain what they were
doing, or to choose a different route. All verbal protocols
were recorded, and any other non-verbal responses, such as
body/head turning, were noted by the experimenter.
The device itself was programmed to collect timestamps
on any interaction the user had with the map. The subject
was instructed to press a “start” button when each task was
given to them, and a “done” button when the end location
was reached – time to complete each task was gathered this
way. The actual paths taken by the subjects were recorded
by the experimenter.
At the end of each task, subjects were debriefed and asked
to comment on how they used the maps and what
difficulties they had finding the target locations. When all
tasks were completed, the subjects were asked to comment
on their strategy during the tasks and asked to clear up any
final questions the experimenter had about their experience.

Map Design
The map program used by subjects was custom made by
the researcher for the iPad tablet device. The choice to use
of a tablet computer was made because of its portability, the
ability to make custom software, and because they are
relatively intuitive to operate – A user just has to touch the
screen to activate buttons. The maps were based on the
floor plan of the Beckman Institute and built in Microsoft
Visio, exported as JPEG files and loaded as part of the
program on the device. The decision to show each floor
separately was made because showing the entire map as one

2229

image would have made it much more difficult for users to
read words and symbols on the map.

the third floor. These specific features made situated route
planning challenging, especially for novices.

Tasks

	  

Figure 3-3: Basement

The subjects in this experiment had 10 tasks to complete.
The order of these tasks were fixed for all subjects, such that
the strategies used by different subjects can be directly
compared. These tasks were chosen based on a series of
pilot studies. The sequence of tasks would require subjects
to use a mix of different strategies and utilize a wide range
of environmental cues to finish. The first seven of these
tasks required subjects to look for a location and find the
shortest route to reach the location. The last three tasks had
additional constraints that required participants to come up
with a route that satisfy the constraints (e.g., do not use the
elevator). These tasks were presented one at a time on the
iPad, which would be visible during the task. The
experimenter would ask the subject whether they
understood what they needed to do, and provide simple
explanation to clarify the task if necessary (without giving
any hints on how to get to the location). Subjects could not
see the next task until the current task was finished (i.e.,
when they clicked “done” on the iPad and the experimenter
agreed that the task was done, the next task would be
presented). Subjects were instructed to find the shortest path
to reach the target location.

	  

A: First Floor

	  

B: Second Floor

	  

C: Third Floor

	  

D: Fourth Floor

Results

	  

E: Fifth Floor
Figure 1. The maps used in the experiment. Participants can
switch to any of the floors (A to E) with a touch of a button
on the screen of an iPad. The maps showed the location of
the elevators, stairs, exit doors, as well as office blocks in
different colors and their numbers.
Figure 1 shows the map of each floor. The maps showed
the locations of the main building objects, such as elevators,
staircases, exit doors, and office blocks. The numbering
system of each block was also shown. Note that the
numbering of office blocks was in general consistent across
floors, but because of the locations of labs, conference
rooms, and offices with different configurations on each
floor, there were some inconsistencies. For example, 1100s
was missing on the first floor. The basement used a different
number system. The fourth and fifth floor had a different
layout than the rest of the floor. Because of the same reason,
the staircases did not all go to all floors. For examples, the
one of the far left hand side of the maps only went from the
second to the fifth floor, and the one at the middle the map
went only from the basement to the third floor. Similarly,
while the main elevator went to all floors, the one on the
right hand side of the map only went from the basement to

All verbal protocols were transcribed, and all other
information recorded from the subjects during the tasks was
combined with the verbal transcription. Completion times
were extracted for each task. We did not find any significant
effect of tasks on strategy use nor completion times,
suggesting that the behavior did not differ significantly
across tasks. We therefore collapsed all tasks in the analysis.

Route Efficiency
For each task, we computed the best route and compared the
route walked by each participant to the best route.
Following Holscher (2011) and Wiener et al. (2009), route
efficiency was calculated as RE=(D-D’)/D’, where D was
the route taken and D’ was the best route. For example,
when RE equals 0.5, the chosen route is 50% longer than
the best route. A smaller value of RE indicates better
efficiency.
The mean route efficiency (RE) across participants was
0.68 (min=0, max=2.46), with a standard deviation of 0.23.
We found that RE correlated with the PTSOT measure
significantly (r=-0.68, p<0.05), suggesting that those with
higher spatial ability had a better RE (smaller value). We
will interpret this result further in the context of how
participants performed the tasks. Before that, we will need
to describe how we analyzed the verbal protocols to study
how participants differed in how they performed the tasks.

2230

Verbal protocol analysis
The verbal protocols were transcribed for each task for each
subject. The transcribed protocols were first annotated based
on a subset of spatial linguistic categories directly from
Tenbrink et al. (2011) (details below). The annotated
protocols were then further coded to investigate how much
the subjects referred to objects or locations on the map, the
environment, or in their mental representation. The coded
protocols were further analyzed to identify spatial strategies
used in the tasks. For all annotation and coding, two
independent coders first performed about 5% of the
protocols and reached consensus on the general schemes,
and independent coded the rest of the protocols. The interrater agreement reached over 0.8 in both cases.
We used the major spatial linguistic categories from
Tenbrink et al., which included spatial elements, such as
landmarks (staircases, hallways, or elevators), start and end
points (e.g., from here to there); and directions (e.g., to the
left). We also included the category of orientation
indicators, such as references to orientation signs (e.g., exit
signs, office numbers on wall, etc) and processes of
orientation (e.g., inferring the relative locations of two
points). All verbal protocols were annotated by highlighting
words or phrases that belonged to these categories in each
task. These spatial linguistic categories were used to
represent instances of spatial information processing, which
were then further coded to study the nature of these
processes.
After the annotation, the protocols were further coded into
whether the spatial information processes were based on
different information sources. In particular, we were
interested in the representations and processes of spatial
information. In this task, there are multiple sources of
information that could impact representations and processes.
From the schematic maps, objects and locations are
primarily represented in an allocentric system, where as
perceptual cues of objects and locations in the environment
are primarily represented in an egocentric system (Klatzky,
1998). A third possibility is when the allocentric
representation in a schematic map is transformed into a
mental (imaginal) representation (Klatzky, 1998), from
which egocentric references to locations can be made. The
mental representation can also help to combine information
from the schematic maps with perceptual cues to inform
navigation, possibly from an egocentric perspective.
Observing when participants chose to process spatial
information from the maps, the environment, or the mental
representations can therefore help to understand how
representations and processes are related to strategies and
performance.
The annotated protocols were further coded and
categorized into whether participants processed spatial
information from (1) the schematic maps (external
representation), (2) the environment (perceptual cues), or (3)
mental representations (e.g., memory or mental
representation of spatial information). 98% of the annotated
protocols could be categorized into these three categories.

When processing was based on information from the
schematic maps, participants would use some form of
deictic references (e.g., looking and/or pointing at the map)
to objects or labels on the maps, and infer the relative
locations of these objects or labels based on their
representations on the maps (without referencing their self
positions). For example, a participant would say “This is
where I need to go” (pointing to the map), “and I need to
take the elevator here, so I will need to go through here”
(pointing to the map). When processing information from
the environment, the participant would refer to perceptual
cues such as an information sign on the wall, the hallway, or
the elevator, and would say, for example “I should turn left
to follow this sign to the room”. When processing was
based on mental representations, the participant would adopt
some forms of imaginal representations, referring to a
location without referencing information on the map or
visible cues in the environment. Rather, the references
would be based on memories, an imagined direction relative
to the current location of the participant, or relative
locations with respect to an imagined (or memories of)
locations at which the participant were standing. For
example, the participant would say “The room should be
right above me” or “The cafeteria is right below me, so the
room should be somewhere in that area” (pointing to the
lower left direction).
Each of the annotated protocols were inspected and coded
into one or more of the three information sources. For each
participant, we counted how many times each of these
information sources were used in each task. We then
compared how these uses changed across tasks, and how
they correlated with their performance.

Spatial ability, processes, and performance
To understand how processes impact the relations
between spatial ability and performance, we performed a
regression analysis of the effects of spatial abilities and the
number of times processes were based on information from
the maps, the environment, and the mental model. We
hypothesized that the effect of spatial ability on
performance (route efficiency) could be mediated by how
participants processed spatial information. We therefore
performed a mediation analysis to understand the extent to
which the use of maps, environmental cues, and mental
representations mediated the effect of spatial ability on
performance.
Figure 2 shows the standardized regression weights from
the analysis. We first regressed spatial ability on route
efficiency, and found a significant β=-0.68. The measures of
use of maps, environmental cues, and mental
representations were entered in one at a time to test how
they mediated the effect. Spatial ability had an effect on the
use of maps and mental representations (β=0.43 and β=0.51,
respectively) but not on the use of environmental cues. The
use of maps and mental representations had an effect on
route efficiency (β=-0.16 and β=-0.35, respectively), but the
use of environmental cues did not predict route efficiency.

2231

When the use of maps was controlled for, the direct effect of
spatial ability on route efficiency was reduced to β=0.61,
but the effect was still significant at p<0.05. When the use
of environmental cues was controlled for, there was little
change in the direct effect of spatial ability on route
efficiency. The reduction of effect for both cases (use of
maps and environmental cues) was not significant according
to the Sobel Test (Sobel, 1982). However, when the use of
mental representations was controlled for, the direct effect
of spatial ability on route efficiency became non-significant
(β=-0.51, p=0.09). The reduction of effect was significant
(Δ=0.17, p<0.05) according to the Sobel Test. The result
suggested that the use of mental representation was a
significant mediator of the effect of spatial ability on route
performance.

Figure 2. Regression analysis that tested how the use of
maps, environmental cues (Env), and mental representations
(MR) mediated the effect of spatial ability (measured by
PTSOT) on route efficiency. The numbers represented
standardized regression weights. Numbers with an asterisk
(*) were significant at p<0.05.
To better visualize how the processing of information
from different sources impact performance, we performed a
median split based on route efficiency, and created two
groups of participants – the low and high route efficiency
groups. The average number of each type of processing was
plotted against the 10 tasks (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. The average number of spatial information
processing using the maps, the environment, and the mental
representation in the low and high route efficiency groups.

more on the use of the maps and mental representations,
which increased across tasks. The use of environmental
cues, however, did not increase as in the low efficiency
group.
The pattern of results suggested that participants in the
high efficiency group relied more on the use of mental
representations, while participants in the low efficiency
group relied more on the use of environmental cues in
situated route planning. Given that the regression analysis
showed that the use of mental representations mediated the
effect of spatial ability on performance, the differences
shown in Figure 3 showed that participants with better
spatial ability were able to develop better mental
representation of the building, which led to better
performance.
We inspected the protocols of the participants in the low
and high efficiency groups to investigate whether there were
qualitative differences in how they performed the tasks. In
general, we found that participants in both groups relied on
the maps to infer the locations of important landmarks to
derive a partial route plan. What differed most was how they
executed the plan as they navigated towards the target
location. Participants in the low efficiency group tended to
combine visual cues and general navigation strategies
(strategies independent of the building layout) to navigate.
For example, they would start walking in one direction and
search for an information sign that would help them to get
closer to the target location. Only when necessary (e.g.,
when they were lost), they would try to look at the maps and
look for labels or landmarks that will help them to identify
where they were.
In contrast, participants in the high efficiency group
tended to construct a mental representation of the route as
they studied the maps and the surroundings, and executed
their plan according to the mental representations. For
example, they would transform the allocentric
representations of relative locations of landmarks on the
maps to egocentric representations of relative directions in
the actual environment. By doing so, they could orient
themselves towards these locations with respect to their
current locations and infer the general directions to go based
on the transformed egocentric representations. Our results
showed that the success of this transformation process
predicted their performance, and the effect of spatial ability
(using the measure of perspective taking and spatial
orientation) on performance was found to be mediated by
the use of mental representations.

Discussion

As shown in Figure 3, the low and high efficiency groups
showed very different patterns in how they processed spatial
information. Participants in the low efficiency group relied
mostly on the maps and the environment to do route
planning, and the use of mental representations was much
lower throughout the tasks. There was also a trend that the
use of environmental cues increased across tasks. In
contrast, participants in the high efficiency group relied

The current study aimed to explore how novice participants
used mobile maps to perform situated route planning in a
complex, multi-level building. We found that the use of
mental representations of the building was important for
route planning and navigation. The construction of mental
representations seemed important for participants to
transform the allocentric, schematic representations of the
environment in the maps to mental representations, such

2232

that they could more effectively make directional judgment
to guide navigation. We also found that participants with
higher spatial ability would more likely perform this
transformation, and as a result, performed better.
Although this study was not focused on categorizing the
spectrum of wayfinding strategies as in previous studies
(e.g., Holscher, et al., 2011; Tenbrink et al., 2011), the
current findings were in general consistent with them. In
particular, we did find that wayfinding strategies ranged
from generic strategies such as reading of information signs,
to the use of landmarks and features that were specific to the
building, such as the use of common building structures
(e.g., elevator, staircase) or central points (e.g., main
entrance). The main contribution of the current study,
however, was on the process of situated route planning
when mobile maps were available. In particular, we found
that while some participants relied on deictic strategies to
process spatial information in schematic maps and the
environment, some chose to transform the spatial
information into mental representations to facilitate situated
route planning.
Our results suggested that mental representations were
more useful for indoor wayfinding. However, given that we
only conducted the study in one building, it was not clear to
what extent the results could be generalized to other
buildings. In fact, it was possible that some of the awkward
visual cues and information signs in Beckman Institute
could make the deictic strategies less effective, and
egocentric mental representations could be more reliable
(even thought they could be more cognitively demanding to
construct). Future research on different buildings can help
shed light on the generalizability of results. Nevertheless,
the current findings did point to an interesting research
direction on the effects of spatial information
representations and processes on indoor wayfinding with
maps.

References
Gärling, T., Lindberg, E., Mäntylä, T. (1983). “Orientation
in buildings: effects of familiarity, visual access, and
orientation aids,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 68
(1), pp. 177-186.
Gärling, T. and Gärling, E. (1988) “Distance minimization
in downtown pedestrian shopping,” Environment and
Planning A, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 547-554.
Hegarty M and Waller D. (2004). A dissociation between
mental
rotation
and
perspective-taking
spatial
abilities. Intelligence. 32:175–191.
Hochimair, H.H. (2005). “Investigating the effectiveness of
the least-angle strategy for wayfinding in unknown street
networks,” Environment and Planning B, Planning and
Design, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 673-691.
Hölscher, C., Meilinger, T., Vrachliotis, G., Brösamle, M.,
and Knauff, M. (2006). “Up the Down Staircase:
Wayfinding Strategies and Multi-Level Buildings,”
Journal of Environmental Psychology, vol. 26, no. 4, pp.
284-299.

Hölscher, C., Tenbrink, T., Wiener, J. M. (2011). “Would
you follow your own route description? Cognitive
strategies in urban route planning,” Cognition, vol. 121,
no. 2, 228-247.
Klatzky, R. L. (1998). Allocentric and egocentric spatial
representations:
Definitions,
distinctions,
and
interconnections. In C. Freksa, C. Habel, & K. F. Wender
(Eds.), Spatial cognition - An interdisciplinary approach
to representation and processing of spatial knowledge, pp.
1-17. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Kozhevnikov M, Hegarty M, and Mayer R. E.
(2002). Revising the visualizer-verbalizer dimension:
Evidence for two types of visualizers. Cognition and
Instruction. 20:47–77.
Kuipers, B. (1978). “Modeling spatial knowledge,”
Cognitive Science, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 129-153.
Kuipers, B., Tecuci, D. G., Stankiewicz, B. J. (2003). “The
skeleton in the cognitive map: A computational and
empirical exploration,” Environment and Behavior, vol.
35, no. 1, pp. 81-106.
Meilinger, T. (2008). “The network of reference frames
theory: A synthesis of graphs and cognitive maps,” in
Spatial cognition VI: Learning, reasoning, and talking
about space, pp. 44-360.
Sobel, Michael E. (1982). "Asymptotic Confidence Intervals
for Indirect Effects in Structural Equation Models".
Sociological Methodology 13: 290–312
Tenbrink, T., Bergmann, E., and Konieczny, L. (2011).
“Wayfinding and description strategies in an unfamiliar
complex building,” In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 1262–
1267.
Tversky, B. (1981). Distortions in memory for maps.
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 407-433.
Wang, F. W., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Updating egocentric
representations in human navigation. Cognition, 77, 215–
250.
Werner, S., Krieg-Brückner, B., Herrmann, T. (2000).
“Modelling navigational knowledge by route graphs,” in
Spatial cognition II: Integrating abstract theories,
empirical studies, formal methods, and practical
applications, pp. 295-316.
Weiner, J. M. and Mallot, H. A. (2003). “Fine-to-coarse
route planning and navigation in regionalized
environments,” Spatial Cognition and Computation, vol.
3, no. 4 pp. 331-358.
Weiner, J. M., Schnee, A., Mallot, H. A. (2004). “Use and
interaction of Navigation Strategies in Regionalized
Environments,” Journal of Environmental Psychology,
vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 475-493.
Wiener, J. M., Ehbauer, N., & Mallot, H. A. (2009).
Planning paths to multiple targets: Memory involvement
and planning heuristics in spatial problem solving.
Psychological Research, 73(5), 644–658

2233

