UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Numeral systems across languages support efficient communication: From approximate
numerosity to recursion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/27j6p2x9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Xu, Yang
Regier, Terry

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Numeral systems across languages support efficient communication:
From approximate numerosity to recursion
Yang Xu (yang xu ch@berkeley.edu)
Terry Regier (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)
Language and Cognition Lab, Department of Linguistics
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
Languages differ qualitatively in their numeral systems. At
one extreme, some languages have a small set of number terms,
which denote approximate or inexact numerosities; at the other
extreme, many languages have forms for exact numerosities
over a very large range, through a recursively defined counting
system. What explains this variation? Here, we use computational analyses to explore the numeral systems of 25 languages
that span this spectrum. We find that these numeral systems all
reflect a functional need for efficient communication, mirroring existing arguments in the domains of color, kinship, and
space. Our findings suggest that cross-language variation in
numeral systems is shaped by the functional need to communicate precisely, using minimal cognitive resources.
Keywords: number; semantic variation; efficient communication; functionalism; recursion; language and thought.

Numeral systems and recursion
A central question in cognitive science is why languages
partition human experience into categories in the ways they
do (Berlin & Kay, 1969; Levinson & Meira, 2003). Another central question concerns the basis and nature of recursion (Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002; Pinker & Jackendoff,
2005). These two questions converge in the study of numeral
systems across languages.
Languages vary in their numeral systems (Greenberg,
1978; Comrie, 2013). Moreover, there are qualitatively distinct classes of such numeral systems. Some languages have
numeral systems that express only approximate or inexact
numerosity; other languages have systems that express exact numerosity but only over a restricted range of relatively
small numbers; while yet other languages have fully recursive counting systems that express exact numerosity over a
very large range. This increasing precision from approximate to exact systems is reflected in child development: at
age 3 or 4, children who are learning an exact counting system transition from an approximate to a precise understanding of number words (Wynn, 1990). This “crystallization”
of discrete numbers out of an approximate base has been argued to be just what adult speakers of languages with approximate numeral systems do not have, compared with those of
exact ones (Pica et al., 2004; Gordon, 2004). Instead, approximate numeral systems appear to be grounded directly
in the non-linguistic approximate number system, a cognitive
capacity for approximate numerosity that humans share with
non-human animals (Dehaene, 2011).
We seek to understand why certain numeral systems are attested in the world’s languages while other logically possible
systems are not. We also seek to understand why the qualitative classes of such systems – from approximate numerosity,

to exact counting over a restricted range, to fully recursive
counting – appear as they do.

Efficient communication
An existing proposal has the potential to answer these questions. It has been argued that systems of word meanings
across languages reflect the need for efficient communication. On this account, for any given semantic domain, the
different categorical partitionings of that domain observed
in the world’s languages represent different means to the
same functional end: communicating precisely, with minimal expenditure of cognitive resources. This idea is supported by cross-language computational analyses in the domains of color (Regier et al., 2007), kinship (Kemp & Regier,
2012), and space (Khetarpal et al., 2013) – and it also reflects a more general recent focus on efficient communication
as a force that explains why languages take the forms they
do (Fedzechkina et al., 2012; Piantadosi et al., 2011; Smith et
al., 2013). We ask here whether the same idea explains why
numeral systems appear as they do, from approximate to fully
recursive form.
Speaker S(i)

Listener L(i)

4

4 5

“a few”

Figure 1: Scenario for communicating a number.
The idea of efficient communication involves a tradeoff between two competing forces: informativeness and simplicity.
An informative system is one that supports precise communication; a simple system is one with a compact cognitive
representation. A maximally informative system would have
a separate word for each object in a given semantic domain
– which would be complex, not simple. In contrast, a maximally simple system would have just one word for all objects in a given semantic domain – which would not support
precise communication. The proposal is that attested semantic systems are those that achieve a near-optimal tradeoff be-

1802

tween these two competing principles, and thus achieve communicative efficiency (Kemp & Regier, 2012).
Figure 1 illustrates these ideas. 1 Here, a speaker has a particular number in mind (4, mentally represented as an exact
point on a number line), and wishes to convey that number to
a listener. The speaker has expressed that number using the
English approximate term “a few”, rather than the exact term
“four” that is also available in English. On the basis of this
utterance, the listener mentally reconstructs the number that
the listener believes the speaker intended. Because the term
“a few” is inexact, the listener’s reconstruction of the intended
number is also inexact, and is shown as a probability distribution centered near 4 or 5 and extending to neighboring numbers as well. As a result, the listener’s mental reconstruction
does not match the speaker’s intention perfectly. However, if
the speaker had instead used the exact term “four”, that term
would have allowed the listener to reconstruct the speaker’s
intended meaning perfectly. We take the informativeness of
communication to be the extent to which the listener’s mental
reconstruction matches the speaker’s representation. Communication is not perfectly informative in the case of “a few”
but would be perfectly informative in the case of “four”.
Clearly, an exact numeral system that picks out specific integers is more informative than an approximate system - but it
is less simple. A system of approximate numerals can span a
given range of the number line using very few terms, whereas
many exact integer terms would be needed to span the same
range. Thus the high informativeness of an exact numeral system comes at a high cognitive cost. Importantly, however, a
recursive exact system would be specifiable using a relatively
small number of generative rules, rather than separate lexical
entries for each exact numeral. Thus, recursive numeral systems may be a cognitive tool (Frank et al., 2008) that enables
highly informative communication about number at the price
of only modest cognitive complexity.
We wish to know whether these ideas can account for
which numeral systems, and which classes of such systems,
are attested across languages. To test this, we require: (1) a
dataset of cross-language numeral systems, (2) a formal specification of our theory, and (3) a test of the theory against
the data. We specify each of these in turn below, and then
present our results. To preview those results, we find that
numeral systems across languages strongly tend to support
near-optimally efficient communication, and that the drive for
efficient communication also helps to explain why the different classes of numeral systems appear as they do. Our results suggest that the different types of numeral system found
across languages all support the same functional goal of efficient communication, in different ways.

Data
We considered the numeral systems of 25 languages. All but
one were from Comrie (2013), a survey of numeral bases
1 The symbols S(i) and L(i) in the figure are explained in our
formal presentation below.

in the World Atlas of Language Structures (WALS). This
survey includes references to grammars for individual languages, each of which describes that language’s numeral system. Comrie (2013) draws a distinction between “restricted”
numeral systems, which he defines as those that do “not effectively go above around 20”, and other numeral systems,
which cover a larger range, often through recursion. We
focused on all 20 languages that Comrie had listed as “restricted”, together with several representative languages from
the same source that have numeral systems over a larger
range. These numeral systems from WALS were supplemented by a description of the Mundurukú numeral system
from Pica et al. (2004); the data from this latter source are
more detailed than those from the grammars.
These languages span the spectrum from approximate, to
exact restricted, to fully recursive numeral systems. 2 We
have used these class designations loosely up until now; we
now define them precisely. We took a language’s numeral
system to be approximate if the grammar or other description
on which we relied for that language explicitly states that the
meanings of the numerals in the system are approximate or
inexact. All such systems in our data were restricted in Comrie’s sense. We took a language’s numeral system to be exact restricted if the system covers a restricted range (again
in Comrie’s sense) but the description of the system does not
explicitly state that the meanings were approximate or inexact; thus we assumed exactness unless there was evidence to
the contrary. Finally, we took a language’s numeral system
to be recursive if the numeral system was listed by Comrie as
having a base: e.g. the English numeral system is recursive
with base 10. 3 These categories do not entirely exhaust the
space of attested systems. For example, Comrie lists several
extended body-part numeral systems, which use body parts
beyond the 10 fingers to enumerate, and can reach well above
20, and there are some restricted languages that use recursion
within a limited range. However, the three broad classes we
use do pick out major types of numeral system.

Formal presentation of theory
We have seen that the notion of efficient communication involves a tradeoff between the competing forces of simplicity
and informativeness. We first formalize each of these two
forces in turn, and then the tradeoff between them. This formalization builds on that of Kemp & Regier (2012).

Simplicity
Simplicity is the opposite of complexity, and we define the
complexity of a numeral system to be the number of rules
2 Approximate: Pirahã, Wari (3 terms); Gooniyandi (5 terms);
Mundurukú (6 terms). Exact restricted: !Xóõ, Achagua, Araona,
Baré, Hixkaryána, Mangarrayi, Martuthunira, Pitjantjatjara (4
terms); Awa Pit, Kayardild (5 terms); Barasano, Hup, Imonda,
Rama, Yidiny (6 terms); Waskia, Wichı́ (11 terms). Recursive: Chinese, English (base-10); Ainu (base-20); Georgian (base-10 & 20).
3 We focus on the most fine-grained set of numeral terms available in each language, ignoring for now approximate terms in languages with an exact numeral system, e.g. “a few” in English.

1803

needed to specify it (Kemp & Regier, 2012). We specify numeral systems as grammars, based on the primitive components listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Components for representing numeral systems.
Component
1
m(w)
g(x)
s(w,n)
S = {}
+
×

Table 2: Grammars for sample approximate, exact restricted,
and recursive numeral systems over the range 1-100. The
specification of each rule adds a unit complexity of 1.

Description
Primitive concept of 1
Meaning of form w
Gaussian with mean x
Successor of w with length n
Specification of set S
Addition
Subtraction
Multiplication

Number
1
∼2-4
∼5-100

Number
1
2
3
4
5-100

Two of these primitives require explanation. g(x) is a Gaussian centered at position x on a number line that scales in accord with the non-linguistic approximate number system; it
is intended to ground approximate numerals directly in that
cognitive system. s(w,n) is a generalization of the standard successor function (successor(w)= m(w)+1); it defines a line segment that begins at m(w)+1 and continues
for some exactly specified length n, picking out the interval
[m(w)+1,m(w)+n]. Although in attested systems this length
n is generally 1, the more general case is used for hypothetical
numeral systems against which we compare attested ones.
Table 2 presents grammars for the numeral systems of three
languages, one from each of the three classes we consider
here, and indicates the complexity of each. Here and elsewhere in this paper, we restrict our attention to numerals over
the range 1-100.

Number
1
2
3-12
20
100
13...19
30...90
{21...29
91...99}

Informativeness
Informativeness of communication was illustrated in the communicative scenario of Figure 1. Returning to that scenario,
we may represent the speaker’s intended meaning as a probability distribution S(i) over numbers i, and analogously represent the listener’s mental reconstruction of that meaning
as a distribution L(i) over numbers i. We assume that the
speaker has certainty: S(t) = 1 for the intended target number t. We assume moreover that the character of the listener
distribution L(i) depends on the number term produced by the
speaker. If the speaker has produced a word w that is semantically grounded in the approximate number system (Dehaene,
2011) via a rule involving the primitive g(·), we assume that
the listener distribution takes the form:
|i − µw |
L(i) ∝ f (i|w) = exp [−( √ p
)2 ]
2v i2 + µ2w

(1)

This equation is derived from the first equation on p. S6 of the
supporting online materials for Pica et al. (2004), who present
it as a formalization of the comparison of two numerosities,
both represented as Gaussians, in the non-linguistic approximate number system, which obeys Weber’s law. f (i|w) captures the similarity of the number i to the mean µw of the cate-

Approximate: Pirahã

Complexity: 3

Form
‘hói’
‘hoı́’
aibaagi

Rule
g(1)
g(2)
g(7)

Exact: Kayardild

Complexity: 7

Form
‘warngiida’
‘kiyarrngka’
‘burldamurra’
‘mirndinda’
‘muthaa’

Rule
1
s1 (‘warngiida’)
s1 (‘kiyarrngka’)
s1 (‘burldamurra’)
s∞ (‘mirndinda’)
s1 (w) = s(w,1)
s∞ (w) = s(w,∞)

Recursive: English

Complexity: 24

Form
‘one’
‘two’
‘three’...‘twelve’
‘twenty’
‘hundred’
w‘teen’ : w ∈ones\1,2
w‘ty’ : w ∈ones\1,2
u-v : u ∈tens, v ∈ones

Rule
1
s1 (‘one’)
s1 (‘two’)...s1 (‘eleven’)
m(‘two’)×m(‘ten’)
m(‘ten’)×m(‘ten’)
m(w) + m(‘ten’)
m(w)×m(‘ten’)
m(u) + m(v)
s1 (w) = s(w,1)
ones\1,2 = {’thir’,’for’,’four’,
’fif’,’six’...’nine’}
‘thir’ = ‘three’
‘for’ = ‘four’
‘fif’ = ‘five’
ones = {‘one’...‘nine’}
tens = {‘twenty’...‘ninety’}

gory named by the word w, under the assumptions of Weber’s
law. v is the empirically determined Weber fraction, which we
take to be 0.17 in our analyses, following Pica et al. (2004). 4
In contrast, if the speaker has used an exact number term w
grounded in exact primitives such as s(·,·), we assume that
the listener distribution is given by the size principle (Tenenbaum, 1999):
L(i) = p(i|w) =

1
|w|

(2)

4 We also repeated our analyses with v = 0.3 at the suggestion
of Stanislas Dehaene (personal communication); the results did not
differ qualitatively from those we report below.

1804

Mundurukú. They also collected fine-grained data on the way
the Mundurukú name different numerosities, but they did not
directly test whether their formalization of the approximate
number system also accommodates those linguistic data.
a)

Fraction of response

where |w| is the number of integers contained in the exact interval named by the number word w. 5 In the case of most attested systems, an exact numeral such as “nine” will pick out
just a single integer, so that p(9|“nine”) = 11 = 1. However
the formula also generalizes to hypothetical exact numerals
defined as longer exact intervals of the number line.
Given these specifications of the speaker (S) and listener
(L) distributions, we define the communicative cost C(i) of
communicating a number i under a given numeral system to
be the information lost in communication – that is, the information lost in the listener’s reconstruction L when compared
to the speaker’s distribution S. We model this information
loss as the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between distributions S and L. In the case of speaker certainty (S(i) = 1 for
the target number i), this reduces to surprisal:

b)

Munduruku naming data
pug
xep xep
ebapug
ebadipdip
pug pogbi
adesu
xep xep pogbi
ade

1
0.8

Weber-law model
1
0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

5

10

15

0
0

5

10

15

Number

C(i) = DKL (S||L) = ∑ S(i) log2
i

1
S(i)
= log2
L(i)
L(i)

We model the communicative cost for a numeral system as a
whole as the expected value of C over all numbers i:
E[C] = ∑ N(i)C(i),

(4)

i

Here, N(i) is the need probability of target number i. We
estimated need probabilities by the normalized frequencies
of English numerals in the Google ngram corpus (Michel et
al., 2011) for the year 2000, smoothed with an exponential
curve via log-linear regression (Pearson correlation with unsmoothed data = 0.97). 6

Tradeoff
We take a numeral system to be simple to the extent that it exhibits low complexity, and we take it to be informative to the
extent that it exhibits low communicative cost E[C]. Given
this, we consider a numeral system to be near-optimally efficient if it is more informative (i.e. exhibits lower communicative cost) than most logically possible hypothetical systems of
the same complexity.

Testing the theory
We test our theory against the data in two steps. We first test
whether the model of the approximate number system represented by Equation 1 accommodates fine-grained linguistic data from the one language for which we have such data,
Mundurukú. We then test whether all numeral systems in our
dataset are near-optimally efficient in the sense defined above.

Mundurukú and the approximate number system
Pica et al. (2004) showed that their formalization of the approximate number system, governed by Weber’s law, accounted well for non-linguistic numerosity judgments by the
5 L(i) = 0

Figure 2: Modeling Mundurukú naming data.

(3)

if i lies outside the category named by w.
6 N(i) decays roughly exponentially with increasing i. Data from
spoken English (Leech et al., 2001) show a similar trend.

Figure 2(a) shows, for numerosities 1 to 15, the fraction of
times each numerosity i was named with a given Mundurukú
word or locution w (Pica et al., 2004).7 We modeled this fraction p(w|i) using Bayes’ rule: p(w|i) ∝ f (i|w)p(w), where
f (i|w) is given by Equation 1, based on Weber’s law, and the
prior p(w) is given by the relative frequency of word w in the
data, over all numerosities. We fit this model to the data in
Figure 2(a) by finding placements of category means µw that
minimize the mean-squared-error (MSE) between model and
data. The model fit was good (MSE = 0.004), and is shown
in Figure 2(b). A variant of this model based instead on exact
numeral representation (Equation 2) performed much more
poorly (MSE = 0.03, fit not shown). These findings suggest
that the model of the approximate number system given by
Equation 1 provides a reasonable basis for grounding approximate numeral systems.

Near-optimal efficiency of numeral systems
To test whether the attested numeral systems in our dataset
are near-optimally efficient, we assessed their simplicity and
informativeness relative to a large set of logically possible
hypothetical systems. These hypothetical systems fell in the
same three classes as our attested systems: approximate, exact restricted, and recursive.
We generated approximate hypothetical systems that have
k = 3 through k = 20 numeral categories, and that place these
categories at the lower end of the number line, specifically
in the interval [1,20]. We did this because these specifications also accommodate the attested systems in our dataset,
and we wanted to generate hypothetical systems that were
broadly comparable to actual ones. For each k, we exhaustively enumerated all possible placements of k means
 for a
k-term system in the interval [1,20], producing 20
k systems
7 The

data for a given numerosity i do not always sum to 1.0 because some infrequent terms were not reported. In our model, we
accommodated this fact by introducing an unnamed dummy category corresponding to these unreported terms.

1805

a)

b)

Communicative cost

25
Piraha
Wari
Gooniyandi
Munduruku
4−term
5−term
6−term
11−term
Recursive
Hypothetical (a)
Hypothetical (e)
Hypothetical (r)

20

15

Approximate systems
2

Optimal

6

8

10

12

Exact systems
14

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Optimal
Achagua

Piraha
Wari

Optimal
Kayardild

Optimal

Optimal

10

Gooniyandi

Yidiny
Optimal

5

Optimal

Wichi

Munduruku
0

Chi Ain Geo
0

4

5

10

15

20

Optimal
Recursive

Eng
25

Complexity

Figure 3: (a) Near-optimal tradeoff between communicative cost and complexity across 25 attested numeral systems, compared
with hypothetical approximate (a), exact restricted (e) and recursive (r) systems. ‘Chi’, ‘Ain’, ‘Geo’, ‘Eng’ stand for ‘Chinese’,
‘Ainu’, ‘Georgian’ and ‘English’. (b) Comparison of sample attested systems to optimal systems of the same complexity.
for each k. The grammar for each such system was simply
a list of Gaussians g(·) centered at these means, by analogy
with the Pirahã grammar in Table 2.
We generated exact restricted hypothetical systems analogously. For k = 3 through k = 20, we exhaustively enumerated all possible partitions of the range [1,20] into k nonoverlapping exact intervals, and took each such partition to
be a hypothetical system. The grammar for each such system
represented these intervals using the s(·,·) primitive. As in
the Kayardild grammar in Table 2, we required an additional
separate rule to define each interval length used in the grammar. As a result, exact numeral system grammars that use
intervals of many different lengths are penalized in complexity. Systems with numerals that pick out specific integers are
included in this class: in this case the interval size is 1.
Finally, we generated hypothetical recursive systems by
considering the full space of canonical base-n recursive numeral systems (Hurford, 1999) for n = 2 to 30. We took a
canonical base-n system to be one in which there are distinct
lexical items for the numerals 1 through n, and all numerals beyond that are constructed by generative rules according
to the pattern xn + y for some already-defined numerals x, y
(Comrie, 2013). In these systems, all numerals correspond
to specific integers. The English grammar in Table 2 is not
perfectly canonical because the teens are part of a separate
subsystem from other high numerosities, but it is an example
of a recursive base-10 system.
Figure 3(a) shows all hypothetical and attested systems
plotted according to their complexity and communicative
cost. Colored circles denote attested systems. Light gray bars
denote the range of costs exhibited by approximate hypothetical systems of a given complexity; dark gray bars denote
the range of costs exhibited by exact restricted hypothetical
systems of a given complexity; and the extent of the black
horizontal line (not including the light gray portion of that
line) at communicative cost 0 denotes the range of complexi-

ties exhibited by hypothetical recursive systems, all of which
have communicative cost 0. It can be seen that in general,
attested numeral systems in our dataset tend to be more informative (show lower communicative cost) than most hypothetical alternatives of the same complexity. Thus, these
attested systems do support near-optimally efficient communication about number. Figure 3(b) shows sample systems
from our dataset compared with the theoretically optimally
informative (lowest cost) systems of the same complexity –
in all cases color-coded such that a numeral corresponds to
a colored region of the number line. It can be seen that the
attested systems resemble these theoretical optima.
These results support a functional account of why the different classes of numeral system in the world’s languages appear as they do, namely as different ways of navigating the
tradeoff between simplicity and informativeness. Approximate numeral systems (e.g. Wari, with 3 terms) represent
one extreme on a continuum: they are simple (non-complex),
requiring only a minimal cognitive investment in communicating about number. These systems support near-optimally
informative communication for that level of cognitive investment – but they do not closely approach perfectly informative
(0 cost) communication. Exact restricted systems (e.g. Kayardild, with 5 terms) are slightly more complex – and they
support somewhat more informative communication. Finally,
recursive systems represent the informative extreme of this
continuum: these systems support perfectly informative communication, because there is a (recursively generated) separate name for each integer within a large range. Such finegrained naming would be prohibitively expensive under an
exact non-recursive or an approximate system: one lexical
rule per integer in the range. But a recursive system can be
seen as a cognitive tool that supports perfectly informative
communication over a large range, at the cost of only modest complexity. Interestingly, our exploration of hypothetical
recursive systems revealed (although not shown in the figure)

1806

that base-10 and base-20 systems are near-optimally simple,
whereas base-2 systems are quite complex – which could explain the cross-linguistic prominence of base-10 and base-20
systems, and the very low frequency of base-2 recursive systems over a large range.

Conclusions
We have seen that the need for efficient communication helps
to explain why numeral systems across languages take the
forms they do, by analogy with recent demonstrations in other
semantic domains – and that the same functional need helps
to explain the qualitatively different classes of numeral system found across languages. At the core of this explanation
is the idea that attested numeral systems near-optimally trade
off the competing demands of informativeness and simplicity.
Several questions are left open by these findings. Will
the results generalize to other languages? Are these findings
themselves dependent on simplifying assumptions we have
made? What sort of evolutionary process produces these patterns? Future studies should address these questions, to place
our present findings in their proper context. For now, however, we hope that the evidence we have presented helps to
explain the diversity of numeral systems in the world’s languages, in terms of the functional drive for efficient communication.

Acknowledgments
We thank Charles Kemp for his role in developing the computational framework we use. We thank Stanislas Dehaene and
three anonymous reviewers for their comments. This work
was supported by NSF grant SBE-1041707, the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC).

References
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their universality and evolution. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Comrie, B. (2013). Numeral bases. In M. S. Dryer
& M. Haspelmath (Eds.), The world atlas of language structures online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology. (Available online at
http://wals.info/chapter/131, Accessed on 2014-01-26)
Dehaene, S. (2011). The number sense: How the mind creates
mathematics. New York: Oxford.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012). Language learners restructure their input to facilitate efficient
communication. PNAS, 109, 17897–17902.
Frank, M. C., Everett, D. L., Fedorenko, E., & Gibson, E.
(2008). Number as a cognitive technology: Evidence from
Pirahã language and cognition. Cognition, 108, 819–824.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words: Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306, 496–499.
Greenberg, J. H. (1978). Generalizations about numeral systems. In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals of human lan-

guage, volume 3: Word structure (pp. 249–295). Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The
faculty of language: What is it, who has it, and how did it
evolve? Science, 298, 1569–1579.
Hurford, J. (1999). Artificially growing a numeral system. In
J. Gvozdanovic (Ed.), Numeral types and changes worldwide. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Kemp, C., & Regier, T. (2012). Kinship categories across languages reflect general communicative principles. Science,
336, 1049–1054.
Khetarpal, N., Neveu, G., Majid, A., Michael, L., & Regier,
T. (2013). Spatial terms across languages support nearoptimal communication: Evidence from Peruvian Amazonia, and computational analyses. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen,
N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Leech, G., Rayson, P., & Wilson, A. (2001). Word frequencies in written and spoken English based on the British National Corpus. London: Longman.
Levinson, S. C., & Meira, S. (2003). ‘Natural concepts’
in the spatial topologial domain–adpositional meanings in
crosslinguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic typology. Language, 79, 485–516.
Michel, J. B., Shen, Y. K., Aiden, A. P., Veres, A., Gray,
M. K., The Google Books Team, et al. (2011). Quantitative analysis of culture using millions of digitized books.
Science, 331, 176–182.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. PNAS, 108,
3526–3529.
Pica, P., Lemer, C., Izard, V., & Dehaene, S. (2004). Exact and approximate arithmetic in an Amazonian indigene
group. Science, 306, 499–503.
Pinker, S., & Jackendoff, R. (2005). The faculty of language:
What’s special about it? Cognition, 95, 201–236.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 104,
1436–1441.
Smith, K., Tamariz, M., & Kirby, S. (2013). Linguistic
structure is an evolutionary trade-off between simplicity
and expressivity. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, &
I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Tenenbaum, J. B. (1999). A Bayesian framework for concept
learning. Doctoral dissertation, MIT.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting. Cognition, 36, 155–193.

1807

