UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Observed strategies in the freehand drawing of complex hierarchical diagrams

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0gc845zf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Roller, Ramona
Cheng, Peter

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Observed strategies in the freehand drawing of complex hierarchical diagrams
Ramona Roller (rr224@sussex.ac.uk)
Peter C-H. Cheng (p.c.h.cheng@sussex.ac.uk)1
Department of Informatics, University of Sussex
Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK
Abstract
Chunk decomposition and assembly strategies have been
found in the drawing of complex hierarchical diagrams (specifically AVOW diagrams). Analysis of 40 diagrams produced by five participants provided evidence for the strategies
based on the duration of pauses between drawn elements.
The strategies were initially discovered using a new visualization technique developed to allow the detailed examination of
the sequential order of diagram drawing in conjunction with
information about the durations of pauses associated with
drawn elements.
Keywords: Drawing; chunks; pause analysis; Graphical Protocol Analysis; AVOW diagrams; adaptive strategies.

Introduction
How do people draw diagrams? Understanding the nature
of graphic production processes has potentially important
theoretical implications for Cognitive Science and practical
applications in related disciplines, because drawing is a
challenging cognitive activity that involves many processes
spanning a wide range of functions of the cognitive architecture. Some notable previous studies include Goel’s (1995)
investigations of the critical role of sketching in design
problem solving, at high level, and Van Sommers (1984)
classic work and Akin’s (1986) studies on elementary processes of drawing, at a low level. From a developmental
perspective, Karmiloff-Smith (1990) investigated children’s
increasing flexibility in their use of schemes with age as
they drew imaginary objects.
However, there has been relatively little research on the
processes of drawing at an intermediate cognitive level that
examines what strategies are used when drawing complex
diagrams. For example, given a diagram with many elements and a rich structure, what factors actually govern the
sequencing and timing of the production of those elements?
Cheng, McFadzean & Copeland (2001) studied the role of
chunks in copying simple geometric figures and found that
three hierarchical levels could be distinguished by analyzing
the pauses between drawn elements. Obaidellah and Cheng
(2009) studied the strategies used in the drawing of the ReyOsterrieth complex figure, as used in the psychometric test
of memory, which is composed of 56 lines that are organized into distinct patterns. Also using the analysis of pauses between drawn elements, they found that when the figure
is reproduced from memory drawers tended to process the
elements in a hierarchical fashion. The production of individual lines conforms to the distinctive patterns and at a
1

higher level these patterns tend to be drawn together in
groups common across the drawers.
We have used the terms Graphical Protocol Analysis,
GPA, (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2006, 2007) for the technique of recording, analyzing and interpreting chunking
based behaviours in graphical production, which we take to
include drawing, writing natural language and also writing
formal notations (e.g., mathematical equations). With GPA,
the latency or pause just preceding the execution of a drawing action – making a mark – reflects the amount of cognition required and as such reveals boundaries between the
processing of successive chunks, because the addition retrieval and planning operations required to start the production of a new chunk that are not presented for elements
within a chunk. As extensively exploited in many classical
studies in cognitive science, pauses with particularly long
durations will be taken to reveal the presences of transitions
between chunks.
One possible reason for the scarcity of studies on production strategies in drawing is the lack of effective techniques
to combine information about the sequence of drawn elements with data on the duration of pauses, so that the presence and role of chunks can be related to the overt drawing
behaviours. Thus, one of the two general aims of the paper
is to introduce a technique to integrate these sources of data
in the form of a readily interpretable visualization of graphical protocols.
The other aim of this paper is to examine the nature of the
strategies that are used in drawing to produce complex hierarchically structured diagrams. Such diagrams will naturally be treated as chunks on more than one level, so how are
those chunks structures processed in order to generate a
coherent linear sequence of drawing actions? Diagrams are,
of course, a diverse class of cognitive artifacts, so the choice
of target stimuli is large. However, the adopted class of
diagrams must meet two competing demands: (i) have a
sufficiently complex hierarchical structure to permit the
manifestation of nontrivial drawing strategies; (ii) be sufficiently simple and coherent that participants can feasibly
learn them in the context of an experiment and that drawings of them can be readily analyzed. A class of hierarchical complex diagrams that meets these demands are
AVOW diagrams invented by Cheng (2002) to the model of
the behaviour of basic electrical circuits. AVOW diagrams
represent individual circuit components, networks of components and whole circuits, respectively, as rectangles,
small sets of rectangles and complete groups of rectangles.

Corresponding author

2020

Fig 1a shows a simple electrical circuit and Fig 1b is an
AVOW diagram for that circuit. We call a single AVOW
rectangle a box. AVOW diagrams for more complex circuits include: (Fig 1c) two resistors in series; (d) two resistors in parallel; (e) two resistors in parallel that are together
in series with another; (f) two in series that are in parallel
with one other.
a!

b!

c!

d!

e!

f!

Fig 1. An electric circuit (a) and some AVOW diagrams
Although not important for the present paper, the height,
width, area and slope of the diagonal of any individual box,
or composite of rectangles, respectively represents the voltage, current, power and resistance of components or networks. AVOW diagrams substantially improve the ease of
learning about basic electricity (Cheng, 2003; Cheng &
Shipstone, 2003). In the experiment, participants were
shown the standard drawing of electrical circuits consisting
of rectangular icons for resistors connected together by lines
representing wires. Their task was to draw AVOW diagrams to solve problems about the operation of the circuits.
2

A
1a

3a

8
5

B

C
10

1b

9
6

D

7
11

4a

3b

3c

4b

Fig 2. One AVOW diagram: two drawing strategies
So, theoretically, what are the possible strategies that may
be used to draw AVOW diagrams from given circuit diagrams? Whilst learning about AVOW diagrams participants
gradually acquire graphical chunks consisting of simple
groups of AVOW boxes that correspond to common networks (Cheng, 2002). Figs 1b-d are examples of patterns
that learners easily acquire as chunks (Cheng, 2002). Thus,
drawing a complex AVOW diagram is likely to be organized around the production of AVOW boxes in such
groups. There are, at least, two ways in which a diagram
with multiple AVOW boxes may be drawn, which proceed
in opposite “directions”: (a) a decomposition strategy in
which an overall diagram is broken down into chunks and
then sub-chunks; (b) an assembly strategy in which chunks
are built in turn from sub-chunks in a incremental fashion.
These strategies have been informally observed in previous
studies with AVOW diagrams.
To make this more concrete, consider how the two approaches could be used to draw Fig 2, which consists of four
AVOW boxes. Boxes C and D constitutes a chunk for two
resistors in series, which together many make up a higher
level chunk of B in parallel with [C+D], that in turn is part

of the overall diagram comprising A in series with
B+[C+D]. Under the decomposition strategy the rectangle
for the overall diagram is drawn, lines 1a-1b-2-3a-3b-3c-4a4b. Then this overall rectangle is subdivided at the top
level by drawing line 5, which is followed by a subdivision
at the next lowest lever with line 6. The last subdivision by
line 7 makes its splits the lowest level. Finally, each of the
diagonals for the boxes are drawn in turn, lines 8, 9, 10 and
11, repeating the order of the chunks.
Under the assembly strategy the drawing progresses by
drawing individual AVOW boxes in turn, for example starting with lines 1a, 2, 3a, 5 and 8. The next to be drawn
builds on to the first: lines 1b, 6, 4a and 9. This is followed
by lines 7, 3b and 10 for the penultimate box and lines 4b,
3c and 11 finally.
The diagonals in the boxes are typically seen as secondary
to the perimeter of the rectangles, which define the size and
shape of the boxes, so two alternative strategies may be
applied to draw them. In the one-at-a-time approach whenever a box is completed its diagonal is immediately drawn
before continuing with the verticals or diagonals of other
boxes. Clearly, in these cases the diagonal should be considered as part of the lowest level chunks that are individual
AVOW boxes. In the all-together approach all the diagonals are filled together after the pattern for a particular
chunk is completed. It is tempting to consider such groups
of diagonals as constituting some form of sub-chunk, merely because they are all drawn together, but this is a supposition to be tested.
In order to test whether these strategies exist, two forms
of related evidence will be used. First, the order of production of sequences of lines will be closely examined in relation to the pauses in graphical production. This will be
achieved using the new visualization technique that is to be
introduced here. Second, four predications (P1-P4) have
been formulated that relate to differences in the duration of
pauses at particular points in the drawing of complex
AVOW diagrams, on the basis that long pauses are indicative of the processes occurring at the boundary between
chunks.
P1: For the decomposition strategy it is predicted that the
pauses for the drawing of the first line of the overall rectangle for a group of AVOW boxes will be longer than the
pauses for the subdivisions of the rectangle, because of the
extra processes are involved in the initiation of the new
chunk.
P2: Under the assembly strategy it is predicted that the
pause before beginning to draw a sequence of AVOW boxes
will be longer when there are more AVOW boxes in the
chunk. Specifically, the pause for a chunk consisting of a
single AVOW box (Fig 1b) will be shorter than for chunks
consisting of two or more purely in series or in parallel (e.g.,
Fig 1c or 1d) .
P3: With the assembly strategy it is predicted that for a
chunk consisting of two or more boxes, the pause before the
first box will be longer than the second and subsequent
boxes, because extra processes are involved in the initiation

2021

of the new chunk that are not present for later boxes. Note
the similarity to P3 to P1.
P4: This prediction concerns the drawing of immediately
consecutive diagonals under the all-together approach. P4a:
If they are being treated as a single chunk, then the pause
before drawing first diagonal should be longer than the
other diagonals in the sequence. P4b: Also, if they are being treated as a single chunk, then the pause for the first
diagonal in a set of more than one should be longer the
pause for the first diagonal in general. The reasoning behind this pair of predictions resembles that for P3 and P2,
respectively, but at the level of diagonals rather than boxes.
To test the strategies, drawings of AVOW diagrams were
obtained for another experiment that studied learning with
AVOW diagrams over many sessions. Computer logs of
participants drawings were taken from the last of six hourlong sessions, in which participants had practiced drawing
many AVOW diagrams of increasing complexity in order to
learn about electric circuits. The two tasks selected for
analysis here involved drawing AVOW diagrams to model
circuits with different configurations. The general details of
the overarching learning experiment are not important to the
graphical protocol analyses conducted here.

Method
Participants
Four women and four men took part in the overarching
learning experiment, but three were eliminated from this
experiment because they did not successfully draw diagrams
for all of the tasks selected for the present analysis. All were
University of Sussex students with little prior knowledge of
basic electricity. They were paid for participation and tested
individually.

Materials
The target circuit diagrams were presented in booklets,
which sat on a small easel to the side of a Wacon Intous3
graphics tablet. For each drawing a sheet of plain paper was
clipped to the tablet and the drawings were made using a
Wacom inking pen. A Java programme specially written in
our lab for GPA studies captured the pen movements, including the positions and times of all touches and lifts of the
pen to and from the paper. The temporal accuracy of the
logging was better than 1 ms.
For the purpose of the present experiment two test items,
here labeled TA and TB, were selected from the last session
of the overarching learning experiment, in which the greatest number of participants had successfully completed drawing solutions. Task TA involved a circuit with five resistors
and the problem of modelling circuit behaviour in normal
operation and three fault conditions. Task TB involved
three resistors with two switches and the problem of modelling circuit behaviour in all four combinations of switch
positions. As four diagrams were produced for both TA and
TB, and five participants took part, a data set of 40 diagrams
was available for analysis. (For reference, in the overarch-

ing learning experiment TA was task 2 and TB was task 3,
in session 6).

Procedure
In the overarching learning experiment the participants
worked through explanations and examples of graded topics
in electricity. For each topic they drew AVOW diagrams as
solutions to exercises in which conventional circuit diagrams were presented with different values of resistors or
varying positions of switches. Immediately following each
exercise they were given feedback in the form of drawings
of correct AVOW diagrams. With each exercise they were
instructed to first workout their solutions by sketching
whatever AVOW diagrams they wished and once they were
confident in their answer to draw their complete solution
diagram neatly on a fresh sheet of paper. Just the final solutions diagrams were selected for analysis here, because
participants would have been producing familiar diagrams
from memory and so will have structures of chunks that are
both active and relatively stable.
In order to generate readily interpretable graphical protocols participants were trained to draw straight lines by always lifting the pen off the paper whenever they wished to
change direction. That participants quickly adapted to this
approach was clear for three reasons: (a) they needed just a
few practice items to become comfortable with this style of
drawing; (b) except once at the beginning of each session
they needed no further prompts to use the approach; (c)
there are few cases of failures to lift the pen at the end of
lines, where they just produced L shape lines. Thus, it is
unlikely this style of drawing will have impacted on the
chunk level drawing strategies in which we are interested.

Visualization for graphical protocol analysis
In order to easily see the order of line drawing and to relate
these to pause durations a new graphical protocol visualization has been developed. Fig 3 and 4 show examples of the
visualization (the letters and numbers have been added as a
coordinate reference system). The thicker grey lines are
stokes drawn by the participants; or more precisely a line
connecting the end points of those strokes. The continuous
trajectory curve runs between successive lines, intersecting
each of them at a point near their beginning (one quarter of
the way along): it begins at A4 in Fig 3 and A3 in Fig 4.
The curve reveals both the order of production of the lines
and the direction in which each is drawn. The small circles
at the intersection of the lines and the trajectory curve have
four sizes which represent the duration of pauses for the
associated line: from small to large these are ≤1, ≤2, ≤5, >5
s. For example, in Fig 3 the point at D1 is actually 5,940
ms, E14 is 1,233 ms and L13 is 657 ms. Additional symbols drawn over these points, such as the ‘X’ at A4 in Fig 3
or the square at H7 in Fig 4, will be explained below.
The graphical protocol visualization was implemented using the standard graph plotting capabilities of Microsoft
Excel.

2022

Similar inspection of all the other 38 diagrams showed
that all the groupings of boxes are readily classified in terms
of the two strategies.
Table 1. Means of the trial median pause for various
measures of the two strategies and for diagonals
Measure
a) Start diagram
Decomposition
b) Begin a group
c) Subdivision
Assembly
d) All boxes
e) Single box
f) 1st box in sequence of 2+ boxes
g) 1st box in sequence (any length)
h) Boxes except 1st in sequence
Diagonals
i) All diagonals
j) 1st diagonal in a set of any size
k) Diagonals except the 1st in a set
l) First diagonals in a set of 2+
diagonals

Fig 3. Protocol exhibiting the decomposition strategy

Pause
(ms)
2,450

Predictions
and cases

1,928
1,400

P1; b>c
5/7

4,380
10,800
4,490
4,370
763

P2; e<f
3/7
P3; g>h
7/7

629
654
690
690

Predictions
Fig 4. Protocol exhibiting both strategies

Results
To examine the strategies all the logs for the two tasks of
the six participants were presented using the new visualization. By inspection it was found that the drawing of all
boxes could be exclusively classified into either the decomposition or the assembly strategies, as described using Fig 2.
For example, for one selected diagram of participant P3 in
the solution to TB, Fig 3, starts with the drawing of an overall bounding box (A4–D1–E14–O3–O8), followed by the
subdivision into two halves (J9–I3), and then the right half
was subdivided (K7), which is clearly a decomposition
approach. Following the subdivisions the three diagonals
were completed (C11–K6–K13), and unusually this participant then labeled the boxes (D13–K7–L13). Fig 4 shows
one of the diagrams that participant P6 drew for TB that
uses both the decomposition and assembly strategies in a
single drawing. Initially, the outline of an encompassing
box is drawn to the left (A3–A7–C6–C1). that was then
subdivided (B3), before one diagonal is drawn (B2); the
other was forgotten. This is followed by a single large box
(H7–I1–W3) with its diagonal filled immediately (H5),
which is a use of the assembly strategy building onto the
previously drawn pair of boxes. The pair of boxes on the
right is also drawn by assembly, because the upper boxes is
drawn fully (X3–Z2–X2) before the lower box (Z4–Z7-Y6).
The descending diagonal at Z2 is one of the rare cases
where the participant neglected to lift the pen from the paper
at a change of direction, so that the line actually represents
two line segments for the top and right side of the top box.

As all the approaches to the drawing of the diagrams fit the
two strategies it is possible address the predictions made
above that concern the durations of pauses in relations to
how the diagrams might be chunked. Thus, a coding
scheme was devised to classify the circumstance under
which each line was drawn. These included: (a) the start of
a new diagram – shown by an ‘X’ in the protocol visualizations (e.g., Fig 4, A3); (b) the start of group boxes under the
decomposition strategy along with the number of boxes
created by the subdivisions; (c) the start of a sequence of
boxes under the assembly strategy – shown by a square in
the visualization (e.g., Fig 4, H7 and X3) – along with the
number of boxes in the sequence; (d) the start of a set of one
or more consecutive diagonals, along with the number of
them. The start of a set of one or more consecutive labels
was also coded but as there were few of these and they as
they occurred as the last elements to be drawn in a diagram,
they are omitted from the analysis. The codes were applied
to the logs by two coders and there was precise agreement
on all of the codes for the lines for 37 of the diagrams, with
the three disagreements resolved through discussion. This
level of agreement is not surprising as all the drawing conformed to just the two strategies under consideration.
From the coded logs the pause value measures needed to
test the predictions were computed. For each trial –
comprising the four diagrams for one task – the medians of
the relevant pauses were computed for each participant.
Medians were used as pause data in GPA data is skewed.
Aggregation was performed the level of trials rather than
diagrams so there were sufficient data points for the computation of the median for each of the measures. Table 1 gives
measures and trends, where comparisons between measures
are made, as well as the number of individual trials support-

2023

ing the given trend. The latter is given in relation to the
total number of trials for which data was available. This is
less than 8 because the strategies were not exhibited in every trial. In making comparisons between pairs of values, it
should be noted that the time for the execution of elementary operations is typically considered to be of the order of
100 ms. Therefore, any differences between values that are
several times this magnitude are likely to be meaningful,
because they are likely to be due to differences at the level
sets of operations. If a difference is less than 100 ms it is
likely to be due to individual differences in speeds of processing rather than variations in the sequences of operations
that underpin different sub-tasks.
Prediction P1 is supported to the extent that the time to
draw the perimeter rectangle of a group of AWOW boxes is
substantially greater than the pause for sub-divisions; Table
1 lines (b) and (c). Of the seven trials exhibiting the decomposition strategy five had trends in the expected directions.
Prediction P2 is not supported as the time to begin drawing a single box alone is substantially longer than the time
to begin drawing the first box in a sequence with more than
one box; Table 1, f and g. However, there are nearly equal
numbers of trails that have trends that are or are not in the
expected direction.
Prediction P3 is supported strongly as the pause for the
first box in a sequence is longer than for the remaining boxes in the sequence; Table 1g & 1h. This trend is as expected
for all seven trials for which the assembly strategy was
exhibited. In Fig 4, the occurrence of large circles (long
pauses) associated with the square symbols (beginning of
assemblies) at H7 and X3 with the presences of small circles
elsewhere illustrates this pattern of data.
Prediction P4 is concerned with possible patterns of pauses if the drawing of sets of consecutive diagonals would be
treated as if they were chunks. The specific prediction are
actually irrelevant because the pause values for all the conditions, Table 1, j and l, have pause values that are essentially the same; the maximum difference between any of the
measures is 60 ms, which is lower than the execution time
of elementary operations. Further, the absolute value of the
pauses for drawing a diagonal is relatively small, which
suggests that relatively simple sequences of operations underpins their production.
Comparing the values of the decomposition operations
with the assembly operations, Table 1b-c versus 1d-h, an
interesting pattern may be noted. To start a diagram by
decomposition takes about 2 s whereas to start an assembly
takes more than double the time at over 4 s, but continuing
the subdivisions of a decomposition take about 1.5 s, which
is twice the time for continuing with the subsequent assembly of boxes at about ¾ s.

Discussion
Drawing is an interesting phenomenon for study in cognitive science as the graphical production of a drawing engages many cognitive processes and potentially places large

demands on the cognitive system. This will likely require
sophisticated strategic adaptations to manage the diverse
loads on the system. Previous work has been just begun to
examine the underlying cognitive processes of drawing.
The findings here provide some further insight into nature
of the strategies used in the drawing of complex hierarchical
diagrams.
Previously, Obaidellah and Cheng (2009)
showed that the patterns of lines in the Rey- Osterrieth figure were encoded as chunks and that the reproduction of the
diagram exploited those chunks in a decomposition approach that operated at three levels. The results here extend
those findings in various ways.
First, the decomposition strategy in drawing complex diagrams is a general phenomenon to the extent that it is exhibited in quite a different class of diagram, which has recursively nested chunks on multiples levels. Under this strategy an overall framework is first produced and is successively divided into parts that match the structure of simple
chunks. Second, an alternative assembly strategy was observed that constructs a diagram in an incremental piecewise
fashion by adding new components on to previously drawn
parts of the diagram, which operates in a working outwards
manner rather than the working inwards approach of the
decomposition strategy. Third, it was found that these strategies are not used exclusively when drawing a particular
diagram but may occur within the same diagram, as occurred in Fig 4. The conditions under which the alternatives
are selected for use would be interesting to investigate in
order to understand whether it is contingences related to the
physical process of drawing, or the familiarity and ease of
processing certain chunks, or a subtle combination of the
two, that determines strategy choice. Fourth, the differences
in the durations to starting and continuing the execution of
each strategy (Table 1 e-f vs. g-h) suggests that the costs of
performing the strategies may be differently distributed over
the process of drawing a whole diagram. Notwithstanding
the previous point, this is another factor that is likely to
influence the selection of drawing strategies.
These findings should be treated with caution as 3 participants were excluded, because they did not produce a complete set of diagrams. This may have introduced a bias,
with the sample favouring participants who are more competent at drawing or better learners.
The introduction of the new visualization (Fig 3 and 4)
supported the ready interpretation of the strategies in the
graphical protocols and the clear determination that the
decomposition and assembly strategies were being used, and
exclusively so. A particular feature of the GPA visualization is the introduction of a trajectory curve intersecting the
drawn lines, which appears to be an effective way to show
the sequential order and direction of the drawn lines. In our
previous experiments with visualization designs, software
generated lines joined the end of one drawn line to the beginning of the next, but this tends to make the display too
clutter for easy interpretation. The trajectory curves also
appears easier to use than animations of the drawing with
which we and others (e.g., Eye and Pen, http://

2024

www.eyeandpen.net) have experimented, because the
curves not only provide local spatial and temporal detail but
also give an overview of the whole course of drawing.
Chunks clearly have a core role in the functioning of both
strategies. The support for the first and third predictions
provides some evidence for this view. Both predictions are
based on the idea that the time to start the production of the
first element in a chunk will be longer than subsequent
elements, because there will be initial recall and planning
actions associated with the first element that do not have to
be repeated for later elements. This is consistent finding
across many different tasks, such as writing memorized
sentences (van Genutchen & Cheng, 2010). It would be
surprising if it did not apply to drawing also. However, the
absence of support for prediction P2, on first sight, is contrary to this expectation, in that it was found that the pause
before the production of a single box was longer than that
for the production of a chunk comprising multiple boxes.
There are at least two possible explanations for this seemingly anomalous result. First, the longer pauses for a single
box may be because single boxes may have occurred more
frequently at the beginning of a new diagram, which will
have additional process not found in the continuation of a
diagram, such as decisions about the location and size of the
first box. Second, the coding of the protocols assumed that
the only chunks possessed by the participants were simple
sequences of boxes purely in series or parallel; patterns c
and d in Fig 1. However, if participants possessed chunks
such as Fig 1e and f, then the drawing of many solo boxes
would actually be the initiation of the drawing of a more
complex chunk comprised of three boxes. From the experiment in Cheng (2002) it seems likely that by the sixth session in the present overarching learning experiment the
participants would possess such chunks. Therefore, the
elevated time for a chunk of one box probably has been
erroneously misclassified and should be associated with
complex chunks comprising multiple boxes.
Prediction P4 is interesting because it assumes that sets of
diagonals might be processed as chunks and so would have
patterns of pauses that reflect those in predictions P1 to P3,
but at a lower level. However, from the uniformity of the
pauses for different set sizes and sequential positions it must
be inferred that sets of diagonals were not being treated as
chunks. Rather it appears that participants might simply
have been using a simple strategy of spotting and filling in
empty gaps in the AVOW diagrams. This is consistent with
the duration of the pauses, which would sufficient for a set
of operations such as: visually search for a gap, initiate a
goal to fill the gap, move the pen to target area, prepare to
make a stroke. The occurrence such a sequence of actions is
not in itself surprising, but it makes an instructive point that
care must be taken when analyzing the process involved in
the drawing complex hierarchical diagrams: one should
expect diverse strategies, some of which may be based on
the chunking of the diagrammatic components, including
the decomposition and assembly strategies, but others may

simpler approaches that directly exploit the structure of the
external graphical environment.
To conclude, it should be noted that the findings here are
based on just one class of complex diagrams. The observed
strategies may not be manifest in other types of diagrams,
especially so if they are less hierarchical in nature, and other
strategies are likely to exist for different classes of diagram.

Acknowledgments
Ramona Roller was supported by Junior Research Associate
award from the Doctoral School of the University of Sussex.
Our thanks go to the members of the Representational Systems Lab for their support in this work.

References
Akin, O. (1986). Psychology of Architectural Design. London, Pion Ltd.
Cheng, P.C-H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
principles for effective representational systems. Cognitive Science, 26(6), 685-736.
Cheng, P. C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2006). A temporal
signal reveals chunk structure in the writing of word
phrases Proc. of the 28th Ann. Conf. of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cheng, Peter C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2007). Measuring
Mathematical Formula Writing Competence: An Application of Graphical Protocol Analysis. In D. S. McNamara
& J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proc. of the 29th Ann. Conf. of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Cheng, P. C-H., & Shipstone, D.M. (2003). Supporting
learning and promoting conceptual change with box and
AVOW diagrams. Part 1: Representational design and
instructional approaches. International Journal of Science
Education, 25(2), 193-204.
Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of Thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A developmental perspective on cognitive science. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Obaidellah, U. H., & Cheng, Peter C-H. (2009). Graphical
production of complex abstract diagrams: drawing out
chunks and schemas. In N. Taatgen & H. v. Rijn (Eds.),
Proc. of the 31st Ann. Conf. of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
van Genuchten, E., & Cheng, P. C-H. (2010). Temporal
chunk signal reflecting five hierarchical levels in writing
sentences. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proc.
of the 32nd Ann. Conf. of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Van Sommers, P. (1984). Drawing and Cognition. New
York, Cambridge University Press.

2025

