UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On what happens in speech and gesture when communication is unsuccessful

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1h1386fk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hoetjes, Marieke
Krahmer, Emiel
Swerts, Marc

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On What Happens in Speech and Gesture when Communication is Unsuccessful
Marieke Hoetjes (m.w.hoetjes@tilburguniversity.edu)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@tilburguniversity.edu)
Marc Swerts (m.g.j.swerts@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, the Netherlands.

Abstract
Repeated references have been found to be reduced as compared
to references that are not repeated, both in speech and in gesture.
In the present study we wanted to see whether certain factors
can inhibit this reduction in repeated references. In a production
experiment, speakers were confronted with negative feedback
after an initial description of an object, indicating that the
communication was unsuccessful. We found that after initial
negative feedback, second references were reduced with regard
to all speech variables. When the speakers were confronted with
additional negative feedback, the ensuing third references were
increased in the number of words and the duration, as compared
to the second references, but further reduced in their speech rate.
Gesture rate increased in third references as compared to initial
references. After (repeated) instances of unsuccessful
communication, speakers speak slower and increase their
gesture rate, thereby making their repeated references clearer for
the addressee.
Keywords: Gesture; repeated references; negative feedback.

Introduction
Repeated references in speech and gesture
Repeated references occur in discourse whenever a
particular person or object is mentioned or described more
than once. These references are never exactly the same. The
differences in the ways in which references are realised are
not only due to naturally occurring variability in speech, but
are also influenced by the mere fact that the information
status of the referent changes when it gets repeated. For
instance, when an object is mentioned a second time, it
already belongs to the discourse model of speaker and
addressee, and can be assumed to be common ground.
Research has found that repeated references in speech are
often reduced, as compared to initial references. This
reduction can be acoustic (Aylett & Turk, 2004; Bard, et al.,
2000; Fowler, 1988; Lindblom, 1990), lexical (Brennan &
Clark, 1996; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), or both (Galati
& Brennan, 2010). For example, a person might first be
described as ‘that tall guy with the funny hat’, followed by a
lexically reduced reference to ‘the hat guy’.
This reduction process in repeated references extends to
gesture production. It has been found that repeated
references contain fewer gestures (de Ruiter, Bangerter, &
Dings, 2012; Hoetjes, Koolen, Goudbeek, Krahmer, &

Swerts, 2011, under revision; Jacobs & Garnham, 2007) and
that gestures in repeated references are smaller (Vajrabhaya
& Pederson, 2013) and less precise (Galati & Brennan,
2014; Gerwing & Bavelas, 2004; Hoetjes, et al., 2011, under
revision) than gestures in initial references.
We can relate these reduced repeated references to the
idea that during conversation, speakers and addressees try to
minimize their collaborative effort (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986), while being as communicatively efficient as possible
(Jaeger & Tily, 2011; Zipf, 1936). This is also in line with
Grice’s (1975) Maxim of Quantity which states that
speakers should make their contribution to the discourse “as
informative as required” but “not more informative than is
required”.
However, speakers may also repeat words in a markedly
different context, for example in a situation in which a
problem occurred during interaction and it is unsure whether
the reference to an object is shared by the speaker and the
addressee. The question is whether in cases like this, an
opposite process could also take place, in which speakers do
not reduce, or might even increase, their (speech and)
gesture production of repeated references, especially if
doing so is communicatively necessary or efficient. In this
paper we investigate a likely scenario in which a repeated
reference may be expanded rather than reduced, namely
when a speaker receives (negative) feedback.

Effect of feedback on gesture production
It can be argued that in cases of successful repeated
references the addressee (implicitly) informs the speaker
that less (gestural) information suffices. However, what
about situations of miscommunication, or situations in
which the addressee needs more information? Lindblom
(1990) claims, in his theory of hyper & hypo-speech, that
speakers reduce when this is possible, but hyper-articulate
when this is necessary. In fact, Oviatt, Bernard and Levow
(1998) found that when users of a simulated automatic
speech recognition system corrected recognition errors, they
tended to hyper-articulate, for example by lengthening
speech segments.
Providing feedback is the simplest way in which the
addressee can explicitly tell the speaker that more (or less)
information is required. Previous research on the effect of
feedback in spoken conversation found that more details

2369

were given when the addressee was attentive and provided
feedback (Kuhlen & Brennan, 2010). Previous research on
the effect of feedback on gesture showed that gesture rate
was reduced when addressees were less attentive and did not
provide positive feedback (Jacobs & Garnham, 2007) or
when they did not provide any feedback at all (Beattie &
Aboudan, 1994). Holler and Wilkin (2011) found that when
speakers provided confirmatory responses (i.e., after
positive feedback by the addressee), speakers’ gesture rate
was reduced, but when addressees provided feedback that
“encouraged clarification, elaboration or correction” (Holler
& Wilkin, 2011, p. 3522 ), gesture rate was not reduced but
remained constant. These results suggest that the type of
feedback that is provided matters for gesture production.
In our previous study on reduction in speech and gesture
in repeated references (Hoetjes, et al., 2011, under revision),
the speaker was always given implicit positive feedback
(since he or she could only go to the next trial once the
matcher had found the correct object). In that study, we
found that the number of gestures was reduced in repeated
references. However, it is reasonable to assume that when it
is communicatively necessary or efficient for the speaker to
be clearer, for example in the case of negative feedback,
speakers do not reduce the gestures in their repeated
references, but keep their number, rate and execution
constant or even increase them. Increased gesture
production due to negative feedback would fit the general
idea that speakers tend to be communicatively efficient.
After all, if a reference is not merely repeated in the
discourse because it happens to re-occur, but because the
negative feedback suggests that the reference is not shared
(as is the case in repeated references in unproblematic types
of discourse), then the speaker could decide to try and put
more effort in a following reference, for example by making
this reference clearer, not just in speech but also in gesture.
We aim to find out whether this is the case by looking at the
evolution of repeated references after negative feedback.

Present study
We conducted a production experiment where, in some
trials, speakers were confronted with negative feedback
from an addressee after producing a referring expression,
which lead to repeated reference production. We studied
several aspects of speech and gesture to see whether these
repeated references were increased with regard to speech
and gesture production. To facilitate comparison, the
method that was used was largely identical to our previous
study on reduction in speech and gesture, as reported in the
2011 CogSci proceedings (Hoetjes, et al., 2011).
Considering the fact that speakers tend to take the
addressee into account and tend to be communicatively
efficient, we expect that after negative feedback speakers
will try to make their repeated references clearer than their
initial references, in speech especially by speaking with a
lower speech rate, and in gesture by producing more
gestures that are also increased in their execution (i.e.,

gestures that take longer, are larger and more often twohanded).

Method
In order to study unsuccessful communication, participants
were videotaped while taking part in a director-matcher
task. In this task, the director had to describe an abstract
object to the matcher in such a way that the matcher could
identify the correct object from a range of similar looking
objects. In some trials, the matcher purposely and repeatedly
chose the wrong object, causing the director to produce a
repeated reference.

Participants
Participants were 38 Dutch undergraduate students (9 male,
29 female, age range 18-30 years old, M = 21 years and 7
months), who took part as partial fulfilment of course
credits. The participants took part in the experiment in the
role of director. A confederate took part in the role of
matcher. This confederate was the same person (female, 20
years old) for all participants.

Stimuli
Following Hoetjes, et al. (2011, under revision), stimuli
consisted of picture grids of so-called Greebles1 (see
Gauthier & Tarr (1997) for a detailed description of the
Greebles and their properties). We used Greebles because
they caused the director to provide detailed descriptions,
accompanied by many (mainly iconic) gestures (see
Hoetjes, et al., 2011, for more details on why the Greebles
were used). We created two picture grids, each containing
16 Greebles. In each trial, one object in the picture grid was
surrounded by a red square, indicating that this was the
target object of that trial. An example of a picture grid can
be seen in Figure 1. The order in which the two picture grids
were presented was counterbalanced over participants.
The experimental manipulation was that several objects
had to be described repeatedly due to apparent
communication problems: in each of the picture grids, seven
objects had to be described once (these were fillers), one
object had to be described twice, and two objects had to be
described three times. The objects that had to be described
repeatedly were always preceded and followed by an object
that had to be described only once. The repeated references
to the same object had to be given one straight after the
other, when negative audio feedback provided by the
matcher made clear to the participant that an incorrect object
had been chosen. For the current paper we analysed all three
descriptions of the objects that had to be described three
times.

1

Images courtesy of Michael J. Tarr, Center for the Neural
Basis of Cognition and Department of Psychology Carnegie
Mellon University. URL: http://www.tarrlab.org/

2370

Grid 2

Figure 1: Example of one of the picture grids. The target
object of this particular trial is marked by a red square.

Procedure
The experiment consisted of a director-matcher task that
was performed in a lab, where the director and the matcher
were seated at a table opposite each other (see figure 2 for
an example of the setup). The director was presented with
the trials on a computer screen, and the task was to provide
a description of the target object in such a way that it could
be distinguished, by the matcher, from the 15 distractor
objects. The director was told that the matcher was shown
the same objects on her screen as on the director’s screen,
but that these objects were ordered differently for the
director and the matcher (this meant that the director could
not use the object’s location in the grid for the target
descriptions).

Figure 2: Example of experimental setup. The director is
seen from the back, viewing one of the picture grids.
The director was told that, on the basis of his/her target
description, the matcher picked the object that she thought
was being described. After the matcher had picked one of
the objects, a sound would tell whether the matcher had
chosen the correct object or not (a low buzzing sound was
played for an incorrect object identification and a high ping
sound was played for a correct object identification). In
reality however, and unknown to the director, the director
and the matcher both viewed the same picture grid and all
the matcher had to do was play one of the sounds after the
director had given a description of the target object of that
particular trial.
When the sound indicating incorrect object identification
was played, the director had to continue describing the same

target picture until the sound indicating correct object
identification was played. Once finished successfully, the
director went on to the next trial. The feedback given by the
matcher only consisted of the sounds that were played after
each trial and there was no free conversation between the
director and the matcher. This was done in order to ensure
that the same unspecified negative feedback was provided
across participants and (target) items (cf. Healey, Mills, &
Eshgi, 2013, for a similar approach) .
After 10 trials (and a total of 15 descriptions), the director
was shown a second picture grid containing 16 new objects,
and continued for another 10 trials (i.e., 15 descriptions).
The participants were debriefed at the end of the
experiment, and none of the participants expressed any
suspicions concerning the experimental set-up.
For half of the participants, there was a screen between
the director and the matcher, causing a lack of mutual
visibility. However, due to lack of space we will not
describe the effect of (lack of) visibility in detail here.
Overall, the lack of visibility caused references to be
reduced, in speech and gesture, as compared to when there
was mutual visibility. Important for the present paper, is that
we found no interaction between visibility and repetition.
We will discuss the effect of repetition in detail below.

Data analysis
The experiment was filmed, the video recordings were
digitized, and the recordings showing the director were
annotated using the multimodal annotation program ELAN
(Wittenburg, Brugman, Russel, Klassmann, & Sloetjes,
2006). The subsequent speech and gesture annotation and
data analysis were largely based on our previous research on
repeated references, as reported in Hoetjes, et al. (2011,
under revision).
For the speech analyses we analysed the duration (in
seconds), the number of words, and the speech rate (in
number of words per second), all per trial. For the gesture
analyses all gesture stroke phases (main expressive part of
the gesture, as proposed by Kendon (2004) and McNeill
(1992) were selected. We then ran analyses on the quantity
of gestures (in numbers and gesture rate, i.e. number of
gestures per 100 words, per trial), and also on several
aspects of the execution, or quality, of the gestures. The
analyses on the quality of the gestures were based on a
smaller dataset (of 29 participants) in which all descriptions
were accompanied by at least one iconic gesture (the focus
on iconic gestures was due to the fact that, unsurprisingly
given the affordances of the stimuli, iconic gestures were
the type of gesture produced most often). The following
gesture aspects were taken into account. We measured the
duration of the gesture stroke, the size of each gesture (by
coding whether the stroke was produced using a finger (1),
the hand (2), the forearm (3) or the entire arm (4)),
annotated whether the gesture was produced using one hand
or two hands (resulting in a range from 1-2, with e.g. 1.3
indicating that 30% of gestures were two-handed), and we

2371

counted the number of repeated strokes per trial (if any). A
stroke was considered to be repeated when identical strokes
followed each other without a retraction phase in between.
Speech and gesture analysis were conducted for all three
reference descriptions of the objects that had to be described
three times. The statistical procedure consisted of two
repeated measures ANOVAs, one by participants (F1) and
one by items (F2). On the basis of these, minF’ was
computed (Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013; Clark,
1973), so that the results can be generalised over
participants and items simultaneously, while keeping the
experimentwise error rate low (Barr, et al., 2013, p. 268).
Bonferroni tests were used for post hoc multiple
comparisons.

Results
Effects on speech
In table 1, the means and standard errors of the dependent
variables in speech for all three object descriptions can be
found.
Table 1. Overview of means and standard errors (SE) for
duration (in seconds), number of words, speech rate (in
number of words per second)), as a function of Repetition
(three levels). Star indicates significant minF’.

Duration *
Words*
Speech rate*

Initial (SE)
39.7 (2.5)
85.0 (6.0)
2.1 (.05)

Second (SE)
28.9 (1.6)
55.4 (3.4)

Third (SE)
33.2 (1.8)
58.7 (3.9)

1.9 (.05)

1.7 (.05)

Firstly, we found that the second descriptions were
shorter than the initial descriptions and the third descriptions
were longer than the second descriptions, but shorter than
the initial ones (see table 1). This effect of repetition was
significant, F1 (2,72) = 29.22, p < .001, ŋp2 = .448; F2 (2,9) =
7.20, p < .05, ŋp2 = .616; minF’(2,14) =5.78, p < .05. Post
hoc Bonferroni analyses showed that all three descriptions
differed from each other (p < .05).
Secondly, we analysed the number of words used in the
object descriptions. The second descriptions contained
fewer words than the initial descriptions, and the third
descriptions contained more words than the second
descriptions, but fewer words than the first descriptions (see
table 1). This effect of repetition was significant, F1 (2,72) =
29.22, p < .001, ŋp2 = .448; F2 (2,9) = 15.91, p < .01, ŋp2 =
.780; minF’ (2,21) = 10.29, p < .001. Post hoc Bonferroni
analyses showed that the initial descriptions differed from
the second descriptions and from the third descriptions (both
p < .01). The second and third descriptions did not differ
significantly from each other.
Thirdly, we analysed the speech rate. Speech rate was
reduced for each repeated reference (see table 1). This effect

of repetition was significant, F1 (2,72) = 30.61, p < .001, ŋp2
= .460; F2 (2,9) = 18.19, p < .01, ŋp2 = .802; minF’(2,22) =
11.40, p < .001. Post hoc Bonferroni analyses showed that
all descriptions differed from each other (p < .01).

Effects on gesture
In table 2, the means and standard errors of the dependent
variables in gesture for all three object descriptions can be
found.
Table 2. Overview of means and standard errors for
number of gestures (per trial), gesture rate per trial (in
number of gestures per 100 words), gesture duration (in
seconds), gesture size (range 1-4), number of hands (where
1.4 indicates that 40% of the gestures were produced using
two hands), and gesture repetition (number of repeated
strokes), as a function of Repetition (three levels). Star
indicates marginally significant minF’.

Number of gestures
Gesture rate *
Gesture duration
Gesture size
Number of hands
Gesture repetition *

Initial (SE)
3.3 (.49)
4.1 (.67)
1.1 (.07)
2.9 (.10)
1.5 (.06)
.33 (.06)

Second (SE)
2.6 (.38)
4.8 (.79)
1.2 (.09)
2.9 (.09)
1.4 (.06)
.50 (.10)

Third (SE)
3.3 (.52)
5.3 (.74)
1.1 (.06)
2.9 (.09)
1.3 (.05)
.55 (.09)

The analyses for the gesture rate showed a higher gesture
rate for each repetition (see table 2). This effect of repetition
was significant over participants and items, F1 (2,72) = 7.1,
p < .01, ŋp2 = .165; F2 (2,9) = 4.8, p < .05, ŋp2 = .516, but
only marginally significant for minF’, minF’(2,24) = 2.86, p
= .07. Post hoc Bonferroni analyses showed that the gesture
rate of the initial descriptions differed from gesture rate of
the third descriptions (p < .01).
For the number of stroke repetitions within each gesture
we found an effect of repetition over items and a marginal
effect over participants and for minF’, F1 (2, 54) = 3.24, p =
.06, ŋp2 = .107; F2 (2,9) = 13.64, p < .05, ŋp2 = .752;
minF’(2,62) = 2.61, p = .08, with an increase for each
following description. Post hoc Bonferroni analyses showed
a difference between gestures from initial descriptions and
from third descriptions (p < .05).
The other gesture aspects that were analysed (number of
gestures, gesture duration, gesture size, number of hands),
showed no significant effect of repetition in minF’, although
in some cases there was an effect of repetition over
participants (for number of gestures), or over items (for
number of hands).

Discussion and Conclusion
For speech duration and the number of words we found that
there was reduction in the second description compared to
the initial description, and an increase in the third

2372

description as compared to the second description. This may
be explained by different strategies that participants used for
the second and third descriptions. When an object had to be
described for a second time, many participants provided
some additional information to their initial description but
did not repeat most of the information from the initial
description, making the second description shorter than the
first. When the same object had to be described for a third
time, many participants decided to take time to repeat
information from the initial description, and sometimes also
added additional information (see example 1). This increase,
or reset, in the third descriptions as compared to the second
descriptions is in line with Oviatt et al.’s (1998) findings on
repeated descriptions after recognition errors.
Example 1. Initial, second and third descriptions of the
same object, translated into English (original in Dutch).
Gestures occurred during the speech that is placed between
square brackets.
Initial description (30.2 seconds, 86 words, 3 gestures):
“This is more like a vase with a kind of shell as as yes
arm or something, how should I know what it is. Let’s say
at the widest part of the vase there is a kind kind [of shell
that you can listen to] coming out. To the right of it there
is [a point going to the right]. And then yes it is quite
smooth going down, you can see a [clear ball] as a kind
of head let’s say, that is only one.”
Second description (20.9 seconds, 50 words, 4 gestures):
“And damn. Uh [the shell] of the arm by the way is
pointing its opening [downward]. Uh and then yes just
above the bottom of that shape there are, sticking out [a
point to the left] and a kind of blunt [round] nose there
seems to be in the middle.”
Third description (26.5 seconds, 60 words, 5 gestures):
“Uh oh wait. It’s the only shape that has let’s say if you
look [at] the the [middle] [of the shape that] goes down,
there seems to be a kind of elongated ellips, a kind of
nose-like something and to the left of that nose there is [a
point], quite a large point like a toucan’s beak [to the
left].”
The reduction we found in speech rate means that
speakers tended to produce fewer words per second for each
subsequent reference. This could be because they slowed
down their speech, because they produced more empty
pauses in repeated references, or both. Future, more detailed
analysis could clarify this. Although this is a reduction in
numbers, this is consistent with a hyper-articulation
interpretation, with speakers trying to make their references
clearer, in the sense that a reduced speech rate arguably
makes it easier for the matcher to determine which object
was referred to.
We found a marginally significant increase (in minF’) for
gesture rate and gesture repetition. Participants produced
more gestures per 100 words and more repeated strokes in

third descriptions as compared to first descriptions. The
increase in gesture rate was caused by the fact that in
repeated references, the number of words was reduced, but
the number of gestures stayed constant. This means that the
relative reliance on gesture increased in repeated references.
The other gesture variables did not show significant
differences across references. Although this is not an
increase as such, it can also be seen as an absence of
reduction. We may interpret this absence of reduction as
some sort of reset back to the level of the initial description.
The results from this study add to those from previous
studies on repeated references, in which it was found that
repeated references are reduced, in speech (e.g. Galati &
Brennan, 2010) and in gesture (e.g. Hoetjes, et al., 2011;
under revision). For example, in Hoetjes et al. (2011), we
found that, after implicit positive feedback, gestures in
repeated references were reduced with regard to their
number, whereas in the present study, after receiving
negative feedback, the number of gestures stayed constant
(and their rate increased).
Previous research on feedback showed that both lack of
feedback and providing positive feedback can cause gesture
rate to be reduced (e.g. Holler & Wilkin, 2011; Jacobs &
Garnham, 2007). The present study shows that negative
feedback can cause gesture rate to increase. However, since
research showed that attentiveness matters (Kuhlen &
Brennan, 2010), it might be the case that, had the negative
feedback been more elaborate and produced by the matcher
herself instead of through a pre-recorded sound, the gesture
rate would have increased (even) more. Future research
could study whether this might be the case.
It can be argued that the fact that the descriptions were
unsuccessful caused the director to doubt (especially after
the second reference) whether there was any common
ground between the director and the matcher. Previous
studies (Gerwing & Bavelas, 2004; Holler & Stevens, 2007)
found reduction in gesture in cases of common ground. It
might be the case that in the present study, the descriptions
were not reduced, but produced with more effort, in an
attempt by the director to (re)create common ground with
the matcher (example 1 suggests such a process).
The current results support our hypothesis that repeated
references are not always reduced but can become more
effortful following communication problems, and can also
be related to the idea that speakers try to be as
communicatively efficient as possible (Jaeger & Tily, 2011).
In the context of our experiment, the director was given
negative feedback indicating that more information was
necessary. The ensuing descriptions given by the director
provided the matcher with the necessary extra (visual)
information (in the form of a lower speech rate and a higher
gesture rate), thereby making the overall discourse as
communicatively efficient as possible.

2373

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Elsa Jonkers and Kristel Bartels for
their help in collecting, transcribing and annotating the data,
Nick Wood for technical support, and Adriana Baltaretu,
Martijn Goudbeek, Ruud Koolen, Fons Maes, Ingrid
Masson-Carro, Jorrig Vogels, Hans Westerbeek and two
anonymous reviewers for useful comments and suggestions.
We received financial support from The Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research, via a Vici grant (NWO
grant 27770007), which is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal
redundancy hypothesis: a functional explanation for
relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence,
and duration in spontaneous speech. Language and
Speech, 47(1), 31-56.
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M.,
Doherty-Sneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000).
Controlling the intelligibility of referring expressions in
dialogue. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 1-22.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68, 255-278.
Beattie, G., & Aboudan, R. (1994). Gestures, pauses and
speech: An experimental investigation of the effects of
changing social context on their precise temporal
relationships. Semiotica 99(3-4), 239-272.
Brennan, S., & Clark, H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 22(6), 1482-1493.
Clark, H. (1973). The Language-as-Fixed-Effect fallacy: A
critique of language statistics in psychological research.
Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 12, 335359.
Clark, H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
de Ruiter, J. P., Bangerter, A., & Dings, P. (2012). The
interplay between gesture and speech in the production of
referring expressions: Investigating the trade-off
hypothesis. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(2), 232–248.
Fowler, C. A. (1988). Differential shortening of repeated
content words produced in various communicative
contexts. Language and Speech, 31(4), 307-319.
Galati, A., & Brennan, S. (2010). Attenuating information in
spoken communication: For the speaker, or for the
addressee? Journal of Memory and Language, 62, 35–51.
Galati, A., & Brennan, S. (2014). Speakers adapt gestures to
addressees’ knowledge: implications for models of cospeech gesture. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience,
29(4), 435-451.
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. (1997). Becoming a “Greeble”
expert: exploring mechanisms for face recognition. Vision
Research, 37, 1673-1682.
Gerwing, J., & Bavelas, J. (2004). Linguistic influences on
gesture's form. Gesture, 4, 157-195.

Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech arts
(pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Healey, P., Mills, G. J., & Eshgi, A. (2013). Making things
worse to make them better: The role of negative evidence
in the coordination of referring expressions. Paper
presented at the Pre-Cogsci 2013, Berlin.
Hoetjes, M., Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., Krahmer, E., &
Swerts, M. (2011). GREEBLES Greeble greeb. On
reduction in speech and gesture in repeated references. In
L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher & T. F. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 3250-3255). Boston:
Cognitive Science Society.
Hoetjes, M., Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., Krahmer, E., &
Swerts, M. (under revision). Reduction in speech and
gesture during the production of repeated references.
Holler, J., & Stevens, R. (2007). The effect of common
ground on how speakers use gesture and speech to
represent size information. Journal of Language and
Social Psychology, 26(1), 4-27.
Holler, J., & Wilkin, K. (2011). An experimental
investigation of how addressee feedback affects cospeech gestures accompanying speakers’ responses.
Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 3522–3536.
Jacobs, N., & Garnham, A. (2007). The role of
conversational hand gestures in a narrative task. Journal
of Memory and Language, 56, 291-303.
Jaeger, T. F., & Tily, H. (2011). Language Processing
Complexity and Communicative Efficiency. WIREs:
Cognitive Science, 2(3), 323-335.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture. Visible action as utterance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kuhlen, A., & Brennan, S. (2010). Anticipating Distracted
Addressees: How Speakers' Expectations and Addressees'
Feedback Influence Storytelling. Discourse Processes,
47(7), 567- 587.
Lindblom, B. (1990). Explaning variation: a sketch of the H
and H theory. In W. Hardcastle & A. Marchal (Eds.),
Speech production and speech modelling (pp. 403-439).
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. What gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Oviatt, S., Bernard, J., & Levow, G. A. (1998). Linguistic
Adaptations During Spoken and Multimodal Error
Resolution. Language and Speech, 41(3-4), 419-449.
Vajrabhaya, P., & Pederson, E. (2013). Repetition vs.
listener accommodation: A case study of co-speech
gesture in retellings. Paper presented at the NWAV42,
Pittsburgh.
Wittenburg, P., Brugman, H., Russel, A., Klassmann, A., &
Sloetjes, H. (2006). ELAN: a Professional Framework for
Multimodality Research. Paper presented at the LREC.
Zipf, G. K. (1936). The psychobiology of language:
Routledge.

2374

