UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pantomime Strategies: On Regularities in How People Translate Mental Representations
into the Gesture Modality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7ph695g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Van Nispen, Karin
Van de Sandt-Koenderman, Mieke
Mol, Lisette
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pantomime Strategies: On Regularities in How People Translate
Mental Representations into the Gesture Modality
1

2

Karin van Nispen (k.vannispen@tilburguniversity.edu)1
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Mieke van de Sandt-Koenderman (m.sandt@rijndam.nl)2
Rotterdam Neurorehabiltation Research (RoNeRes), Erasmus University Rotterdam, The Netherlands

Lisette Mol (l.mol@tilburguniversity.edu)1
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@tilburguniversity.edu)1

Abstract
Pantomimes are gestures that occur in absence of speech,
which have no conventional meaning. Since their meaning
is not conventionalized, the question arises as to what
extent they are idiosyncratic. To study this, we collected
pantomimes for a standardized set of objects and annotated
what representation techniques people used. This resulted
in the (to our knowledge) first database of pantomimes.
Analyses show that there are regularities in the use of
pantomime. That is similar techniques are used for objects
across individuals. This shows that pantomime is not fully
idiosyncratic. As pantomime is based on people’s mental
representation of objects, the observed regularities seem to
be a result of intrinsically similar mental representations.
Our database gives insight into pantomime 'norms' and
could be used as a baseline against which clinical groups
(e.g., people with aphasia) can be compared.
Keywords: Pantomime; Mental representation; Iconicity;
Idiosyncrasy; Non-verbal communication

Introduction
Pantomimes are hand gestures that occur in absence of
speech (McNeill, 2000). They may not be used as
frequently as co-speech gestures, but their use can be
convenient in situations where speaking is difficult (for
instance in a bar, where the music is very loud). The
meaning of pantomime is not determined by any
convention (McNeill, 2000). That is, the form and
meaning of pantomime gestures does not meet any kind of
socially constituted group standard (in contrast to
emblematic gestures, whose meaning is culturally defined,
as for instance for ‘the thumps up’ emblem). Does this
mean that the construction of pantomime is idiosyncratic?
We know that in the production of co-speech gestures,
which are assumed to be non-conventionalized as well,
certain similarities between speakers may nevertheless
arise. Turkish and Japanese speakers, for instance,
represent manner and trajectory in separate gestures more
often than English speakers. This is thought to be a result
of conventions in spoken language (Kita & Özyürek,
2003). Language is unlikely to influence pantomime
though (Goldin-Meadow, So, Özyürek, & Mylander,
2008), as it is produced in absence of speech. Does this
mean that different people use different pantomimes for
the same concepts, or will there be certain regularities?

If people cannot rely on linguistic knowledge when
producing pantomime, what other sources can they draw
from? They may rely on the mental concept of an object1,
such as a whistle. According to Barsalou (1999), one's
mental representation of an object includes perceptually
based representations, such as knowledge of the shape,
use and sound of a whistle. Although individual
experiences with the world (and for this example with
‘whistles’) may differ, for people within a certain culture
or community there probably is a great deal of overlap or
correspondence between such experiences. This results in
similarities across individual’s mental representations.
When producing a pantomime, people probably rely on
these representations and translate them into pantomime.
To this aim, they might use iconicity, which is a similarity
between form and meaning (Müller, 1998). For a whistle,
iconicity may for instance show in a mapping between the
shape of the object (a cylinder with a small extension, see
Figure 1) and a hand shape that is similar to this (a fist
with slightly stretched index and middle finger).
Importantly, not everything is easily represented in
pantomime. A first restriction lays in the constraints of the
gesture modality. In the gesture domain, one can easily
depict physical or spatial properties (e.g. Alibali, 2005),
but other properties (for instance color and sound) may be
more challenging. As a consequence, for depicting an
object in pantomime, people have to select a conceptual
feature from their mental representation that meets the
constraints of the pantomime domain. Second, for reasons
of efficiency people will not express all features that meet
these criteria.
This leads to the question of how people select the
features suitable to depict in pantomime. As McRae, Cree,
Seidenberg, and McNorgan (2005) describe in their
database of semantic object norms, there may be many
features associated with an object (see Table 1 for an
overview of features related to a whistle). These features
can reflect a variety of basic knowledge types, such as
information on its sound, shape and function (based on
Wu & Barsalou, 2009). These features can be divided into
salient or distinctive and non-distinctive features. In the
dataset of McRae et al. (2005), a feature is distinctive
when it is not used for any of the other objects.
1
This paper will only focus on objects, animals and plants. For
reasons of efficiency we will refer to these categories as
‘objects’.

3020

How do people select from these different features? In
Sign Languages, in which particularly the iconic signs
show great similarity to pantomime, objects are often
represented by a salient feature. In American Sign
Language, for instance, a lion is represented by its salient
feature ‘manes’ (Perniss, Thompson, & Vigliocco, 2010).
This could be applied in pantomime as well. For instance
for the object ‘whistle’ both its use and sound would be
salient. The first feature seems more likely to be selected
though, since the other is not as easily translated into
pantomime. Importantly though, there could be multiple
salient features that can be depicted in pantomime (for our
whistle example this may be its use but possibly also its
shape). Furthermore, a feature in itself may be depicted by
various representation techniques. ‘Whistling’ could be
represented by pretending to hold a whistle, but also by
shaping the fingers in front of one's mouth as if the hand
is a whistle, also see Müller (1998) for a more elaborate
description of the different ways in which objects can be
depicted. This illustrates that people have many
possibilities at their disposal. We do not know yet how
people choose from those possibilities when having to
depict an object in pantomime.
Table 1 Semantic features associated with a whistle
(based on the database of McRae et al., 2005)

Whistle
Distinctive
Feature
(class)1
used for alerting
F
makes high pitched
S
noise
produces loud noise
S

Non-distinctive
Feature
(class)1
made of metal
V
Used by blowing air
F
through
produces noise
S

has a ball inside

V

is small

V

used by lifeguards

F

made of plastic

F

used in games

F

is loud

S

used for sports

F

used by the police

F

1

to assess word finding difficulties in people with aphasia),
which could be used as a baseline against which clinical
groups (e.g., people with aphasia) can be compared.
For the representation of an object in pantomime, people
have to rely on their mental representation. As mental
representations are intrinsically similar, we expect to find
regularities in the way in which objects are represented in
pantomime across participants for the tested objects. As
pantomime is very suitable for representing spatial and/or
physical information, we expect that the representation
techniques used are based on spatial and/or physical
features that are, similar to what we see in Sign Language,
distinctive for an object.

Methods
Participants
Twenty native speakers of Dutch participated in the
experiment (5 male), age 32-65 (M=53). They were all
right handed (assessed by means of the Edinburgh
Handedness Inventory; Oldfield, 1971).

Procedure
Participants were asked to convey 60 objects from the
Boston Naming Test, BNT (Kaplan et al., 1983) through
pantomime. The object-pictures in the BNT vary from
objects that are easy to name (named with highly frequent
words) such as a ‘whistle’, to more difficult ones (named
by low frequent words), such as 'compasses' (see Figure 1
and 2). The order in which the objects were presented is
linked to their naming difficulty, meaning that naming
difficulty increases as one progresses in the task.
Participants were only allowed to use pantomime
gestures; speaking was explicitly forbidden. Participants
gave their consent to be videotaped during the experiment.

F = Function, S = Sound, V = Visual form and surface

Current study: Gesture is a growing field, in which a lot
of attention has been paid to co-speech gestures and their
underlying processes (e.g. De Ruiter, 2000; Kita &
Özyürek, 2003; Krauss, Chen, & Gottesman, 2000) and
function (e.g. Alibali, Heath, & Myers, 2001; GoldinMeadow, Nusbaum, Kelly, & Wagner, 2001). Pantomime
however, remains understudied. How do people construct
pantomime? And which mental processes are involved?
The current study aims to shed light on these questions.
Twenty participants used pantomime to ‘name’ the 60
objects of the Boston Naming Test, BNT (Kaplan,
Goodglass, & Weintraub, 1983). We assessed the way in
which objects are (in an iconic way) represented by
annotating the representation techniques used for each
object. To our knowledge, these data constitute the first
pantomime database. Besides its theoretical relevance, it
is also clinically relevant. Our database provides
‘pantomime norms’ for the BNT (a test that is used widely

Figure 1 Easy object
(verbal naming): Whistle

Figure 2 Difficult object
(verbal naming):
Compasses

Analysis
For each object, the pantomimes produced were annotated
into different representation techniques using the ELAN
gesture coding software package (Wittenburg, Brugman,
Russel, Klassmann, & Sloetjes, 2006). Based on Müller
(1998), we identified six representation techniques:
handling (e.g., pretending to hold a whistle), enact
(handling without an object, e.g., pretending to swim),
object (e.g., use fingers to represent a whistle), shape
(e.g., outlining the shape of a whistle), deictic (e.g.,
pointing at one’s mouth) and other (all pantomimes that
do not fit into previous categories), also see Table 2.

3021

Coding was done by the first author. We performed
several analyses. First, we annotated for each of the 60
objects which pantomime techniques were used, and
whether any regularities could be detected across
participants. We set a threshold: if 80% or more (≥16/20)
of the participants used a technique for a specific object,
we labeled this as a default technique. To explore
potential explanations of why these techniques were
applied, we investigated the relation between the use of
pantomime techniques and linguistic and perceptual
characteristics of the objects. Linguistic variables included
‘imageability’ (which is the degree in which the word
associated with the object evokes a visual represenation;
van Loon-Vervoorn, 1985), ‘nameability’ (which is the
average score correct for verbal naming as determined in
the norms for the BNT test), and ‘age of acquisition of the
object names’ (see Heesbeen & Van Loon-Vervoorn,
2001).
Table 2 Coding scheme for representation techniques
used (van Nispen, van de Sandt-Koenderman, Mol, &
Krahmer, 2014).
Representation
Technique

Definition

Example

Handling

Pretending to
use an object

Pretending to write
with a pencil

Enact

One pretends to
be in a different
situation,
without using an
object

Pretending to be
cold by rubbing
one’s hands to
opposite shoulders

Object

Using one’s
hands to
represent (part
of) an object

Holding a hand in
front of one’s face
for representing a
mask

Shape

Outlining or
molding the
shape of an
object

Drawing the outline
of a house with
one’s index finger

Deictic

Pointing (index
finger) at object,
location or
trajectory

Pointing at one’s
chair

Other

All gestures that
do not fit into
previously
named
categories

Showing three
fingers for
representing the
number ‘three’

To investigate what criteria related to perceptually based
features of an object influence the decision for a
pantomime technique we used the classification of McRae
et al. (2005). For our analysis we looked into a subset of
our objects that matched the objects in their dataset
(N=24). We analyzed objects for 2 classifications: 1)
objects that had function as a distinctive feature

(described as ‘Visual motion’ and/or ‘Function’ in Wu &
Barsalou’s taxonomy) and 2) objects that had shape as a
distinctive feature (described as ‘Visual shape’ in Wu &
Barsalou’s taxonomy).

Results
As shown in Figure 3, for 52 out of 60 objects we found
that a specific technique was used by 80% or more of the
participants for that object, see Figure 4 for examples of
these default techniques. This suggests that there are
regularities in the way people refer to objects in
pantomime. Objects can have one or more techniques that
are used as default. For 44 out of 60 objects people used
only a single technique as default. As shown in Table 3a
handling was the default technique for 18 objects, enact
for 2 objects, object for 10 objects and shape for 24
objects. For 5 objects people used either handling or
object (see table 3b). These techniques mostly reflected
the same information (use of an object) depicted by
different techniques (e.g. for saw: pretending to hold a
saw and move it back and forth or showing a flat hand
perpendicular to the table and move it back and forth).
For 7 objects two techniques were used by 80% or more
of the participants. These defaults were always
combinations of shape and another technique. For ‘igloo’
and for ‘cactus’ the combination of the two techniques in
itself were used by more than 80% of the participants, see
Table 3b. Besides, for ‘cactus’ there is even a third
‘default’ technique, enact, which is used 85% of the
participants (but is not used by 80% or more in
combination with both shape and handling). For only 8
out of 60 objects no default technique was found. In
addition to the above named default techniques people
may have added other techniques in their pantomime
behavior. Those techniques though were not used by 80%
or more of the participants and are not reported here.

Figure 3 Percentage of objects that did or did not have
a default technique

3022

Table 3a Pantomime techniques, ‘defaults’, used by 80% or more of the participants for a certain object.
The ranking of the objects in the BNT (indicating verbal naming difficulty) are given between square brackets. Objects
that occur twice in the table, because for two techniques the threshold was met, are shaded grey.
Handling
Accordion [47]
Broom [12]
Dart [25]
Harp [38]
Pallet [58]
Pencil [3]
Racket [21]
Scroll [53]
Comb [7]
Door knocker [40]
Harmonica [30]
Stethoscope [42]
Toothbrush [10]
Whistle [5]
Wheelchair [16]
Abacus [60]
Canoe [26]
Cactus [36]

Object
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
95%
95%
95%
95%
95%
95%
95%
95%
90%
90%
85%

Helicopter [11]
Bed [1]
Compasses [50]
Muzzle [44]
Snail [22]
Pelican [41]
Volcano [23]
Mask [18]
Octopus [13]
Sphinx [55]

Enact
100%
90%
90%
85%
90%
90%
85%
80%
80%
80%

Igloo [33]
Cactus [36]

Shape
90%
85%

Acorn [32]
Globe [27]
Plants rack [57]
Pyramid [43]
Camel [17]
Funnel [46]
Igloo [33]
Mushroom [14]
Rhino [31]
Cactus [36]
Unicorn [45]
Wreath [28]
Yoke [56]
Abacus [60]
Asparagus [49]
Bench [20]
Hangman’s rope [48]
House [4]
Snail [22]
Protractor [59]
Tripod [52]
Coat Hanger [15]
Pelican [41]
Tree [2]

100%
100%
100%
100%
95%
95%
95%
95%
95%
90%
90%
90%
90%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
85%
80%
80%

Table 3b Combination of gesture techniques used by 80% or more of the participants for a certain object.

Saw [9]
Scissors [6]
Sugar Tongs [54]
Bolt [51]
Hangman’s rope [48]

Either/Or
Handling (65%) or Object (40%)
Handling (35%) or Object (70%)
Handling (40%) or Object (65%)
Handling (90%) or Object (35%)
Handling (50%) or Object (45%)

To explore potential explanations for the selection of
these default techniques, we first looked into the relation
between the used default techniques and the linguistic
variables related to the objects. Pearson’s correlation for
percentage of people that used a technique for an object
and scale scores for ‘imageability’, ‘nameability‘ and ‘age
of acquisition’ for that object did not show any significant
correlations.
Second, for a subset of 24 objects that matched objects
in the database of McRae et al. (2005), we split the objects
up into different groups. For the first list we made a
division between objects that did or did not have

100%
100%
100%
95%
85%

Cactus [36]
Igloo [33]

Combination
Shape + Handling
Shape + Enact

90%
85%

‘function’ as distinctive feature and for the second list we
made a division between objects that did or did not have
‘shape’ as a distinctive feature. Objects that had ‘function’
as a distinctive feature, were depicted more often with
object: t(21)=1.20; p<.01, and handling (marginally
significant): t(21)=1.27; p=.09, than objects that did not
have ‘function’ as a distinctive feature. No differences
were found between objects that did or did not have shape
as distinctive feature for the different pantomime
techniques

3023

Discussion
Our results show that there are ‘default’ ways in which
certain groups of people pantomime objects. These default
techniques concern specific features of the object (a
handling technique represents the function of the object,
such as the function ‘used for blowing air through’ of a
whistle, see Figure 4). This implies that, even though
there are no conventions on the use of pantomime, its
production is not idiosyncratic. Rather, the observed
regularities seem to be a result of people’s intrinsically
similar mental representations.
Some remarks could be made with respect to these
findings. We assumed that the regularities found do not
arise from some sort of cultural or linguistic based
convention on how to produce specific pantomimes
(Goldin-Meadow et al., 2008; McNeill, 2000). After all, it
is unlikely that our Dutch participants had ever thought
about how to pantomime, for instance, a sphinx. Our
analyses did not reveal what selection process does lead to
the observed regularities, as the database of McRae et al.
(2005) was not able to predict this. This illustrates the
surplus value of our pantomime database, as it gives
insight into spatial information related to objects. McRae
et al. (2005) point out that this kind of information is to a
large extend omitted in their linguistic based database, as
this is typically something that is difficult to verbalize.
Furthermore, it shows that distinctive features are not
necessarily the same for language and gesture. A feature
as ‘used to blow air through’ may not be distinctive in
language (as it applies for whistle, but also for
harmonica), but in pantomime the different handling
techniques are distinctive.
Pantomime, just as well as language, has its own
‘typicalities’. Features, for instance, may differ in their
degree of difficulty to express in pantomime. The pictures
used in the task provide information on the shape of the
objects. Therefore, in this task, shape pantomimes may be
cognitively less effortful than for instance handling
pantomimes. On the other hand, for handling pantomimes
one could propose that this is natural or embodied
movement (something we do in our daily lives as well;
Hostetter & Alibali, 2008). As Ellis and Tucker (2000)
have shown, viewing an object may even prime the
actions associated with grasping the object. This implies
that handling pantomimes could even be naturally evoked
by some of the objects. For shape or object pantomimes
on the other hand one has to perform a ‘new’ action.
Finally, it is unclear to what extent the different features
vary in the degree to which they are ‘cognitively
accessible’. Possibly, some features are accessed more
easily, or faster than others.
Possibly, our design using pictures has also influenced
the ‘accessibility’ of certain features and/or mental
representations. First, pictures obviously visualize the
shape of the depicted object, which may partly explain
why shape gestures were relatively often relied upon as a
representation technique. Second, the pictures used might
influence the conceptualization of the observed object.
For instance, a picture of an igloo, with the entrance
towards the viewer, may elicit other representations
(entering the igloo), than a picture with an entrance facing
the side. However, our data show that our participants
frequently express information through gesture that is not

depicted in the target picture (as for instance showing
‘pain’ for cactus and ‘cold’ for igloo). Nevertheless, it
would be interesting for future research to repeat this
experiment with spoken and/or written presentation of the
targets
Although we do not know what processes lead to
selection of specific pantomimes, we can speculate as to
why these regularities occur. Would the observed
regularities aid its comprehensibility? Goldin-Meadow,
McNeill, and Singleton (1996) discuss that gesture takes
on linguistic properties when it has to carry the ‘burden’
of communication. The observed regularities in
pantomime may be a first ‘step’ in this process. In our
experiment and in a speaking community, there is no need
and not enough ‘pantomime interaction’ for pantomime to
take on linguistic properties and develop into a more
conventionalized gesture system, such as home sign or
sign language. The question of whether the use of the
observed default techniques in pantomime aids
comprehensibility will be addressed in future studies
where we will take the comprehensibility of pantomime
into account.
In future studies we plan to look closer into the use of
pantomime and its implications for clinical settings. In
addition to the current study, we will look at pantomimes
used by people with aphasia and the features they express.
Hopefully this will shed more light on the question of
whether some features are cognitively more easily
accessed and/or produced than others. In addition to these
analyses we will also assess the comprehensibility of the
studied pantomimes and assess their added value for
communication.

Figure 4 Participants using a default pantomime technique
for the objects ‘whistle’ and ‘compasses’ (figure 1 and 2).
Above: Handling techniques for the object ‘whistle’ (used
by 95% of the participants). Below: Object techniques for
the object ‘compasses’ (used by 90% of the participants).
(Participants gave informed consent for the use of their
pictures.)

3024

Conclusion
Similar techniques are used across individuals to depict
objects in pantomime. This shows that pantomime is not
fully idiosyncratic. As pantomime is based on people’s
mental representation of objects, the observed regularities
seem to be a result of intrinsically similar mental
representations. Our study has resulted in a first
pantomime database, which we will make publicly
available on https://www.dataverse.nl/dvn/. It provides
pantomime norms for 60 well documented objects from
the Boston Naming Task that could be used to compare
clinical groups to.

References
Alibali, M. W. (2005). Gesture in spatial cognition:
Expressing, communicating, and thinking about spatial
information. Spatial cognition and computation, 5(4),
307-331.
Alibali, M. W., Heath, D. C., & Myers, H. J. (2001).
Effects of visibility between speaker and listener on
gesture production: Some gestures are meant to be seen.
Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 169-188.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(04), 577-660.
De Ruiter, J. P. (2000). The production of gesture and
speech. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language & Gesture (pp.
284-311). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, R., & Tucker, M. (2000). Micro‐affordance: The
potentiation of components of action by seen objects.
British journal of psychology, 91(4), 451-471.
Goldin-Meadow, S., McNeill, D., & Singleton, J. (1996).
Silence is liberating: Removing the handcuffs on
grammatical expression in the manual modality.
Psychological Review, 103(1), 34-55.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S. D., &
Wagner, S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing lightens
the load. Psychological Science, 12(6), 516-522.
Goldin-Meadow, S., So, W. C., Özyürek, A., & Mylander,
C. (2008). The natural order of events: How speakers of
different languages represent events nonverbally.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(27), 9163-9168.
Heesbeen, I. M. E., & Van Loon-Vervoorn, W. A. (2001).
Diagnostiek en herstelmeting van taalproblemen na
niet-aangeboren hersenletsel. Universiteit Utrecht,
Utrecht.
Hostetter, A., & Alibali, M. (2008). Visible embodiment:
Gestures as simulated action. Psychonomic bulletin &
review, 15(3), 495-514.
Kaplan, E., Goodglass, H., & Weintraub, S. (1983). The
Boston Naming Test. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
Kita, S., & Özyürek, A. (2003). What does crosslinguistic variation in semantic coordination of speech
and gesture reveal?: Evidence for an interface
representation of spatial thinking and speaking. Journal
of Memory and Language, 48(1), 16-32.
Krauss, R. M., Chen, Y., & Gottesman, R. F. (2000).
Lexical gestures and lexical access: A process model. In
D. McNeill (Ed.), Language & Gesture. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

McNeill, D. (2000). Language and Gesture. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
McRae, K., Cree, G., Seidenberg, M., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large
set of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research
Methods, 37(4), 547-559.
Müller, C. (1998). Iconicity and Gesture. In S. Santi, I.
Guatiella, C. Cave & G. Konopczyncki (Eds.), Oralité et
Gestualité. Montreal, Paris: L'Harmattan.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: The Edinburgh inventory.
Neuropsychologia, 9(1), 97-113.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R., & Vigliocco, G. (2010).
Iconicity as a general property of language: evidence
from spoken and signed languages. Frontiers in
Psychology, 1.
van Loon-Vervoorn, W. A. (1985).
Voorstelbaarheidswaarden van Nederlande woorden.
Zeist: Swets & Zeitlinger.
van Nispen, K., van de Sandt-Koenderman, M., Mol, L.,
& Krahmer, E. (2014). Should pantomime and
gesticulation be assessed separately for their
comprehensibility in aphasia? A case study.
International Journal of Language and Communication
Disorders, 49(2), 265-271.
Wittenburg, P., Brugman, H., Russel, A., Klassmann, A.,
& Sloetjes, H. (2006). ELAN : a professional framework
for multimodality research.
Wu, L.-l., & Barsalou, L. W. (2009). Perceptual
simulation in conceptual combination: Evidence from
property generation. Acta Psychologica, 132(2), 173189.

3025

