UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Partial color word comprehension precedes production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fd2k5pj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Wagner, Katie
Jergens, Jill
Barner, David

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Partial color word comprehension precedes production
Katie Wagner
kgwagner@ucsd.edu

Jill Jergens
jillmjergens@gmail.com

David Barner
barner@ucsd.edu

Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego

Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego

Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Previous studies report that children use color words in a
haphazard manner before acquiring adult-like meanings. The
most common explanation for this is that children struggle to
abstract color as a domain of linguistic meaning, and that this
results in a stage in which children produce but do not
comprehend color words. However, recent evidence suggests
that children’s early usage of color words is not random, and
that they acquire partial but systematic meanings prior to
acquiring adult-like meanings. Here we employ parent report,
a color word production task and an eye-tracking
comprehension task to provide further support for this
conclusion and show for the first time that toddlers often
acquire color word meanings even before beginning to
produce them.
Keywords: word learning; adjectives; color; receptive
language; expressive language

Introduction
Color words pose a difficult problem for children learning
language (Sandhofer & Smith, 1999; Kowalski & Zimiles,
2006; O’Hanlon and Roberson, 2006). As noted in a number
of previous reports, children produce color words for many
months before converging on adult-like meanings (Pitchford
& Mullen, 2003; Sandhofer & Smith, 1999; Soja, 1994), a
pattern also found in other domains of word learning, such
as time and number (Brooks, Audet, & Barner, 2012; Busby
Grant & Suddendorf, 2011; Shatz, Tare, Nguyen, & Young,
2010; Wynn, 1992). Many previous studies have argued that
this delay between production and adult-like comprehension
is due to children’s difficulty identifying color as the
relevant domain of linguistic meaning, and thus that
children initially produce color words despite lacking
meanings for them (Franklin, 2006; Kowalksi & Zimiles,
2006; O’Hanlon & Roberson, 2006; Sandhofer & Smith,
1999). Challenging this, the present study shows that
children often acquire partial meanings for color words
before beginning to produce them. This suggests that the
delay between production and the acquisition of adult-like
meanings cannot stem from problems abstracting color, but
instead is best explained by a gradual inductive process of
determining the boundaries of individual color words.
In most domains of vocabulary acquisition, past studies
have found that children acquire basic meanings of words
before they begin to produce them in speech, such that in
infancy and early childhood the number of words that
children comprehend far exceeds the number of words that
they produce (Goldin-Meadow, Seligman & Gelman, 1976;
Harris, Yeeles, Chasin & Oakley,1995). However,

according to some accounts there are important exceptions
to this pattern. For example, children learn to count and
produce number words many months before they acquire
their meanings (Wynn, 1990, 1992; Carey, 2009). Also,
similar claims have been made in the domains of time
(Shatz et al., 2010; Friedman; Tillman & Barner, 2013), and
emotion (Widen & Russell, 2003). In each of these lexical
domains, when children are asked a question – e.g., “What
color is this?” or “How many are there?” they respond with
domain-appropriate words (e.g., red, seven) but often select
the word incorrectly (e.g., responding red when asked about
a purple object; for discussion see Shatz et al., 2010).
Across these domains, children often produce words for
months – or in some cases for several years – before they
acquire their adult-like meanings.
In the case of color words, the most common explanation
for this lag between production and adult-like
comprehension is that children struggle to abstract color as
the relevant dimension of linguistic meaning. In other
words, although children quickly learn to produce and form
a category of color words that are associated with one
another, they struggle to identify color as the aspect of
experience that this category of words encodes (e.g.,
Franklin, 2006; Kowalksi & Zimiles, 2006; Sandhofer &
Smith, 1999). Critically, on this account, children’s
difficulty is specific to abstracting color, rather than with
mapping individual color words to particular hues and
identifying category boundaries. As evidence for this view,
proponents note that preverbal infants possess perceptual
color categories that are similar to those of English-speaking
adults (Franklin, Pilling & Davies, 2005; Bornstein, Kessen
& Weiskopf, 1976). For example, according to Shatz,
Behrend, Gelman, and Ebeling (1996), “on perceptual tasks,
infants treat the continuous dimension of hue categorically
much as adults do. . . Thus, the apparent difficulty children
have with color term acquisition cannot be primarily
because the perceptual domain is continuous whereas the
lexical domain is discontinuous” (p. 178). Accordingly,
these accounts argue that once children identify color as the
relevant dimension of meaning, they acquire color word
meanings quickly, since they can easily map new color
words onto pre-existing perceptual color categories:
“Children seem to struggle with their first color word yet
learn most of the other basic terms fairly rapidly over the
next several months . . . This seems to suggest that there is
some kind of ‘switch’ for children’s ability to learn and map
color words correctly” (p. 324 Franklin, 2006).

1724

While these accounts offer a parsimonious account both
of children’s difficulty with color words and the origin of
color word meanings (i.e., as rooted in perceptual
categories), they ultimately cannot explain how children
converge on language-specific color word meanings. This is
because children must be able to learn the color boundaries
of any of the world’s languages. And critically, languages
vary both with respect to the number of categories they
encode and the precise location of the color category
boundaries (Kay, Berlin, Maffi, Merrifield & Cook, 2009).
For example, Berinmo, a tribal language with five basic
color categories spoken in Papa New Guinea, features the
colors nol (green, blue and purple) and wor (green, yellow,
orange and brown). Thus, Berinmo marks a color boundary
that is absent in English (i.e. a boundary within the English
green category), but also fails to mark other boundaries that
are found in English (e.g. the boundary between blue and
purple; see Roberson, Davidoff, Davies, & Shapiro, 2005).
This cross-linguistic variation in the number and location
of color word boundaries suggests that children must use
evidence from their language input to construct languagespecific color word meanings. Recent studies suggest that
this inductive problem, rather than problems abstracting
color, may be the primary difficulty that children have when
learning color words. In one recent study, Wagner, Dobkins
and Barner (2013) replicated previous reports finding that 2to 4-year-olds produce many errors when they use color
words. However, when they analyzed the nature of these
errors, they found that they were highly systematic in
nature. For example, the children’s errors were perceptually
proximal to the target (e.g., children were more likely to
label purple as red than blue). They also found that
children’s errors were typically overextensions of adult
categories. For example, when children used blue to label
green, they almost always also used it to label blue. These
data suggest that rather than having trouble identifying hue
as relevant to color word learning, children’s main difficulty
appears to be due to determining color word boundaries.
Wagner et al.’s (2013) study also suggests that, contrary
to past reports, many children have meanings for color
words as soon as they produce them. However, it remains
unknown whether children acquire partial meanings prior to
producing color words as is the case with object labels
(Goldin-Meadow, Seligman & Gelman, 1976; Harris,
Yeeles, Chasin & Oakley, 1995) or instead, after production
as previous studies of color word learning have argued.
Evidence of partial color word meanings prior to production
would suggest that children map color words onto specific
regions of color space very early in development, and that
identifying the relevant dimension of meaning for color
words may be no more difficult than for other domains of
meaning. To investigate this, we tested 18- to 33-montholds using an eye-tracking task, to determine the earliest
moment at which they assign preliminary meanings to color
words. Also, we collected parent report data regarding each
child’s production and comprehension of color words and
conducted an in-lab assessment of color word production.

Method
Participants
Fifty-five 18- to 33-month-olds (24 girls; mean age = 1;11,
SD=3.2 mo) participated. An additional 6 children were
excluded due to a 50% chance of protanopia or deuteranopia
color deficiency based on family history (n=1), failure to
complete the task (n=3) and full knowledge of color terms
demonstrated during the production task (n=2). 23 adults (6
women; mean age = 21;8, SD=1;6) also participated.

Procedures
Parent Report Parents were asked to complete a
questionnaire that asked separately whether children
understood and spontaneously produced each of the eleven
English basic color words (red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
purple, pink, black, brown, gray, and white) as well as the
twelve nouns used in the Comprehension Task (see below).
In-lab Production Task 11 pictures of colored fish (one for
each of the eleven basic English colors) were placed colored
side down in front of the child, and the experimenter flipped
over each card one at a time, and asked for each card, “What
color is this?”
Eye-tracking Comprehension Task The purpose of this
task was to assess whether children comprehended color
words by presenting a spoken color word and testing (1)
whether they would increase fixations to a target color and
(2) whether they would also increase fixations to a distractor
from a color category perceptually close to the target color.
We expect that children with overextended color word
meanings may increase fixations to perceptually close
distractors in addition to the target color image.
Children viewed 24 scenes, each containing four pictures
of the same kind of object, each in a different color. The
images included socks, chairs, balloons, purses, boxes, cups,
cars, kites, stars, boats, books, and bows, and were obtained
from the UCSD International Picture Naming Project
(Szekely et al., 2004). Prior to each trial, an attractor –
centered and equidistant between all four objects – was
presented to direct the child’s gaze to the center of the
screen. During each trial, a voice first directed the
participant’s attention to all of the objects (e.g., Look at the
socks) and then to the object of the target color (e.g., Look,
the orange sock is my sister’s). Each scene was presented
for six seconds and the target color word was spoken at the
three-seconds. Each scene included two pairs of colors
where the colors of each pair were perceptually adjacent to
each other (close distractors) but distant from the members
of the other pair (far distractors; e.g., red and orange vs. blue
and green). On each of the 24 trials, one of the four colors
(e.g., blue) served as the target color (e.g., blue), and the
color that served as the target was counterbalanced between
children.
We used Tobii Studio 3.1.6 in combination with a Tobii
X120 eye tracker to track children’s eye movements.
Children were calibrated using Tobii Studio’s standard 5point calibration.

1725

Results
Analysis of production errors
Of the 55 participants, only 18 produced color words during
the in-lab production task. In order to determine if these 18
children were applying color words systematically or
haphazardly, we replicated two of the analyses reported in
Wagner, Dobkins and Barner (2013).
We first asked whether children’s errors reflected
overextensions of adult categories. For example, a child
may know that red refers to red objects, yet have a broader
meaning for red than adults, and therefore overextend it to
orange and yellow objects. Given that a child used a label
incorrectly on at least one of the eleven trials, we asked
whether they also used that label correctly for its target
color. Chance performance was defined as in Wagner et al.
(2013). We calculated the base rates of how frequently a
child produced each of the incorrect color words (e.g., if a
child uses red to label 4 of the 11 colored fish) to calculate
the probability that the word would be used correctly (e.g.,
using red to label the red fish, 4/11 or 36%). We then took
the mean of these probabilities to calculate the overall
probability of overextension. Using a binomial test, we
found that the percentage of incorrectly used labels that fit
the above definition of overextension – 73% – is greater
than would be expected from chance (33%, p<0.001), and is
almost identical to the rate reported by Wagner et al. (2013).
Next, given that a child used a color label incorrectly, we
asked whether the hue they labeled was proximal to the hue
denoted by the word they used (where proximity was
defined in Munsell color space). For example, if a child
labeled orange as red, this would be considered proximal,
but if a child labeled yellow or blue as red this would be
considered a non-proximal error. As in Wagner et al., to
determine chance we calculated the probability of each
label-stimulus error pair (the probability of using red to
label an orange stimulus) as equal to the product of the base
rates. For example, if 20% (0.2) of errors were in response
to an orange stimulus and 80% (0.8) of errors involved
using the label red, then the probability of using red to label
orange would be 0.2 x 0.8, or 0.16. To determine the overall
chance probability of proximal errors, we summed across
the probability of all label stimulus pairs that are classified
as proximal. Using a binomial test, we found that the
percentage of errors that were proximal (41% of 111 total
errors) was greater than chance (30%; p = 0.006). This
replicates Wagner et al’s results and is consistent with the
hypothesis that children have partial meanings for color
words before they acquire full adult-like meanings.
Parent report
According to parent report, on average children’s
comprehension of color words exceeded production. Of the
11 basic color terms, parents reported that their children
understood a mean of 4.1 words (SD = 4.5) and produced a
mean of 2.6 words (SD = 3.9). Children, however, produced
fewer color words on average in the lab (mean: 1.7; SD =

2.9). Of the 12 common nouns used in the eye-tracking task,
on average parents reported that their children understood
7.8 (SD = 2.7) and produced 4.7 (SD = 3.9). Thus, parent
report data suggest that for most children comprehension
precedes production for color words as well as the 12
common nouns included in our study.

Eye-Tracking Analyses
For these analyses, children were divided into four groups
based on parent report and the in-lab production task. This
allowed us to verify color word comprehension in a group
of children reported to comprehend but not produce any
color words (Comprehension-Only; n = 11), which if
confirmed suggests that comprehension sometimes precedes
production. Also, it allowed us to test the small group of
children who were reported to produce but not comprehend
any color words (Production-Only, n=6), to ask whether
these children actually lacked meanings, or had partial
meanings like those documented in error analysis above,
and by Wagner et al. (2013). The remaining two groups
were children thought by parents to have no knowledge of
color words and children who were reported to both produce
and comprehend them (Comprehension–and-Production, n =
20; No-Knowledge, n = 18). In three instances where
children’s performance on the in-lab production task
exceeded that indicated by parent report, children were
classified according to performance on the in-lab task. Note,
that even the most advanced group (Production-andComprehension Group) still had limited knowledge of color
words, producing on average only 4.3 of 11 color words in
lab (6.7 according to parent report) and demonstrated adultlike understanding of only 2.4 color words.
The color words that children understand and produce
vary considerably between children. Thus, we performed an
individual level analysis, and targeted color words that
children were reported to produce only, comprehend only or
both comprehend and produce. We relied on parent report
and performance on the in-lab production task to determine
which of the eye-tracking trials should be included in the
analysis for each child. Trials were included for the analysis
as follows: for each child in the Production-Only group, we
included trials which tested color words that the child
produced (either in lab or according to parent report); for
each child in the Comprehension-Only group, we included
trials that tested color words that the child comprehended
(according to parent report); for each child in the
Production-and-Comprehension group, we included trials
that tested color words that the child produced and
comprehended (either in lab or according to parent report)
For the No-Knowledge and Adult groups, all trials were
included.
Eye movements were successfully tracked 81% (SD =
15.4) of the time for children and 92% (SD = 4.4) of the
time for adults. Total fixation durations from the eyetracking task were binned into four time periods. The first
time period (baseline) was from 250ms after the beginning
of each trial to 250ms after the color word was spoken to

1726

allow time for participants to plan and execute eyemovements. The second time period was from 251ms after
the color word was spoken to 1000ms, the third from
1001ms to 2000ms and the fourth from 2001ms to 3000ms.
In order to compare the time spent fixating the two far
distractors to the time spent fixating the close distractor and
the target, we calculated the average time spent fixating the
two far distractors. We then used this average far distractor
fixation time to compute re-weighted proportions of the
fixation time for the close distractor, the target and the mean
of the far distractors during each of the four time periods.
Under the null hypotheses of random looking behavior, the
re-weighted proportions would be equal and if all fixations
were directed to one of the images, equal to 0.33.

Figure 1: Fixation to targets (top) and close distractors
(bottom) relative to far distractors
For each participant group, we performed a 4 (time:
baseline, 251-1000ms, 1001-2000ms, 2001-3000ms) x 3
(fixated image: target, close distractor, far distractor)
repeated measures ANOVA to determine whether
participants’ looking behavior (i.e. the proportion of time
spent fixating each of the image types) changed after the
target color word was spoken.
Interactions between time and fixated image were found
for the Adult group (F(6,242)=191.07, p<0.001), the
Comprehension-Only group (F(6,110) = 2.53, p = 0.025),
the Comprehension-and-Production group (F(6,209) = 2.40,
p = 0.029) as well as the Production-Only group (F(6,55) =
2.32, p = 0.046). No interactions or main effects were

observed in the No-Knowledge group (all Fs < 1.5). These
interactions indicate that the relative looking behavior
between the images changed over time in response to the
presentation of the spoken color word. We next explored
these interactions by conducting planned comparisons to
determine if the changes observed in the participants’
looking behavior were consistent with comprehension of the
spoken color word. Specifically, we calculated a difference
score by subtracting the reweighted proportion of fixations
to the far distractors from the reweighted proportion of
fixations to the target (and in a second analysis, to the close
distractor). We expected that difference scores after
presentation of color words would be greater than during
baseline if participants comprehended (or partially
comprehended) the words in question. For all of these
planned comparisons, we conducted one-tailed dependentsamples t-tests. Two-tailed tests were not employed because
there is no hypothesis that would predict fixations to the
target (or close distractor) to decrease after the color word
was spoken.
Adults showed increased fixations to the target (relative
to far distractors) when compared to baseline during all
three post-color word time windows (all ts(22) > 12, all ps <
0.001; all Cohen’s ds > 3.5), but did not show increased
fixations to the close distractor during any time windows
(all ts < 1).
Like the adults, the Comprehension-Only Group showed
increased fixations towards the target during the time
window 1001-2000ms after the target color word was
spoken (t(10) = 1.93, p = 0.041, d = 0.91) but did not show
increased fixations to the close distractor during any of the
time windows (all ts < 1). Thus, these children, like adults,
exclusively increased fixations to the target despite failing
to produce any color words. The Production-andComprehension group showed increased fixations towards
the target during both the 1001-2000ms (t(19) = 2.71, p =
0.0069, d = 0.94) and 2001-3000ms (t(19) = 2.04, p = 0.028,
d = 0.67). Also, they exhibited increased fixations to the
close distractor during the 2000-3000ms time window (t(19)
= 2.12, p = 0.024, d = 0.84) and fixations to the close
distractor approached significance during the 1001-2000ms
time window (t(19) = 1.46, p = 0.081, d = 0.48), suggesting
that the children in this group may have overextended
meanings of the color words. Finally, although a significant
interaction between time and fixated image was observed
for the Production-Only group (see above), none of the
planned comparisons reached statistical significance due to
the very low number of participants that qualified for this
group. However, as in the Production-and-Comprehension
Group, this group exhibited increased fixations to the target
(though beginning one time period earlier during the 251 to
1000ms time window), an effect which approached
significance (t(5) = 1.54, p = 0.092, d = 0.92). Also like the
Production-and-Comprehension group, the Production-Only
group exhibited a trend of increased fixations to the close
distractor during the later 2001-3000ms time window (t(5) =
1.46, p = 0.10, d = 0.80). Furthermore, although these

1727

effects did not reach statistical significance, the effect sizes
were comparable to those in the Production-andComprehension Group.1 See Figure 1.

Discussion
We investigated color word knowledge in a group of
young English-speaking children, including a subset who
had yet to produce any color words. Replicating previous
reports (Pitchford & Mullen, 2003; Sandhofer & Smith,
1999; Soja, 1994), we found that children make many errors
when labeling colors, but that these errors are non-random:
children appear to learn preliminary, non-adult-like,
meanings for color words very early in the acquisition
process, often before they begin producing them in speech
(Wagner, Dobkins, & Barner, 2013; Bartlett, 1978). These
data provide evidence against the idea that the delay
between color word production and the acquisition of adultlike meanings stems from a failure to abstract color as a
domain of meaning (Franklin, 2006; Kowalksi & Zimiles,
2006; O’Hanlon & Roberson, 2006; Sandhofer & Smith,
1999). Instead, our data suggest that children identify color
as relevant to color word meaning very early in acquisition,
often before they even begin producing color words, and
that adult meanings emerge late due to a gradual inductive
learning process.
Several pieces of evidence support these conclusions.
First, replicating Wagner, Dobkins, and Barner (2013), a
color word production task found that when children made
color labeling errors, they were highly systematic. For
example, when children made errors, they were often
overextensions: when children used a word like red to label
orange, they very often also used the same word to correctly
label its target hue (e.g., the color red). Also, children’s
errors were often to hues that were directly adjacent to the
target color, again consistent with the hypothesis that they
initially overextend their color words beyond the adult color
boundaries. Like the data from Wagner et al., these findings
suggest that the delay between color word production and
acquisition of adult-like meanings is due primarily to a
gradual inductive process of identifying adult-like category
boundaries.
A second piece of evidence came from parental report.
On average, parents reported that children comprehended
more color words then they produced. Only 6 of our
participants produced color words but were reported by
parents as not comprehending them. In contrast, parents of
12 children reported that their children comprehended color
words without producing them. This was not simply
because we sampled from children who were too old, and
thus had advanced color word knowledge: We also found 20
children who neither produced nor comprehended color
1
Unfortunately, increasing the number of Production-Only
children by even 10 participants would require running at least 100
additional children given their relative rarity. In the overwhelming
majority of cases, parents who report that their children produce a
word also believe that their children comprehends that word, too –
an intuition which is strongly supported by our data.

words according to parent report. These data are clearly at
odds with previous claims that children use color words
randomly for months before mastering adult-like meanings
(Pitchford & Mullen, 2003; Sandhofer & Smith, 1999; Soja,
1994). However, our data also suggest that parent report
data should be interpreted with caution. Although we found
that children frequently had meanings for color words
before they produced them – consistent with what parents
reported – it is very unlikely that these children had
acquired full, adult-like, meanings at this stage. As noted
above, children in the production-only and comprehensiononly groups did not accurately use color words to label
colors in our in-lab labeling task (often overextending to
adjacent hues), but did systematically look to the
appropriate target color for these same words in the eyetracking task and many also fixated perceptually close
distractor colors. In sum, our findings suggest that although
parents are likely right that their children have acquired
some meaning for their color words, their judgments should
not be interpreted as evidence for full adult-like meanings.
Our eye-tracking data support the conclusion that partial
meanings often precede color word production. Consistent
with parent report, children whose parents indicated that
they both produced and comprehended color words looked
significantly longer to target hues when target words were
presented. Likewise, we found that children who did not
produce color words but whose parents said they
comprehended
them
also
showed
evidence
of
comprehension in the eye-tracking task. Finally, the small
group of children who produced color words but were
reported by parents as not understanding them also tended to
look more towards the target hues when target words were
presented, though this result was only marginally significant
due to the limited number of parents who classified their
children as only producing color words – a fact which itself
is consistent with the hypothesis that production only rarely
precedes comprehension.
In sum, evidence from parental report, an in-lab
production task, and an eye-tracking comprehension
measure together suggest that, contrary to the conclusions of
many previous reports, color words resemble other earlyacquired words: in most children, meanings emerge before
children produce color words in speech though it takes some
time before children’s meanings become adult-like. Also,
our data raise questions about other cases in which
researchers have argued that production precedes
comprehension, such as number and time. Emerging
evidence, consistent with our study, suggests that children
may acquire early partial meanings for a variety of abstract
words before they acquire full adult-like meanings,
including object labels (Ameel, Malt & Storm, 2008),
number words (Barner & Bachrach, 2010; Brooks, Audet, &
Barner, 2012; Condry & Spelke, 2008; Sarnecka & Gelman,
2004), time words (Tillman & Barner, 2013) and emotion
words (Widen & Russell, 2003). While children are able to
fast map words to their referents, they may require

1728

considerable time to converge on full-fledged adult
meanings (Carey & Bartlett, 1978).

Acknowledgments
We thank the members of the Language and Development
Lab for scheduling participants, collecting data, and coding
responses. This work was supported by the James S.
McDonnell Foundation Scholar Award to DB.

References
Ameel, E., Barbara, M., & Storms, G. (2008). Object
naming and later lexical development: From baby bottle
to beer bottle, Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 262285.
Barner, D. & Bachrach, A. (2010). Inference and exact
numerical representation in early language development.
Cognitive Psychology, 60, 40-62.
Barrett, M. (1978). Lexical development and overextension
in child language. Journal of Child Language, 5, 205-219.
Bartlett, E. J. (1978). The acquisition of the meaning of
color terms: A study of lexical development. In R. N.
Campbell & P. T. Smith (Eds.), Recent Advances in the
Psychology of Language (pp. 89–108). New York:
Plenum.
Bornstein, M., Kessen, W., Weiskopf, S. (1976). Color
vision and hue categorization in young human infants.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 2, 115-129.
Brooks, N., Audet, J., & Barner, D. (2012). Pragmatic
inference, not semantic competence, guides 3-year-olds’
interpretation of unknown number words. Developmental
Psychology, 49, 1066-1075.
Busby Grant, J., & Suddendorf, T. (2011). Production of
temporal terms by 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 26, 87–95.
Carey, S. & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Proceedings of the Stanford Child Language
Conference, 15, 17-29.
Condry, K. & Spelke, E. (2008). The development of
language and abstract concepts: the case of natural
number. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
137, 22-38.
Franklin, A. (2006). Constraints on children’s color term
acquisition. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
94, 322–327.
Franklin, A., Pilling, M. & Davies, I. (2005). The nature of
infant color categorization: Evidence from eye
movements on a target detection task. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 91, 227-248.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Seligman, M., & Gelman, R. (1976).
Language in the two-year old. Cognition, 4, 189-202.
Harris, M., Yeeles, C., Chasin, J. & Oakley, Y. (1995).
Symmetries and asymmetries in early lexical
comprehension and production. Journal of Child
Language, 22, 1-18.

Kay, P., Berlin, B., Maffi, L., Merrfield, W. R. & Cook, R
(2009). The World Color Survey. Palo Alto, CA: CSLI
Press.
Kowalski & Zimiles (2006). The relation between children’s
conceptual functioning with color and color term
acquisition. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
94, 301–321.
O’Hanlon, C., & Roberson, D. (2006). Learning in context:
Linguistic and attentional constraints on children’s color
term learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
94, 275–300.
Pitchford, N., & Mullen, K. (2003). The development of
conceptual colour categories in pre-school children:
Influence of perception on categorization. Visual
Cognition, 10, 51–77.
Reich, P. (1976). The early acquisition of word meaning.
Journal of Child Language, 3, 117-123.
Roberson, D., Hanley, J.R. & Pak, H. (2009). Thresholds for
color discrimination in English and Korean speakers.
Cognition, 112, 482-487.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Shapiro, L. (2005).
Color categories: Evidence for the cultural relativity
hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 378-411.
Sandhofer, C., & Smith, L. (1999). Learning color words
involves learning a system of mappings. Developmental
Psychology, 35, 668–679.
Sarnecka, B. & Gelman, S. (2004). Six does not just mean a
lot: preschoolers see number as specific. Cognition, 92,
329-352.
Shatz, M., Behrend, D., Gelman,S., & Ebeling, K. (1996).
Colour term knowledge in two-year-olds: evidence for
early competence. Journal of Child Language, 23,177199.
Shatz, M., Tare, M., Nguyen, S. P., & Young, T. (2010).
Acquiring non-object terms: The case for time words.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11, 16–36.
Soja, N. (1994). Young children’s concept of color and its
relation to the acquisition of color words. Child
Development, 65, 918-937.
Szekely, A., Jacobsen, T., D'Amico, S., Devescovi, A.,
Andonova, E., Herron, D., … Bates, E. (2004). A new online resource for psycholinguistic studies, Journal of
Memory and Language, 51, 247-250.
Tillman & Barner, D. (2013). Learning the language of
time: Children’s acquisition of duration words. Cognitive
Sciences Society, Berlin, Germany.
Wagner, K., Dobkins, K & Barner, D. (2013). Slow
mapping: Color word learning as a gradual inductive
process. Cognition, 127, 307-317.
Widen, S. & Russell, J. (2003). A closer look at
preschoolers’ freely produced labels for facial
expressions, Developmental Psychology, 39, 114-128.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of the number
words and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24,
220–251.

1729

