UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perceptual Category Learning: Similarity and Differences Between Children and Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9c5830c3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Rabi, Rahel
Minda, John Paul

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perceptual Category Learning:
Similarity and Differences Between Children and Adults
Rahel Rabi (rrabi@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2 CANADA

John Paul Minda (jpminda@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2 CANADA
Abstract
Studies of category learning have supported the idea that people rely on at least two cognitive systems when learning new
categories. A verbally-mediated system is best suited for
learning rule-based categories, and a nonverbal, procedural
system is best suited for learning categories that are not defined by a rule. To further examine the cognitive systems involved in categorization, two experiments explored developmental differences in perceptual category learning. In the first
experiment, children and adults were asked to learn a set of
categories consisting of stimuli equated on feature salience. A
single-feature rule (the criterial attribute) or overall similarity
would allow for perfect performance on this task. We found
that adults made significantly more rule-based responses to
the test stimuli than did children. A second experiment examined non-rule-based category learning by having children and
adults complete a prototype abstraction task. Children showed
evidence of prototype abstraction, with many children showing a similar pattern of responding to adults. Results are discussed within the COVIS framework.
Keywords: Category learning; Development; COVIS

Introduction
Categorization is a fundamental process that allows us to
meaningfully parse the world, and to group like objects together so that they can be treated equivalently. This process
has been examined in both adults and children (Ashby &
Maddox, 2005; Minda, Desroches, & Church, 2008; HuangPollock, Maddox, & Karalunas, 2011; Rabi & Minda,
2014), with research suggesting that children have a reduced
capacity for executive functioning and rule selection (Bunge
& Zelazo, 2006; Casey et al., 2004). Due to these limited
capacities, adults should outperform children on categorization tasks involving rule selection, but performance differences should be minimized in cases where to be learned
categories have little or no rule selection component.
One way to understand any possible differences between
children and adults is to consider the possibility that multiple cognition systems underlie category learning. According
to multiple-systems theories (the Competition between Verbal and Implicit Systems, or COVIS, is a well known example) a verbal system is assumed to learn rule-based categories (Ashby et al., 1998). This system is mediated primarily
by the prefrontal cortex, the medial temporal cortex, the
anterior cingulate cortex, and the head of the caudate. This
system requires sufficient cognitive resources to search for,
store, and apply a rule (Zeithamova & Maddox, 2006). This

system is assumed to be the default approach for normallyfunctioning adults when learning new categories (Ashby et
al., 1998). The multiple-systems approach also assumes that
a nonverbal system learns non-rule-based categories. The
nonverbal system is mediated by sub-cortical structures in
the tail of the caudate nucleus, relies on a dopaminemediated reward signal to learn, and does not rely as heavily
on verbal working memory and controlled attention. This
system is well suited to learn categories that have a strong
family resemblance (FR) structure (Ashby et al., 1998). It is
not well suited for rapid rule learning or for categories that
require a disjunctive rule and thus have no clear family resemblance structure (Minda et al., 2008). Both systems
compete during learning and when a classification decision
is made. Ultimately, the system with the more successful
responding strategy will tend to dominate performance
(Ashby et al., 1998).
COVIS and other multiple-systems theories make several
predictions about developmental effects on category learning, because the regions of interest are known to develop
with age. For example, research has shown that developmental changes in rule use reflect the rate of development of
the prefrontal cortex (Bunge & Zelazo, 2006). As such, we
might expect age-related improvements in explicit rulebased categorization if the prefrontal cortex is assumed to
mediate many of the cognitive aspects of the verbal system
(hypothesis testing, selective attention, etc.). In contrast, the
nonverbal system is mediated by the tail of the caudate nucleus, which seems to be fully developed in children (Casey
et al., 2004). Thus, young children should be able to learn
non-rule-based categories in a similar manner to adults.
Prior research has consistently demonstrated age-related
improvements in rule-based category learning. For example,
Minda, Desroches, and Church (2008) compared categorization performance in 3-, 5-, and 8-year-olds, as well as
adults. Results revealed that adults outperformed children
on categories that were optimally learned by a disjunctive
rule (e.g., 2 of the 3 stimulus features were relevant for the
disjunctive rule). However, children could learn singledimensional rules about as well as adults, suggesting that
the ability to learn rules was not completely absent in children. Huang-Pollock and colleagues (2011) examined the
ability of school-aged children and adults to learn rule-based
or non-rule-based categories. They found that the adults
performed better than the children in both cases, and the

2811

primary reason was children’s over reliance on single dimensional rules. Both of the studies suggest that children do
have access to the explicit, rule learning system, but this
system operates less efficiently in children because of their
less well-developed hypothesis-testing abilities (i.e., searching for, storing, updating, and applying rules) and relatively
less successful inhibitory control. Recently, work in our lab
has examined rule-based category learning in children ages
4-11 and its connection to executive functioning (Rabi &
Minda, 2014). Younger children showed the strongest rulebased deficit relative to older children. Interestingly, a larger
working memory capacity (e.g., on a digit span task) and
stronger inhibitory control abilities (e.g., on a Flanker task)
were associated with better categorization performance.
While these findings are in line with multiple-systems
theories, additional research is required to better understand
developmental differences in categorization. COVIS and
other multiple-systems theories assume that the verbal and
nonverbal systems compete to learn the categories and to
provide the response (Ashby et al., 1998). Minda et al.’s
(2008) findings related to a category set for which only one
strategy was viable. Similarly in Huang-Pollock et al., the
children learned categories that had only one optimal strategy (Huang-Pollock et al., 2011). To further examine the
types of categorization strategies that are preferred by children and adults it is useful to examine categorization sets for
which both rule-based and non-rule-based strategies are
available. For example, Minda and Miles (2009) asked children and adults to learn a set of categories for which both a
single-feature rule or overall similarity would allow for perfect performance. Findings revealed that adults made more
rule-based responses to test stimuli than did the children.
Additionally, some stimulus features were more salient than
others, and as a result, the proportion of criterial attribute
responding in children was higher for high salience features
than for low salience features. This type of attentional capture may have reduced hypothesis-testing demands, allowing children to identify the correct rule with more ease.
However, the question remains: how would children perform when given a different set of test stimuli with features
of equal salience?

dren in our study would show less CA performance than
children in Minda & Miles study, because using stimuli with
equally salient feature would encourage children to take part
in hypothesis testing to test various rules. Instead, it was
expected that children would base responses on single features or family resemblance.

Method
Subjects Subjects included 39 children with a mean age of
5.61 years (SD = 0.43 years) recruited from the University
of Western Ontario’s YMCA Child Care Centre and a Montessori School in London, Ontario. Of the 39 children who
participated in the study, data from 11 children were discarded because they did not complete the experiment, indicated that there were guessing, or their performance on the
last block of category learning was not significantly higher
than chance performance. This left 28 children (11 boys, 17
girls) who showed evidence of category learning. Participants also included 37 students from the University of
Western Ontario who participated for course credit or
money. Data from 4 adults were discarded because their
performance on the last block of category learning was not
significantly higher than chance performance and they indicated that they were guessing or responding randomly. This
left 33 adults (16 men, 17 women) who showed evidence of
category learning.
Materials Participants learned to classify drawings of fish
that varied along five binary dimensions. An example set of
stimuli is shown in Figure 1. The category set was made up
of 10 objects with five objects belonging to each of two
categories. The binary structure for Category A and Category B was identical to the Minda & Miles (2009) study.
Stimuli consisted of a prototype for Category A and Category B, and the remaining category members had four
features in common with their own category’s prototype and
one feature of the opposite category’s prototype. Perfect

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we extended the research of Minda &
Miles (2009) to examine the relative differences between
children’s and adults’ category learning abilities and styles.
Similar to Minda & Miles, we asked participants to learn
two five-dimensional categories that could be learned perfectly by the verbal system, using a verbalizable rule based
on a single dimension (the criterial attribute, CA) or by the
implicit system by using a strategy based on the family resemblance of category members. Our study differed from
Minda & Miles, in that we designed a set of stimuli with
features that children rated as being approximately equal in
salience. Additionally, we created a single-feature test in
which participants indicated plausible category membership
for features presented in isolation. We predicted that chil-

Figure 1: This is an example of the training items for each
category used in the learning stage, along with the test items
for the transfer stage.

2812

categorization performance could be attained by learning the
CA (e.g., “striped tail fish in Category B, otherwise Category A”) or by learning the family resemblance structure. In
a separate feature rating study, we tested the perceived perceptual salience of the fish stimuli in a group of 24 children
(mean age of 5.32 years). Results revealed that children
rated all the features as being equally noticeable, F(4,92) =
1.87, p = .12.
Procedure Participants were first told that they would be
playing a game in which they would see pictures of different
fish on the computer screen. They were told that some of
these fish lived in the aquarium and some lived in the fishbowl. Their job was to help these fish find their homes by
clicking on the correct place on the screen. The learning
stage consisted of five blocks in which each of ten possible
training stimuli was presented in random order, once per
block, for a total of 50 trials.
On each trial, a picture of a fish appeared in the middle of
the screen and pictures of the two category labels (aquarium
or fishbowl) were shown in the top left and right corners of
the screen. On each trial, participants clicked on the fish’s
category label. Correct responses were indicated with a
green check mark displayed in the center of the screen for 3
seconds and incorrect responses were indicated with a red
X. In addition, the correct category label was circled during
this period regardless of whether the response was correct or
incorrect.
Upon completion of the 50 training trials, participants
were told that they would be seeing some additional fish and
that they should help the fish find their homes using what
they had learned during the training phase. The transfer
stage consisted of two blocks of 10 stimuli in which the 10
training stimuli and the 10 novel transfer stimuli were
shown once each in random order (see transfer stimuli in
Figure 1). Each trial followed the same sequence of events
as in the training stage except that no feedback was given.
Participants then completed the single feature phase and
were shown each individual feature of the fish (e.g., a
straight tail, a pointed mouth, etc.) on the computer screen
one at a time and they indicated in which category the feature was most often found by clicking on either the fish
bowl or aquarium. The single feature phase consisted of one
block of 10 trials and as in the transfer phase, feedback was
not given.

children’s and adults’ performance.
Transfer Analysis As a measure of general competence, we
calculated the proportion correct on the training items that
were presented during the transfer phase (old items) and
compared that with performance on the last block of the
training phase. A non-significant result would suggest that
performance was in the same general range during both
phases. Adults performed at .94 (SD = .09) correct on the
final training block and .97 (SD = .06) correct on the old
items that were presented during the transfer phase, t(32) =
1.79, p = .08. Children performed at .83 (SD = .11) correct
on the final training block and .80 (SD = .15) correct on the
old items that were presented during the transfer phase,
t(27) = −1.33, p = .19. The proportion of CA responding by
each group of participants is shown in Figure 2B. Adults
tended to make more classifications based on the CA than

Results
Learning Analysis Learning curves were calculated by
averaging performance for each age group at each block.
The resulting learning curves, shown in Figure 2A, suggest
that at the start both groups were performing at the same
level, but with practice adults outperformed children. A 2
(age) x 5 (block) mixed ANOVA revealed a main effect for
block, F(4, 236) = 27.62, p < .001, and a main effect for
age, F(1, 59) = 12.58, p < .001. An interaction was found
between age and block, F(4, 236) = 3.10, p = .02, indicating
that across the 5 blocks a difference emerged between

Figure 2: Panel A shows category learning performance for
children and adults. Panel B shows the proportion of CA
responding for children and adults in the transfer stage, with
individual subject data shown as points.

2813

did children, t(59) = 2.62, p = .01. In addition, the figure
shows each individual data point and suggests that most
adults made classifications that were rule based (i.e., 100%
CA performance), but a different pattern emerged for the
children. Although a few of the children learned the rule,
most did not. Many participants seemed to show performance that was a mixture of strategies, with some rule-based
responses and some non rule-based responses. No children,
however, showed any evidence of pure family-resemblance
learning.

Table 1: Number of Participants Using Each
Strategy in Transfer Stage
__________________________________________
Age
CA
FR
SD
Other
Children
Adults

Strategy Analysis We designed a strategy analysis that
compared each subject’s performance on all the exemplars
shown in the transfer phase with the predicted performance
of several different idealized strategies. For each subject, we
calculated the correlation between their pattern of responses
on each stimulus with the responses produced by each of 6
possible categorization strategies: rule based on CA, rule
based on each of 4 suboptimal dimensions (SD), or FR similarity. Subjects whose data was not fit by any of the strategies were counted as “other”. We assumed that a strong
correlation between performance and strategy indicated a
possible reliance on that strategy and the model with the
strongest correlation was deemed to be the best fit. Next, we
counted the number of subjects whose data was best fit by
each type of strategy. Table 1 shows that adults tended to
respond according to a CA strategy more often than children; children tended to be “other”. We analyzed these differences with a chi-square test and confirmed that adults and
children used different categorization strategies, X2(2) =
13.12, p = .001.
Single Feature Analysis We calculated the proportion correct (defined as selecting the category that was most associated with each individual feature) for each single feature
item and averaged across participants. Overall, adults made
more correct single-feature classifications than did children
(M = .84, SD = .37 for adults and M = .64, SD = .48 for
children), t(59) = 4.24, p < .001. We also examined the performances on the single feature test for participants in each
strategy bin shown in Table 1. The results are summarized
in Table 2 and these results show that children essentially
performed at chance on the single feature test regardless of
which strategy they adopted (0.6 would result for a subject
who performed perfectly on one single feature and was
guessing on the other 4). Adults showed much better performance on the single feature tests. The adults who were
classified as FR subjects performed the best, consistent with
the claim that they were taking into account all of the features. Even the CA learners (the largest group of adults)
performed well on the other features. The 2 adults who relied on a single, non-criterial dimension were closest to the
children’s performance levels.

Discussion
Despite learning the category set relatively well, children
and adults differed in their classifications of the test

7
19

0
4

5
2

16
8

Table 2: Single Feature Performance by Strategy Use
__________________________________________
Age
CA
FR
SD
Other
Children
Adults

.66(.11) na(na) .66(.15) .61(.19)
.84(.20) .90(.20) .70(.42) .80(.17)

Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses.
stimuli. Adults were more likely to classify transfer stimuli
in accordance with the CA compared to children, with many
children relying on “other” strategies. These other strategies
seemed to be a mixture of responses from the two systems
(some rule-based, some similarity-based). Additional research is needed to understand this subset of subjects. Only
a small subset of children showed any indication that they
were able to find a perfect rule among 5 possible rules. This
key result is consistent with the predictions of COVIS, in
that adults showed a bias for rule learning of the verbal system. Another prediction of COVIS that was possibly confirmed was the prediction that both systems operate simultaneously, because the single feature performance of adults
who ultimately learned the CA was fairly high (.84). Good
performance on the single feature test indicates the presence
of category level knowledge of the other, non-CA features.
Overall, we found no evidence that children showed a preference for family resemblance learning, indicating that children did not rely on an overall similarity approach (nonverbal system) when categorizing stimuli.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 revealed that in contrast to adults, children
struggled to find the optimal rule in the categorization task.
Furthermore, young children may not yet be able to engage
in systematic and effective rule learning. Given that children
are equipped with the ability to learn new categories: are
there category learning tasks on which children can perform
relatively well, and in a way that is strategically similar to
adults? In Experiment 2, we asked children and adults to
learn a set of nine-dot prototype distortions of the kind that
have been used in the past to assess prototype abstraction
(e.g., Smith & Minda, 2002). Given that this kind of category learning has been linked to primary and secondary
visual areas (Reber, Stark, & Squire, 1998b) and is not rule
based, we predicted that children would perform relatively
well on this task, relative to adults.

2814

Method
Subjects 20 adults were recruited from the University of
Western Ontario and 17 children (8 male, 9 female) were
recruited from the University Laboratory School at the University of Western Ontario. Children were all between 4 and
5 years old and the mean age was 4.53 (SD = .26). The data
from one child was excluded because that child had difficulty understanding the task.
Materials The dot-distortion task was created with a wellestablished method that generates a family of dot patterns
from a single prototype. The distortions were similar to, but
not exactly like, the originating prototype. Small adjustments to the location of some dots resulted in items that
were “low distortions” of the prototype, and large adjustments resulted in “high distortions”. We connected the dots
to form irregular, 9-point polygons. The training set consisted of the prototype, 20 low-level distortions, 20 highlevel distortions, and 20 random patterns. See (J.D. Smith &
Minda, 2002) for complete details.
Procedure The training phase consisted of 2 random-order
blocks of all 40 high-distortion training stimuli (80 trials).
On each trial, subjects viewed the shape and then clicked the
“OK” button to advance to the next stimulus. The testing
phase consisted of a random order of 4 presentations of the
prototype, 20 low-level distortions, 20 new high-level distortions, and 20 random patterns (64 trials). On each trial,
subjects were told that they were going to see more shapes,
and that they were to indicate if each shape was part of the
same category they had just seen.

Results
The proportion of category endorsements (saying “yes” to
a stimulus in the test phase) for the prototypes, low distortion, high distortion, and random items were calculated (see
Figure 3). Both children and adults showed typicality gradients with prototypes being endorsed strongly and random
items being endorsed weakly. To verify this effect, we conducted an age (children, adults) x stimulus type (prototype,
low, high, random) ANOVA. We found a main effect of
stimulus type, F(3, 102) = 87.52, p < .001, indicating that
subjects were able to reliably distinguish category members
from non category members. There was no significant main
effect of age, F(1, 34) = 1.92, ns, indicating overall performance did not differ between children and adults. Additionally, a significant interaction was found, F(3, 102) =
5.45, p < .01. Post-hoc analyses revealed that the children
and adults significantly differed on the proportion of prototype endorsement, F(1, 34) = 6.50, p < .05, but did not significantly differ on other stimulus types. A closer look at the
data revealed that the majority of children were endorsing
the prototype at a similar level to adults, with the exception
of 2 children (1 child displayed 0% prototype endorsement,
and the second child endorsed each stimulus type an equal
amount). After removing these 2 children from analyses, a t-

Figure 3: Performance of children and adults on the four
kinds of test stimuli.
test confirmed that children did not differ from adults on the
proportion of prototype endorsement, t(32) = 1.85, p = .074.

Discussion
In contrast to Experiment 1 in which children and adults
seemed to adopt different strategies when learning the categories, the results of Experiment 2 suggest that when there
is no rule to learn, children and adults appear to learn via a
similar strategy. That is, children were able to distinguish
category members from non category members and that the
level of endorsement depended on how close or far items
were from the originating prototype. The data from adult
participants followed nearly the same pattern as that shown
by children, with the exception of the finding that adults
endorsed the prototype to a greater extent than children.
This finding is not all that surprising given the fact that we
were testing young children. Age-group differences may be
more attributable to differences in metaskills and experience, rather than to differences in capacities/non-rule-based
category learning. While the difference in prototype endorsement between children and adults may have been
driven by the outlier performance of two specific children,
given our limited sample size, future research is required to
better understand the role of prototypes in children’s categorization behaviour. Overall, the typicality gradient observed
among adults and most children, suggests that children can
generally perform well in this task because there are no
rules to learn, the stimuli cannot be described verbally, and
the nearly incidental learning paradigm reduced the demands on working memory. Freed from the strict demands
of the hypothesis testing tasks, children appear capable of
abstracting a visual prototype and generalizing to new items,
even after a relatively short training interval.

Conclusions
Experiment 1 revealed that children are less likely to classify stimuli according to the criterial attribute rule compared

2815

to adults. Experiment 2 showed that when children are
learning category sets that are not amenable to rule learning,
they can perform relatively well, and adopt strategies similar
to adults. However, differences in the stimuli used across
studies may also partly explain performance differences.
The results of Experiment 1 are generally consistent with
a multiple-systems theory of category learning, in that
COVIS predicts that the verbal system should learn categories by testing various rules and eventually applying a verbal
description for the correct single-dimensional rule (Ashby et
al., 1998). Children, unlike adults, are expected to have
more difficulty relying on the verbal, rule-based system. As
a result, children should be less able to efficiently engage in
hypothesis testing and inhibit incorrect rules. While children
did struggle with finding the criterial attribute rule, surprisingly, no children adopted a purely, family-resemblance
based strategy. This could be due to children using a mixture of strategies (e.g., “other” group), or possibly because
the stimulus-response associative process of implicit learning takes more time than what was given in our task.
Compared to the Minda & Miles (2009) study involving
stimuli with features of varying salience, controlling for
feature salience in Experiment 1 resulted in a decrease in
children’s categorization performance. Such findings suggest that children may have learned the CA more so in the
Minda & Miles study because the feature that corresponded
to the CA was perceptually salient. In other words, if the
CA required some degree of testing and inhibition, children
may not have been able to find it. They may have relied
instead on an imperfect rule and/or overall similarity, as
evidenced by the large subset of children classified as using
“other” strategies. While the majority of children in Experiment 1 struggled to identify the correct categorization
rule, a handful of children were able to identify the criterial
attribute. So, what factors differentiate children who can
learn correct categorization rules from those who cannot?
Rabi and Minda (2014) examined the cognitive processes
involved in rule-based category learning, and suggest that
working memory and inhibitory control, may be able to explain some of the observed developmental differences in
category learning.
The results of Experiment 2 demonstrate that children are
capable of learning categories that do not require rules to
solve. Children demonstrated a similar pattern of performance on the dot pattern task compared to adults. That is,
similar to adults, most children showed a typicality gradient
with prototypes being endorsed strongly and random items
being endorsed weakly. Additionally, the fact that participants are first exposed to a set of category exemplars under
incidental learning conditions suggests that the nature of this
task may be more relatable to naturalistic category learning.
Future research should further examine the incidental learning capabilities of children using different tasks.
Our data do allow the basic conclusion that when children
need to search for a rule to optimize learning, they have
difficulty relative to adults, and often succumb to their cognitive limits by selecting a suboptimal rule. When the task

does not have a rule, and features an implicit learning task,
they seem to be able to learn the categories in a similar
manner to adults. More research is needed concerning the
examination of developmental differences in category learning, which can illuminate the various cognitive systems that
are involved in this fundamental cognitive process.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada to
the second author. Correspondence should be addressed to
Rahel Rabi by email at rrabi@uwo.ca.

References
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., & Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of multiple systems in category learning. Psychological Review,
105, 442-481.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Human category
learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 149-178.
Bunge, S. A., & Zelazo, P. D. (2006). A brain-based account of the development of rule use in childhood.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15, 118-121.
Casey, B. J., Davidson, M. C., Hara, Y., Thomas, K. M.,
Martinez, A., Galvan, A., et al. (2004). Early development
of subcortical regions involved in non-cued attention
switching. Developmental Science, 7, 534-542.
Huang-Pollock, C. L., Maddox, W. T., & Karalunas, S. L.
(2011). Development of implicit and explicit category
learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 109,
321–355.
Minda, J. P., Desroches, A. S., & Church, B. A. (2008).
Learning rule-described and non-rule-described categories: A comparison of children and adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory, & Cognition,
34, 1518-1533.
Minda, J. P., & Miles, S. J.(2009). Learning new categories:
Adults tend to use rules while children sometimes rely
on family resemblance. Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Rabi, R., & Minda, J. P. (2014). Rule-based category learning in children: The role of age and executive functioning.
PLoS ONE, 9(1), e85316.
Reber, P., Stark, C., & Squire, L. (1998b). Cortical areas
supporting category learning identified using functional
MRI. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 95,
747-750.
Smith, J. D., & Minda, J. P. (2002). Distinguishing prototype-based and exemplar-based processes in dot-pattern
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 800-811.
Zeithamova, D., & Maddox, W. T. (2006). Dual-task interference in perceptual category learning. Memory & Cognition, 34, 387-398.

2816

