UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers expect others to learn rationally from evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8fg3170g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Yang, Phyllis
Magid, Rachel
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preschoolers Expect Others to Learn Rationally from Evidence
Phyllis Yan1 (yanphyll@umich.edu), Rachel Magid1 (rwmagid@mit.edu), &
Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

Tenenbaum, Kemp, Griffiths, & Goodman, 2011 for
review).
However, we do not know to what extent children expect
other agents to rationally revise their beliefs from data.
Some support for the notion that children are sensitive to the
relationship between evidence and others’ beliefs comes
from classic work on theory of mind (e.g. Wimmer &
Perner, 1989; see Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001 for
review). Recent research suggests that some of these
abilities emerge very early in development (Onishi &
Baillargeon, 2005; Southgate, Senju, & Csibra, 2007,
Baillargeon, Scott, & He, 2010). However, although theory
of mind tasks require reasoning about others’ knowledge
based on evaluations of the evidence available to them,
these tasks involve a relatively simple instantiation of the
expectation that others will learn based on their observations
of the world; children only need to understand that
perceptual access to information should give an agent
epistemic access to that same information. Do children
expect others to learn rationally in more complex situations,
including cases that require not just representing the
available evidence but drawing appropriate inferences from
the evidence?
The current study looks at whether children expect agents
to rationally update their beliefs from data by borrowing
from two influential tasks in the literature. We know that
even infants can make inferences about populations from
samples of evidence and are sensitive to whether evidence is
sampled randomly or selectively (e.g., Gweon, Tenenbaum,
& Schulz, 2010; Xu & Denison, 2009; Xu & Garcia, 2008).
We also know that by the age of five, children can reason
explicitly about others’ true and false beliefs (see Wellman,
Cross, & Watson, 2001 for review). Given these abilities
and children’s expectation of rational agency, we ask
whether preschoolers expect another agent to rationally
update his true or false beliefs given randomly or selectively
sampled data from populations.
Specifically, to investigate children’s expectations about
others’ evidence-based learning, we cross a sampling
paradigm with an unexpected transfer task. The child and
another agent (a Frog puppet) see two boxes: one containing
more rubber ducks than ping pong balls (the Duck box) and
one containing more balls than ducks (the Ball box). The
Frog leaves, and the child either sees the boxes moved and
returned to the same location (so that the Frog has a true
belief about the location of each box) or switched (so that
the Frog has a false belief about the location of each box).

Even infants expect agents to act rationally in pursuit of their
goals. However, little research has looked at whether young
children expect other agents to learn rationally. In the
current study, we investigated 4.5- to 6-year-olds’ reasoning
about another agent’s beliefs after the agent observed a
sample drawn randomly or selectively from a population.
We found that those children who could correctly track both
the true state of the world and the other agent’s initial beliefs
expected the other agent to learn rationally from the data.
Critically, this inference depended upon but could not be
reduced to either the child’s own understanding of the world,
or the child’s own inferences from the sampling process,
suggesting that the ability to integrate these component
processes underlies a developing understanding of the way
in which evidence informs others’ beliefs.
Keywords: rational action; theory of mind; learning.

Introduction
Expectations of rational agency support our ability to
predict other people’s actions and infer their mental states
(Dennett, 1987; Fodor, 1987). Adults assume that agents
will take efficient routes towards goals (Heider, 1958;
D’Andrade, 1987), and developmental studies suggest that
these expectations emerge early in life. For instance, 1-yearolds can use situational constraints, along with knowledge
about an agent’s goal, to predict an agent’s actions.
Similarly, they can use knowledge of an agent’s actions and
situational constraints to infer the agent’s goal, as well as
knowledge of an agent’s actions and goal to infer
unobserved situational constraints (Csibra, Bíró, Koos, &
Gergely, 2003; Gergely & Csibra, 2003; Gergely, Nádasdy,
Csibra, & Bíró, 1995). Such studies provide abundant
support for a principle of efficient action with respect to
agents’ goals and constraints. Here we ask whether learners’
expectations extend to the more colloquial meaning of the
word rational: the expectation that other people’s judgments
and beliefs have a basis in the evidence they observe.
This question is distinct from the question of whether
children themselves draw rational inferences from data.
Many studies suggest that well before kindergarten children
can use small samples of evidence to infer the extensions of
word meanings, identify object categories, learn causal
relationships, and reason about others’ goal-directed actions,
and they do so in a manner consistent with Bayesian
inference (see Gopnik & Wellman, 2013; Schulz, 2012; and

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!"
1

Denotes joint first-authorship.

"
916

At test, the Frog returns, and both the child and the Frog
watch as the experimenter reaches into the Duck box and
draws a sample of three ducks either apparently at random
(without looking into the box) or selectively (looking in and
fishing around). Children are asked, “Where does Froggy
think the Duck box is?”
As shown in Table 1, if children expect the Frog to
rationally update his beliefs from evidence, then the cross
between old and new locations and random and selective
sampling predicts a pattern of responses that is distinct from
the pattern that would be generated if children were
adopting many other possible response strategies. (See
Predictions to follow.) That is, if children generate the
predicted pattern of responses on this task, they can only do
so insofar as they expect third parties to rationally update
their beliefs from evidence.

Location/Random Sampling (NL/RS) condition, the Old
Location/Selective Sampling condition (OL/SS), and the
New Location/Selective Sampling (NL/SS) condition.
Familiarization Phase In all conditions, the experimenter
showed the child the Duck and Ball boxes side-by-side on a
table (L/R counterbalanced across participants). Each box
was placed on a different colored mat, red or blue, to help
children track the identities of the boxes. Initially, the black
felt hid the boxes’ front sections. Children were given a
duck and a ball, not drawn from either box to hold briefly.
The experimenter then lifted the felt, revealing the front
sections of both and said, “One box has mostly ducks, and
one box has mostly balls. Which box has mostly ducks?
Which box has mostly balls?” If the child answered
incorrectly, the experimenter told the child the correct
answer and repeated the questions.

Method

Preference Phase The experimenter introduced the agent,
“Froggy,” by saying “This is my friend Froggy!” The
experimenter said, “Froggy likes ducks better than balls.”
The experimenter then asked the Frog if he wanted to play
with the ball. The Frog replied, “No, I only like ducks!”
The child was then asked to hand the Frog his favorite toy.
The Frog’s preference for ducks was established to help
children track the Frog’s goal of locating the Duck box.
Once the experimenter confirmed that the child understood
the Frog’s preference for ducks, both the child and the Frog
learned that the boxes could move in two ways. The
experimenter said, “The boxes can move so that they are in
the same place” (experimenter rocked the boxes back and
forth three times) or “the boxes can move so that they are in
different places.” (If the experiment started with the Duck
box on the red mat and the Ball box on the blue mat, the
Duck box was moved to the blue mat and the Ball box to
the red mat, or vice versa; counterbalanced across
participants.) The experimenter then asked the Frog,
“Which box do you like best?” The Frog approached the
Duck box and said, “I like this box, I like the Duck box!”
The experimenter returned the boxes to their original
locations. The experimenter asked the child to point to the
box the Frog preferred; all children answered this question
correctly.

Participants and Materials
One hundred and sixty-one children (mean: 65 months;
range: 54-82 months) participated in the study. All of the
children were recruited from an urban children’s museum.
We tested an older age range than typically tested in the
standard unexpected transfer task because although we
borrow from this task, the current study was more
demanding in a number of respects. First, both boxes
contained the same objects; they differed only in the relative
proportion of the objects. Second, after familiarization, the
contents of the boxes were occluded, and in half the
conditions, the locations were switched, imposing a high
working memory load throughout the task. Finally, children
had to integrate the belief information with inferences about
sampling processes to draw inferences on behalf of a third
party whose beliefs may have differed from their own.
Two black cardboard boxes (30cm3) were each separated
into two sections by a cardboard barrier. The front side of
both boxes was a clear plastic panel, with a sheet of black
felt affixed over it. Each box had a hand-sized hole in the
top. For one box, referred to as the “Duck box,” the front
section was filled with 45 rubber ducks and 15 ping pong
balls. For the other box, referred to as the “Ball box,” the
front section was filled with 45 ping pong balls and 15
rubber ducks. (3:1 ratios were chosen because they are
easily discriminable by preschoolers and because three
consecutive ducks are far more likely to be randomly
sampled from Duck box than the Ball box.) The back
sections of both boxes also contained toy rubber ducks and
ping pong balls, and were hidden from view. Each box was
placed on a colored mat. A Frog puppet served as the agent.

Belief Phase After demonstrating the boxes’ movements,
the experimenter told the child that the Frog was tired and
hid the Frog under the table. Children watched as the
experimenter re-covered the front side of both boxes with
the black felt. For children in the Old Location conditions,
the experimenter rocked the boxes back and forth saying,
“I’m going to move the boxes so that they are in the same
place.” For children in the New Location conditions, the
experimenter switched the locations of the boxes saying,
“I’m going to play a trick on Froggy! I’m going to move the
boxes so that they are in different places.” In both
conditions, the experimenter asked children two questions to
check that they understood both the true locations of the
boxes (location check) and the Frog’s beliefs about the

Procedure
We crossed the two locations where the Duck box could be
at the end of the study (Old and New) and two kinds of
sampling processes from the Duck box (Random and
Selective),
yielding
four
conditions:
the
Old
Location/Random Sampling (OL/RS) condition, the New

917

boxes (belief check). The location check question was,
“Where is the duck box?” The belief check question was,
“Where does Froggy think the duck box is?”

improbable unless the evidence is sampled from the Duck
box. Therefore when evidence is randomly sampled from
the Old location (OL/RS) children should infer that the frog
will retain his belief and will continue to think (correctly)
that the duck box is in the Old location. When evidence is
randomly sampled from the New location (NL/RS) children
should infer that even though the Frog was absent during the
transfer, the Frog will now update his former false belief,
and (correctly) conclude that the Duck box has been moved
to the New location.

Test Phase The experimenter brought the Frog back to the
table saying, “Look, Froggy is back!” The experimenter
asked the Frog to watch the two boxes and then responded
to a pretend phone call saying, “Hello? Oh, you want me to
take three ducks from the box on the red (blue) mat?”
(always announcing the mat that corresponded to the actual
location of the Duck box). We included the phone call to
dispel any impression that the experimenter was
pedagogically sampling from the box in order to teach the
Frog (or the child) the actual location of the Duck box. In
the Random Sampling conditions, the experimenter looked
over her shoulder (i.e., not into the box) and reached
through the hole into the Duck box three times in rapid
succession, drawing out a duck each time and counting
“One, two, three” after retrieving each duck. In the Selective
Sampling conditions, the experimenter peered through the
hole into the duck box and left her hand inside the box for
1-2 seconds before retrieving a duck. She counted,
“One…two…three” after finding each duck. After sampling
three ducks from the box and ending the pretend phone call,
the experimenter asked, “Froggy, did you see that?” to
which the Frog always replied, “Yes.” Next, children were
asked the critical test question: “Where does Froggy think
the duck box is?”

Table 1: Possible patterns of responses to the test
question in each of the four conditions: Old
Location/Random
Sampling
(OL/RS);
New
Location/Random
Sampling
(NL/RS);
Old
Location/Selective
Sampling
(OL/SS);
New
Location/Selective Sampling (NL/SS). OLD indicates
that the child would point to the original location of the
Duck box and NEW that the child would point to the
new location. The predictions if children expect other
agents to engage in rational learning from data are
listed in row 6.

Predictions
Recall that in all four conditions, the experimenter always
drew the sample from the Duck box and that the child
witnessed the Duck box’s movements. Thus children might
have responded to the test question in a variety of ways: 1)
they might have given the actual location of the Duck box in
all cases; 2) they might have given the Frog’s initial beliefs
about the location of the Duck box in all cases, considering
only the Frog’s epistemic access to the boxes’ location and
ignoring the sampling evidence; 3) they might have used
only the sampling evidence and assumed that random
sampling indicated the presence of the Duck box and
selective sampling indicated the absence of the Duck box; 4)
they might have assumed the Duck box was in whichever
location the experimenter sampled ducks from; 5) they
might have responded at chance.
We instead predicted a unique pattern of responding,
distinct from all five of these possibilities (See Table 1). If
children expect agents to rationally update their beliefs, they
should respond jointly to the Frog’s prior belief about the
boxes’ locations and the type of sampling process the Frog
observed. A sample randomly drawn from a population is
likely to be representative of the population. Thus we
predicted that in the Random Sampling conditions, the
children would expect the Frog to use the evidence to
update his beliefs about the location of the Duck box.
Specifically, randomly sampling three ducks in a row is

RESPONSE
OPTIONS

OL/RS

NL/RS

OL/SS

NL/SS

1 Location

OLD

NEW

OLD

NEW

2 Belief

OLD

OLD

OLD

OLD

3 Random-stay;
Selective-shift

OLD

NEW

NEW

OLD

4 Where ducks
were sampled

OLD

NEW

OLD

NEW

5 Chance

50/50

50/50

50/50

50/50

6 Rational
learning

OLD

NEW

OLD

OLD

By contrast, any sample can be selectively drawn from a
population; selectively sampled evidence is much less
informative about the population from which it is drawn.
When someone selectively samples items from a population,
she might be doing so because those items are rare and thus
difficult to sample from the population but she might be
doing so for a variety of other reasons (in order to
demonstrate something about those items, e.g., to express a
preference or to draw an observer’s attention to their
properties; Kushnir, Xu, & Wellman, 2008; Gweon,
Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2010). Thus the evidence is more
ambiguous in the Selective Sampling conditions than the
Random Sampling conditions. Because the data do not
strongly distinguish between competing hypotheses, the
learner’s prior belief about the boxes’ locations is more
likely to be maintained. Thus we expected that when
evidence is selectively sampled from the Old location
(OL/SS) or when evidence is selectively sampled from the

!

918

New location (NL/SS) the children would expect the Frog to
retain his initial beliefs about the location of the Duck box
and continue to believe it was in the Old location.

within each condition, children significantly chose the Old
location more often than chance in all conditions (p < .05 by
binomial test) except the New Location/Random Sampling
condition, where a non-significant majority (63%; 19/30) of
children chose the New location. Indeed, in the New
Location/Random Sampling condition there was a trend for
the oldest children to prefer the new location: 9 of the 11 6year-olds (82%), p < .07 by binomial test.

Results
Check Questions
We will refer to children who answered either of the two
check questions incorrectly as “non-trackers.” Data from
non-trackers were collected during the course of obtaining
data from 30 “trackers,” or children who passed both check
questions, in each of the four conditions. Of the 161
children tested, 75% (N = 120) were trackers and 25% (N =
41) were non-trackers. Children were more likely to fail to
track in the New Location conditions (71%, N = 29) than the
Old Location conditions (29%, N = 12), !2(1) = 6.24, p = .01,
suggesting (unsurprisingly) that correctly tracking the
change in location and belief of the absent Frog was more
difficult in the New Location conditions. Of the nontrackers, 29% (N = 12) answered only the location check
incorrectly, 51% (N = 21) answered only the belief check
incorrectly, and 20% (N = 8) answered both check questions
incorrectly. The belief check was no more difficult for the
children than the location check, !2(1) = 1.3, p = .25,
suggesting that the primary issue may have been the
working memory load. There was a trend for non-trackers to
be younger than trackers (non-trackers: M = 62 months;
trackers: M = 66 months; t(159) = 1.71, p = .09, d = .31).
Non-trackers may have subsequently given responses
about the Frog’s belief that did not reflect information
necessary to make accurate rational inferences on behalf of
the Frog. To determine whether children rationally inferred
the Frog’s beliefs based on a sample drawn from a
population, we examined the responses of trackers and nontrackers separately.

30

Chose Old

Chose New

Number of Children

25
20
15
10
5
0
Old
Location

New
Location

Random Sampling

Old
Location

New
Location

Selective Sampling

Figure 1: Number of trackers who chose the Old and New
locations in each condition in response to the test question
about the Frog’s belief.
Non-trackers To determine whether children’s ability to
infer that another agent would rationally update his belief
from the data depended on the ability to explicitly and
continuously represent the mental state of the Frog and the
location of the two boxes, we examined data from the 41
non-trackers separately. Here the linear contrast was not
significant, F(1, 40) = .52, p = .48, !2 = .01. Indeed, the nontrackers engaged in a very different pattern of responding
than the trackers, a pattern not predicted by any of our
individual accounts (see Table 1) but arguably a blend of
chance responding and responding to the location where
they had seen ducks sampled. Since these were children
who had themselves forgotten the location of the Duck box,
the Frog’s beliefs about the location of the Duck box, or
both, it makes sense that they either simply guessed at
chance, or guessed that the Duck box might be where they
had last seen ducks. Future work might computationally
model the predictions of each account, as well as use
mixture models, and establish with greater precision the
source of children’s errors as well as of their successes.
Note however that the difference in performance between
the trackers and the non-trackers suggests that the trackers
were not simply defaulting to baseline responding but were

Test Question
Because we had a priori hypotheses about the pattern of
results, we performed planned linear contrasts. We
formalized the prediction that the responses in the New
Location/Random Sampling condition would differ from the
other three conditions, and that the other three conditions
would not differ from each other by conducting the analyses
with the weights -1, 3, -1, and -1 for the Random Sampling,
Old and New Locations, and Selective Sampling, Old and
New Location conditions respectively.
Trackers First, we analyzed data from the 120 trackers, the
children who recalled the Frog’s belief as well as the boxes’
actual locations. The linear contrast was significant: F(1,
119) = 37.66, p < .001, !2 = .21. Children were significantly
more likely to believe the frog had updated his belief to the
New location in the New Location/Random Sampling
condition than in the other conditions, and none of the other
conditions differed from each other (Percentage of children
choosing Old location by condition: OL/RS: 87%; NL/RS:
37%; OL/SS: 96%; NL/SS: 73%; See Figure 1.) Looking

919

instead responding as predicted: inferring that the Frog
would rationally update his beliefs from the data.

Chose Old

Number of Children

15

the same inferences as did children who successfully
tracked these elements.
Although overall children were sensitive to both the
Frog’s prior beliefs and the sampling method, performance
of 4- and 5-year-olds differed from that of 6-year-olds in the
New Location/Random Sampling condition. The tendency
of older children, but not younger children, to update the
Frog’s belief more often than chance implies that the degree
to which children consider the other agent’s beliefs may
affect their inferences about the other agent’s evidencebased learning. Although this result should be interpreted
with caution given the small sample of 6-year-olds (N = 11),
future research might investigate a developmental trajectory
in which learners become increasingly able to predict the
way other agents will update their beliefs from data. This
would be consistent with other findings suggesting a
relatively protracted development of children’s explicit
theory of mind reasoning (Gweon, Dodell-Feder, Bedny, &
Saxe, 2012; Wellman & Liu, 2004).
On the flip side, future work might investigate whether
even younger children expect other agents to rationally
update their beliefs from evidence. Young children
understand that seeing leads to knowing (Onishi &
Baillargeon, 2005; Pratt & Bryant, 1990). This ability,
together with the ability to make predictions about rational
action, might suggest that an understanding of how others
learn from evidence is also present in infancy. Younger
children might be able to demonstrate this understanding
when the demands of the task are reduced.
Finally we note that children in this study were able to
make predictions about what the Frog would think about the
location of the Duck box given the evidence, even though
they themselves always knew the true location of the Duck
box. Moreover, children were able to draw different
inferences depending on the ambiguity of the evidence,
showing different patterns of responding in the Random and
Selective Sampling conditions. Previous research has
suggested that although children understand that others can
have false beliefs relatively early, it is not until age 7 or 8
that children recognize that ambiguous evidence is open to
different interpretations (e.g., a line drawing could be
viewed as two different kinds of animals; Carpendale &
Chandler, 1996). The current study suggests that even
younger children consider how other people’s prior beliefs
can result in different interpretations of the same evidence.
We suggest there is inherent value in appreciating that a
variety of perspectives can be brought to bear on a single set
of evidence, and that an expectation that others will engage
in rational learning from data may be foundational to this
appreciation.

Chose New

10
5
0
Old
Location

New
Location

Random Sampling

Old
Location

New
Location

Selective Sampling

Figure 2: Number of non-trackers who chose the Old and
New locations in each condition in response to the test
question about the Frog’s belief.

Discussion
This study considered 4.5- to 6-year-olds’ reasoning about
how other people learn from evidence. Considerable
research has investigated children’s expectation that other
agents act rationally; in the current study, we extend the
principle of rational agency to suggest that children also
expect other agents to learn rationally.
To make inferences on behalf of another agent children
needed to integrate the agent’s prior beliefs with the
evidence the agent observed and the way the evidence was
sampled. The responses of children who tracked both the
boxes’ locations and the Frog’s initial belief patterned with
the inferences that a rational learner would make. Children,
particularly the 6-year-olds, were inclined to believe that the
Frog would change his mind to think the Duck box was in
the New location when the evidence was strong and in
conflict with the Frog’s prior belief (New Location/Random
Sampling). Children did not expect the Frog to change his
mind when the evidence was consistent with the Frog’s
prior beliefs (Old Location/Random Sampling; New
Location/Selective Sampling), or when the evidence
conflicted with the Frog’s prior beliefs but was weak and
thus provided little ground for belief revision (Old
Location/Selective Sampling).
The markedly different pattern of inferences made by the
trackers and non-trackers suggests that the ability to predict
how other agents will learn from evidence is contingent
upon an explicit understanding of beliefs as separate from
reality. Children who did not recall the locations of the
boxes or whether the Frog had a false belief, did not make

Acknowledgements
We thank the Boston Children’s Museum and the families
who participated in this research. We also thank Eleanor
Holton for help with data collection and coding the data and

920

members of the Early Childhood Cognition Lab for helpful
comments and discussion. This material is based upon work
supported by the Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines
(CBMM), funded by NSF STC award CCF-1231216 and
was funded by a National Science Foundation Career Award
(#0744213) to LS.

Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007). Action
anticipation through attribution of false belief in twoyear-olds. Psychological Science, 18, 587- 592.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., and Goodman,
N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind: Statistics, structure,
and abstraction. Science, 331, 1279-1285.
Wellman, H. M. & Cross, J. W., Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: the truth about
false belief. Child Development, 72, 655-684.
Wellman, H.M. & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of theory-of-mind
tasks. Child Development, 75, 523-541.
Wimmer, H. &, Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition 13, 103-128.
Xu, F. & Denison, S. (2009). Statistical inference and
sensitivity to sampling in 11-month-olds infants,
Cognition, 112, 97-104.
Xu, F. & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 5012-501.

References
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief
understanding in infants. Trends in cognitive sciences, 14,
110-118.
Carpendale, J.I. & Chandler, M.J. (1996). On the distinction
between false belief understanding and subscribing to an
interpretive theory of mind. Child Development, 67, 16861706.
Csibra, G., Bíró, S., Koós, O., & Gergely, G. (2003). Oneyear-old infants use teleological representations of actions
productively. Cognitive Science, 27, 111-133.
D’Andrade, R. (1987). A folk model of the mind. In
Holland D., Quinn, N. (Eds.), Cultural Models in
Language and Thought. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Dennett, D. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics: The problem of meaning
in the philosophy of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gergely, G. & Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological reasoning in
infancy: the naïve theory of rational action. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 287-292.
Gergely, G., Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Bíró, S. (1995).
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of
age. Cognition, 56, 165-193.
Gweon, H., Dodell!Feder, D., Bedny, M., & Saxe, R.
(2012). Theory of Mind performance in children
correlates with functional specialization of a brain region
for thinking about thoughts. Child development, 83, 18531868.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J., & Schulz, L. E. (2010). Infants
consider both the sample and the sampling process in
inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
107, 9066-9071.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
relations. New York: Wiley.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F. & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young
children use statistical sampling to infer the preferences of
other people. Psychological Science, 21, 1134-1140.
Onishi, K.H. & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-oldinfants understand false beliefs? Science, 308, 255-258.
Pratt, C. & Bryant, P. (1990). Young children understand
that looking leads to knowing (so long as they are looking
into a single barrel). Child Development, 61, 973-982.
Schulz, L. E. (2012). The origins of inquiry: Inductive
inference and exploration in early childhood. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 16, 382-389.

921

