UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Problem Solving: What are the Important Questions?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76s9s36z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Funke, Joachim

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Problem Solving: What are the Important Questions?
Joachim Funke (joachim.funke@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de)
Department of Psychology, Heidelberg University, Hauptstr. 47
69117 Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract

2011) promoted a shift in the field of decision making to
incorporate “ecological rationality”. Similarly, Huber (2012)
pointed to the fact that decision behavior in realistic risky
scenarios is quite different from that in gambles; it requires
not probability estimation but active risk-management.
The purpose of this paper is a stock-taking of some of the
problems identified, to discuss potential remedies for them
and to look for future perspectives. To discuss the current
state in the field of problem solving, it needs more space
than six pages in a conference paper – but at least it is a
starting point for discussion.
I see three major areas for discussion: (1) What are the
phenomena to be explained? (2) What methods, what
methodology is appropriate to the subject? Is the neglect of
introspection really adequate to our state of the art? (3)
What is the progress in theory since the legendary work
from Newell and Simon (1972)? What can we expect from
new data sources like detailed computer log-files with
interaction protocols? How can we relate data to theoretical
assumptions?

Problem solving research is in need for re-thinking main
questions. The purpose of this paper is a stock-taking of some
of the identified problems, to discuss potential remedies for
them, and to look for future perspectives. I see three areas for
discussion: (1) What are the phenomena to be explained? (2)
What methods should be used? What methodology is
appropriate to the subject? (3) What is the progress in theory
since the legendary work from Newell and Simon (1972)?
What can we expect from new data sources? How can we
relate data to theoretical assumptions?
Keywords:
questions.

problem

solving;

methodology;

research

“How does the solution arise from the problem situation? In what
ways is the solution of a problem attained?” (Duncker, 1945, p.1)

Introduction
In 1982, Ulric Neisser published a famous paper entitled
"Memory: What are the important questions?" that
requested a change in research topics for memory research.
Instead of research on laboratory-induced phenomena, he
wrote, researchers should look for more real-life orientation
of their research questions and thereby increased the
relevance of psychological memory research by addressing
questions like eyewitness testimony and other phenomena
of everyday memories.
In my view that is based on 30 years active research in
this subfield, problem solving research is in need for a
similar shift. After the seminal paper from Dietrich Dörner
(1980) that proposed to move from simple to complex
problems, a lot of research has been initiated in that area
(for an overview, see the two editions: Frensch & Funke,
1995; Sternberg & Frensch, 1991) and delivered new
insights into phenomena like intellectual emergency
reaction (Dörner, 1997) or into the connection between
emotion and complex problems (Spering, Wagener, &
Funke, 2005). At the same time, a decline of traditional
problem solving research in the style of Newell and Simon
(1972) has occurred, if one follows the description given by
Ohlsson (2012).
The request for a change in research paradigms is not a
new one – in the nearby area of decision making, claims
about a shift of the research focus to more natural situations
are clearly articulated. Gary Klein and his “Naturalistic
Decision Making” group (see for a review: Klein, 2008)
postulated such a shift many years ago; also, Gigerenzer and
his ABC group (see for a review: Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier,

About Phenomena:
What are the Interesting Issues?
If one reads papers on problem solving, the world as it is
reflected in the articles looks as if there were no changes for
the last 50 years. Tasks like the Nine-Dot Problem (first
mentioned in Sam Loyd's Cyclopedia of Puzzles from 1914)
that require insight problem solving are still famous (e.g.,
MacGregor, Ormerod, & Chronicle, 2001). The same is true
for the Tower of Hanoi (e.g., Anderson, Albert, & Fincham,
2005), a kind of “drosophila” for problem solving research.
But the phenomena outside the lab (i.e., the problems we
have to face in reality) have changed dramatically. Intransparency, dynamics, and polytely, for example, are omnipresent in daily lifes’ problem spaces. I will explain these three
features shortly.
Attributes of real-world problems Real problems are not
presented on a silver platter and do not show all necessary
information to the problem solving person (intransparency).
On the contrary: information selection has become a new
problem – on the one side to identify missing information,
on the other side to find valuable information in a flood of
potentially misleading or false data.
It is not only information collection and selection that has
changed drastically. Typically, real life problems are not
static situations like a position on a chessboard – on the
contrary: they change over time while we are still in the

493

Rethinking Methods and Methodology:
What is the Best Way for Data Collection?

process of searching for solutions (dynamics). High-stake
problems (e.g., catastrophic events) often change over time
very quickly and require adaptive strategies and flexible
responses.
Last but not least: the goal function is not well defined or,
even worse, contains seemingly contradictory goals (Blech
& Funke, 2010). Especially in political conflicts, the
polytelic structure of the situation makes it sometimes
impossible to find acceptable compromises (polytely).

The questions of method and methodology depend on
epistemological assumptions that are prevalent in certain
scientific communities. They change over time depending
on the current paradigms. I will not discuss fundamental
issues but concentrate on the value of introspection and on
sampling issues (sampling of problems as well as of
solvers).

Definition of problems What is a “problem”? In simple
situations, problems are “well-defined”. There is a set of
givens, some operators to change the givens, and a welldefined state that has to be reached with minimal effort. In
complex situations, problem definitions vary with the
different perspectives from the different stakeholders. It
varies because the different stakeholders follow different
goals. Consequently, in “wicked problems” (Rittel &
Webber, 1973) there are no clearly defined goal states; the
problem is “ill-defined” in terms of an optimal goal state.
Problem solving research with wicked problems is also
research about a persons’ preferences and her/his goal
structures – without goals, there are no problems. Changing
the aspiration level leads to a change in the difficulty of the
problem under question – a change that is also possible if
one alters the level of resolution in the description of the
problem space (Selten et al., 2012).

Introspection, Single Cases, Simulations Whereas in the
beginning of modern psychology of thinking, introspection
was still an acceptable technique, behavioristic traditions
have eliminated this source of evidence nearly completely.
In a recent paper, Jäkel and Schreiber (2013) encouraged
cognitive scientists to revisit this methodological approach.
In their understanding, introspection (“…the ill-understood
and problematic metacognitive processes that are central to
introspective methods and that distinguish them cognitively
from think-aloud methods”, Jäkel & Schreiber 2013, p. 22)
offers a chance for a better understanding of cognitive and
meta-cognitive processes.
What we need are in-depth descriptions and analyses of
how people deal with complex dynamic situations in daily
life, business, politics, science, and technology. Successes
as well as failures may provide a rich source of data for
researchers (Dörner, 1997). Kluwe (1995) put emphasis on
the use of single cases of complex problem solving but up to
now not much research has been done in that direction (but
see, e.g., Dörner & Güss, 2011). As has been demonstrated
impressingly in the case of catastrophes (e.g., Zapf &
Reason, 1994), such singular events contain a lot of
information that can be used as proof of concepts and
theories. Cognitive modeling often starts with the
reproduction of single case activities. A database with such
cases would allow for testing and comparing different
models with broadly accepted and deeply documented
reference cases.
Last but not least: the use of computer simulations
(Brehmer & Dörner, 1993; Gray, 2002) brings complexity
into the lab and allows for manipulation of time (real-time,
slow-motion, fast motion) and space (reality, fiction). But
can we really trust results from simulated scenarios? Isn`t it
necessary to go into the field, search for high-stake
situations and see how stakeholders act there? We need
more research on this issue before a solid answer can be
given.

Interactions with emotion and motivation Problem
solving is seen primarily as a cognitive activity – but is that
a true description of the phenomenon? If someone does not
reach a goal immediately the situation can become
frustrating. Problems are defined by producing negative
emotions. So, why are we not researching the regulation
processes in the case of complex problems?
The same is true for motivation: When do we loose
interest in a problem and give up (or change our aspiration
level; see the section above)? Why show some problem
solvers more “grit” than others? The self-regulatory
activities are not only related to cognition, but also to
emotion and motivation. Our theories about problem solving
are mostly theories about cognitive processes that ignore
interactions with other psychic functions.
Consequences So, from my point of view problem solving
research has to address at least some of these features in
more detail and follow the recommendations given by Klein
(2008) about the need for “naturalistic decision making”.
How people deal with uncertainty is a still unexplained
phenomenon (Dörner, 1980; Mackinnon & Wearing, 1980;
Osman, 2010). Also, there remains as an open question the
one of processing complexity: Does complex problem
solving require complex cognition, or is it simply more of
the same simple basic cognitive processes (see Funke,
2010)?

Stimulus sampling of problems For assessment purposes,
a large item universe is needed. That is one of the
advantages of formal systems (Funke, 2001) like structural
equation systems or finite state automata. The disadvantage
of using these formalisms is the restricted range of problems
that all follow the same model. Subjects are confronted with
changing semantics but the deep structure of the problems
does not change: one has to deal with linear combinations or
with state transitions. After a while, the problem situations

494

Relating Theories to Data:
How is Progress to be Expected?

become routine and the assessment no longer addresses
problem solving behavior but routine actions. How long are
subjects in those assessment situations problem solvers and
when do they learn from experience?

Since the seminal work from Newell and Simon (1972) that
introduced the concepts of “problem space”, “heuristic
search”, and “logic theorist” not much progress in theory
has occurred. The “theory of spaces” has been differentiated
by, e.g., Burns and Vollmeyer (2002), Klahr and Dunbar
(1988), or Simon and Lea (1974). The use of simple
heuristics has been demonstrated in many experimental
situations (Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011). Concerning
logical decision making, the assumptions of a “homo
economicus” are highly questionable. Decision makers
outside of laboratory gambles do not search for
probabilities, but for “risk-defusing operators” (Huber,
2012). Is the Instance-Based Learning Theory (Gonzalez,
Lerch, & Lebiere, 2003) an optimal starting point for theory
formulation? We have to apply theories like this one to our
data and see if they can explain or even predict some of the
phenomena that we find in our data sets.
Might we expect progress in theory if we go into “Big
Data”? The use of data mining techniques is nowadays an
interesting approach (e.g., Zoanetti, 2010). From my point
of view, theory comes first by delivering the constructs we
are searching for. This leads to the question: how is problem
solving related to other constructs in the field? I will
concentrate my review on the relation of problem solving to
intelligence, wisdom, creativity, and executive functions.

It is funny that problems that nowadays come under the
term “complex problem solving”, are less complex (in terms
of the previously described attributes of complex situations)
than at the beginning of this new research tradition. The
emphasis on psychometric qualities has led to a loss of
variety. Systems thinking requires more than analyzing
models with two or three linear equations – nonlinearity,
cyclicity, rebound effects, etc. are inherent features of
complex problems and should show up at least in some of
the problems used for research and assessment purposes.
Minimal complex systems run the danger of becoming
minimal valid systems.
To increase the validity of assessments, we do not need
more of the same, but different types of task requirements.
The universe of (complex) problems seems to be large
enough to allow for proper and diverse task selection. If
stimulus sampling is not done broadly, Fiedler (2011, p.
166) warns against the consequences of bad practices,
namely, that "findings may reveal more about the stimuli
chosen than the persons being tested".
Person sampling of problem solvers Sternberg (1995)
points in his comparison of European and North American
research on complex problems to the fact that different types
of problem solvers are on focus: Americans prefer experts,
Europeans prefer novices. Also, NDM has a clear
preference to experts in their natural setting (Klein, 2008).
From my point of view, we need samples of novices as
well as those of experts – the novices showing domaingeneral strategies influenced by little previous knowledge,
the experts showing domain-specific procedures with a lot
of world and domain knowledge in the background. As has
been demonstrated in the case of creativity research, if one
orients research to psychometric standards one needs larger
samples and has therefore to reduce selection criteria (see
Gruber & Bödeker, 2005, p. 4). Consequently, real experts
in solving complex problems from which one could learn
about successful strategies fall out of scope. The identified
and measured thought processes might not be representative
for the domain.

Intelligence For many years, a controversy existed between
those who believed in complex problem solving processes
as being a separate competency (e.g., Beckmann & Guthke,
1995) compared to those who did not believe in this specific
competency but who reduced CPS performance to basic
abilities like working memory capacity and intelligence
combined with knowledge (e.g., Süß, Kersting, & Oberauer,
1993).
The relationship between CPS and intelligence was
indeed for long time an unclear one (for a review, see
Wenke, Frensch, & Funke, 2005) but recent research, in the
context of large-scale assessment (Greiff et al., 2013;
Wüstenberg, Greiff, & Funke, 2012) as well as in other
contexts (Danner, Hagemann, Schankin, Hager, & Funke,
2011), supported the view of an identifiable and measurable
CPS competency beyond IQ. The exact attributes of this
surplus competency and the actual processes behind this
competency remain open.

Consequences So, from my point of view problem solving
research has to give up methodological rigorism and to open
the field once again for controlled introspection and singlecase studies that describe the phenomena in a less restricted
way. At the same time, more variety in terms of problem
situations as well as in terms of problem solvers is needed to
get a broader view of the phenomenon. Psychometric
requirements should not dictate the selection of tasks;
instead, these requirements should be fulfilled after the
search for valid sampling methods has been successful
made.

Wisdom The connection to wisdom is also unclear: it
should be related to problem solving because finding
acceptable solutions for conflicts is one important attribute
of wisdom (Baltes & Smith, 2008). Wisdom is also needed
for choosing appropriate strategies. For example, the famous
Chinese Thirty-Six Stratagems can be seen as a collection of
strategic wisdom that can be applied to complex problems.
Managerial problem solving might profit from these ideas.
Without research on these issues, we do not know.

495

As long as knowledge-poor problems dominate our
research labs, we will not detect strong effects of accumulated and crystallized knowledge.

To be clear: problem solving requires more than moving
towers or connecting dots under some restrictions. Problem
solving is not only a cognitive process but includes also
motivation and emotion regulation due to frustrations (Barth
& Funke, 2010). Problem solving also requires more than
solving linear equation systems: The concept of minimal
complexity (Greiff & Funke, 2009) and the resulting
assessment of dynamic decision making (see Greiff,
Wüstenberg, & Funke, 2012; Wüstenberg, Greiff, & Funke,
2012) were useful steps for classroom assessment but it
needs a more ambitious, informationally comprehensive
environment to address the richness of problem solving in
dynamic environments.
When summarizing the recent history of problem solving
research under the auspices from what he correctly labeled
the “Newell-Simon paradigm”, Ohlsson (2012, p. 117)
wrote:

Creativity The more complex a problem becomes, the more
creativity in finding appropriate solutions is necessary.
Because problem solving is defined as non-routine behavior,
it is essentially connected to creativity (Simonton, 2012).
The introductory quote to this paper from Duncker (1945)
points exactly to that connection. To be clear: creativity is
one important aspect of problem solving, but does not cover
other aspects of the concept that consist also of strategy
development and use, knowledge acquisition and
application, etc.
The assumed strong connection between creativity and
problem solving has implications for assessment: the more
complex a presented problem, the more freedom in
generating solutions by a subject is required. If a subject has
to choose options for actions from pull-down menus,
assessment of creativity in the context of generating and
finding solutions to problems is massively restricted.

“In summary, Newell and Simon’s first concept of
generality, codified in the General Problem Solver, failed as
a psychological theory because it is not true: there is no
single problem solving mechanism, no universal strategy that
people apply across all domains and of which every taskspecific strategy is a specific instance. Their second concept
of generality initiated research on the cognitive architecture.
The latter is a successful scientific concern with many
accomplishments and a bright future. But it buys generality
by focusing on a time band at which problem solving
becomes invisible, like an elephant viewed from one inch
away.”

Decision making, planning, executive functions In a
recent review, Diamond (2012) differentiates three higher
executive functions: reasoning, problem solving, and
planning. The first two are said to be synonymous with fluid
intelligence. The strong interest in self-regulation processes
connects these research areas under a common label (see
Zelazo, Carter, Reznick, & Frye, 1997).
Decision making should be seen as a specific cognitive
activity within a larger activity called problem solving. In
the course of problem solving, many decisions have to be
made – but they have to be orchestrated and integrated into
the course of action regulation. Metacognition is needed to
monitor the whole process and to redirect attention
depending on solution progress.

I have no worry about the future of problem solving
research when I look around me. In politics, on the business
market, in our environment but also in our personal life
complexities are ever increasing. So, the need for research is
there – what seems to be missing is an attractive problem
solving theory that stimulates further research, a proper set
of diverse tasks for experimenting with them, and a
methodology that opens again the window to inner
processes.
Coming back to Ulric Neisser’s (1978) famous paper on
memory research – did it change anything? Research is a
slow tanker – but once an idea is in the world it starts to
influence people. Following Neisser’s comments, memory
research today is much more real-world oriented than 35
years ago. So, if my considerations could nudge problem
solving researchers into a more real-life orientation, I would
be happy.

Consequences The connection between problem solving
and related constructs can be tested by comparing models of
their relationship with appropriate data. From my point of
view, process models need other types of data than
structural models: Because computer-based assessment
technologies offer the chance to get rich log-files,
developing and testing such models should be possible.
Here I see also a chance for cognitive modeling to inform us
about basic processes and how they contribute to the
constructs on the next levels of aggregation.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the German Research Foundation (DFG) for their
continuous support (Fu 173/13, 173/14) as well as to the
German Ministry of Education (BMBF; FKZ 01JG1062 and
01LSA004). Discussions with Dorothee Amelung, Carolin
Baumann, Andreas Fischer, Helen Fischer, Julia Hilse, and
Daniel Holt helped to prepare this paper by sharpening my
point of view. Also, thanks to the comments of three
anonymous reviewers – I read all of them carefully even if I
did not follow them completely.

Final Remarks
Problem solving is one of the key competencies in the 21st
century. That explains the interest of PISA and other
worldwide operating large-scale assessments of the
competencies of next generations’ workforce. The reason
for this is simple: more and more business is done nonroutinely and therefore requires problem solving activities
(see, e.g., Autor, Murnane & Levy, 2003).

496

References

Funke, J. (2010). Complex problem solving: A case for
complex cognition? Cognitive Processing, 11, 133-142.
Gigerenzer, G., & Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic decision
making. Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 451-482.
Gilhooly, K. J., & Murphy, P. (2005). Differentiating
insight from non-insight problems. Thinking &
Reasoning, 11, 279-302.
Gonzalez, C., Lerch, J. F., & Lebiere, C. (2003). Instancebased learning in dynamic decision making. Cognitive
Science, 27(4), 591–635.
Gray, W. D. (2002). Simulated task environments: The role
of high-fidelity simulations, scaled worlds, synthetic
environments, and laboratory tasks in basic and applied
cognitive research. Cognitive Science Quarterly, 2, 205227.
Greiff, S., Wüstenberg, S., & Funke, J. (2012). Dynamic
Problem Solving: A new measurement perspective.
Applied Psychological Measurement, 36(3), 189-213.
Greiff, S., Wüstenberg, S., Molnar, G., Fischer, A., Funke,
J., & Csapo, B. (2013). Complex problem solving in
educational settings – Something beyond g: Concept,
assessment, measurement invariance, and construct
validity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(2), 364379.
Gruber, H. E., & Bödeker, K. (2005). Creativity, psychology
and the history of science. Dordrecht, NL: Springer.
Huber, O. (2012). Risky decisions: Active risk management.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21(1), 2630.
Jäkel, F., & Schreiber, C. (2013). Introspection in problem
solving. Journal of Problem Solving, 6(1), 20–33.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.
Klein, G. (2008). Naturalistic decision making. Human
Factors, 50, 456-460.
Kluwe, R. H. (1995). Single case studies and models of
complex problem solving. In P. A. Frensch & J. Funke
(Eds.), Complex problem solving: The European
perspective (pp. 269-291). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacGregor, J. N., Ormerod, T. C., & Chronicle, E. P.
(2001). Information processing and insight: A process
model of performance on the nine-dot and related
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 27, 176-201.
MacKinnon, A. J., & Wearing, A. J. (1980). Complexity
and decision making. Behavioral Science, 25, 285-296.
Neisser, U. (1978). Memory: What are the important
questions? In M. M. Gruneberg, P. E. Morris & R. N.
Sykes (Eds.), Practical aspects of memory (pp. 3–24).
London: Academic Press.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ohlsson, S. (2012). The problems with problem solving:
Reflections on the rise, current status, and possible future
keywords. Journal of Problem Solving, 5(1), 101–128.

Anderson, J. R., Albert, M. V., & Fincham, J. M. (2005).
Tracing problem solving in real time: fMRI analysis of
the subject-paced Tower of Hanoi. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 17(8), 1261–74.
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., & Murnane, R. J. (2003). The skill
content of recent technological change: An empirical
exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4),
1279–1334.
Baltes, P. B., & Smith, J. (2008). The fascination of
wisdom: Its nature, ontogeny, and function. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 3(1), 56–64.
Barth, C. M., & Funke, J. (2010). Negative affective
environments improve complex solving performance.
Cognition & Emotion, 24(7), 1259–1268.
Beckmann, J. F., & Guthke, J. (1995). Complex problem
solving, intelligence, and learning ability. In P. A.
Frensch & J. Funke (Eds.), Complex problem solving: The
European perspective (pp. 177-200). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Blech, C., & Funke, J. (2010). You cannot have your cake
and eat it, too: How induced goal conflicts affect complex
problem solving. Open Psychology Journal, 3(1), 42–53.
Brehmer, B., & Dörner, D. (1993). Experiments with
computer-simulated microworlds: Escaping both the
narrow straits of the laboratory and the deep blue sea of
the field study. Computers in Human Behavior, 9(2-3),
171–184.
Burns, B. D., & Vollmeyer, R. (2002). Goal specificity
effects on hypothesis testing in problem solving.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A(1),
241–261
Danner, D., Hagemann, D., Schankin, A., Hager, M., &
Funke, J. (2011). Beyond IQ. A latent state-trait analysis
of general intelligence, dynamic decision making, and
implicit learning. Intelligence, 39, 323-334.
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions. Annual Review of
Psychology, 64, 135-168.
Dörner, D. (1980). On the difficulty people have in dealing
with complexity. Simulation & Games, 11, 87-106.
Dörner, D. (1997). The logic of failure. Recognizing and
avoiding error in complex situations. New York: Basic
Books.
Dörner, D., & Güss, C. D. (2011). A psychological analysis
of Adolf Hitler's decision making as commander in chief:
Summa confidentia et nimius metus. Review of General
Psychology, 15, 37-49.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem-solving. Psychological
Monographs, 58(5).
Fiedler, K. (2011). Voodoo correlations are everywhere-Not only in neuroscience. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 6(2), 163–171.
Frensch, P. A., & Funke, J. (Eds.). (1995). Complex
problem solving: The European perspective. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Funke, J. (2001). Dynamic systems as tools for analysing
human judgement. Thinking & Reasoning, 7, 69-89.

497

Osman, M. (2010). Controlling uncertainty: a review of
human behavior in complex dynamic environments.
Psychological Bulletin, 136(1), 65–86.
Rittel, H. W. J., & Webber, M. M. (1973). Dilemmas in a
general theory of planning. Policy Sciences, 4, 155–169.
Selten, R., Pittnauer, S., & Hohnisch, M. (2012). Dealing
with dynamic decision problems when knowledge of the
environment Is limited: An approach based on goal
systems. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 25(5),
443–457.
Simon, H. A., & Lea, G. (1974). Problem solving and rule
induction: A unified view. In L. W. Gregg (Ed.),
Knowledge and cognition (pp. 105-127). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Simonton, D. K. (2012), Creativity, problem solving, and
solution set sightedness: Radically reformulating BVSR.
Journal of Creative Behavior, 46, 48–65.
Spering, M., Wagener, D., & Funke, J. (2005). The role of
emotions in complex problem-solving. Cognition and
Emotion, 19, 1252-1261.
Sternberg, R. J. (1995). Expertise in complex problem
solving: A comparison of alternative conceptions. In P. A.
Frensch & J. Funke (Eds.), Complex problem solving: The
European perspective (pp. 295-321). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Sternberg, R. J., & Frensch, P. A. (Eds.). (1991). Complex
problem solving: Principles and mechanisms. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Süß, H.-M., Kersting, M., & Oberauer, K. (1993).
[Predicting control performance in computersimulated
systems by means of knowledge and intelligence].
Zeitschrift für Differentielle und Diagnostische
Psychologie, 14, 189-203.
Wenke, D., Frensch, P. A., & Funke, J. (2005). Complex
problem solving and intelligence: Empirical relation and
causal direction. In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Pretz (Eds.),
Cognition and intelligence: Identifying the mechanisms of
the mind (pp. 160-187). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Wüstenberg, S., Greiff, S., & Funke, J. (2012). Complex
problem solving: More than reasoning? Intelligence, 40,
1-14.
Zapf, D., & Reason, J. T. (1994). Introduction: Human
errors and error handling. Applied Psychology: An
International Review, 43, 427-432.
Zelazo, P. D., Carter, A., Reznick, J. S., & Frye, D. (1997).
Early development of executive function: A problemsolving framework. Review of General Psychology, 1(2),
198–226.
Zoanetti, N. (2010). Interactive computer based assessment
tasks: How problem-solving process data can inform
instruction. Australasian Journal of Educational
Technology, 26, 585-606.

498

