UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prosodic Encoding of Informativity: Word Frequency and Contextual Probability Interact with
Information Structure

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0f89c8wm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Chuoying Ouyang, Iris
Kaiser, Elsi

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Prosodic Encoding of Informativity:
Word Frequency and Contextual Probability Interact with Information Structure
Iris Chuoying Ouyang (chuoyino@usc.edu)
Elsi Kaiser (emkaiser@usc.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of Southern California
3601 Watt Way, GFS 301, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA

Abstract
This study investigates how prosody encodes the extent to
which a linguistic element is informative. While most prior
work has approached this question from one of the two
angles, namely (i) information theory/statistical probability
and (ii) discourse-pragmatics/information structure, we focus
on the interaction between these two dimensions. Our results
show that the prosodic marking of information-structural
categories depends on statistical probabilistic factors.
Specifically, the post-focus pitch reduction resulting from
new-information focus and corrective focus is modulated by
the focused word’s frequency and contextual probability,
respectively. In terms of pitch, new-information narrow focus
patterns like wide focus when the focused word is lexically
infrequent, although the two focus types differ when the word
has high frequency. Furthermore, corrective narrow focus
patterns like wide focus when the focused word is
contextually improbable, although the two focus types differ
when the word has low contextual probability. We discuss
how these results suggest that prosody reflects speakers’
expectation and surprise about the interlocutor’s knowledge
state. Our findings highlight the importance of integrating
research from the information-theoretical perspective with
research from the information-structural perspective, to
improve our understanding of prosody.
Keywords: informativity, post-focus reduction, interactive
design, information structure, focus, information theory

1. Introduction
It is widely accepted that prosody can encode the extent to
which a linguistic element is informative. Acoustic-phonetic
properties of an utterance such as f0/pitch reflect the relative
informativity of its components. Most prior work has
approached the prosodic encoding of informativity from one
of two angles: (i) information structure in a discoursepragmatic approach or (ii) statistical probability in an
information-theoretic approach (see references cited in the
remainder of Introduction).
In the discourse pragmatics and information structure
tradition, acoustic prominence has been shown to be
associated with linguistics elements in the foreground, or in
focus, which add new information to the discourse.
Elements in new-information focus, i.e. those parts of the
utterance that are new to the discourse, are acoustically
more prominent than given elements, i.e. those that are old
to the discourse (e.g. Chen & Braun, 2006; Schwarzschild,
1999). More specifically, material in narrow newinformation focus, where only one component of an
utterance (e.g. the action, the patient, the location, etc.) is

focused, receives greater acoustic prominence than material
in wide new-information focus, where an entire utterance
with multiple components is focused (e.g. Breen et al., 2010;
Eady et al., 1986). It has also been shown that material in
contrastive focus, to which alternatives exist in some way, is
realized with greater acoustic prominence than noncontrastive material (e.g. Cooper et al., 1985; CouperKuhlen, 1984; Katz & Selkirk, 2011; Krahmer & Swerts,
2001). Existing studies across languages have investigated
various types of contrastive focus (e.g. Vallduví & Vilkuna,
1998). We investigated one subtype, namely corrective
focus, which serves to correct information conveyed
previously in the discourse (see also Breen et al., 2010 and
Dik, 1997).
On the other hand, in the information theory and
statistical probability tradition, a correlation has been
found between acoustic reduction and the redundancy, or
the predictability of linguistic elements. Probabilistic
measurements used to represent the predictability of a
linguistic unit include context-independent properties such
as frequency and neighborhood density (e.g. Munson &
Solomon, 2004; Wright, 2003) and context-dependent
properties such as joint probability and conditional
probability (e.g. Bell et al., 2003; Pan & Hirschberg, 2000;
van Son et al., 1998).
Are there connections between information-structural
and information-theoretic approaches? As can be seen
from the discussion above, these two research traditions
have investigated rather different factors of informativity
from distinct perspectives, despite their shared interest in
informativity and prosody. A limited number of studies in
the statistical-probabilistic approach have examined the
effect of repeated mention (a repeated word is by definition
given, not new, information) on different kinds of linguistic
units (e.g. Aylett & Turk, 2004; Baker & Bradlow, 2009;
Bell et al., 2009; Pluymaekers et al., 2005). To our
knowledge, only one existing study has addressed the
interaction between statistical-probabilistic and discoursepragmatic factors: Baker and Bradlow (2009) found that
word frequency influences the amount of reduction that a
word undergoes when it is mentioned for a second time;
high-frequency words exhibit more shortening upon second
mention than low-frequency words. It remains unclear
whether other kinds of statistical-probabilistic features also
have an impact on the prosodic effects of discoursepragmatic factors and whether word frequency interacts
with other types of information structure in the same say.

1120

1.1 Aims of the Study
As discussed above, prior work shows that the prosodic
representation of an utterance depends on how informative
its constituents are relative to each other. Discoursepragmatic features, such as information structure, and
statistical-probabilistic features, such as inherent frequency
and contextual probability, both play a role in the prosodic
encoding of informativity. It is striking that little attention
has been paid to the potential interaction between discoursepragmatic and statistical-probabilistic factors, given the
considerable efforts that have been devoted to both kinds of
factors separately. To shed light on this issue, we conducted
a psycholinguistic production study that investigated three
related questions: (i) Do discourse-pragmatic and statisticalprobabilistic features interact in determining the prosodic
prominence of an element, and if so, how? (ii) If statistical
features do interact with pragmatic features in shaping the
prosodic profile of an utterance, to what extent can
statistical factors impact the prosodic effects of pragmatic
factors? (iii) If the prosodic encoding of pragmatic
informativity does depend on the statistical informativity of
an element, do different pragmatic factors interact with
different statistical factors in the same way? For example,
could it be that the prosodic cues for new-information vs.
corrective focus differ in whether they are sensitive to
frequency vs. contextual probability?

2. Method
We conducted a production study with an interactive design.
Each trial consisted of a production task (which provided
the critical recordings) and a subsequent selection task
(which was included to heighten participant engagement). In
both tasks, participants interacted with a partner (who was a
lab assistant). Sixteen native speakers of American English
participated. The target sentences of interest were those
spoken by the participants in the production task on target
trials. The selection task was included to engage both people
in the production task: Paying attention to what the other
person said in the production task was necessary to
successfully perform the selection task (not discussed here
due to space limitations)

2.1 Production Task
Participants worked with a partner in producing sentence
pairs. Each sentence pair consisted of a question asked by
the partner (Sentence A) and a response given by the
participant (Sentence B). As shown in the example dialogs
in (1)-(3), target sentences (i.e. Sentence B on target trials)
are transitive clauses with the following structure: a thirdperson plural pronoun subject (they), a simple past tense
verb, an object, and a prepositional phrase indicating a
location. The critical word we focus on is the object of each
target sentence (e.g. cars). To investigate whether statistical
factors interact with information-structural factors in
shaping the prosodic profile of a sentence, we manipulated
(i) word frequency of the target object, (ii) whether it was

probable in the context of preceding verb and following
location, and (iii) its information structural status, relative to
the question. Thus, a within-subject design with three
independent variables was implemented: (i) word
frequency (with two levels: high or low word frequency),
(ii) contextual probability (with two levels: high or low
contextual probability), and (iii) information structure
(with three levels: narrow corrective focus, narrow newinformation focus, or wide/VP focus). There were 48 target
trials; participants encountered four items in each condition.
The experiment also included 48 filler trials. The dependent
variable that we measured was the pitch/f0 of a sentence.
We manipulated the information structure of the critical
nouns by means of the question asked by the partner (which
was answered by the participant), as exemplified in (1)-(3).
NARROW CORRECTIVE FOCUS
(1)
A: I heard that Teresa and Martha kicked dirt in the garage.
B: No, they kicked [cars]FOCUS in the garage.
NARROW NEW-INFORMATION FOCUS
A: What did Connie and Sharon kick in the garage?
B: They kicked [cars]FOCUS in the garage.

(2)

WIDE/VP FOCUS
A: What did Evelyn and Jacqueline do?
B: They [kicked cars in the garage]FOCUS.

(3)

Norming study: The contextual probability of target
words was estimated through a norming study. Native
speakers of American English performed a fill-in-the-blank
writing task, where they saw sentences composed of a
personal name, a verb, a blank, and a location (e.g. Brittany
kicked ______ in the garage.) and filled in the blank with
one or two words. There were 63 items in total; 66 to 70
responses were collected for each item. Four verb-location
contexts and eight objects were ultimately selected for the
target sentences in the main study. We chose the target
words for the high-probability conditions from the two of
the top three most popular objects given a verb-location
context (e.g. kicked cars/cans in the garage). Target words
in the low-probability conditions in the main study never
occurred as responses for a given context in the norming
study (e.g. no one completed kicked ______ in the garage
with ‘books’ or ‘shells’). Another four objects were selected
to be the ‘incorrect’ objects in the questions (Sentence A’s)
eliciting corrective focus (ex. 1). They were words that were
not frequently elicited in the norming study but did occur at
least one in a given context (e.g. kicked dirt in the garage),
and thus had a contextual probability between the highprobability and low-probability target words.
Word frequency of the target objects was determined
according to the SUBTLEXus database (Brysbaert & New;
2009). The ‘incorrect’ objects in questions that elicited
corrective focus (ex. 1) had a word frequency between the
high-frequency and low-frequency target words for a given
context. All the verbs, objects and prepositions were
monosyllabic, and the locations were short noun phrases
with the definite article.

1121

2.2 Predictions
When it comes to pitch/f0, prior work found that elements in
narrow focus are prosodically more prominent than those in
wide focus, and this prosodic encoding of narrow focus
appears as emphasis on the narrowly focused component
and reduction in the material preceding and following it.
More concretely, in declarative sentences, narrow focus
results in higher mean and maximum pitch on the stressed
syllable in the focused element (e.g. Breen et al., 2010) and
lower pitch in the post-focus material (e.g. Cooper et al.,
1985) and the pre-focus material (e.g. Japanese: Hwang,
2012). Pre-empting our results somewhat, we note here that
prosodic prominence for narrow focus mostly manifested
itself as post-focus reduction in our data (a sudden and
substantial drop in pitch after the focused component, see
Cooper et al., 1985 for related work). Therefore, in the
remainder of this section, we present our predictions in
terms of pitch movement that comes after the object (i.e. the
narrowly focused word) in a sentence.
As discussed in the Introduction, we hypothesized that the
prosodic cues for pragmatic informativity would be
obscured when statistical informativity was high (low
frequency and predictability). In other words, prosodic
effects of information structure may be weakened when
there are other factors demanding prosodic prominence.
We also tested whether the prosodic effects of pragmatic
informativity could disappear entirely when multiple
sources of high statistical informativity were present (i.e.
low word frequency and low contextual probability), and
whether different pragmatic factors (i.e. corrective focus and
new-information focus) could react differently to different
statistical factors.
Based on existing findings (e.g. Cooper et al., 1985 and
Baker & Bradlow, 2009), we expected that when the
narrowly focused words are high frequency and/or highly
contextually probable, we will be able to detect prosodic
reflexes of information structure, such that post-focus
reduction in the narrow corrective focus condition and the
narrow new-information focus condition results in a pitch
drop after the object that is faster and deeper than the widefocus condition. When the narrowly focused words are low
frequency and/or low contextual probability, we predicted
that the prosodic distinctions between narrow and wide
focus might be weakened or even entirely absent. In other
words, fast and deep pitch dropping after the object might
be observed in only one or even neither of the two narrowfocus conditions. If these predictions turn out to be correct
and prosodic effects of information structure are indeed
weakened when there are other factors also demanding
prosodic prominence, we can then also look into whether
word frequency and contextual probability influence
corrective focus and new-information focus in different
ways.

3. Data Analysis and Results
Pitch measurements were first obtained in terms of
fundamental frequency (f0) (STRAIGHT: Kawahara, de

Cheveigne & Patterson, 1998; VoiceSauce: Shue, Keating,
Vicenik & Yu, 2011). Raw f0 values were smoothed
(smoothn in MATLAB: Garcia, 2010) and converted into a
semitone scale using the algorithm 69+12*log2(f0/440).
Finally, the data were normalized by subject using the zstandardization to factor out the individual differences in
pitch ranges.
To investigate whether different levels of word frequency
and contextual probability have different effects,
quantitatively or qualitatively, on the prosodic encoding of
information structure, we examined the distinctions between
information-structure categories in the four conditions of
word frequency and contextual probability separately: high
frequency words in high probability contexts, low frequency
words in high probability contexts, high frequency words in
low probability contexts, and low frequency words in low
probability contexts. Pitch values (i.e. semitones normalized
by subject) of target sentences were analyzed using the
Smoothing Spline ANOVA method (Gu, 2003). We divided
each sentence into five intervals – pronoun ‘they’, verb,
object, preposition and article, and the location noun – and
extracted ten data points with equal time spacing from each
interval. The negative ‘no’ at the beginning of a sentence in
the corrective-focus conditions was not included in the
statistical analyses. Mixed-effects models were conducted
using the ssanova function in the R package gss (Gu, 2013).
We used information structure, time, and their interaction as
fixed effects and included random intercepts for subjects
and items. In all statistical analyses presented in this paper,
the hypotheses were tested at a significance level of α=0.05.
Overall, the predictions outlined in Section 2.2 were
borne out, as can be seen in Figures 1-4, which shows pitch
contours throughout the sentences. Let us take a closer look
at the middle three intervals from the verb (henceforth
referred to as the pre-object interval) to the object to the
preposition+article region (henceforth referred to as the
post-object interval). The three information-structural
categories barely differ in the pre-object and object intervals.
Significant differences mostly occur in the post-object
interval, where narrow corrective focus (red lines with
squares) and narrow new-information focus (blue lines with
triangles) have a deeper pitch fall than wide focus (green
lines with circles) in some cases, depending on word
frequency and contextual probability. More specifically:
When the narrowly focused object is high frequency and
occurs in a highly probable context (kicked cars in the
garage), both types of narrow focus differ significantly from
the object in wide focus (differences in fitted values =
0.112-0.427, 95% C.I.’s = fitted values ±0.045-0.049;
Figure 1). When object is frequent but contextually
improbable (kicked books in the garage), only newinformation focus differs significantly from wide focus;
corrective focus patterns with wide focus (differences in
fitted values = 0.094-0.249, 95% C.I.’s = fitted values
±0.040-0.042; Figure 2). In contrast, when the object has
low word frequency but high contextual probability (kicked
cans in the garage), corrective focus differs significantly

1122

from wide focus; new-information focus does not
(differences in fitted values = 0.095-0.292, 95% C.I.’s =
fitted values ±0.041-0.043; Figure 3). Finally, neither type
of narrow focus differs from wide focus when the object is

infrequent and contextually improbable (kicked shells in the
garage; differences in fitted values = 0.004-0.190, 95%
C.I.’s = fitted values ±0.041-0.044; Figure 4).

Figure 1-4: Log pitch (semitones) of target sentences, normalized by subject

This supports our general prediction that prosodic effects of
information structure are weakened when there are other
factors demanding prosodic prominence.
As a whole, these findings pose a challenge to the
widespread view that narrow focus (consistently) leads to
greater prosodic prominence than wide focus. In fact, prior
work on information structure, taken together, suggests a
prominence hierarchy: contrastive/corrective information is
prosodically marked with greater prominence than plain
new information (e.g. Breen et al., 2010 and Katz &
Selkirk, 2011), and narrowly focused new information is
more prominent than new information in wide focus (e.g.
Breen et al., 2010). As discussed above, however, we did
not find this hierarchy in our data. Crucially, it seems that
many prior studies investigated probable contexts and did
not manipulate word frequency, which may explain why
the hierarchical relation has been found between corrective
focus, new-information focus, and wide focus. Consider a
hypothetical study that involves a mixture of highfrequency and low-frequency words that are focused in
probable sentences. Based on our findings, in such a study
corrective focus will have greater prominence than wide

4. Discussion
This study investigated the interaction between statistical
and pragmatic factors in sentence prosody. Although a
considerable number of studies have examined prosodic
cues from either a statistical or an informationstructural/discourse-pragmatic perspective, little work has
been done to include these two kinds of informativity
factors in one study and look into their interaction. Our
results show that the prosodic prominence associated
with information structure is modulated by word
frequency and contextual probability in terms of postfocus pitch reduction. Both types of narrow focus result in
significant post-focus pitch lowering when frequent words
are narrowly focused in a probable context. In contrast,
frequent words with low contextual probability lead to
significant post-focus pitch lowering only when they are in
new-information focus, and infrequent words with high
contextual probability do so only when they are in
corrective focus. When infrequent words are narrowly
focused in an improbable context, post-focus pitch
lowering is not significant in either type of narrow focus.

1123

focus, since the sentences are probable; new-information
focus will be less prominent than corrective focus and
more prominent than wide focus, because frequent words
pattern with the former but infrequent words with the latter.
This prediction is confirmed by a follow-up analysis that
we conducted where we pooled the frequency conditions
and only examined the conditions of high contextual
probability. Tested at the significance level of α=0.05, the
pitch fall immediately following the object was largest for
corrective focus, second largest for new-information focus,
and smallest for wide focus. In other words, the common
generalization that corrective focus is more prominent
than narrow focus which is more prominent than broad
focus may be an epiphenomenon stemming from not
controlling for word frequency and using relatively
probable contexts. Our findings highlight the importance
of disentangling information structure and statistical
factors: To fully understand how prosody encodes
informativity, it is important to integrate the work in the
information-theory approach and the work in the
information-structure approach (see Wagner & Watson,
2010, pp.933 for relevant discussion).
Why should the prosodic effects of statistical factors
interact with information-structure in the way we observed?
Our results show that the prosodic cues for correction and
‘plain’ new information are sensitive to probability and
frequency, respectively. For corrective focus, post-focus
pitch reduction appears only when the focused element is
contextually probable; whereas for new-information focus,
post-focus pitch reduction appears only when the focused
element is lexically frequent. We suggest that these
differential effects can be explained in terms of the
interaction between interlocutors. In a corrective focus
structure (ex. 1), when the correct information is
contextually improbable (e.g. kicked books in the garage),
the interlocutor’s misbelief (e.g. kicked dirt in the garage)
may not be very surprising, which perhaps motivates low
pitch prominence (as low as wide focus) in the correction.
Possibly for similar reasons, new information conveyed by
infrequent words is realized with low pitch prominence.
Compared to high-frequency words that have a large
number of meanings/senses (e.g. Nelson & McEvoy, 2000),
lexical associates (e.g. Reder, Anderson & Bjork, 1974),
and suitable contexts (e.g. Adelman, Brown & Quesada,
2006), low-frequency words have been claimed to be
semantically less diverse (e.g. Hoffman, Rogers & Ralph,
2011). In a new-information focus structure (ex. 2), when
the new information is an infrequent word with a relatively
specific meaning (e.g. kicked cans in the garage), it may
not be surprising that the interlocutor has asked for the
information (i.e. what they kicked). On the other hand,
when the new information is a frequent word with a
relatively ‘vague’ meaning (e.g. kicked cars in the garage),
it may seem to the speaker that the interlocutor’s question
is not worth asking (and thus surprising). If these ideas are
on the right track, they fit with the view that speakers take
into account the interlocutor’s knowledge state. Under

this view, these interaction patterns reflect the speaker’s
expectations about what the interlocutor “should have
known”. This study adds to the body of literature regarding
whether/to what extent interlocutors consider each other’s
knowledge and perspectives (e.g. Bell, 1984; Brown &
Dell, 1987; Hanna, Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 2003; Keysar,
Barr, Balin & Brauner, 2000; Lockridge & Brennan, 2002).
Our findings suggest that people’s expectation about their
interlocutor’s knowledge state is an important factor
involved in the prosodic encoding of informativity. Future
work will allow us to further test the validity of this idea.

5. Conclusions
We conducted a psycholinguistic production study that
investigated how two types of informativity interact in
shaping the prosody of utterances: (i) statistical
informativity in terms of lexical frequency and contextual
probability, and (ii) pragmatic informativity such as newinformation focus and corrective focus. Our results show
that lexical frequency modulates the prosodic prominence
associated with new-information focus, and contextual
probability modulates the prosodic prominence resulting
from corrective focus. In terms of pitch cues, newinformation narrow focus differs from wide focus only
when the object is high frequency, and corrective narrow
focus differs from wide focus only when the object has
high contextual probability. We discuss how these patterns
can be explained from an interaction-based perspective –
speakers take into account their interlocutor’s knowledge
state; prosody reflects speakers’ expectations/surprise
about what the other person has in mind. By integrating
factors that have previously been examined in separate
traditions of work, this study brings new insights into the
relationship between informativity and prosody.

References
Adelman, J. S., Brown, G. D. A. & Quesada, J. F. (2006).
Contextual diversity, not word frequency, determines
word-naming and lexical decision times, Psychological
Science, 17(9): 814-823.
Aylett, M. & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal
redundancy hypothesis: a functional explanation for
relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence
and duration in spontaneous speech, Language and
Speech, 47(1): 31-56.
Baker, R. E. & Bradlow, A. R. (2009). Variability in word
duration as a function of probability, speech style, and
prosody, Language and Speech, 52(4): 391-413.
Bell, A. (1984). Language style as audience design,
Language in Society, 13(2): 145-204.
Bell, A., Brenier, J., Gregory, M., Girand C. & Jurafsky, D.
(2009). Predictability effects on durations of content and
function words in conversational English, Journal of
Memory and Language, 60(1): 92-111.
Bell, A., Jurafsky, D., Fosler-Lussier, E., Girand, C.,
Gregory, M. & Gildea, D. (2003). Effects of
disfluencies, predictability, and utterance position on

1124

word form variation in English conversation, Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 113(2): 1001-1024.
Breen, M., Fedorenko, E., Wagner, M. & Gibson, E.
(2010). Acoustic correlates of information structure,
Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(7): 1044-1098.
Brown, P. & Dell, G. S. (1987). Adapting production to
comprehension: The explicit mention of instruments,
Cognitive Psychology, 19(4). 441-472.
Brysbaert, M. & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kucera
and Francis: a critical evaluation of current word
frequency norms and the introduction of a new and
improved word frequency measure for American English,
Behavior Research Methods, 41(4): 977-990.
Chen, Y. & Braun, B. (2006). Prosodic realization in
information structure categories in standard Chinese, in
R. Hoffmann & H. Mixdorff [Ed], Speech Prosody 2006,
Dresden: TUD Press.
Cooper, W., Eady, S. & Mueller, P. (1985). Acoustical
aspects of contrastive stress in question-answer contexts,
Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 77(6): 21422156.
Couper-Kuhlen, E. (1984). A new look at contrastive
intonation, in R. Watts & U. Weidman [Ed], Modes of
Interpretation: Essays Presented to Ernst Leisi on the
Occasion of His 65th Birthday, Tübingen: Gunter Narr
Verlag.
Dik, S. C. (1997). The Theory of Functional Grammar,
Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Eady, S. J., Cooper, W. E., Klouda, G. V., Mueller, P. R. &
Lotts, D. W. (1986). Acoustical characteristics of
sentential focus: Narrow vs. broad and single vs. dual
focus environments, Language and Speech, 29(3): 233251.
Garcia, D. (2010). Robust smoothing of gridded data in
one and higher dimensions with missing values,
Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 54(4):
1167-1178.
Gu, C. (2003). Smoothing Spline ANOVA Models, New
York: Springer.
Gu, C. (2013). Package gss: General Smoothing Splines
[computer
program],
http://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/gss/.
Hanna, J., Tanenhaus, M. K. & Trueswell, J. C. (2003).
The effects of common ground and perspective on
domains of referential interpretation, Journal of Memory
and Language, 49(1): 43-61.
Hoffman P., Rogers, T. T. & Ralph, M. A. (2011).
Semantic diversity accounts for the missing word
frequency effect in stroke aphasia: Insights using a novel
method to quantify contextual variability in meaning,
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(9): 2432-2446.
Hwang, H. K. (2012). Asymmetries between production,
perception and comprehension of focus types in
Japanese, Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2012, 326-329.
Katz, J. & Selkirk, E. (2011). Contrastive focus vs.
discourse-new: Evidence from phonetic prominence in
English, Language, 87(4): 771-816.

Kawahara, H., de Cheveigne, A. & Patterson, R. D. (1998).
An instantaneous-frequency-based pitch extraction
method for high-quality speech transformation: revised
TEMPO in the STRAIGHT-suite, Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing (ICSLP ’98). 1367-1370.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A. & Brauner, J. S. (2000).
Taking perspective in conversation: The role of mutual
knowledge in comprehension, Psychological Science,
11(1): 32-38.
Krahmer, E. & Swerts, M. (2001). On the alleged existence
of contrastive accents, Speech Communication, 34(4):
391-405.
Lockridge, C. B. & Brennan, S. E. (2002). Addressees’
needs influence speakers’ early syntactic choices,
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9(3). 550-557.
Munson, B. & Solomon, N. P. (2004). The influence of
phonological neighborhood density on vowel articulation,
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
47: 1048-1058.
Nelson, D. L. & McEvoy, C. L. (2000). What is this thing
called frequency? Memory and Cognition, 28(4): 509522.
Pan, S. & Hirschberg, J. (2000). Modeling local context for
pitch accent prediction, Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Conference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL-00). 233-240.
Pluymaekers, M., Ernestus, M. & Baayen, R. H. (2005).
Lexical frequency and acoustic reduction in spoken
Dutch, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
118(4): 2561-2569.
Reder, L. M., Anderson, J. R. & Bjork, R. A. (1974).
Semantic interpretation of encoding specificity, Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 102(4): 648-656.
Schwarzschild, R. (1999). Givenness, AVOIDF and other
constraints on the placement of accent, Natural
Language Semantics, 7(2): 141-177.
Shue, Y.-L., Keating, P., Vicenik, C. & Yu, K. (2011).
VoiceSauce: A program for voice analysis, Proceedings
of the 17th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences
(ICPhS XVII). 1846-1849.
Vallduví, E. & Vilkuna, M. (1998). On rheme and contrast,
in P. W. Culicover & L. McNally [Ed], Syntax and
Semantics 29: The Limits of Syntax, San Diego:
Academic Press.
van Son, R. J. J. H., Koopmans-van Beinum F. J. & Pols, L.
C. W. (1998). Efficiency as an organizing principle of
natural speech, Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP ’98). 2375-2378.
Wagner, M. & Watson, D. (2010). Experimental and
theoretical advances in prosody: A review, Language
and Cognitive Processes, 25(7): 905–945.
Wright, R. (2003). Factors of lexical competition in vowel
articulation, in J. Local, R. Ogden & R. Temple [Ed],
Phonetic Interpretation: Papers in Laboratory
Phonology VI, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1125

