UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Purpose-Based Thinking Affects Belief in the Existence of Everyday Objects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vq6s9s9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Dink, Jacob
Rips, Lance

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Purpose-Based Thinking Affects Belief in the Existence of Everyday Objects
Jacob W. Dink (JacobDink2011@u.northwestern.edu)
Lance J. Rips (Rips@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA
Abstract

Though teleological thinking is natural, it has intuitive
limits—that is, it seems not to apply to certain domains. For
example, it is natural to think about the purpose behind a
knife’s creation in reasoning about why it exists; but
whether a particular knife exists seems to be a fact that
depends only on the physical state of the world. “Object o
exists at time t” seems like a clear case of an objective
physical fact.
The present paper examines the limits of teleological
thinking, given this particularly strong test case: Can
teleological information affect simple judgments of whether
an everyday object exists?
In order to answer this, it is helpful to think about how
teleological thinking affects other types of judgments, such
as categorization. When naming an artifact, adults (and
children as young as six years) focus not only on its current
physical structure and appearance, but also on the artifact’s
history, i.e., how it got to its current state (e.g., Gutheil et
al., 2004). Another factor in categorization is an object’s
future. For example, adults will categorize an animal, based
not just on its current appearance, but also on what type of
offspring it ends up having (Rips, 1989).
Might we expect analogous effects of an object’s past and
future on judgments about that object’s existence? Imagine
you encounter a pile of chair parts. You are told that
yesterday these parts were made in a factory and that
tomorrow they will be assembled into a chair and sold to a
furniture company. Does the chair exist today? In answering
this question, people may focus on the physical state of the
chair [parts] today, ignoring how the parts got into that state
or what’s going to happen to them. However, it is also
plausible that people will be sensitive to the fact that these
parts were made with the intention of becoming a chair, and
that they will soon become a chair. People might think of
the chair as on an “upward trajectory” into existence.
Similarly, if shown an identical pile of chair parts, and told
that these parts were intentionally disassembled so they
could be thrown into a landfill, people might think of the
chair as being on a “downward trajectory” out of existence.
However, not all trajectory-based scenarios imply
teleological thinking. Imagine you are told that the chair
parts were just disassembled and will soon be rotting in a
landfill. This may influence your judgment about whether
the chair exists simply because these facts provide clues to
the physical state of the chair. These facts could cause you
to wonder why the chair was disassembled or why it will so
soon be rotting. Many potential answers to these questions
would imply that the physical state of the chair is
compromised (e.g., the chair hardly existed after the termite

When we reason about the physical world, we don't just think
about physical facts. For example, in judging why an object
exists, or belongs to a particular category, we often appeal to
intentions, functions, and purpose (e.g., “knives exist for
cutting”). Such “teleological” thinking is common, but
intuitively it has limits: For example, whether an object exists
appears to depend only on the objective physical state of the
world. In contrast, we present evidence that intentions can
influence people’s judgments of whether an everyday object
exists. Participants read stories about an object being
disassembled. Controlling for the physical status of the
object, people's judgments about whether the object existed
were sensitive to the purpose guiding the disassembly. These
results serve as a case study in the psychological power of
intentions: Apparently straightforward judgments about the
physical world can be shaped by the state of the mentalworld.
Keywords: teleological thinking; object concepts; singular
concepts; ontology; physical reasoning; intentions

Introduction
Everyday thinking about the physical world goes beyond
just physical facts. For example: why are knives sharp?
Though we can answer this by appealing to the physical
forces that lead to knife-sharpening in knife-factories, it
seems more natural to say that knives are sharp because they
are used for cutting. This second type of explanation is an
example of “teleological” thinking. Teleological thinking is
concerned with intentions, functions, or purposes (e.g.,
knives are for cutting things), and we can contrast such a
purpose-based approach with thinking about physical
processes (e.g., knife-sharpening).
Teleological thinking is pervasive in human cognition.
Both adults and children are sensitive to teleological
information in their categorization judgments (especially for
artifacts). For example, if told that an object looks like an
umbrella but was intended to be a lampshade, adults
categorize it as a lampshade (Rips, 1989; see also Gutheil,
Bloom, Valderrama, & Freedman, 2004; Matan & Carey,
2001). Adults prefer teleological explanations over physical
explanations for artifacts (e.g., knives) and biological parts
(e.g., noses; Kelemen, 1999). This preference is even stronger
in children, who readily extend teleological explanations to
almost all categories, living (e.g., “tigers are for biting”) and
non-living (e.g., “mountains are for climbing”; Kelemen,
1999). Given the prevalence and broad developmental origins
of teleological thinking, some researchers have argued that it
is a natural default, which is suppressed with age and
schooling (Kelemen & Rosset, 2009).

415

Method

infestation; it was just a shell of a chair). This in turn would
make you less likely to say the chair exists.
In contrast, the present experiments ask whether
teleological information can directly influence participants’
judgments about the existence of an everyday object, even
when controlling for the physical state of that object.
Participants read a story about a man who disassembled his
computer into each of its parts. Across conditions, the
stories varied (a) the man’s purpose in disassembling the
computer, and (b) the final state of the computer—all while
holding constant the computer’s current physical state.
Participants decided whether the computer existed
immediately after disassembly, before its eventual fate.
If information about the intentions or the eventual fate of
the computer alters participants’ judgments, this would
suggest that people sometimes use teleological information
to make decisions about the existence of everyday objects.
This would provide a strong demonstration of the
prevalence of teleological thinking in human cognition:
Teleological information can influence even apparently
objective judgments made without time-pressure.

Materials For participants in both conditions, the beginning
of the story was the same:
John was a nice man in his mid-30s, who lived in a large
apartment building. John was a bit of a technology
enthusiast, and he needed a new computer. On January 1st,
John ordered some computer parts online from a couple
different retailers. On January 2nd, the various packages of
computer parts arrived, he took them out of their
packaging, and he put them on his desk. On January 3rd,
John built his very own computer from the parts. The
computer had 10 parts, and was a Windows computer.
John happily used the computer for about a year.

At this point, the story diverged depending on condition.
On December 15th, John decided that he wanted …
[Reassemble Condition] …to clean the inside of his
computer. He decided that, the next day, he would take
his computer apart and clean all the parts. Once it was
cleaned, he could put it back together.
[Keep Disassembled Condition] …a new computer. He
decided that, the next day, he would take his computer
apart, clean all the parts, and find out what they were
worth so that he could sell them.
On December 16th, John disassembled his computer
into its ten parts, and cleaned each part.
[Reassemble Condition] This tired him out and he
decided to finish up the next day.
[Keep Disassembled] Condition: Using his smart phone,
he looked up what each part was worth at various online
resellers. This tired him out and he decided to finish up
the next day.
On December 17th, John…
[Reassemble Condition] …took the computer parts and
reassembled them as they had originally been assembled.
He sat down, turned his computer on, and started using it.
[Keep Disassembled Condition] …set up the sales online
with various retailers, packaged the parts in several
boxes, drove to the post office, and had the parts sent off
to their new owners.

Experiment 1
Participants read a story about a man who built a computer
and later decided to take it apart. In the “reassemble”
condition, participants learned that the man intended to
disassemble the computer because he wanted to clean the
parts, and that he went on to clean them and reassemble the
computer. In the “keep disassembled” condition, participants
were told that he intended to disassemble the computer
because he wanted to clean and then sell the parts, and that he
went on to do so. The ultimate fate of the computer always

Dec 15

Dec 16

John decides to
John takes
take computer apart it apart

Manipulation:
Intentions
• Intends to reassemble
• Intends to sell parts

Dec 17

John sells/
reassembles

Procedure Participants read all the material on a computer
screen. On the first screen, participants were presented with
the story about John and his computer. On the second
screen, participants saw this story again and answered
several questions about the computer’s existence at three
dates in the story. They were to “Rate your agreement with
the following statement: By the end of [date] the computer
exists.” Participants responded on a 7-point scale, with 7
marked “Agree- Definitely Exists,” 1 marked “Disagree—
Definitely Does Not Exist,” and 4 marked “Not sure.”
The dates were: January 1st (before the computer was first
built); January 3rd (immediately after the computer was first
assembled and working); and December 16th (immediately
after the computer was disassembled, either for cleaning or
for selling—but before reassembly or selling occurred).

Manipulation:
Fate of Computer
• Computer reassembled
• Computer parts sold

Figure 1: A summary of the manipulations in the story.
matched the intentions in this experiment. Figure 1
summarizes these manipulations.
Participants were then asked whether they thought the
computer existed on the date it was first disassembled.
Importantly, the intentions being formed, the computer’s
disassembly, and the final outcome for the computer, were all
separate incidents. While the intentions and the outcome
varied, the physical state of the computer on the key date was
the same across both conditions. Therefore, any differences
across conditions should be due to teleological factors: either
intentions, fate, or some combination of the two.

Participants Twenty-one participants were recruited on
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk for monetary compensation.

416

Results & Discussion

the ultimate fate of the computer parts—either sold or
reassembled—is independent of John’s original intentions.

We are interested in participants’ ratings for whether the
computer exists—specifically, their ratings for December
16th. Responses for Jan. 1st & 3rd serve as a control, since in
both conditions, the computer’s existence (or non-existence)
was unambiguous on both dates. This allows us to check
whether participants were paying attention. Any participant
who marked 7 (“definitely exists”) for January 1st (before
the computer parts had even been shipped from the various
retailers) is excluded from further analysis. Likewise, any
participant who marked 1 (“definitely does not exist”) for
January 3rd (immediately after the computer had been fully
assembled and was working) is also excluded from analysis.
In this experiment, two participants were excluded. As
expected, for each of the first two questions, ratings did not
differ significantly across conditions: either for Jan. 1st
(t(17)=.86, p=.40) or Jan 3rd (t(17)=.70, p=.49).
On December 16th, the same thing happened to the
computer in both conditions: The computer was
disassembled into ten parts. In the reassemble condition, the
mean rating for this day was in the middle of the scale, near
the “not sure” mark, as shown in Figure 2. However, in the
keep-disassembled condition, the mean rating for December
16th was at the bottom of the scale, near the “does not exist”
mark. These ratings differed significantly, t(17)=2.26,
p=.037. In the reassemble condition, ratings did not differ
significantly from 4 (the “not sure” midpoint), t(9)=.66,
p=.53. However, in the keep-disassembled condition, ratings
were significantly lower than the midpoint, t(8)=5.75,
p < .001.
In summary, in the keep-disassembled condition,
participants were confident that the computer did not exist;
however, in the reassemble condition, there was little
agreement about whether the computer existed. Though
ratings for December 16th differed across conditions, the
physical state of the computer on December 16th did not:
Participants in both conditions were told that the computer
was taken apart into its ten parts and cleaned. What differed
across conditions was teleological information: John’s
intentions (on Dec. 15th) and the ultimate fate of the
computer (on Dec. 17th). So the differing ratings across
conditions seem to have been driven by this teleological
information.

Method
Materials and procedure Participants saw the same
information as in the previous experiment for all dates
through December 16th. Participants in both conditions then
read about a man who broke into John’s house while he was
sleeping. Half the participants read that this man
reassembled the computer, checked that it was functional,
and then stole it and donated it to charity. The other half
read that the man stole the individual parts and donated each
to a separate charity. Therefore, this experiment
independently manipulated (a) the intentions guiding the
computer’s disassembly and (b) the ultimate fate of the
computer.
Participants were divided into four groups, corresponding
to each cell of the 2x2 design. The procedure was otherwise
the same as in Experiment 1.
Participants Eighty participants were recruited on
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform and received monetary
compensation. We excluded 15 participants on the same
basis as in Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
The main variable of interest is participants’ ratings for
December 16th. Figure 2 shows that participants who were
told that John intended to reassemble the computer rated it
more likely to exist (M=4.16, SD=2.44) than those told that
John intended to sell the computer parts (M=2.45, SD=2.15),
F(1,61)=9.20, p=.004. However, the ratings for stories in
which the computer parts were ultimately reassembled
(M=3.67, SD=2.42) were roughly the same as for those in
which the computer parts were ultimately scattered
(M=2.91, SD=2.43), F(1,61)=1.89, p=.18. There was also no
interaction between intention and fate, F(1,61)=.68, p=.41.
Collapsing across the fate manipulation and looking only
at the ‘intention’ manipulation reveals a pattern similar to
the first experiment. When participants learned that John
disassembled the computer with the intention of
reassembling it, their mean ratings for Dec. 16th were not
significantly different from the midpoint of the scale,
t(32)=.36, p=.72. However, when participants were told
John disassembled the computer with the intention of selling
the parts, participants’ mean rating was significantly lower
than the midpoint of the scale, t(32)=4.13, p<.001.
As in the previous experiment, participants’ ratings did
not significantly differ across conditions for the first two
dates. For Jan. 1st, an ANOVA revealed no main effects
(fate: F(1,61)=.071, p=.79; intention: F(1,61)= 2.82,
p=.098) or interactions (F(1,61)=.49, p=.49). Likewise, for
Jan 3rd there were no main effects (fate: F(1,61)=1.15,
p=.29; intention: F(1,61)=.30, p=.59) or interactions
(F(1,61)=1.70, p=.20).
The results of this experiment help clarify the role of
teleological information in judgments about existence.

Experiment 2
The results so far are consistent with the idea that people
sometimes use teleological information when making
judgments about existence. However, these results do not
pinpoint what teleological information people use: We did
not vary independently the intentions for the object and
what eventually happened to it. The present experiment is
similar to the first, except that these two factors are
orthogonal. This involved a change to the end of the story.
Here, before John can follow through with his intentions for
the computer parts, these computer parts are stolen. The
thief either reassembles the computer and donates it to
charity, or steals the individual parts and donates them. So

417

When deciding whether the computer exists after its
disassembly on December 16th, participants were heavily
influenced by the purpose guiding this disassembly.
However, they were minimally influenced by what
happened to the computer after December 16th. When
deciding whether something exists, people do not seem to
consider all types of teleological information, but are instead
uniquely sensitive to relevant intentions.
These results also help rule out alternative explanations
for the first experiment’s results. Taken in isolation, one
might worry that the results of Experiment 1 could have
been due to participants’ sensitivity to task demands, or
confusing key dates in the story. For example, if participants
had mixed up December 16th and 17th, their differing
judgments about the computer’s existence could have been
driven by the difference in the computer’s physical state on
December 17th. However, in the present experiment, there
was no effect of the computer’s state on December 17th,
rendering this explanation unlikely.
Because there was no main effect of fate or an interaction
between fate and intentions, the following experiments
follow Experiment 1 in combining these factors. This allows
the stories to be easier to understand.

One possibility is that the intentions must connect,
perhaps causally, to the physical state of the object. We
know from the previous experiments that intentions bias
existence judgments, even controlling for the object’s
physical state. But it still may be important that a
connection between intentions and state exists. In the stories
of Experiments 1 and 2, John’s intention to take the
computer apart was the reason the computer was
disassembled. What if John’s intentions were incidental?
For example, if some other causal force put the computer
into its disassembled state, so that John’s intentions had
nothing to do with it, we might predict that his intentions
would no longer influence existence judgments.
Alternatively, intentions may not need to be connected to
an object’s state in order to influence judgments about
whether it exists. Simply having the intentions to destroy the
computer may influence decisions about whether the
computer exists.
The following experiment was designed to distinguish
these two possibilities. Participants were given a story
similar to that in Experiment 1, but with the ordering of
certain events reversed. In the previous story, John’s
intentions for the computer resulted in the computer’s
physical state. In the present experiment, however, the
computer is first disassembled, and only then does John
decide what to do with it. Participants were told that an
important screw fell loose from the computer, resulting in
the computer falling apart into all ten components,
otherwise undamaged. On the morning of December 16th,
John comes upon the computer, and decides whether he
wants to reassemble or get rid of the parts.
As in earlier experiments, participants were asked
whether they thought the computer existed on December
16th—after the computer has been dissembled and after John
has decided what to do with it, but before he actually carried
out his intention. In this experiment, however, John’s
intentions had no role in the computer’s disassembly. If his
intentions nevertheless influence existence judgments, this
would suggest that intentions bias these judgments,
regardless of the role those intentions play in the physical
state of that object.

Figure 2: Participants ratings for whether the computer
exists on Dec. 16th. The 7 rating corresponds to “definitely
exists”, and the 1 corresponds to “definitely does not exist.”
For Experiments 1, 3, & 4, the legend refers to both John’s
intentions and to the fate of the computer. For Experiment 2,
the legend only refers to John’s intentions, and the fate of
the computer is specified below the bars.

Method
Materials and Procedure The procedure in this experiment
was identical to Experiment 1. Like Experiment 1, there
were two conditions: keep disassembled and reassemble.
The story that participants read was identical to that of
Experiment 1, up until the events of December 15th.
Participants in both conditions were told that, while John
was asleep on the evening of December 15th, an important
screw came loose in his computer. The screw fell out,
causing the computer to fall apart into each of its ten parts.
Participants were told that none of the parts were damaged.
For December 16th, participants in both conditions read
that John happened upon the computer and noticed that none
of the parts were damaged.

Experiment 3
These results suggest that intentions can influence
existence judgments. However, it is unclear under what
conditions intentions will matter. In order for intentions to
affect judgments about an object’s existence, how do these
intentions have to relate to the object?

418

Participants in the keep-disassembled condition read that,
though John knew it would be trivial to reassemble the
computer, he decided that he “didn’t feel like it.” They were
told that he had to run to work, and would get rid of the old
parts and look for a new computer the next day. They were
then told that, on Dec. 17th, he got rid of the old computer.
Participants in the reassemble condition instead read that,
since John knew it would be trivial to reassemble the
computer, he decided he would do so. They were told he
had to run to work, and would reassemble it the next day.
They were then told that, on Dec. 17th, he reassembled the
computer.

contact: In Experiment 3, John did not come into contact
with the computer (with the intent to destroy/clean it) until
after December 16th. In contrast, the causal explanation
predicts that the key difference between experiments is the
causal connection between the intentions and the computer’s
state: In Experiment 3, John’s intentions were not
responsible for the computer’s state on Dec. 16th.
The present experiment compares these two explanations.
The story in this version is similar to that in the first
experiment, except John never comes into contact with the
computer. However, John still causes the computer’s
disassembly. If John’s intentions influence participants’
responses (as they did in Experiments 1 & 2), this would
suggest that his intentions need to be causally (but not
physically) connected to the computer’s physical state in
order for these intentions to influence judgments about the
computer’s existence.

Participants Seventy-one participants were recruited online
for monetary compensation. Using the same criteria as in
the previous experiments, we excluded 10 participants.

Results & Discussion

Method

In contrast to previous experiments, Figure 2 shows that
the mean rating in the reassemble condition and in the keepdisassembled condition did not differ significantly,
t(59)=.65, p=.52. Therefore, participants’ judgments in this
experiment were not influenced by the differing intentions.
As in previous experiments, for each of the first two
questions, ratings also did not differ significantly across
conditions: either for Jan. 1st (t(59)=1.12, p=.27) or Jan. 3rd
(t(59)=1.40, p=.17).
These results suggest that only certain intentions can
influence judgments about an object’s existence—
specifically, intentions that are somehow connected to that
object’s physical state. One explanation for these results is
that participants do not find intentions relevant for an
object’s existence at a time unless they are causally
connected to that object’s physical state at that time.
However, this causal explanation may seem odd in view
of our earlier findings. All of the experiments so far have
controlled for the physical state of the computer across
conditions. The connection between the intentions and the
physical state of the computer did not make any tangible
difference. Why then should a causal connection matter?
An alternative explanation is that participants engage in
“magical” thinking about the computer’s existence. Even
though John’s intentions do not have any tangible effects on
the computer’s physical state, perhaps participants still think
of the intentions as imparting something intangible. This sort
of thinking might fall under the “law of contagion,” which is
the belief that, through physical contact, special intangible
properties or essences can be transmitted (e.g., you might be
reluctant to buy a sweater that was previously worn by Hilter;
Nemeroff & Rozin, 1994; Newman, Diesendruck, & Bloom,
2011). Participants may believe that, when John has the intent
to destroy the computer and then comes into physical contact
with it, he imparts to it an extra bit of non-existence.

Materials and Procedure Participants read a story similar
to that of Experiment 1, except John was out of town on
December 15th and December 16th. Participants in the keepdisassembled condition were told that John wanted a new
computer, and participants in the reassemble condition were
told he wanted his computer cleaned.
Participants in both conditions were told that on Dec. 16th
John called his personal assistant to have him disassemble
the computer, and that “John's personal assistant was a loyal
and unquestioning employee, and didn't even ask or think
about why he was taking the computer apart.” The personal
assistant disassembled the computer into all ten parts and
cleaned the parts. On Dec. 17th, John returned home and
sold/reassembled the parts (depending on condition).
Participants Twenty-three Northwestern undergraduates
participated for course-credit. Using the same criteria as in
the previous experiments, three participants were excluded

Results & Discussion
As expected, for each of the first two questions, ratings
did not differ significantly across conditions: either for
Jan. 1st (t(18)=.60, p=.56) or Jan. 3rd (t(18)=1.50, p=.15).
Figure 2 displays the mean ratings for the two conditions
in this experiment. In contrast to Experiment 3, and like
Experiments 1 and 2, the mean rating in the reassemble
condition was significantly higher than that in the keepdisassembled condition, t(18)=2.53, p=.021. This
experiment also replicated Experiment 1 and 2’s qualitative
difference in responses across conditions: Ratings were
significantly lower than 4 (“not sure”) in the keepdisassembled condition (t(18)=7.06, p<.001), but not in the
reassemble condition (t(18)=0.75, p=.48).
These results, coupled with those of Experiment 3, are
consistent with the idea that a causal connection is what
matters in order for intentions to affect existence judgments.
When assessing whether an everyday object exists,
participants are influenced by intentions that play a causal

Experiment 4
The contagion explanation predicts that the key difference
between Experiments 1-2 and Experiment 3 is physical

419

role in that object’s physical state. But these results suggest
that physical contact between the person with intentions and
the object is not necessary.

example, two rats clamped together for no reason are two
separated entities, but two rats clamped together because they
jointly make an excellent bomb-sniffing device are one entity.
Rose & Schaffer concluded that participants’ judgments were
driven by whether the fused object had a function.
Could this explanation be extended to the present study?
John’s intention to keep his computer may emphasize its
function as a whole, while his intention to sell the individual
parts may emphasize the functions of the parts. This in turn
may influence whether participants think the disassembled
computer exists as a whole or whether it is “just” parts.
Future research can explore these possibilities. It may be
that intentions play a privileged role in deciding whether an
object has a purpose, and this in turn plays a privileged role
in deciding whether that object exists. Alternatively,
intentions for an object and that object’s function could each
play a separate and independent role in influencing
existence judgments. In either case, teleological information
(considered broadly as encompassing intent, purpose, and
function) seems an important part of how humans make
seemingly objective judgments about existence.

General Discussion
In the four experiments in this paper, we found a
remarkably consistent pattern of teleological information
influencing judgments about an object’s existence. The
intentions causally responsible for an object’s physical state
changed judgments about whether it existed, shifting people
from uncertainty (not sure if the object exists) to certainty
(confident the object does not exist). In cases where an
object’s existence is somewhat ambiguous, the intent to
destroy that object can be enough to convince people it has
gone out of existence.
This finding suggests that teleological information can
shape seemingly objective judgments. This conclusion fits
with prior research showing that other types of seemingly
“objective” judgments—e.g., judgments about causation or
about mental states—can be influenced by surprisingly nonobjective factors like moral or functional norms (for a
review, see Knobe, 2010). Future work can explore whether
the effect found here taps into the same basic cognitive
phenomenon as this previous research.
How do the effects found in the present experiments
generalize to other kinds of entities? These experiments
focused on only one object: a computer. An important next
step is to verify that these effects extend to other artifacts.
Additionally, future studies can examine whether these
effects occur for natural kinds as well.
It is possible that, as is the case for categorization, adults
restrict their teleological thinking about existence to only
artifacts, like computers or chairs. However, there is a
notable difference between the effects found here and those
found for artifact categorization. For artifact categorization,
creator’s intentions are privileged: adults categorize an
object based on its creator’s ultimate intent, even if this
intent played no causal role in the artifact’s appearance or
function (Chaigneau, Castillo, & Martinez., 2008). In
contrast, the results of Experiments 3 and 4 suggest that,
when judging whether an object exists, the causal role of
intentions may be important. This opens the door to the
possibility that intentions will matter in judging the
existence of any object, as long as those intentions are
responsible for that object’s state. The object’s ownership or
kind (natural or artificial) may matter less than whether that
object has come under human influence.
Another open question is the relation between purpose for
an object—e.g., John’s intentions for the computer—and the
purpose of an object—e.g., the function of the computer
relative to the function of the computer parts. Recent
evidence suggests that the latter may influence how people
make judgments about the existence of objects. Rose &
Schaffer (in prep.) presented vignettes about objects that were
fused together, and asked participants to judge whether the
result constituted one or two objects. They found that people
use teleological information to individuate objects: for

Acknowledgements
We thank Brock Ferguson, John Glines, Nicholas
Leonard, Kelly Sheehan, bethany ojalehto, Joshua Knobe,
Sid Horton, and Dedre Gentner for helpful discussion of
these studies, and John Glines for research assistance.

References
Chaigneau, S. E., Castillo, R. D., & Martínez, L. (2008).
Creators’ intentions bias judgments of function
independently from causal inferences. Cognition, 109,
123–132.
Gutheil, G., Bloom, P., Valderrama, N., & Freedman, R.
(2004). The role of historical intuitions in children’s and
adults’ naming of artifacts. Cognition, 91, 23–42.
Kelemen, D. (1999). The scope of teleological thinking in
preschool children. Cognition, 70, 241–272.
Kelemen, D., & Rosset, E. (2009). The human function
compunction: Teleological explanation in adults.
Cognition, 111, 138–143.
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as scientist, person as moralist.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(04), 315–329.
Matan, A., & Carey, S. (2001). Developmental changes
within the core of artifact concepts. Cognition, 78, 1–26.
Nemeroff, C., & Rozin, P. (1994). The contagion concept in
adult thinking in the United States: Transmission of
germs and of interpersonal influence. Ethos, 22, 158–186.
Newman, G. E., Diesendruck, G., & Bloom, P. (2011).
Celebrity contagion and the value of objects. Journal of
Consumer Research, 38, 215–228.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning (pp. 21–59).
Rose, D. & Schaffer, J. Folk Mereology Is Teleological. In
preparation. Retrieved from
www.jonathanschaffer.org/folkmer.pdf

420

