UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Quick Linguistic Representations and Precise Perceptual Representations: Language
Statistics and Perceptual Simulations under Time Constraints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3fq7c83h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hutchinson, Sterling
Tillman, Richard
Louwerse, Max

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Quick Linguistic Representations and Precise Perceptual Representations:
Language Statistics and Perceptual Simulations under Time Constraints

!

Sterling Hutchinson (S.C.Hutchinson@uvt.nl)

Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

!

Richard Tillman (R.N.Tillman@uvt.nl)

Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

!

Max M. Louwerse (M.M.Louwerse@uvt.nl)

Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
Many studies have argued that language comprehension
requires perceptual simulation. In previous work we have
demonstrated that because language encodes perceptual
relations, comprehenders can also rely on language statistics
to bootstrap meaning through limited grounding. The extent
comprehenders do this depends on the nature of the cognitive
task, the stimulus, the individual, as well as the speed of
processing, with linguistic representations preceding
perceptual simulation. In the current study we report results
that investigated whether time constraints impacted the use of
perceptual and linguistic factors during language processing.
Participants made fast or slow speeded judgments about
whether pairs of words were semantically related. Subjects
were also instructed to either respond as quickly as possible
to the words they were presented, or respond as accurately as
possible. The perceptual factor was operationalized as an
iconicity rating of the stimulus pairs occurring in a particular
orientation in the real world and the linguistic factor was
operationalized as the frequency of the stimulus pairs in
language. The linguistic factor best explained the RTs when
subjects had to respond quickly. On the other hand, when
given more time to respond, both linguistic and perceptual
factors explained response times. These findings support the
view that language processing is both linguistic and
embodied, with linguistic representations being relevant for
quick good-enough representations and perceptual
simulations being important for more precise information.
Keywords: embodied cognition; symbolic cognition; symbol
interdependency; perceptual simulation; language processing;
time course.

Introduction
Embodied representations are concepts in memory that
involve modality-specific simulations of all of the actual
experiences associated with those concepts. Proponents of
embodied cognition have argued that these embodied
representations are fundamental to language processing
(Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 1997; Pecher & Zwaan, 2005;
Semin & Smith, 2008; Zwaan, 2004). Prior research has
indeed demonstrated that when experimental tasks elicit the
consideration of perceptual features of words, processing

!!
!

does seem to be facilitated (Pecher, van Dantzig, Zwaan, &
Zeelenberg, 2009; Šetić & Domijan, 2007; Zwaan,
Stanfield, & Yaxley, 2002; Zwaan & Yaxley, 2003). For
example, response times (RTs) decrease when words are
presented in an iconic ordering (i.e., pan – stove instead of
stove – pan). Sentences implying particular orientations
(e.g., pencil in a drawer) also resulted in faster RTs when an
image of the object was presented horizontally as opposed
to vertically. Furthermore, Glenberg and Kaschak (2002)
also demonstrated embodied cognition with the actionsentence compatibility effect, where participants read
sentences that implied specific directional movements (e.g.,
Liz told you the story), and responded faster with a
congruent motion than with an incongruent motion. Studies
like these are taken as evidence that embodied
representations facilitate language processing, and that
embodiment is central to cognition.
Alternative to embodied theories, symbolic theories
suggest that word meaning can be derived from linguistic
context (Landauer & Dumais, 1997) and does not rely
solely upon embodied representations. In other words,
instead of activating perceptual simulations, mental
representations can be viewed symbolic connections
between a concept and its ‘likeness’ within memory (Fodor,
1975; Pylyshyn, 1973).
Recently we have argued for a unified account, by
proposing the Symbol Interdependency Hypothesis
(Louwerse, 2007, 2011; Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2008).
According to the Symbol Interdependency Hypothesis,
language comprehension is linguistic through statistical
interdependencies within language and is embodied through
the references language makes to perceptual experiences or
the external world. That is, when a word is processed, a
fuzzy meaning of the word is constructed primarily on the
basis of language statistics (for instance, the linguistic
context of a word). If a more detailed representation is
required, perceptual simulations allow for a precise mental
representation. In essence, language acts as a sort of
shortcut for language users by encoding symbolic and
embodied relations in the world. Importantly, this
hypothesis does not reject either account but rather suggests

2399

that both perceptual and linguistic representations are used
during processing and that their prevalence is relative
depending on the cognitive task at hand. For instance, the
type of stimulus has been shown to be a factor whether
linguistic or embodied representations dominate, with
pictures eliciting more reliance on perceptual simulations
and words eliciting more reliance on linguistic information
(Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010).
The cognitive task is also a particularly relevant factor
when determining the dominance of linguistic or embodied
representations, with subjects depending more on perceptual
information when making iconicity judgments and more on
linguistic information when making semantic judgments
(Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010). Because the iconicity
judgments imply semantic judgments, Louwerse and
Jeuniaux argued that language statistics best explain
shallow, good-enough representations, and perceptual
simulation best explain detailed full-fledged representations.
Louwerse and Connell (2011) tested this hypothesis further
and found that when comparing the effect of language
statistics and perceptual information on response times,
language statistics best explained quick response times,

whereas perceptual information best explained slow
response times (with both language statistics and perceptual
simulation equally contributing to medium response times).
Louwerse and Hutchinson (2012) extended the Louwerse
and Connell (2011) study in an EEG experiment,
demonstrating that linguistic cortical regions were relatively
more active early in a trial and perceptual cortical regions
were relatively more active later in a trial. Importantly, both
cortical areas were active throughout processing, simply the
relative importance of each area varied over time. In sum,
processes related to symbolic cognition (i.e., linguistic
frequency) are more prominent in the early stages of
comprehension whereas processes related to embodied
cognition are more prominent later in processing. As
subjects glean just enough information from word cooccurrences to understand the relationship between word
pairs immediately, while perceptual representations then
take over to fill in the rest of the picture. Studies that
demonstrate that the relative prominence of linguistic
representations precede that of perceptual representations,
leave the question open whether RTs actually decrease
because perceptual representations are facilitating

Table 1: Related and unrelated iconic word pairs and their LSA cosine values.
Related Word One

Related Word Two

airplane
antenna
attic
car
ceiling
fender
flame
hat
head
jockey
kite
knee
lid
mailbox
mane
monitor
moustache
nose
pan
pedestrian
rocket
seat
smoke
steeple
stirrup
sweater
track
train

runway
radio
basement
road
floor
tire
candle
scarf
foot
horse
string
ankle
box
post
hoof
keyboard
beard
mouth
stove
sidewalk
launchpad
pedal
chimney
church
saddle
pants
runner
railroad

LSA

Unrelated Word One

Unrelated Word Two

belt
billboard
boat
bouquet
branch
bridge
charcoal
cork
cup
faucet
flower
fountain
glass
handle
headlight
hiker
hood
lamp
lighthouse
mantle
penthouse
pitcher
plant
sheet
sky
sprinkler
stoplight
tractor

shoe
highway
trailer
vase
root
river
grill
bottle
saucer
drain
stem
pool
coaster
bucket
bumper
trail
engine
table
beach
fireplace
lobby
mound
pot
mattress
ground
lawn
street
field

0.77
0.74
0.55
0.43
0.72
0.45
0.59
0.47
0.46
0.43
0.45
0.71
0.57
0.44
0.51
0.51
0.61
0.56
0.51
0.45
0.68
0.44
0.51
0.52
0.54
0.61
0.63
0.66

2400

LSA
0.23
0.09
0.06
0.28
0.23
0.28
0.19
0.3
0.4
0.38
0.27
0.31
0.07
0.2
0.41
0.04
0.23
0.2
0.37
0.06
0.09
0.16
0.18
0.12
0.34
0.11
0.01
0.2

processing or rather because the task duration biases
subjects to employ embodied representations. In most, if not
all, embodied cognition experiments, participants have no
pressing time constraints on their responses during a
semantic judgment task, other than perhaps several seconds
in order to force a decision. It is therefore possible that such
a strong effect of perceptual simulation occurs during word
processing because subjects are allotted a longer time to
process the words they are seeing. Put simply, is it because
we are making a slower decision that we rely upon
perceptual processes, or is it because we are relying upon
perceptual processes do we then make a slower decision?
Likewise, is it because we are making a faster decision that
we rely upon linguistic processes, or is it because we are
relying upon linguistic processes do we then make a faster
decision? In the following study we ask whether the RT
effects of perceptually related pairs are due to timing
constraints in the experiment or if they are indeed due to the
perceptual or linguistic relationships between word pairs.
We predicted that subjects might be even more influenced
to rely on quick linguistic representations, if the instructions
asked them to make responses as quickly as possible, and
would be more likely to rely on perceptual representations if
they were asked to respond as accurately as possible.
Importantly, responses that take longer would then be more
likely to encourage the use of perceptual representations,
which is consistent with prior research. Therefore, our
prediction was that if participants were under a speed time
constraint and instructed to be as fast as possible, then they
would rely on linguistic information, such as statistical
linguistic frequencies. If the participants were given more
time or instructed to be more accurate, however, they would
access perceptual representations.

Methods
Design
The experiment was a 2x2 design where response speed
(fast or slow) and instructions (accuracy-focus or speedfocus) varied.

Participants
Ninety-four native English speakers in the United States
were recruited through Mechanical Turk (Mean Age =
34.68, SD = 12.12). Forty-five participants were randomly
assigned to the fast response condition, 49 to the slow
response condition, 43 (25 fast and 18 slow) to the
accuracy-focus response condition, and 51 (20 fast and 31
slow) to the speed-focus response condition.

an iconic relation, with half of the pairs having a high
semantic association and half having a low semantic
association as determined by latent semantic analysis (LSA)
(Landauer, McNamara, Dennis, & Kintsch, 2007). LSA is a
computational linguistic technique that allows for
estimating the relationship between words in a corpus while
ignoring word order. Each subject saw half of the critical
items in their iconic ordering (e.g., cup - saucer), and the
other half in a reverse iconic order (e.g., saucer - cup), this
was counterbalanced throughout the experiment.

Procedure
As in prior studies, participants were asked to judge the
semantic relatedness of word pairs presented on a computer
screen. Words were presented one above another in a
vertical configuration, with the first word appearing at the
top of the screen, and the second at the bottom. Upon
presentation of a word pair, participants indicated whether
the pair was related in meaning by pressing designated
counterbalanced yes or no keys. All word pairs were
randomly ordered for each participant to negate any order
effects and each trial was separated by a ‘+’ fixation symbol.
Subjects were also instructed to either respond as quickly
as possible to the words they saw, or respond as accurately
as possible to the words they saw. In the fast response
condition, subjects were allotted 1000 ms to respond to the
stimuli before a message reading ‘TOO SLOW’ would
appear in the center of the screen. In the slow response
condition, subjects were allotted 2500 ms to respond to the
stimuli before a message reading ‘TOO SLOW’ would
appear. In the accuracy-focus condition, subjects were asked
to try to be as accurate as possible in their responses,
whereas in the speed-focus condition, subjects were asked
to try to be as quick as possible in their responses. Subjects
were asked to describe the directions in a few sentences
before beginning the task to ensure understanding. They
were also asked to write a few sentences describing what
they thought the purpose of the experiment was after they
completed the session. There were no participants who
misunderstood the directions, nor did any participants guess
the true purpose of the experiment.!

Results
Four participants were removed from the analysis because
more than 30% of their responses were incorrect, as
measured by incorrect responses to lexical items. The
Table 2: Mean and SD values of RTs for accuracy, speed,
fast, and slow conditions.

Materials
The experiment consisted of 56 pairs of words that shared
an iconic relationship (e.g., cup - saucer), that is where one
item is usually found either above or below another (see
Table 1). These word pairs were extracted from prior
research (Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010). To reduce the
likelihood of participants developing expectations about the
experiment, 56 filler items consisted of word pairs without

2401

Accuracy

Speed

Fast

M = 806.27
SD = 252.22

M = 787.12
SD = 258.81

Slow

M = 1328.47
SD = 473.27

M = 1247.89
SD = 454.96

12
8
4
0

Linguistic

Perceptual

*

*

Accuracy

Speed

Figure 1: Strength of the effect in absolute t values of
perceptual and linguistic factors for accuracy and speed
conditions. * denotes p < .05
linguistic and perceptual factors were operationalized as in
Louwerse and Jeuniaux (2010), with the linguistic factor
being calculated as the log frequency of each word pair, in
both orders. The order frequency of all word pairs within 3–
5 word grams was obtained using the large Web 1T 5-gram
corpus (Brants & Franz, 2006). The perceptual factor was
operationalized as an iconicity rating of the stimulus pairs
whereby a set of different participants from the University
of Memphis were asked to estimate the likelihood that the
word pairs appeared above one another in in the real world.
Ratings were made on a scale of 1–6, with 1 being
extremely unlikely and 6 being extremely likely.
All analyses were mixed models that specified subjects
and items as random factors (Baayen, Davidson, & Bates,
2008) and RT as the dependent variable. To ensure
participants correctly performed their task we tested for and
found a main effect of speed, F(1, 9378) = 38.43, p < .01,
with faster RTs in the fast time constraint. We also found a
main effect of task, F(1, 9378) = 20.95, p < .01, with faster
RTs in condition where subjects were asked to respond as
quickly as possible. Furthermore, we found a significant
interaction between time constraint speed and task, F(1,
22.45) = 26.96, p < .01 (see Table 2). These findings
suggest that participants were faster to respond to word
pairs during a semantic judgment task when a 1000 ms time
constraint was imposed than when they were allotted 2500
ms to respond. In addition, subjects were faster to respond
to word pairs when they were asked to focus on responding
quickly than when they were asked to focus on responding
accurately.
To determine if linguistic and/or perceptual factors
impacted processing during a semantic judgment task, for
all correct critical trials, we ran a linear mixed effect model
with word frequency and perceptual ratings as fixed factors
and subject and item as random factors. Word frequency
best explained resulting RTs, F(1, 2349) = 26.96, p < .01,
although the perceptual factor also contributed (albeit not

significantly), F(1, 2349) = 2.93, p = .08. These findings
suggest that the linguistic factor accounts for processing
during a semantic judgment task. However, past research
found that both linguistic and perceptual factors explained
RTs (Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010). Perhaps the perceptual
factor here failed to reach significance for all subjects due to
the fact that many of the subjects were under time
constraints.
In fact, when subjects were asked to focus on accuracy,
word frequency did not explain RTs F(1, 1177) = 1.75, p =
19, while the perceptual factor did, F(1, 1177) = 8.08, p < .
01. This is in line with the idea that perceptual simulations
are more relevant later during processing. However, when
subjects were asked to focus on speed, word frequency
explained RTs, F(1, 1169) = 97.42, p < .00, but the
perceptual factor did not, F(1, 1169) = 2.36, p = .12. These
results suggest that linguistic factors might play a more
important role early, and perceptual information becomes
important later in processing.
To determine if this is the case, we conducted a linear
mixed effect regression where word frequency and a
perceptual factor were fixed factors and subjects and items
were random factors for analyses of both the short and long
periods of time. When subjects were only given a short time
period to respond, word frequency accounted for RTs, F(1,
1125) = 7.01, p < .01, whereas the perceptual factor
remained irrelevant F(1, 1125) = 0.31, p = .57. In contrast,
when subjects were given a longer time period to respond,
both factors explained RTs, with word frequency F(1, 1221)
= 5.92, p = .02, and the perceptual ratings F(1, 1221) =
3.67, p =.05, both reaching significance. These results are in
line with prior research that suggest that when participants
are given enough time to respond to word pairs in a
semantic judgment task, linguistic factors and perceptual
factors are relevant for processing, with linguistic
representations preceding perceptual representations (as the
linguistic factor was significant for the short time period,

!

Linguistic

Perceptual

*

3

*
Absolute t-value

Absolute t-value

16

!
!
!
!
!
!

*

2

1

0

Slow

Fast

Figure 2: Strength of the effect absolute t values of
perceptual and linguistic factors for accuracy and speed
conditions. * denotes p < .05

2402

whereas the perceptual factor only became significant for
the longer time period).

General Discussion
In the current study our objective was to determine if time
constraints on a semantic judgment task could influence
how much a subject relied on linguistic and perceptual
factors during processing. The Symbol Interdependency
Hypothesis predicted that linguistic factors are important
immediately during processing, preceding a deeper
simulation system. Results from a RT study found exactly
that: participants relied more on a linguistic factor during
processing when subjects given strict time constraints, or
when they were told to focus on responding quickly. When
given more time to respond, both linguistic and perceptual
factors explained response times. These findings are in line
with the findings from Louwerse and Jeuniaux (2010),
Louwerse and Connell (2011), and Louwerse and
Hutchinson (2012) that suggest the linguistic
representations are more relevant early on, and that
perceptual representations are more relevant as time
progresses.
So it might be the case that RT effects are simply
influenced by the amount of time a subject used to respond
to a word pair, as time constraints influenced a subject’s
reliance on perceptual or linguistic factors. Put differently, it
seems as if we are using perceptual simulations when we
make slower decisions and likewise for linguistic
representations and fast decisions. In this study, RT effects
of perceptually related pairs were indeed influenced by the
timing constraints in the experiment and not simply from
the perceptual or linguistic relationships between word
pairs. Specifically, subjects were more likely to utilize
perceptual information when they had more time to process
word pairs on a screen. Conversely, subjects relied more on
linguistic information (and less on perceptual information)
when they had more stringent timing constraints. In
comparison, if it was instead the case that embodied (or
linguistic) effects are found only because of an embodied
(or linguistic) relationship between word pairs, we would
not have expected timing constraints to impact the effect of
either perceptual or linguistic representations. Importantly,
both factors are relevant throughout the time course of
processing word pairs, with the linguistic factor being
relatively more important early during processing and
perceptual information being relatively more important
later. In fact, the linguistic factor significantly explains RTs
in both the slow and fast conditions. Since the linguistic
representations precede perceptual simulation during
processing (Louwerse & Hutchinson, 2012), it is logical that
the linguistic factor would still remain relevant in later
processing, with the perceptual factor becoming relatively
more relevant.
Importantly, the previous findings that have given support
to perceptual simulation (e.g., Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg,
1997; Pecher & Zwaan, 2005; Semin & Smith, 2008;
Zwaan, 2004) are not invalidated through these findings. In
those instances, perceptual simulation was more suited for
the task and presumably time constraint was not a studied

factor. However, the results from the current study show
that perceptual simulation does not always win the struggle
for the most efficient type of processing. The results of the
current study show that when people need to be accurate,
and have enough time to do so, they will more often rely on
perceptual simulation. But that comes at a cost. Intuitively,
in order to activate and process all those connected
concepts, processing cannot be completed as quickly.
However, people rely on the linguistic associations when
time is less available. In these instances, utilizing
distributional semantics from language statistics is a more
efficient route. Symbol interdependency (Louwerse 2007,
2011), argues that these symbols have been encoded with
the grounded referents, so there is no need to activate all
simulations when one symbol can easily and directly lead to
another symbol. It stands to reason that over the course of a
person’s life where they make these symbolic connections
over and over again, they can allow those shortcuts to make
the connections for them. These findings support the view
that language processing is both linguistic and embodied,
with linguistic representations being more prevalent in
quick processing and perceptual simulations being more
important for more precise information.

!

References
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390–412.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660.
Brants, T., & Franz, A. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram Version 1.
Philadelphia, USA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 20, 1–55.
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Fodor, J. (1975). The language of thought. New York, USA:
Crowell.
Landauer, T. K., McNamara, D. S., Dennis, S., & Kintsch,
W. (Eds.). (2007). Handbook of latent semantic analysis.
Mahwah, USA: Erlbaum.
Landauer, T., & Dumais, S. (1997). A solution to Plato’s
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Louwerse, M. M. (2007). Symbolic or embodied
representations: A case for symbol interdependency. In T.
Landauer, W. Kintsch, S. Dennis, & D. S. McNamara
(Eds.), Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis (pp. 102–
120). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Louwerse, M. M. (2008). Embodied relations are encoded
in language. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 838–
844.

2403

Louwerse, M. M. (2010). Symbol interdependency in
symbolic and embodied cognition. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 273–302.
Louwerse, M. M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35, 381–398.
Louwerse, M. M., & Hutchinson, S. (2012). Neurological
Evidence Linguistic Processes Precede Perceptual
Simulation in Conceptual Processing. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3, 385.
Louwerse, M. M., & Jeuniaux, P. (2010). The linguistic and
embodied nature of conceptual processing. Cognition,
114, 96–104.
Louwerse, M. M., & Jeuniaux, P. (2008). Language
comprehension is both embodied and symbolic. In M. de
Vega, A. Glenberg, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Symbols,
embodiment, and meaning (pp. 309–326). Oxford, USA:
Oxford University Press.
Pecher, D. van Dantzig, S.; Zwaan, R. A.; Zeelenberg, R
(2009). Language Comprehenders Retain Implied Shape
and Orientation of Objects. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 62, 1108-1114.
Pecher, D. Zwaan, R.A. (2005). Grounding Cognition: The
Role of Perception and Action in Memory, Language, and
Thinking. Cambridge, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1984). Computation and cognition: Towards a
foundation for cognitive science. Cambridge, USA: MIT
Press.
Semin, G. R., & Smith, E. R. (Eds.). (2008). Embodied
g ro u n d i n g : S o c i a l , c o g n i t i v e , a f f e c t i v e , a n d
neuroscientific approaches. New York, USA: Cambridge
University Press.
Šetić, M., & Domijan, D. (2007). The influence of vertical
spatial orientation on property verification. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 22, 297–312.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153–156.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanﬁeld, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002). Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168–171.
Zwaan, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2003). Spatial iconicity
affects semantic relatedness judgments. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 10, 954–958.

2404

