UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reading and writing direction causes spatial biases in mental model construction in
language understanding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/112131dj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Roman, Antonio
Flumini, Andrea
Escobar, Marysol
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reading and writing direction causes spatial biases in mental model construction in
language understanding
Antonio Román (reche@ugr.es)
Dept. of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada, Spain

Andrea Flumini (andrea.flumini2@unibo.it)
Dept. of Psychology, University of Bologna, Italy

Marysol Escobar (marysol_puig13@hotmail.com)
Autonomous University of Baja California, Mexico

Julio Santiago (santiago@ugr.es)
Dept. of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada, Spain
Abstract

model that represents the spatial position of those three
objects. However, the input leaves unspecified many
aspects of the situation, which the comprehender must
infer. For example, two different spatial arrangements of
the three objects are consistent with the sentence above:
the lamp may be located to the left of the table or to its
right (the TV would be at the opposite side). Jahn,
Knauff, and Johnson-Laird (2007) observed that the
preferred initial model for such a description aligns the
three mentioned objects horizontally in left-to-right (L–R)
order. They suggested that this preference for L–R models
was a bias induced by the habitual reading and writing
direction (RWD) of their German participants. As Jahn et
al (2007) showed, such biases are not inconsequential: the
spatial arrangement of the objects in the model helps
solving some kinds of problems and hinders others.
Román, El Fathi, and Santiago (2013) confirmed the
suggestion by Jahn et al (2007) that such spatial biases
correlate with habitual RWD. They tested Spanish and
Moroccan participants on a task that consisted in drawing
auditorily presented sentences describing static scenes
such as "the table is between the lamp and the TV”.
Spanish participants preferred to draw the lamp on the left
and the TV on the right, whereas Moroccan participants
(who read and write in Arabic, a R-L script) tended to
draw the lamp on the right and the TV on the left. These
results add to a wide, though dispersed, literature that
shows that habitual RWD correlates with lateral biases in
a variety of mental processes and representations,
including low level perceptual and attentional skills
(Andrews, Aisenberg, d'Avossa, & Sapir, 2013; Maass,
Pagani, & Berta, 2007; Mishkin & Forgays, 1952;
Pollatsek, Bolozky, Well, & Rayner, 1981; Smith & Elias,
2013; Spalek & Hammad, 2005), visual exploration
(Chokron & Imbert, 1993; Kugelmass & Lieblich, 1970),
motion preferences in drawing (Kebbe & Vinter, 2012;
Nachshon, 1985; Shanon, 1979) and kissing (Shaki,
2012), item choice from a list (Ariel, Al-Harthy, Was, &
Dunlosky, 2011), aesthetic preferences (Chokron & De

Is the direction of the script able to cause spatial biases in
the mental models that understanders build when listening
to language? In order to answer this question, we
manipulated experimentally the experience of reading a
script with different directionalities. Spanish monolinguals
read either normal (left-to-right), mirror reversed
(right-to-left), rotated downward (up-down), or rotated
upward (down-up) text, and then drew the contents of
auditory descriptions such as “the square is between the
cross and the triangle”. The directionality of the drawings
showed that a brief reading experience is enough to cause
congruent and very specific spatial biases in mental model
construction. However, there were limits to this flexibility:
there was a strong overall preference to arrange the models
along the horizontal dimension.
Keywords: Reading and writing direction; Spatial bias;
Mental model; Cognitive flexibility; Working memory;
Language comprehension.

Can arbitrary and irrelevant aspects of the code that
conveys a message, such as its directionality, modulate
the mental representation of the contents of the message?
In this paper we show that they do.
It is now a standard assumption in the psychology of
language comprehension that the final representation
achieved by comprehenders is a mental model of the
described situation (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Van Dijk, &
Kintsch, 1983; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998, for a review).
Mental models are working memory representations about
the world. They are analogical, spatial, and populated by
concrete content, although they can also represent abstract
content (Goodwin & Johnson-Laird, 2005; Santiago,
Román, & Ouellet, 2011). Once set up, mental models
can be “run” in working memory, allowing us to
anticipate consequences, reason, solve problems, and plan
actions. Language provides instructions that guide mental
model construction in the comprehender (Johnson-Laird,
1983). From a description such as “the table is between
the lamp and the TV,” the listener can construct a mental

2853

Agostini, 2000; Nachshon, Argaman, & Luria, 1999;
Pérez González, 2011), and product attitudes in
advertising (Chae & Hoegg, 2013). RWD also induces
lateral biases in the mental representation of abstract
concepts, such as number magnitude (the SNARC effect;
Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993; Zebian, 2005), time
(Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010; Ouellet, Santiago, Israeli,
& Gabay, 2010; Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991),
events (Dobel, Diesendruck, & Bölte, 2007; Maass &
Russo, 2003), letter sequences (Shaki & Gevers, 2011),
and social groups differing in agentivity (Maass, Suitner,
Favaretto, & Cignacchi, 2009).
How flexible are lateral biases induced by RWD? Many
studies in the literature show that preliterate children
show either no lateral biases (Dobel et al, 2007), or L-R
biases not linked to RWD (Kugelmass & Lieblich, 1970;
Opfer, Thompson, & Furlong, 2010; Shaki, Fischer, &
Göbel, 2012). As children learn to read, RWD-linked
biases develop slowly and progressively (Fagard &
Dahmen, 2003; Kebbe & Vinter, 2012; Kugelmass &
Lieblich, 1970; Dobel et al, 2007; Shaki et al, 2012;
Tversky et al, 1991). Teaching children to read another
language with opposite directionality reduces those biases
(Kugelmass & Lieblich, 1970; Nachshon, 1983), although
they can be quite resistant to change when the new script
is introduced at the adult age (de Sousa, 2012). This
pattern of results suggests that RWD induces spatial
habits with a limited degree of flexibility, which need
important amounts of time and practice to develop and
change. In contrast, other studies show that these biases
are very flexible, and that the mere exposition to a script
can make its associated lateral biases to appear instantly
in bilinguals (Fischer, Shaki, & Cruise, 2009; Shaki &
Gevers, 2011). Román et al (2013) also tested a group of
Moroccan bilinguals in either Standard Arabic or their
second L-R language (either French or Spanish). The
input language had a clear effect on drawing direction,
supporting a flexible deployment of spatial habits
depending on the language in use. However, there was
also a smaller influence of long-term habits linked to the
participants' higher practice in reading Arabic (favouring
R-L biases). Thus, both short-term and long-term
influences can be observed in the manifestation of lateral
spatial biases, and it is still unclear what factors are
responsible for the preponderance of one or another kind
in a given situation (see discussion in Román et al, 2013).
Unfortunately, most previous studies use basically
correlational designs, comparing participants who read
different scripts, which precludes random assignment of
participants to groups. Therefore, extant studies do not
allow us to establish a causal link between RWD and
spatial biases, nor to isolate its time course during
learning. The observed findings could be accounted for by
a myriad other factors that covary with script direction.
For example, many cultural graphic manifestations, such
as comic strips, calendars, and charts, covary in
directionality with the script, and could account for the

observed biases. The most solid conclusions can be drawn
from studies that compare bidirectional bilinguals using
each of their languages, but this kind of participants might
actually constitute a special case, and the potential effects
of modulating factors such as degree of bilingualism or
starting age are still far from clear.
More suited to reveal and explore causal effects are
training studies. In them, monolingual participants are
randomly assigned to use scripts of different
directionality. This fully experimental design allows the
inference of causal relations between directional
experience and spatial biases in target tasks, while all
other factors are kept constant. It also allows measuring
the amount of training necessary for the development of
the biases. To our knowledge, only two studies so far
have followed this approach. Fischer, Mills, and Shaki
(2010) showed that manipulating the associations of small
and large numbers with the left and right sides of lines
within a set of 20 cooking recipes (without changing
script direction) was enough to change and even revert the
SNARC effect. This study shows that some factors other
than script direction may actually be able to induce spatial
biases, and that their effects may develop quite fast. The
only study which has directly manipulated script direction
is Casasanto and Bottini (2013). Dutch participants were
presented with phrases like “one day later” and judged
whether they referred to the past or the future by pressing
either a left or right key, or an up or down key. Text could
be presented either in L-R direction, mirror reversed
(R-L), or 90º rotated downwards (up-down, U-D) or
upwards (down-up, D-U). After a short practice, mirror
reading was able to reverse the standard association
between left and past, and right and future, showing faster
latencies for right-past and left-future responses than the
opposite mapping. When both text and response keys
were rotated onto the vertical axis, U-D text induced an
up-past down-future congruency effect, and D-U text
induced the reversed effect. Their results support a causal
role for script direction on the directionality of the mental
representation of time, and again suggest that these
directional habits can be established after a very short
practice.
One central aim of the present study was to extend
Casasanto and Bottini's (2013) results to a task that taps
onto the processes of mental model construction from
linguistic input. This task is a variant of the drawing task
used by Román et al (2013). Descriptions of static scenes
composed by geometrical shapes such as “the square is
between the cross and the triangle” were presented
auditorily and participants drew the three objects on a
sheet of paper. We assessed how the directionality of their
drawings was influenced by the prior reading of a short
Spanish text in either standard (L-R), mirror reversed
(R-L), or 90º rotated print, either upwards (D-U) or
downwards (U-D). The drawing task used geometrical
shapes instead of real world objects so that the

2854

participants would not feel compelled to arrange them
necessarily along the horizontal axis.

participant's sight the order in which each of the three
mentioned objects was drawn (object order) and the order
in which participants completed the different spaces in the
sheet: right, left, center, up, down or any other (spatial
order). Finally, model order was coded a posteriori from
the drawings themselves, depending on the locations
where the two side objects were placed with respect to the
central object (for more detail, see the Data Coding
section in Roman et al, 2013.) As the analyses in Román
et al (2013) showed, analyzing spatial order and object
order independently did not qualify the results obtained in
the measure of model order, so in the present study we
analyzed only the latter.

Experiment
Method
Participants Eighty Spanish psychology students at the
University of Granada (mean age 21.9 years; 10 males; 5
left-handed). All of them were Spanish native speakers
and did not know any language with a different RWD.
Materials For the reading task, we prepared a 1195 words
fiction narrative in Spanish. Words were printed in 15
points Arial font. The text occupied four pages, each one
containing five to six paragraphs of four to six lines each
one.
For the drawing task we selected nine common
geometrical shapes which could be drawn easily (square,
rectangle, cross, rhombus, triangle, circle, trapezium,
oval, pentagon). As a result of combining the names of
those geometrical shapes, 441 sentences describing a
between relation among three different shapes were
constructed. For example, “The circle is between the cross
and the rectangle” or “The oval is between the triangle
and the rhombus.” All sentences referred to completely
static scenes without any agentive structure.
From this set of 441 sentences, 40 sentences were
randomly selected to be used in the task. They were
randomly divided into two lists of 20 sentences each one.
Each participant was presented with only one list. The
sentences were read aloud by a female experimenter and
recorded in independent sound files.

Figure 1: a) Standard L-R text; b) Mirror-reversed text;c)
Up-down text; d) Down-up text.
Design and Data Analysis There were four groups of 20
participants, depending on the type of directional training:
L-R (standard), R-L (mirror reversed), U-D (rotated 90º
clockwise), and D-U (rotated 90º counterclockwise). In
each condition, the number of drawings with a L-R, R-L,
U-D, and D-U directionality was counted. Because the
four conditions are not independent, it was not possible to
use ANOVA. Therefore, we turned to 95% confidence
intervals and t-tests in order to estimate whether the
number of drawings of a given type was significantly
different from zero and the other conditions.

Procedure The participant sat in front of a computer
screen at a desk with a pen and a stack of 20 empty square
sheets. Stimulus presentation was controlled by Eprime
2.0. Participants were instructed that they should read
aloud a 4-pages text presented on the screen at their own
pace. Reading aloud secured that the text was read. Each
group read the text with a different directionality (see fig.
1): L-R (standard), R-L (mirror reversed), U-D (rotated
90º clockwise), and D-U (rotated 90º counterclockwise).
Instructions warned them to pay attention to the text
because at the end of the experiment there would be five
questions about the content of the story. After finishing
reading, they moved on to draw a set of auditorily
presented sentences, each one on a different sheet. This
task was presented as a filler task before the final
comprehension questions. Care was exercised not to
mention any particular spatial arrangement (e.g.,
horizontal). The program presented the sentences through
loudspeakers. Participants controlled the rate of
presentation by pressing a button to advance to the next
one.
During the drawing task, the experimenter stood behind
the participant and coded in situ and out of the

Results
If the central object (e.g., the circle in the sentence “The
circle is between the cross and the rectangle”) was drawn
anywhere else than at the center, the trial was considered
invalid and was not included in the final analysis. Trials
where it was not possible to ascertain the axis along
which the objects were drawn (i.e., diagonal
arrangements) were also discarded. The number of items
rejected was less than 1%. No participant had more than
one item rejected. Left-handers were few (5) and
unequally distributed between groups, so the effect of
handedness could not be assessed. The results did not
change in any relevant way if left-handers were removed
from the data.

2855

Figure 2: Proportion of drawn models of each directionality (L-R, R-L, U-D, and D-U) in each training group. Error bars
show 95% confidence intervals.

The results revealed clear effects of prior practice with
scripts of different directionality (see fig. 2). All
conclusions that can be drawn from visual inspection of
confidence intervals in fig. 2 were supported by t-tests.
In the group who read standard L-R Spanish, the great
majority of drawings (93.9%) were arranged along the
horizontal axis from left to right. The remaining drawings
(6.1%) were horizontal from right to left. Although not
frequent, their amount differed from zero (see fig. 2;
t(19)=2.68, p=0.01). There were no vertically oriented
drawings.
In the group who read mirror reversed R-L text, the
pattern of results contrasted sharply with the L-R group:
the percentage of R-L drawings increased to 53.5%, and
L-R drawings decreased to 46.5%. Again, there were no
drawings with vertical directionality. Contrasts between
both groups in the proportions of L-R and R-L drawings
were significant (L-R models: t(38)=7.24, p< 0.0001; R-L
models: t(38)=-7.24, p<0.0001). Having a brief
experience of reading in the opposite direction was able to
change the direction of the contents of the mental model
of auditorily presented sentences, almost halving a nearly
absolute preference for L-R models.
The two groups with previous exposure to horizontal
reading (L-R and R-L) revealed a very strong preference
to locate the drawn models on the horizontal axis, as not a
single vertical drawing was produced. Would previous
experience with vertical script change this preference? As
shown in fig. 2, the U-D group also showed a
predominance of L-R models (82.2%), but it was weaker
than in the L-R group (t(38)=2.65, p=0.01). Previous
experience reading U-D text was able to increase U-D
models from 0% to 9%, a numerically small but

significant change as assessed by a t-test against zero (see
fig. 2; t(19)=4.55, p=0.0002). No D-U models were
produced in this group. The percentage of R-L models
(9%) was not different from that in the L-R group
(t(38)=-0.63, p=0.53) and it was also different from zero
(t(19)=2.27, p=0.04). Therefore, reading U-D script
decreased L-R models and increased U-D models, leaving
the amount of R-L models unaffected.
Prior experience reading D-U text also reduced L-R
drawings (65.7%) in comparison to the L-R group
(t(38)=3.15, p=0.003), bringing it down to a level
comparable to that in the group who read U-D text
(t(38)=1.75, p=0.09). The amount of R-L models was
again different from zero (t(19)=2.59, p=0.02) but similar
to that in the L-R group (t(38)=-1.48, p=0.15). Reading
D-U text did increase D-U models significantly above
zero (t(19)=2.49, p=0.02). U-D models, in contrast, were
not produced reliably more often than zero (t(19)=1.80,
p=0.09). Therefore, reading D-U text also decreased L-R
models and increased D-U models, without affecting R-L
models.

Discussion
Summing up, a short prior training reading in different
directions produced quite specific spatial biases on the
mental models constructed from subsequent auditory
descriptions. Reading standard L-R text produced a nearly
absolute preference for horizontal L-R models. Reading
mirror reversed R-L text increased considerably the
amount of R-L models. Reading U-D and D-U text was
able to significantly increase above zero the amount of
U-D and D-U models, respectively, although the size of
the increase was small. Given the absolute absence of

2856

vertical models in the two horizontal reading training
conditions, this small increase is no doubt of theoretical
importance. There also was a small but significant
tendency to produce some R-L models in all
non-mirror-reading groups, but this tendency remained
impervious to prior directional practice. Finally, the
overall pattern reveals a strong preference to construct
models along the horizontal versus the vertical axis.
Can pre-established, life-long L-R tendencies be made
even stronger by immediate practice? The current study
did not have a no-practice control group, but present data
can be compared to published data by Román et al.
(2013). In an analogous scene description drawing task
using real world objects such as table, chair and TV, but
without a prior reading phase, they observed 70.7% of
L-R models in the Spanish group. Interestingly, this is
located between the 93.9% attested in the L-R group and
the 46.5% observed in the R-L group in the present study.
With respect to Román et al (2013) participants, L-R
practice increased (t(37)=3.40, p<0.05) and R-L practice
decreased (t(37)=2.72, p<0.05) the amount of L-R
models.
Present findings therefore provide clear support for a
causal influence of RWD on the spatial inferences that are
made during mental model construction from auditory
linguistic input. What is the specific causal factor remains
to be isolated. RWD provides a systematic directional
training which can also be obtained from experiences with
comic strips, book pages, number lines, charts, and so on.
The present study establishes that exposure to text is able
by itself to change spatial biases, but does not discard
other potential causes.
The present study also suggests that the amount of
practice needed to substantially change previously
established tendencies is very small: a few minutes of
reading a text with a different directionality sufficed to
affect a subsequent language comprehension task. This is
in sharp contrast with many studies that document a slow
and progressive development of spatial biases during the
process of learning to read (e.g., Kugelmass & Lieblich,
1970; see review in the Introduction section) and
motivates the need of further research on the factors that
may explain this contrast. One interesting possibility is
the duration of short-term biases. It is possible that a short
directional experience has a clear effect on spatial biases,
but that those biases are short-lived and vanish after a
period of minutes. Perhaps in order to induce more
permanent spatial biases a much greater amount of
consistent practice is needed. Future studies using training
designs such as the present one will be able to answer this
question.
The present study also reveals a very strong overall
preference to arrange mental models along the horizontal
axis, even though the drawing task made use of
geometrical figures such as a square, a triangle, and a
circle, that could be just as well drawn along the vertical
axis. This horizontal preference may have two different

origins. On one side, it might be the result of long-term
experience with a horizontal script. On the other side, it
might originate from universal preferences of mental
model construction. It is possible that people have a
strong tendency to place the objects in mentally simulated
scenes as if they were standing on the ground instead of
piled up in a stack, even when the objects are geometrical
figures which have no real world constraints. Future
studies using readers of vertical scripts, such as
Taiwanese Chinese, will provide a definitive answer to
this question.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grants P09-SEJ-4772,
Junta de Andalucía and European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF), and PSI2012-32464, Spanish Ministery of
Economy and Competitivity, both to Julio Santiago (PI).

References
Andrews, B., Aisenberg, D., D’Avossa, G., & Sapir, A.
(2013). Cross-cultural effects on the assumed light
source direction: Evidence from English and Hebrew
readers. Journal of Vision, 13(2), 1–7.
Ariel, R., Al-Harthy, I. S., Was, C. A, & Dunlosky, J.
(2011). Habitual reading biases in the allocation of
study time. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(5),
1015–21.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R. (2013). Mirror reading can
reverse the flow of time. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General. doi:10.1037/a0033297
Chae, B. (Grace), & Hoegg, J. (2013). The future looks
“right”: Effects of the horizontal location of advertising
images on product attitude. Journal of Consumer
Research, 40(2), 223–238.
Chokron, S., & De Agostini, M. (2000). Reading habits
influence aesthetic preference. Cognitive Brain
Research, 10(1-2), 45-49.
Chokron, S., & Imbert, M. (1993). Influence of reading
habits on line bisection. Cognitive Brain Research, 1(4),
219-22.
De Sousa, H. (2012). Generational differences in the
orientation of time in Cantonese speakers as a function
of changes in the direction of Chinese writing. Frontiers
in Psychology, 3(255), 1–8.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122(3), 371-396.
Dobel, C., Diesendruck, G., & Bölte, J. (2007). How
writing system and age influence spatial representations
of actions: A developmental, cross-linguistic study.
Psychological Science, 18(6), 487-491.
Fagard, J., & Dahmen, R. (2003). The effects of
reading-writing direction on the asymmetry of space
perception and directional tendencies: A comparison
between French and Tunisian children. Laterality, 8(1),
39–52.

2857

Fischer, M. H., Mills, R., & Shaki, S. (2010). How to
cook a SNARC: Number placement in text rapidly
changes spatial-numerical associations. Brain and
Cognition, 72(3), 333–336.
Fischer, M. H., Shaki, S., & Cruise, A. (2009). It takes
just one word to quash a SNARC. Experimental
psychology, 56(5), 361–6.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-cultural
differences in mental representations of time: Evidence
from an implicit nonlinguistic task. Cognitive Science,
34(8), 1430-1451.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005).
Reasoning about relations. Psychological Review,
112(2), 468-493.
Jahn, G., Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2007).
Preferred mental models in reasoning about spatial
relations. Memory & cognition, 35(8), 2075-87.
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. (1983). Mental models.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Kebbe, H., & Vinter, A. (2012). How culture, age, and
manual dominance affect directionality in drawing side
view objects. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
44(1), 160–172.
Kugelmass, S., & Lieblich, A. (1970). Perceptual
exploration in Israeli children. Child Development,
41(4), 1125-1131.
Maass, A., & Russo, A. (2003). Directional bias in the
mental representation of spatial events: Nature or
culture? Psychological Science, 14(4), 296-301.
Maass, A., Pagani, D., & Berta, E. (2007). How beautiful
is the goal and how violent is the fistfight? Spatial bias
in the interpretation of human behavior. Social
Cognition, 25(6), 833-852.
Maass, A., Suitner, C., Favaretto, X., & Cignacchi, M.
(2009). Groups in space: Stereotypes and the spatial
agency bias. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 45(3), 496-504.
Mishkin, M., & Forgays, D. G. (1952). Word recognition
as a function of retinal locus. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 43(1), 43-48.
Nachshon, I. (1985). Directional preferences in perception
of visual stimuli. The International Journal of
Neuroscience, 25(3-4), 161-174.
Nachshon, I., Argaman, E., & Luria, A. (1999). Effects of
directional habits and handedness on aesthetic
preference for left and right profiles. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 30(1), 106-114.
Opfer, J. E., Thompson, C. a, & Furlong, E. E. (2010).
Early development of spatial-numeric associations:
Evidence from spatial and quantitative performance of
preschoolers. Developmental Science, 13(5), 761–771.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010).
Is the future the right time? Experimental psychology,
57(4), 308-14.
Pérez González, C. (2011). Lateral organisation in
nineteenth-century studio photographs is influenced by
the direction of writing: A comparison of Iranian and

Spanish
photographs.Laterality.
doi:10.1080/1357650X.2011.586701
Pollatsek, A., Bolozky, S., Well, A. D., & Rayner, K.
(1981). Asymmetries in the perceptual span for Israeli
readers. Brain and Language, 14(1), 174-180.
Román, A., El Fathi, A., & Santiago, J. (2013). Spatial
biases in understanding descriptions of static scenes: the
role of reading and writing direction. Memory &
Cognition, 41, 588–599.
Santiago, J., Román, A., & Ouellet, M. (2011). Flexible
foundations of abstract thought: A review and a theory.
In A. Maass & T. W. Schubert (Eds.), Spatial
dimensions of social thought (pp. 41-110). Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Shaki, S. (2012). What’s in a kiss? Spatial experience
shapes directional bias during kissing. Journal of
Nonverbal Behavior, 37(1), 43–50.
Shaki, S., & Gevers, W. (2011). Cultural characteristics
dissociate magnitude and ordinal information
processing. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
42(4), 639-650.
Shaki, S., Fischer, M. H., & Göbel, S. M. (2012).
Direction counts: A comparative study of spatially
directional counting biases in cultures with different
reading directions. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 112(2), 275–81.
Shanon, B. (1979). Graphological patterns as a function
of handedness and culture. Neuropsychologia, 17(5),
457-465.
Smith, A. K., & Elias, L. J. (2013). Native reading
direction and corresponding preferences for left- or
right-lit images. Perceptual & Motor Skills: Learning &
Memory, 116(2), 1–13.
Spalek, T. M., & Hammad, S. (2005). The left-to-right
bias in inhibition of return is due to the direction of
reading. Psychological Science, 16(1), 15-18.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991).
Cross-cultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies in
discourse comprehension. New York: Academic Press.
Zebian, S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts,
spatial thinking, and directionality of writing: The
SNARC effect and the reverse SNARC effect in English
and Arabic monoliterates, biliterates, and illiterate
Arabic speakers. Journal of Cognition and Culture,
1(2), 165–190.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation
models in language comprehension and memory.
Psychological Bulletin, 123(2), 162-185.

2858

