UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reference to self, other, and object as levels of processing in recognition memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6b62f0zg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gauer, Gustavo
Avila-Souza, Juliana
Lannig, Guilherme

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reference to self, other, and object as levels of processing in recognition memory
Gustavo Gauer (gustavo.gauer@ufrgs.br)
Department of Developmental and Personality Psychology, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600
Porto Alegre, RS 90035-003 Brazil

Juliana Ávila-Souza (juliana.avilasouza@gmail.com)
Department of Developmental and Personality Psychology, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600
Porto Alegre, RS 90035-003 Brazil

Guilherme Lannig (guilherme.lannig@gmail.com)
Department of Developmental and Personality Psychology, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600
Porto Alegre, RS 90035-003 Brazil

Abstract
Information related to the self tends to be better remembered
than other information. Mentalization (i.e., attributing mind to
an external entity) is one potential intervening factor in
contrasting myself, others “like me”, and inanimate objects.
Twenty-seven undergraduates (mean age 23.6 years, 16
women) responded to a Remember/Know (R/K) recognition
task. In the study phase, 78 words were presented at 3 levels
of processing: Self (item applies to myself), Other (applies to
the Queen of England) and Object (applies to statues). In test
trials, subjects recognized items as Old or New. After an
"Old" response, an R/K judgment was prompted. We
observed significant differences in recognition reaction times
(RTs) between Self/Other and Self/Object conditions. R/K
judgment RTs showed significant differences between
Self/Object conditions. Results support self-reference at a
deeper level of processing, but not in a continuum from self to
other and to inanimate object.
Keywords: Episodic memory; levels of processing; theory of
mind; self-reference.

Information encoded in relation to the self tends to be better
remembered than other information. The self-reference
effect has been relatively well documented (Glisky &
Marquine, 2009; Magno & Allan, 2007). However,
questions remain as to how self-reference compares to other,
non-self-referential, cases of information encoding. Selfreference effects are especially relevant for episodic
memory. Episodic memory refers to the recall of
information about personally experienced past events from
specific time and space. It is characterized by a set of
specific subjective experiences at retrieval: a sense of
“mental time travel”; a belief in the accuracy of the
information as it corresponds to the actual event; a
qualitative sense of conscious recollection, and a judgment
of “actually remembering” as opposed to “merely knowing”
the event occurred. We explored this latter feature through
the Remember/Know (R/K) paradigm.
The R/K paradigm allows one to explore the role of
conscious recollection when an item is recognized. As
described by Gardiner, Ramponi and Klavehn (1998),
remembering reflects the subjective feeling of having

actually experienced an event, whereas knowing indicates
events recognized without a phenomenological experience
of the subject’s reliving the first occurrence. Those
judgments apply to the retrieval of several types of
information, from the simplest (e.g., items in a study list) to
more complex, like significant events in one’s life.
The levels of processing (LoP) framework suggests that
information is stored in long-term memory with variable
depths of processing depending on conditions at encoding
(Roediger & Gallo, 2006). Shallow levels include physical
and sensory aspects of stimuli and their context; deeper
levels, on the other hand, involve articulating stimuli
features with varying degrees of meaning, from the lexical
to the personal. Items encoded at deeper levels are more
likely to be retained and more available for retrieval.
Ultimately, greater depth of processing means a stimulus or
experience is associated to a deeper level of meaning in a
person's cognitive processing at a given time (Roediger &
Gallo, 2006).
The self is considered to engage the deepest possible LoP
a stimulus might relate to. The self-reference effect consists
of more information about an event encoded when it is
related to oneself. The self may be conceived as a control
function that establishes and maintains goals that regulate
encoding, providing a rich set of inner clues with which
information can be associated (Magno & Allan, 2007).
Moreover, self-reference seems to allow access to a
qualitatively different structure, permitting extensive
elaboration of stimuli and multiple routes for recollection
(Gliski & Marquine, 2009).
A theoretical understanding of the mechanism of selfreference effects demands a clarification of the concept of
self. In that respect, a potential contribution comes from
studies of the cognitive development of the self/other
distinction. Theory of mind and empathy studies have
demonstrated that the perception of other people differs not
only from that of one's self, but also from that of inanimate
objects. Such an effect is hypothesized to result from
considering other humans as being “like me”, in the sense
that they also have beliefs and desires (Meltzoff, 2007). For
inanimate objects, actions would be visually processed and

2258

successfully predicted based on physical characteristics and
physical laws. Understanding human actions and internal
states, however, would rely on the empathic capacities of
perceiving other humans as “like me” and simulating the
observed actions and internal states of other humans within
one's own motor, cognitive, and emotional representations.
Human acts might be represented within a supramodal
code that applies to the self as well as to others (Meltzoff,
2007). There is an overlap of neurocognitive systems
processing knowledge about self-performed actions, selfconceived thoughts, and self-experienced emotions when it
comes to understanding actions, thoughts, and emotions
(Lombardo et al, 2010). Those systems seem to be recruited
in processing information related to others, when they are
human. In that sense, representing self and others share
neural substrate where two aspects of empathy interact:
higher level mentalizing and lower level simulation and
embodiment processes.
Theory of mind studies have explored the hypothesis of a
continuum in empathy effects, from self to other humans,
and further to artificial and/or inanimate objects. Jackson,
Brunet, Meltzoff and Decety (2006) manipulated three
different perspectives in a pain simulation task: the subject’s
own perspective (Self), that of a specific but unfamiliar
person (Other), and that of a plastic limb (Artificial).
Participants rated higher perceived pain and had lower
reaction times (RTs) in response to the Self-condition than
both the Other- and Artificial-conditions: Actual human
perspectives led to significantly higher ratings than the
human- inanimate perspective.
Contrasting between imagining Self and Other in painful
situations versus imagining damage to an artificial limb
pointed out to neural activity associated with adopting the
perspective of a human being. Stronger involvement of the
medial prefrontal cortex extending to the frontal poles in
imagining Self and Other, compared to an Artificial limb,
supports the hypothesis of attribution of mental states (Frith
& Frith, 2003). Mental states are not imagined when the
stimulus is processed as an artificial object.
In a previous study of self-reference and theory of mind
effects on recognition memory (Gauer & DeSouza, 2012),
30 subjects (average 24 years-old, 18 female) responded to a
R/K task manipulating three LoPs at encoding: self, other
and object. In the study phase, 66 words (adjectives and
quality-related nouns) were presented in three conditions,
respectively asking if the word applied: to one´s self (Self
condition); to the President of Brazil (Other); or to a train
(Object). In the test phase subjects responded whether each
item was old or new (O/N) and were prompted for a R/K
judgment if the item was recognized. There were lower
recognition (RTs) for Self, followed by the Other and
Object conditions. RTs for R/K judgments were better
predicted by a “Remember” response than by the LoP
conditions. Results indicate activation of self-related
representations facilitating deeper encoding, but not
necessarily engaging episodic recollection. Recognition
accuracy was significantly greater for items in the Self

condition with the lowest rate in the Other condition. The
results suggested complex influences of self-related
representations in LoP manipulation. Conceptualizations of
self-reference effects on LoPs could benefit from a
clarification of the specific roles of “self” and “other”
categories in cognitive processing. The pattern of results in
that study were only partially compatible with a continuum
from self to other and to inanimate object. That might have
to do with the chosen operationalizations of LoPs. “Applies
to the Brazilian President?” and “applies to a train?” were
the prompts to address respectively the Other and Object
LoPs. The lack of evidence for the continuum hypothesis
might have been confounded by the subjects´ not being
neutral toward the president, combined with the
disproportion of a train when compared to the human form.
In the present study, we refined the experimental
procedure by applying the Theory of Mind principle of
mentalizing to the encoding conditions. Two predictions are
outlined. The first prediction combines the LoP and Theory
of Mind frameworks: reference to self leads to more
effective recognition (a deeper level of processing at
encoding) in comparison to reference to other (human), and
in turn, reference to other engages deeper processing than
reference to inanimate objects. The second prediction,
consonant with previous results on self-reference effects on
episodic memory, is that reference to self at encoding results
in higher frequency of remember judgments at recognition.
Participants answered a computerized R/K recognition task
for verbal stimuli manipulating three empathy-related LoP
conditions at encoding. The self-reference LoP (Self
condition) was operationalized through an “applies to
myself?” prompt at encoding. The Other condition asked if
the item “applies to the Queen of England”. The Object
condition asked if the item “applies to statues”. The Queen
of England was chosen for being a real, well-known, but not
personally acquainted person. Statues were chosen as a
prototypical object referent, clearly nonhuman and
nonliving, although close to the human shape and
proportions. Using the plural aimed at avoiding subjects
imagining a statue of a specific person, with the risk of
referring the item to them and not to the actual inanimate
object.

Method
Participants
Twenty-seven undergraduates (mean age 23.6 years, 16
women) from the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
(Porto Alegre, Brazil) took part in the study voluntarily.
Stimuli
We selected 128 words (adjectives and nouns) from a
concreteness norm list for Portuguese common words
(Janczura, Castilho, Rocha, van Erven & Huang, 2007). The
words were divided into three study lists of 26 words each.
The remaining 50 words were used as distractors in the test
phase. Example of items are: disciplina (discipline), difícil
(difficult), movimento (movement), and contente (happy).

2259

Figure 1: Old/New and R/K mean RTs by LoP

Procedure
The experiment consisted of three stages: study phase, filler
task, and test phase. At the study phase, each of the 78 trials
started with a 2000ms presentation of one of the LoP
prompts, followed by one item, displayed for 2000ms.
“Yes” or “No” responses were entered respectively through
letters “E” or “I” via computer keyboard. In the four-minute
filler task, participants responded to a series of up to 20
simple arithmetic problems. In the test phase, the 78 studied
(Old) items were randomly presented along with 50
distractors. In each trial participants responded whether the
word was in the study list (Old) or not (New). Recognition
responses were entered respectively through letters “E” or
“I” in the keyboard. If the response was “Old”, a
“Remember” or “Know” (R/K) prompt was presented, and
responses were entered respectively through keyboard
letters “E” or “I”. Old/New (O/N) and R/K responses and
RTs were recorded. Trials with incorrect O/N responses,
and RTs below 200ms or above 6000ms were discarded.
Stimuli presentation, responses and RTs recording were
performed using the PxLab platform (Irtel, 2007). The study
was approved by the local ethical committee. All
participants signed an informed consent form to take part in
the experiment.

Results
Crosstabulation of response types by encoding condition
yielded an association between R/K judgment and LoPs (χ²

= 25.36, p < .01). Although Remember responses were more
frequent than Know responses in all conditions, the
frequency of Remember responses was significantly higher
for the Self condition (77.2%) than Other (58.3%) and
Object (64.3%).
Correct recognition RTs and R/K judgment RTs were
submitted to a repeated measures ANOVA with LoP
condition as factor. Results for both dependent variables are
depicted in Figure 1. A main effect of LoP on recognition
RTs was observed (F = 4.83, p < .05). Mean recognition
RTs were lowest for items encoded in the self condition
(1821.07ms, SD = 1007.46), whereas Other showed higher
RTs (2105.20ms; SD = 1210.20) than Object (2030.96ms;
SD = 1134.54). Differences in pairwise comparisons were
significant between Self and Other (p < .05) and marginally
significant between Self and Object (p = .058), but not
significant between Other and Object conditions.
Mean recognition RTs for Remembered items were
significantly lower than for Known items (t = 5.3; p < .01),
regardless of LoP condition. A multivariate test with LoP
condition as fixed factor and the R/K judgment as random
factor maintained a main effect of R/K judgment, but
yielded no interaction between LoP and R/K judgment.
Nevertheless, visual inspection of panels (a) and (b) in
Figure 2 demonstrates that recognition was slower for
Remembered items in the Object condition compared to
Other, but the pattern was reversed for Known items. R/K
judgment RTs showed a main effect of LoP (F = 4.06; p <
.05). RTs for the Self condition were lower than for Other,

2260

Figure 2: Old/New and R/K RTs by LoP in items judged as Remembered versus Known
which in turn were lower than those in the Object condition.
The only pairwise significant difference was found between
Self and Object conditions (p < .05).

Discussion
The present study attempted to contribute to understanding a
relevant aspect of remembering in ecological situations,
namely self-reference. Specifically, the experimental
paradigm sought to investigate combined effects on
recognition memory of two distinct, perhaps
complementary, theoretical accounts of meaning structures
for cognitive representations: Levels of Processing and
Theory of Mind. Even when we accept the evidence that the
self stands as reference to deeper levels of processing, the
exact way in which it compares to other entities remains a
relevant issue of theoretical and empirical inquiry.
In the recognition experiment here presented, items
encoded at the Self condition were consistently more swiftly
recognized than stimuli encoded in reference to another
person or objects. Those results confirm a self-reference
effect at encoding. Moreover, the association between the
Self condition and Remember judgments corroborates a
close relationship between self-reference and episodic
memory. Interpreted through the Levels of Processing
framework, that pattern indicates that reference to self at
encoding favors deep processing and results in stronger
memory signals. Nevertheless, that effect seems to
encompass more than strength of signal once we consider
the association with Remember judgments. Relating an item

to the self also results in a difference in the mode of
representation, favoring recollection processes (episodic
memory) at recognition. On the other hand, Other- and
Object-relatedness showed a less clear pattern in terms of
recognition. At least in a recognition task, our data did not
find effects according to a hypothesized empathy continuum
from self, to “like me” human other, to human-resembling
inanimate object.
Nevertheless, a relationship between the Theory of Mind
constructs, LoPs and episodic memory is suggested if we
compare the patterns of recognition by R/K judgments.
Items processed at the shallower level of Other-reference
were more rapidly recognized than Object-reference items,
but only when participants reported remembering them, not
when the item was judged as known. That suggests that a
“self-other-object” effect might operate linearly in episodic
memory (remembered items), but not in semantic memory
(known items). That pattern of results is congruent to the
one found by Jackson et al (2006) for empathy in pain
judgments.
Finally, we stress that the approach here adopted can
contribute to integrate social cognition models and meaning
structure models into the explanation of cognitive processes.
Despite the present data not corroborating depth of
processing effects distributed along a hypothesized onedimensional account self-other-object continuum, further
studies to test possible relationships among memory
systems and the reference of stimuli to social-cognitive
representational content are encouraged. Evidence for

2261

different memory systems functioning in relation to the
meaning contexts elicited by different entities might
generate new hypotheses regarding the cognitive and neural
relevancy of Theory of Mind distinctions such as self-other,
animate-inanimate, and human-nonhuman.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this project was granted by the National
Council for Scientific and Technological Development
(CNPq).

References
Gardiner, J. M., Ramponi, C. & Klavehn, A. R. (1998).
Experiences of remembering, knowing, and guessing.
Consc & Cogn, 7, 1-26.
Gauer, G. & DeSouza, J. A. (2012). Self-reference as level
of processing in a remember/know experiment.
Abstracts of the Psychonomic Society, 17, 200.
Glisky, E. L. & Marquine, M. J. (2009). Semantic and selfreferential processing of positive and negative trait
adjectives in older adults. Memory, 17(2), 144-157.
Irtel, H. (2007). PXLab: The Psychological Experiments
Laboratory [online], Version 2.1.11. Mannheim:
University of Mannheim.
Jackson, P. L., Brunet, E., Meltzoff, A. N. & Decety, J.
(2006). Empathy examined through the neural
mechanisms involved in imagining how I feel versus
how you feel pain. Neuropsychologia, 44(5), 752-761.
Janczura, G. A., Castilho, G. M., Rocha, N. O., van Erven,
T. J. C. & Huang, T. P. (2007). [Concreteness norms for
909 Portuguese words]. Psicologia: Teoria e Pesquisa,
23, 195- 204.
Lombardo, M.V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T.,
Wheelwright, S. J., Sadek, S. A., Suckling, J., MRC
AIMS Consortium, Baron-Cohen, S. (2010). Shared
neural circuits for mentalizing about the self and others.
J Cogn Neurosci, 22(7), 1623-35.
Magno, E., & Allan, K. (2007). Self-reference during
explicit memory retrieval: an event-related potential
analysis. Psych Sci, 18(8), 672-677.
Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). The ‘like me’ framework for
recognizing and becoming an intentional agent, Acta
Psychol (Amst), 124(1), 26-43.
Roediger, H. L. & Gallo, D. A. (2006). Levels of
processing: some unanswered questions. In M. N.
Benjamin & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Perspectives on
human memory and cognitive aging: essays in honor of
Fergus Craik. New York: Psychology Press.

2262

