UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Running to do evil: Costs incurred by perpetrators affect moral judgment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jz7v94d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Jara-Ettinger, Julian
Kim, Nathaniel
Muetener, Paul
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Running to do evil: Costs incurred by perpetrators affect moral judgment
Julian Jara-Ettinger*, Nathaniel Kim*, Paul Muentener, and Laura E. Schulz

(jjara, nlkim, pmuenten, lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
*These authors contributed equally to the paper.
Abstract

wrongdoing have rarely been investigated as a factor in
psychological studies of moral reasoning.
Here we propose a formal account of this intuition,
suggesting that human beings evaluate others’ actions with
respect to an intuitive theory of how agents assign costs and
rewards to the world, how these cost and rewards combine
to produce utilities, and how these utilities inform agents’
decisions about what actions to take. We will refer to this as
a naïve utility calculus. Details of this account are inspired
by earlier computational models of theory of mind (Baker,
Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2009, 2011; Ullman, Baker,
Macindoe, Evans, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2010; JaraEttinger, Baker, & Tenenbaum, 2012) and have been
developed elsewhere, so here we will discuss the inferences
supported by the formalization intuitively (See JaraEttinger, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, in prep, for a detailed
version of the theoretical framework, and Jara-Ettinger,
Tenenbaum & Schulz, 2013 and Jara-Ettinger, Gweon,
Tenenbaum & Schulz, 2014, for developmental evidence) .
At the core of the naïve utility calculus are a few key
claims:
1) Observers have a theory of rational action that
resembles classical utility theory in three respects:
a. Actions generate rewards and incur costs.
The rewards minus the costs determine the
utility of acting.
b. Both rewards and costs have an external,
agent-independent component and an
internal, agent-dependent component.
c. Rational agents act to maximize the highest
expected utility.
2) Observers can use known and observable
information about agents and the environment to
infer the costs and rewards of actions, enabling
predictions about unseen features of the
environment, unobserved mental states, and others’
future behaviors.
3) These abilities emerge early in development,
supporting children’s ability to reason about agents’
goal-directed behavior.
What predictions does this account make for moral
reasoning and for our car theft scenario in particular?
Understanding how costs and rewards produce utilities, and
how utilities guide planning, allows us to partially infer
these values from the observable actions. Arnold’s car was
difficult to steal. It required bypassing the locks, the alarm,
the bar, and the ignition. The rewards must have been high

Humans evaluate transgressors focusing on their intentions
and the outcome. Here we propose that, in addition to these
factors, we also take into account the cost and reward of
actions, supported by a fundamental inferential process we
call a “naïve utility calculus.” Because inferences about costs
and rewards trade off, observers can infer that agents who
incur higher costs place a higher value on acting. This
inference has implications for moral judgments. Our account
predicts, somewhat paradoxically, that the higher the costs a
perpetrator incurs in transgressing, the more harshly observers
will judge him. Less paradoxically, the same principle holds
for helpful actions: controlling for intention and outcome,
more costly helpful actions will be given more credit.
Consistent with our framework, we find that adults and
preschoolers make graded social evaluations guided by the
costs of the actions.
Keywords: Cognitive Development; Naïve Utility Calculus;
Rational Action; Social Cognition; Social Evaluations.

Introduction
Arnold and Bob are identical twins who just bought
identical cars. Arnold and Bob drove to offices near each
other. Arnold locked his car, set the alarm, and put a club on
the steering wheel. Bob left his car unlocked with the keys
in the ignition. After some hours, they came out to find their
cars had been stolen. Police apprehended the thieves: a guy
named Joe stole Arnold’s car and one named Phil stole
Bob’s car.
Arnold and Bob were clearly innocent victims; Joe and
Phil were clearly guilty thieves. Nonetheless, we might find
that we hold Phil slightly less accountable than Joe. Why?
Research on moral reasoning has investigated many
factors that affect moral judgment: the agents’ in-group or
out-group status; whether the event involves direct or
indirect harm; the agents’ intentions, and the outcomes of
the event (See Baillargeon, Scott, He, Sloane, Setoh, Jin,
Wu & Bian, in press; Greene, 2003; Hamlin, 2013; Knobe,
2010; Mikhail, 2007 for review). Critically however, in this
scenario, none of those contrasts is in play. The agents’
social status is left unspecified, the actions are direct, the
agents apparently act intentionally, and the outcomes are
identical. What then accounts for our graded judgments?
If we hold Joe more accountable than Phil we might
invoke the biblical caution against those who “run to do
evil” (Isaiah: 5:7). However, although recognized in our
ethical canons, the costs a transgressor incurs to commit a

684

enough to make the overall utility profitable. By contrast,
the costs incurred in stealing Bob’s car were low; a smaller
reward could still result in an overall positive utility. Thus
we can be confident that Joe placed a high subjective value
on stealing the car because he engaged in costly actions to
do so. It is less clear whether Phil placed a high value on
stealing the car. Perhaps he would not have done so had the
costs been higher. This difference in subjective value might
derive from many sources (e.g., perhaps Joe was poorer than
Phil). However, in the absence of other information, all we
can infer is that Joe had a strong preference for car theft.
This has direct implications for moral judgment: we are
likely to judge people more harshly to the degree that we
believe they are strongly motivated to perform harmful
actions.
Our suggestion that a naïve utility calculus underlies
moral judgment makes three predictions. First, and perhaps
somewhat counter-intuitively, we should hold perpetrators
of harmful actions more accountable to the degree that their
actions are costly to the perpetrators themselves. We test
this prediction in Experiment 1. Second, these inferences
should hold for helpful actions as well as harmful ones.
(That is, holding intentions and outcomes constant, children
should give both more credit and more blame for high cost
actions than low cost ones.) Finally, to the degree that a
naïve utility calculus underlies moral judgment and is
fundamental to our understanding for rational action, we
should find evidence for these inferences even in very
young children. We test these predictions in Experiment 2.

In the first story the owner left the object in a study room.
The thief was sitting on an adjacent table in the low-cost
version and looking through a window in the high-cost
version. In the second story the owner left the object on a
park bench. The thief was sitting on the same bench in the
low-cost version and looking through a window from the
second story of a nearby building in the high-cost version.
In the third story the owner left his object on a gym
treadmill. The thief was running in the adjacent treadmill in
the short-cost version and on the opposite corner of the gym
in the high-cost version.
Additionally, we varied the value of the object that was
stolen. The lowest value object was an iPod, the middle
value object was an iPad, and the highest value object was a
Macbook Pro. This generated a total of 18 stories (3 base
stories X 2 cost conditions X 3 object value conditions).

Procedure

Log of punishment

Participants were randomly assigned to a cost condition
(high-cost or low-cost conditions) and to an object condition
(low, middle, or high value). This left each participant with
three stories to read.
Punishment assigned by condition
Participants
were
asked
to
*
imagine they were
4
jurors, whose job
was to decide how
3
long thieves have to
spend in a social
2
rehabilitation center.
Each
participant
1
read the study room,
park,
and
gym
stories
that
0
corresponded
to
the
High
Low
Cost
condition they were
Figure 1: Log punishment given
assigned to. Each
to transgressors across in the
story contained a
high and low cost conditions
control question to
along with 95% confidence
ensure participants
intervals. Thieves in the high
remembered
the
cost
condition
received
thief’s
starting
significantly higher punishments
position.
After
compared to transgressors in the
reading each story
low cost condition. The analysis
participants
were
was performed using the log
asked to decide how
transformation because, unlike
many days the thief
the raw response, it was
should spend in a
normally distributed.
social rehabilitation
center.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we look at whether adults take into
account the cost of committing a transgression when
evaluating an agent. We predict that adults will punish
perpetrators more when the perpetrator engages in high cost
actions (that is, actions costly to the perpetrator himself)
than when the perpetrator engages in low cost actions. This
prediction results from a utility calculus in which costly
actions license inferences about heightened motivation, in
this case, to do harmful acts.

Participants
48 U.S. residents (as determined by their I.P. address) were
recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk. Subjects were
randomly assigned to either the long-distance or shortdistance condition (24 subjects per condition). Subjects
within each condition were assigned to one of three possible
theft-value conditions: The low-value theft (stolen iPod), the
middle-value theft (stolen iPad), or the high-value theft
(stolen Macbook Pro) (8 subjects per condition).

Results and Discussion

Stimuli

We calculated each participant’s average punishment score
across the three stories, excluding those where participants
failed to remember the thief’s initial location. Figure 1
shows the results from the experiment. Our primary
question was whether the cost incurred by the thief affected
the participant’s judgments. Collapsing across object-value
conditions, participants assigned 27.19 days of punishment

The stimuli consisted of three stories. In all stories a thief
stole an object that had been left unattended. Each story had
a low-cost version and a high-cost version. In the low-cost
versions the thief was very close to the object, thus making
the theft low-cost. In the high-cost versions the thief was
very far away from the object, making the theft high-cost.

685

in the low-cost condition and 123.01 days in the high-cost
condition (p < 0.012; Welch two sample t-test on log
punishment). Next we analyzed differences in punishment
across both the cost and object value conditions using a twoway ANOVA. We found both a significant effect of the cost
to the thief and the value of the object (p < 0.01 and p <
0.001
respectively).
Participants
assigned
higher
punishments to thieves who stole more valuable objects.
These results suggest that adult’s choice of how much to
punish is influenced by the cost the transgressor incurred as
well as the stolen object’s value. Importantly, each
individual participant only saw a single cost condition.
Although the control question checked participant’s
memory for the initial location of the thief relative to the
object, participants were given no other information that
would enable them to infer that the costs to the thief were
relevant to the task. Moreover, the information even about
the location of the thief with respect to the object was both
very general (i.e., actual distances were never specified) and
differed greatly within the stories they heard (i.e., the
distance across a gym vs. the distance to a nearby building).
Nonetheless, consistent with the predictions of a naïve
utility calculus, participants appeared to impute costs
automatically, resulting in different judgments across
conditions.
However, our data also suggest that participant’s
judgments were not only affected the costs incurred by the
transgressor. Participants also gave longer punishments to
transgressors who stole more (objectively) valuable objects.
One likely explanation is that participants took into account
the loss to the victim and imposed greater punishment for
greater losses. Extending the implications of the naïve
utility calculus over multi-party interactions remains a rich
area for future research.

Story
Name

Type

Narrative

Low-cost

Highcost

Bottle

Nice

Protagonist
fetches a
baby bottle
for her
sibling.

Bottle fell
right under
the
protagonist

Bottle
rolled
into the
adjacent
room

Pencil

Nice

Protagonist
brings
pencils to
his mother

Pencils are
on a nearby
table

Pencils
are on a
table on
the
second
floor

Cookie

Naughty

Protagonist
takes a
cookie
when he
was told
not to.

The cookie
jar is on a
low shelf.

The
cookie
jar is on
a high
shelf.

Gift

Naughty

Protagonist
peeks into
a wrapped
gift.

Gift is on
top of the
table next to
the
protagonist.

Gift is
inside
the
closet.

Table 1: Stories used in Experiment 2.
achieve the outcome. In two story pairs, the protagonist
performed a pro-social action (Bottle and Pencil stories; in
two other pairs, the protagonist performed an anti-social
action (Cookie and Gift stories).

Experiment 2: Children’s Cost Perception

Procedure

Experiment 1 suggests that adults are sensitive to the cost of
actions when evaluating transgressors. In Experiment 2 we
extend this study to children, and to both positive and
negative social evaluations. Using a somewhat simpler
within-subject design, we test the predictions that the cost
incurred by an agent affects children’s judgments of both
credit and blame. Because this aspect of moral judgment
had never been previously investigated in children, we
chose a broad age range for preliminary investigation. No
age trends emerged so here we report all children recruited.

Children were tested individually in a quiet room in the
museum. The child was seated in a small table across from
the experimenter. The experiment began by placing the
high-cost and low-cost version of one of the stories side by
side. The experimenter read each story in the pair (See
Figure 2 for an example). After both stories in the pair were
read, the experimenter asked a control question to ensure the
child remembered which protagonist was closer to the goal
object (e.g., “Who do you think was closer to the baby
bottle at the beginning“). Children were then asked which
protagonist was nicer or which protagonist was naughtier in
the nicer and naughty story types, respectively (e.g., “Who
do you think was nicer?”). The stories were presented in a
fixed pseudo-random order so that children never saw two
“naughty” or two “nice” stories sequentially. Cookie stories
(Naughty) were always followed by the Baby bottle stories
(Nice), and Present stories (Naughty) were always followed
by Pencil stories (Nice). Otherwise, the order of the stories
was counterbalanced across subjects.

Participants
Twenty-two children (mean age (SD): 5.29 years (0.83
years), range 3.63-6.81 years) were recruited and tested at a
local children’s museum.

Stimuli
Eight storybooks were used. (See Table 1.) Each story came
in two versions, always presented in pairs, one in which the
costs of the protagonist’s actions were high (as indexed by
distance traveled) and one in which they were low, for a
total of four trials. The two stories in each pair were
identical except for the cost the protagonist incurred to

Results and Discussion
686

One child was dropped from analyses on all but the gift
story because s/he refused to choose between the
protagonists. An additional child was excluded from
analysis on the pencil story due to experimenter error.
Finally, we excluded children from analyses on any story
where they failed to answer the control question correctly,
resulting in n = 18, 19, 19, and 20 children in the baby
bottle, pencil, gift, and cookie stories, respectively.
Examining each story individually we found that children
chose the high-cost protagonist significantly above chance
(p < 0.05 in each story by binomial test). A total of 14
children completed all four storybooks. 12 of these 14
children (85.71%) selected the high-cost protagonist at least
3 (out of 4) times and 6 children (42.85%) performed at
ceiling (p < 0.0001; binomial test).
Consistent with our predictions, children were sensitive
to the costs the protagonists incurred, and they were equally
sensitive for attributions of credit and blame. The naughty
stories (cookie and gift stories) replicated the qualitative
pattern seen in adults in Experiment 1. Additionally, note
that while previous research has established that children
can make categorical social judgments (e.g., in
distinguishing helpers, hinderers, and bystanders;
Kuhlmeier, Wynn, & Bloom, 2003; Hamlin, Wynn, &
Bloom, 2007), the current results show that children can
also make graded judgments within social categories. These
results are consistent with children’s ability to use a naïve
utility calculus to evaluate agents’ actions.
In our experiment, children were given a two-alternative
Low Cost Version

forced-choice question. As a result, we were able to
establish that children use costs to make social evaluations.
However, it is an open question whether children, like adults
in Experiment 1, spontaneously use cost information in
these tasks. Future experiments might address this.

General Discussion
Here we proposed that a naïve utility calculus -an intuitive
theory of the costs and rewards of decisions- underlies our
ability to make graded social evaluations from relatively
sparse data about agents’ actions and environmental
constraints. In the context of moral judgments, the current
results suggest that the costs an agent incurs to perform a
helpful or harmful action are critical to our moral
evaluations. This reasoning sometimes produces seemingly
paradoxical results such as attributing more blame to
perpetrators who themselves incur greater costs in
committing a transgression.
In our study, we looked at graded judgments of actions
that were not distinguishable on other grounds relevant to
moral reasoning (e.g., social status, directness, intention, or
outcome). By this we do not mean to say that judgments of
intentionality played no role here. The generalizability of an
agent’s actions may well be related to judgments of how
intentional the action was. As we noted in the Introduction,
previous work has manipulated cues to intentionality very
directly (by contrasting knowledgeable, volitional agents to
those who act in ignorance, under duress or accidentally.)
Here none of those contrasts obtain. Nonetheless it is
possible that to the degree that we can make graded
judgments of how intentional an action is, information about
costs bears on our intentionality judgments. In graded
judgments we may treat even an action by a knowledgeable,
volitional agent as “less intentional” when the action is low
cost than when it is high cost. Future research might look at
how the naïve utility calculus bears on judgments of
intentionality.
Why are the costs a transgressor incurs so important to
our judgments of agents’ motivations, and thus to our moral
judgment? We suggest that the cost an agent incurs
provides valuable predictive information about the agent’s
future actions.
If a perpetrator commits a low-cost
transgression, we do not know if they would transgress if
the costs were higher. By contrast, if a perpetrator commits
a high-cost transgression, there is every reason to suspect
that they would also commit transgressions at lower costs.
Joe might not steal Arnold’s car, but Phil would almost
certainly steal Bob’s. To the degree that punishment and
moral judgment act as a deterrent against future
transgressions, scaling these to the costs a perpetrator incurs
may allow us to most effectively deter those most likely to
offend in a broad range of contexts.
More subtly, one key component of the cost of an action
is often the time it takes to perform the action: costly actions
are typically time-consuming. Given that in principle,
transgressors can change their minds and reform their ways
at any point in time, costly transgressions may indicate not

High Cost Version

Figure 2: Example figures from the baby bottle story. The
left column shows the pictures from the low cost version
and the right column shows the pictures from the high cost
version. The bottom row shows the two pictures children
saw when they were asked the control and test question.

687

References

merely the intensity but also the stability of perpetrators’
bad intentions. Thus, less punishment should be assigned to
agents who act more impulsively.
In Experiment 1 we found that adult intuitions of
punishment were influenced not only by the cost to the
transgressor but also by the value of the object. In future
work, we hope to extend the predictions of the naïve utility
calculus to multi-party interactions. When agents choose to
act we expect them to be empathetic towards others. That
is, we expect the utilities of moral agents to be recursive: if I
am a prosocial agent, your utilities affect my utilities (See
Ullman, et. al., 2010 for a similar approach). Therefore, the
value an agent assigns to their belongings should be
included in the transgressor’s costs (e.g., you need more
motivation to steal an object if the victim assigns great
personal value to it). Given no other information, the market
value of the object is the best indicator of how much the
victim valued his/her belonging. To fully test this we require
a more fleshed out account of the naïve utility calculus that
goes beyond the scope of this paper but remains a promising
area for future work.
In our experiments, the costs agents incurred were mainly
indexed by the distance and time they had to travel.
However, costs can be influenced by many things, including
non-obvious properties internal to the agent (e.g., the
agent’s strength or competence). Additionally, some actions
probabilistically incur extrinsic costs due to potential
negative consequences (e.g., getting caught stealing). In our
experiment we established that children and adults were
sensitive to some kinds of costs. However we do not know
yet how costs are represented and integrated, whether some
types of costs are more salient than others, and how
sensitivity to different kinds of costs changes throughout
development. These remain rich areas for future work.
Returning to the current work however, our findings
suggest that a naïve utility calculus may be a fundamental
component of our general moral calculus, evident even in
the judgments of young children. By using the costs an
agent incurs to infer the value the agent places on acting, we
can move beyond merely deciding whether actions are
intentional and direct, and make graded judgments of an
agent’s motivation and the range of contexts under which
the agent is likely to act again. In adding costs to the moral
calculus we can formalize many of our social intuitions and
gain insight into the principles that support our
understanding of others’ behavior.

Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3),
329-349.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011).
Bayesian theory of mind: Modeling joint belief-desire
attribution. In Proceedings of the thirty-second annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 24692474).
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., He, Z., Slona, S., Setoh, P.,
Jin, K., Wu, D., & Bian, L. (in press). Psychological and
sociomoral reasoning in infancy. APA Handbook of
Personality and Social Psychology: Vol . 1. Attitudes and
Social Cognition.
Greene, J. (2003). From neural 'is' to moral 'ought': what are
the moral implications of neuroscientific moral
psychology?. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4(10), 846850.
Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2007). Social
evaluation by preverbal infants. Nature, 450(7169), 557559.
Hamlin, J. K., 2013: Does the infant posses a moral
concept? Concepts: Core Readings.Volume II.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Baker, C. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2012).
Learning what is where from social observations.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 515-520).
Jara-Ettinger, J., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (2013).
Not so innocent: Reasoning about costs, competence, and
culpability in very early childhood. In Proceedings of the
thirty-fourth annual conference of the cognitive science
society (pp. 663-668).
Jara-Ettinger, J., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. in prep.
Naïve Utility Calculus.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz,
L. E. I’d do anything for a cookie (but I won’t do that):
Children’s understanding of the costs and rewards
underlying rational action. In Proceedings of the thirtyfifth annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as scientist, person as
moralist. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(4), 315.
Kuhlmeier, V., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2003). Attribution
of dispositional states by 12-month-olds. Psychological
Science, 14(5), 402-408.
Mikhail, J. (2007). Universal moral grammar: Theory,
evidence and the future.Trends in cognitive
sciences, 11(4), 143-152.
Ullman, T. D., Baker, C. L., Macindoe, O., Evans, O. R.,
Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2010). Help or
hinder: Bayesian models of social goal inference. Neural
Information Processing Systems Foundation.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Boston Children’s Museum and the families
who volunteered to participate. We thank Josh Tenenbaum
for useful comments and discussions. This material is based
upon work supported by the Center for Brains, Minds, and
Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF STC award CCF1231216, and by the Simons Center for the Social Brain
(SCSB) award 6926004.

688

