UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Selective Sustained Attention, the Visual Environment, and Learning in Kindergarten-age
Children: Preliminary Results of an Individual Difference Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rm4v3jh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Godwin, Karrie
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Selective Sustained Attention, the Visual Environment, and Learning in
Kindergarten-age Children: Preliminary Results of an Individual Difference Study
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

targeted activity” (Setliff & Courage, 2011, p. 613). SSA is
hypothesized to play a critical role in learning, as attention
is believed to be important for general cognitive processes
such as encoding (Choudhury & Gorman, 2000). Thus,
inattention is presumed to negatively impact learning.
However, inferences regarding the relationship between
SSA and learning are based largely on children’s
performance on procedural tasks (e.g., sorting shapes,
Choudhury & Gorman, 2000; performance on visual
discrimination tasks, Higgins & Turnure, 1984) rather than
learning per se. Collectively, this work has documented that
SSA is related to children’s task performance. However, the
use of such procedural tasks as an index of learning is
problematic as these tasks bear little resemblance to the
learning activities that children encounter in the classroom.
Other research studies have utilized academic
achievement as an indicator of learning (e.g., Checa &
Rueda, 2011; Lehman et al., 2010; Schweizer &
Moosbrugger, 2004). An association between SSA (indexed
by teacher and parent reports, observations, or laboratory
measures of attention) and measures of academic
achievement have been documented in school-age children,
particularly in the domains of math and reading (e.g., see
Duncan et al., 2007 for review). To date, available research
suggests a persistent relationship between SSA (indexed by
time spent on-task) and achievement; however, studies have
found that the strength of the correlation fluctuates widely,
ranging between 0.13 and 0.71 (for review see Caldwell,
Huitt, & Graeber, 1982; Frederick & Walberg, 1980).
Inconsistencies in the correlation strength are a potential
cause for concern as increasing attention without improving
learning outcomes is unsatisfactory. As Snider (1987) stated
poignantly, “increased amounts of time on task …are
desirable as a means to the end of increased achievement;
otherwise, we simply create well-behaved underachievers”
(as cited in Reid & Harris, 1993, p.31).
Individual differences may provide a potential
explanation for the observed variability in the correlation
strength across the prior literature. Four individual
difference factors posited to modulate the relationship
between SSA and learning are: IQ, Processing speed,
working memory (WM), and inhibitory control. For
instance, children with greater WM capacity may need
fewer learning opportunities (i.e., less time on-task) to learn
the same amount of material as children with lower WM

Prior work has found that selective sustained attention (SSA)
is related to young children’s task performance and to various
indices of academic achievement (e.g., course grades,
standardized test scores). However, experimental research
demonstrating a link between learning and SSA is lacking.
Additionally, much of the existing work is not able to partial
out variance in children’s learning performance due to
individual difference factors. This work examines the putative
relationship between SSA, measured as the proportion of time
spent off-task, and young children’s learning outcomes by
yoking measures of time off-task to immediate measures of
learning, while controlling for the variance in children’s
learning performance due to individual difference factors such
as IQ, working memory, processing speed, and inhibitory
control.
Keywords: Off-Task Behavior; Learning; Attention

Introduction
Improving children’s learning outcomes is a central goal for
both educators and parents. However, improving learning
outcomes is a multifaceted issue with a diverse array of
factors hypothesized to influence children’s learning
progress including: poverty, parental involvement, school
based factors such as teacher or district quality, as well as
student characteristics (e.g., absenteeism, motivation,
aptitude). One factor widely believed to be important to
learning is attention. Modulating attention and ignoring
extraneous information may be particularly relevant for
learning in classroom contexts where children are presented
with numerous sources of potential distraction (e.g., peers,
displays, announcements).
The present study aims to examine the assumed
relationship between selective sustained attention (SSA) and
young children’s learning outcomes by experimentally
inducing lower or higher levels of SSA by introducing or
removing visual distractors (e.g., educational displays
irrelevant to the learning task) and observing the
consequences on children’s learning outcomes. This work
also aims to identify individual difference factors that may
modulate the effect of SSA on children’s learning outcomes.

Selective Sustained Attention and Learning
Selective Sustained Attention (SSA) is defined as: “a state
of engagement that involves narrowed selectivity and
increased commitment of energy and resources on the

541

capacity. In contrast, children with better inhibitory control
may be better able to resist going off-task in the presence of
distractors resulting in more learning opportunities (i.e.,
more time on-task) and better learning outcomes. A small
number of prior studies have included some individual
difference factors (e.g., IQ); however, to date no study has
looked at genuine learning outcomes while systematically
investigating the contribution of multiple individual
difference factors. In this paper, we report preliminary
findings from the first study that aims to systematically
examine these issues.

phases: pre-test, learning phase, and post-test. In the pretest, children were asked to identify the object labeled by the
experimenter from 4 pictorial response options. The pre-test
included 18 trials, which consist of 9 novel test items and 9
familiar items which served as fillers. Two presentation
orders were created. In Order 1 the test items were
randomized with the constraint that the pre-test began and
ended with a familiar item. For Order 2 the presentation
order utilized in Order 1 was simply reversed.
In the learning phase, the children were presented with
pictures of the 9 novel animals and taught the corresponding
label for each object. Each item was presented three times
during the learning phase for a total of 27 trials. Two
presentation orders were created. For Order 1 items were
blocked and randomized within each block (i.e., 3 blocks
each containing the 9 novel items). For Order 2 the
presentation order utilized in Order 1 was simply reversed.
Each paired-associate trial was presented for a duration of 2
seconds.
The learning phase was designed to approximate ‘seatwork,’ an independent learning activity common in
elementary school classrooms. During seat-work, the
teacher typically circulates throughout the classroom
assisting individual students as needed. As a result, the
amount of direct supervision that a particular child receives
during seat-work is typically minimal as the teacher’s
attention is being distributed across the entire classroom.
Consequently, in the present study the experimenter stood in
the hallway while the child completed the learning phase of
the PAL task independently. Thus, if the child engaged in
off-task behavior, the experimenter did not redirect the
child.

Method
Participants
The final sample consisted of 44 kindergarten children
(Mage = 5.46 years, SD = 0.44 years, 21 females, 23 males).
All participants attended a laboratory school at a private
university in Pennsylvania. Children were tested
individually in a quiet room adjacent to their classroom by
the first author of this paper and trained research assistants.

Design
The present study utilized a within-subject design. The
visual environment was the within-subject factor (presence
or absence of environmental distractions). There were two
experimental conditions: (1) High Visual Distraction (HVD)
condition and (2) Low Visual Distraction (LVD) condition.
In the HVD condition, environmental distractors consisted
of educational displays common in elementary school
classrooms (i.e., solar system replica, model tornado,
bulletin board, basket of supplies, etc.). In the LVD
condition the environmental distractors were removed.
Presentation order of the conditions (HVD first or LVD
first) was counterbalanced across participants. The
dependent variable was children’s accuracy on the learning
task in the HVD and LVD condition (i.e., proportion of
correct responses). The amount of time children spent offtask was calculated as a measure of children’s SSA. A
within-subject design was utilized to ensure any learning
differences obtained were a result of the experimental
manipulation rather than variability across groups of
children.

Procedure
Children participated in 10 testing sessions. Each testing
session lasted approximately 15 minutes. In sessions 1 and
2, children completed the learning task in the HVD and
LVD conditions. These sessions were videotaped for coding
purposes in order to calculate the proportion of time
children spent off-task. An individual difference assessment
battery was administered during the remaining 8 testing
sessions. The assessment battery was administered in order
to measure pertinent cognitive factors including: general
intelligence, processing speed, working memory, inhibitory
control, and sustained attention.
Learning Task. The Paired-Associates Learning (PAL)
task is a computer-based learning task, which contains three

(A)

(B)

Q) “Point to the Reedling ”

Q) “What was the name of
this bird?”

Figure 1. Sample assessment items from the Birds pairedassociates learning task. Panel A provides a recognition test item
and Panel B provides a recall test item.

The post-test phase included 18 test items. The post-test
was composed of recognition and recall test items (9
questions each); see Figure 1. For recognition items,
children were asked to point to the animal labeled by the
experimenter from 4 pictorial response options. For recall
items, children were shown a picture of an animal and asked
to recall the item name. Two presentation orders were

542

created. For Order 1 question type was blocked (Block 1:
Recognition questions, Block 2: Recall questions) and the
items were randomized within each block. For Order 2 the
blocking sequence was held constant (Block 1: Recognition
questions, Block 2: Recall questions); however, the
presentation order of the items within each block was
reversed. Two versions of the PAL task were created in
which children learned about different types of animals:
‘Birds’ and ‘Monkeys and Apes.’
Children completed the PAL tasks under two conditions:
(1) under the presence of environmental distractors (HVD)
and (2) without distractors present (LVD). Presentation
order (HVD first or LVD first) was counterbalanced across
participants. PAL version (Birds or Monkeys/Apes) was also
counterbalanced across conditions. Duration of children’s
off-task behavior as well as PAL accuracy was compared
across conditions (HVD vs. LVD).
Coding. PAL sessions were videotaped for coding
purposes. Children’s behavior was coded at the second-bysecond level in order to calculate the proportion of time
children spent off-task. Coders were taught to classify the
child’s behavior as on- or off-task. On-task behavior was
operationalized as engagement with the learning materials
(i.e., the computer). Engagement was determined by the
direction of children’s gaze which is a common measure of
visual attention (see Henderson & Ferreira, 2004; Just &
Carpenter, 1976).
For each instance of off-task behavior, the coders marked
the timing of its onset and cessation. Utilizing time off-task
as a measure of SSA allows for a more precise examination
of the extent to which children are attending to the learning
task. All coders were trained by the first author of this
paper. Training consisted of extensive practice coding
videotapes. A subset of the data (25%) is being re-coded to
ensure good inter-rater reliability. The preliminary Cohen’s
(1960) kappa (0.71) is in line with prior research coding offtask behavior, and it approaches the 0.75 threshold to which
Fleiss (1981) refers to as “excellent.” All coders are
hypothesis-blind.

Hearts and Flowers Task (Davidson, Amso, Anderson, &
Diamond, 2006), children were presented with a series of
hearts and flowers on a computer screen. Children were
instructed to press the response button on the same side as
the stimulus when a heart was presented and to press the
response button on the opposite side that the stimulus was
presented when a flower appeared. The task consisted of 57
trials (12 heart trials, 12 flower trials, 33 mixed trials). Two
scores derived from the task were utilized for the present
study: Accuracy and RT for the mixed trials.
In the Day-Night Task (Gerstadt et al., 1994) children
were shown a set of pictures depicting the sun or the moon.
Children were asked to provide a verbal response which
conflicted with the presented image. The task consisted of
16 trials (Each image was presented 8 times). Two
presentation orders were created: for Order 1 the trials were
randomized and for Order 2 the sequence was reversed.
Working Memory. Children’s verbal WM capacity was
indexed by a simple and complex word span task. In the
simple word span task, children heard a series of familiar
nouns (judged by the MacArthur Communicative
Development Inventory; Dale & Fenson, 1996) and were
asked to repeat the nouns in the same order they were
presented. In the complex word span task, children were
asked to repeat the items in the reverse order. The number
of words given in a set increased monotonically after
children correctly completed two trials within a given set
size. The minimum set size was a list length of 2 words and
the maximum set size was a list length of 6 words. The
child’s score was the largest set size he (or she) could
correctly recite.
Performance-Based
SSA
Measures.
Participants
completed two performance-based SSA tasks: Track-It and
the Kiddie Continuous Performance Task. The Track-It task
(Fisher et al., 2013) was administered to obtain a
performance-based measure of children’s SSA. This task
also provides a non-verbal WM measure. In this task,
children saw several objects (e.g., simple shapes) moving
across a computer screen. At the end of each trial the objects
land on one of nine locations and disappear. Children were
asked to watch the target object while ignoring distractors.
When the objects stopped moving and disappeared from the
computer screen, children were asked to identify the
location last visited by the target object. After each trial, a
memory-check was administered in which children were
presented with an array of shapes and asked to identify the
target object on the preceding trial.
The Kiddie Continuous Performance Task (K-CPT;
Conners & Staff, 2001) was included in the assessment
battery as a standard performance-based measure of SSA. In
this computer task, children were presented with a series of
visual stimuli (i.e., pictures). The child's task was to press a
button in response to the targets and withhold a response for
non-targets. Three scores derived from the K-CPT were
utilized for the present study: hit rate RT, omission errors,
and commission errors.

Individual Difference Assessment Battery
General Intelligence. Participants completed a
commercial intelligence test, the Wechsler Preschool and
Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI; Wechsler, 1989).
Eight subscales were administered in order to obtain an
index of children’s Verbal IQ, Performance IQ, Processing
Speed, and Full Scale IQ.
Processing Speed. In addition to the Processing Speed
measure obtained from the WPPSI, three scales from the
Woodcock Johnson III (WJ-III, Woodcock, McGrew, &
Mather, 2007) were administered (i.e., pair cancelation,
decision speed, rapid picture naming) as well as a simple
motor reaction time task in order to obtain a more
comprehensive evaluation of children’s processing speed.
Inhibitory Control Measures. Participants completed two
executive function tasks that assess inhibitory control: the
Hearts and Flowers Task and the Day-Night Task. In the

543

Results

task (i.e., the ability to accurately track where the target
object disappeared) and two measures from the K-CPT: hit
rate RT (i.e., the average speed of children’s correct
responses) and omission errors (i.e., failure to respond to the
targets). The performance-based SSA composite score was
created by standardizing each measure, using Z-scores, and
averaging the standardized scores together.
The performance-based SSA composite variable was not
found to be significantly correlated with children’s ‘total
recall score’ (r = 0.05, p = 0.76). Consequently, the
performance-based SSA composite variable was not
included in subsequent analyses. In contrast, the association
between the behavioral index of SSA, ‘total time off-task,’
and ‘total recall score’ was marginally significant: Children
who spent more time off-task tended to obtain lower recall
scores, r = -0.38, p = 0.08.

Off-Task Behavior
Coding of the video data is currently in progress.
Consequently, the results regarding children’s off-task
behavior are from a subset of the sample (n = 22), and
should be considered preliminary.
Total proportion of time spent off-task was measured, and
group means were compared in each condition. The overall
proportion of time spent off-task was significantly greater in
the HVD condition (M = 28%, SD = 22%) compared to the
LVD condition (M =12%, SD = 14%), paired-sample t(21)
= 3.99, p = 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.87. This finding suggests
the experimental manipulation of the visual environment
was effective in inducing lower or higher levels of SSA
during the learning task.

Learning Outcomes

Predicting Children’s Learning Outcomes

Pair-wise comparisons were conducted to examine
children’s performance on the pre-test in the HVD and LVD
conditions. The analysis revealed no significant difference
across conditions at pre-test (MHVD = 0.29, SD = 0.14; MLVD
= 0.23, SD = 0.16), suggesting that the counterbalancing
procedure was effective; t(43) = -1.80, p = 0.08.
Additionally, the test stimuli were novel to the children as
performance on the pre-test for both versions of the PAL
task (Birds and Monkeys/Apes collapsed across HVD and
LVD conditions) was not significantly different from
chance (0.25); MBirds = 0.25, SD = 0.15; MMonkeys = 0.27, SD
= 0.16; single sample ts < 0.86, ps > 0.39.
Learning occurred in both conditions as evidenced by
children’s above chance performance on the recognition
subscale in both the HVD (MHVD = 0.47, SD = 0.25) and
LVD (MLVD = 0.49, SD = 0.27) conditions; single sample ts>
5.82, ps < 0.0001. Pair-wise comparisons were conducted to
examine condition differences on the PAL post-test for both
recognition and recall subscales. For the recognition
subscale, there was no significant effect of condition, t(43)
< 1, ns; consequently, this variable was not included in
subsequent analyses. However, a significant effect of
condition was found for the recall subscale. Children
obtained higher recall scores in the LVD condition (M =
0.20, SD = 0.23) compared to the HVD condition (M = 0.14,
SD = 0.18), t(43) = 2.12, p = 0.04, Cohen’s d = 0.29.

Due to the page limit constraints, we are only able to
explore a subset of the data in the present paper. In order to
determine if SSA and the aforementioned individual
difference factors were predictive of children’s learning
outcomes, a linear regression was performed. The dependent
variable was children’s ‘total recall score’ (i.e., average
PAL recall scores across the HVD and LVD conditions).
When ‘total time off-task’ was entered as the sole predictor
of children’s learning scores the model was marginally
significant; F(1, 20) = 3.34, p = 0.082. In this model, total
time off-task was only found to account for 14% of the
variability in children’s learning performance (adjusted R2 =
10%). The fit of the model was enhanced when the
individual difference factors were included in model 2.
Five predictors were included in model 2: (1) total time
off-task, (2) Verbal IQ, (3) Processing Speed composite
(WPPSI-PSQ; WJ-III: pair cancelation, decision speed,
rapid picture naming; motor speed RT), (4) Working
Memory composite (simple and complex word span; nonverbal WM), and (5) Inhibitory Control composite (DayNight task, Hearts & Flowers task (accuracy and RT); KCPT commission errors (i.e., responses to non-targets)).
Composite scores for the individual difference factors were
created by standardizing each measure, using Z-scores, and
averaging the standardized scores together. A correlation
matrix for total time off-task, total recall score, and the
individual difference composite variables is provided in
Table 1. Although many of the composite variables were
significantly correlated with one another, concerns
regarding multicollinearity were mitigated as the tolerance
values were within the acceptable range (ranging from 0.455
to 0.75).
Overall, model 2 significantly predicted children’s
learning outcomes; F(5,16) = 3.74, p = 0.02. The model
accounted for 54% of the variance in children’s learning
scores (adjusted R2 = 39%). However, only verbal IQ was
found to be significantly related to children’s total recall
scores: (β = 0.52, t = 2.59, p = 0.02), while processing speed
was a marginally significant predictor (β = -0.39, t = -1.94,

Are Performance-Based and Behavioral indices of
SSA Related to Children’s Learning?
Next, we examined the relationship between performancebased measures of SSA, the behavioral index of SSA, and
children’s Recall scores on the PAL task. For these
analyses, we averaged children’s scores on the PAL recall
subscale in the HVD and LVD conditions to create a single
variable ‘total recall score’. Similarly the duration of time
spent off-task in the HVD and LVD conditions were
averaged together to create a single variable ‘total time offtask’. A composite performance-based SSA variable was
created which included children’s accuracy on the Track-It

544

p = 0.07). Critically, total time off-task was not found to be
a significant predictor when individual difference measures
were entered into the model (β = -0.20, t = -0.80, p = 0.43).
It is possible that certain individual difference factors may
be more critical in certain types of learning environments
(e.g., having good inhibitory control may be more critical in
the HVD environment and thus a better predictor of learning
than in the LVD condition). Therefore, in models 3 and 4
we examined the relationship between SSA, the individual
difference factors, and learning within each experimental
condition (i.e., LVD vs. HVD).

significantly related to children’s HVD recall scores: (β =
0.54, t = 2.47, p = 0.02).
The present findings suggest that some individual
difference factors, such as IQ, may be a more consistent
predictor of children’s learning outcomes across different
types of learning environments; while the influence of other
individual difference factors (e.g., processing speed) may
only be elevated in certain types of learning environments.

Discussion
The results from the present study indicate that the visual
environment can in principle impact children’s attention
allocation as evidenced by the increase in children’s off-task
behavior in the HVD condition compared to the LVD
condition. Additionally, changes in attention allocation were
related to changes in children’s learning outcomes.
Specifically, children’s recall scores on the PAL task were
significantly higher in the LVD condition compared to the
HVD condition suggesting that SSA (indexed by the
proportion of time spent off-task) is related to children’s
learning. Indeed, when total time off-task was entered as the
sole predictor of children’s total recall scores the model was
marginally significant and time off-task accounted for 14%
of the variability in children’s learning performance.
However, a more predictive model was obtained when
individual difference factors were included in the model:
The model which included time off-task and the individual
difference measures accounted for 54% of the variability in
children’s learning performance. Importantly, once the
individual difference factors were incorporated into the
model, time off-task was no longer a significant predictor.
The present findings tentatively suggest that increasing
learning is not as simple as increasing time on-task. Despite
the intuitive appeal of this belief, time off-task was not
found to be a strong predictor of children’s learning
performance. Conceivably the effect of time on learning
may be modulated by pertinent individual difference factors.
Thus, time off-task may only be a critical factor for children
for whom the allotted time is insufficient due to a variety of
individual difference factors (e.g., children who have a low
IQ, slow information processing speed, weak inhibitory
control, etc.). However it is important to keep in mind that
these findings are based on time off-task data obtained from
a subset of the sample. It remains to be determined if the
preliminary pattern of results will persist once the time offtask data has been coded for the entire sample.
This line of research has the potential to make several
important contributions to the field. First, the present
experiment employed a within-subject experimental
manipulation in which lower or higher levels of SSA were
induced by introducing or removing visual displays during a
learning task. Utilizing a within-subject experimental design
allows inferences to be made regarding causality and thus
improves upon prior work which was largely correlational.
Second, this study helps to address methodological
concerns that limit the generalizability of previous work,
which correlated SSA to distant measures of achievement or

Table 1. Pattern of correlations between total time spent offtask, total recall scores, and the individual difference
composite variables.
1.
Recall
2. Time
Off-Task
3. SSA
Perf.
Based
4. VIQ
5. Proc.
Speed
6. WM
7. Inhib.
Control

2
-.378
+
1

3
.046
.248
1

4
.581
**
-.362
+

5
-.079

6
.233

-.486
*

-.396
+

7
.395
**
-.619
**

.028

-.117

-.015

-.226

.192

.374
*

.388
**

1

.166

.204

1

.378
*

1

1

Note. ** p≤ .01; * p ≤. 05; + p ≤ .10; p-values are 2-tailed.
In model 3 the dependent variable was children’s LVD
recall scores. Five predictors were included in the model:
(1) time spent off-task in the LVD condition, (2) Verbal IQ,
(3) Processing Speed composite, (4) Working Memory
composite, and (5) Inhibitory Control composite. Model 3
significantly predicted children’s LVD recall scores; F(5,16)
= 3.02 , p = 0.04. The model accounted for 49% of the
variance in children’s learning scores (adjusted R2 = 32%;
Tolerance values ranged from 0.56 to 0.78). Processing
speed was significantly related to children’s LVD recall
scores (β = -0.45, t = -2.21, p = 0.04). Verbal IQ was a
marginally a significant predictor: (β = 0.42, t = 1.98, p =
.06) as was inhibitory control (β = 0.37, t = 1.68, p = 0.11).
No other individual difference factors were significant.
In model 4 the dependent variable was children’s HVD
recall scores. Five predictors were included in the model:
(1) time spent off-task in the HVD condition, (2) Verbal IQ,
(3) Processing Speed composite, (4) Working Memory
composite, and (5) Inhibitory Control composite. Overall,
model 4 was marginally significant in predicting children’s
HVD recall scores; F(5,16) = 2.70, p = 0.059. The model
accounted for 46% of the variance in children’s learning
scores (adjusted R2 = 29%; Tolerance values ranged from
0.49 to 0.84). However, only Verbal IQ was found to be

545

task performance rather than learning per se. In contrast, this
study links SSA to immediate measures of genuine learning.
Critically, the learning task utilized in the present study is a
more naturalistic learning task in which children learn to
pair a novel label (i.e., animal name) with the corresponding
picture. The PAL task utilizes valid science content; the
labels and animals that children learn about during the task
are factual. These modifications allow for a more rigorous
examination of the relationship between SSA and learning
and it provides a foundation to more fully explore whether
the previous findings pertaining to the relationship between
SSA and task performance can be extended to learning
outcomes as well.
Considerable variability in the correlation strength
between SSA, achievement, and task performance has been
documented in the prior literature. These divergent results
highlight the importance of investigating the role of
individual differences. The present work begins to addresses
this issue directly by collecting measures of IQ, WM,
processing speed, and inhibitory control which will
ultimately help create a better understanding of the factors
that influence the relationship between SSA and learning.
Upon completion of the video coding of children’s off-task
behavior, additional analyses will be conducted which will
allow a formal test of the hypothesis that the individual
difference factors discussed here mediate or moderate the
relationship between SSA and learning. Collectively, this
work will help foster a more nuanced understanding of the
relationship between SSA and learning.

Program for Windows Technical Guide and Software
Manual. Toronto, ON: MHS.
Dale, P.S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Davidson, M. C., Amso, D., Anderson, L.C. & Diamond, A.
(2006), Development of cognitive control and executive
functions from 4 to 13 years: Evidence from
manipulations of memory, inhibition, and task switching.
Neuropsychologia, 44(11), 2037–2078.
Duncan, G. J., Dowsett, C. J., Claessens, A., Magnuson, K.,
Huston, A. C., Klebanov, P., Pagani, L.S., Feinstein, L.,
Engel, M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Sexton, H., Duckworth, K.,
& Japel, C. (2007). School readiness and later
achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43(6), 14281446.
Fisher, A. V., Thiessen, E., Godwin, K., Kloos, H., &
Dickerson, J. P. (2013). Mechanisms of focused attention
in 3- to 5-year-old children: Evidence from a new object
tracking task. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
114(2), 275-294.
Fleiss, J.L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and
proportions (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley.
Frederick, W. C., & Walberg, H. J. (1980). Learning as a
function of time. Journal of Educational Research, 73,
183-194.
Gerstadt, C., Hong, Y., & Diamond, A. (1994). The
relationship between cognition and action: Performance
of 31⁄2-7 year old children on a Stroop-like day–night
test. Cognition, 53, 129–153.
Henderson, J., & Ferreira, F. (2004). In The interface of
language, vision, and action: Eye movements and the
visual world. New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Higgins, A. T., & Turnure, J. E. (1984). Distractibility and
concentration of attention in children’s development.
Child Development, 55(5), 1799-1810.
Just, M., and Carpenter, P. (1976). Eye fixations and
cognitive processes. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 441–480.
Lehman, E. B., Naglieri, J. A., & Aquilino, S. A. (2010). A
national study on the development of visual attention
using the cognitive assessment system. Journal of
Attention Disorders, 14, 15-24.
Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., & Mather, N. (2007)
Woodcock Johnson III (WJ-III). Riverside Publishing.
Reid, R. & Harris, K. R. (1993). Self-monitoring of
attention versus self-monitoring of performance: Effects
on attention and academic performance. Exceptional
Children, 60(1), 29 - 40.
Setliff, A. E., & Courage, M. L. (2011). Background
television and infants allocation of their attention during
toy play. Infancy, 16(6), 611-639.
Schweizer, K. & Moosbrugger, H. (2004). Attention and
working memory as predictors of intelligence.
Intelligence, 329-347.
Wechsler, D. (1989). Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale
of Intelligence - Revised. San Antonio, TX: The
Psychological Corporation.

Acknowledgements
We thank Jessica Meeks, Anna Loiterstein, Rachel Walsh,
Jennifer Shin, Jae-Won Kim, Anna Vande Velde, Wyatt
D’Emilia, Matt Mastricova, and Amy Barrett for help
collecting and coding data. We thank the children, parents,
and teachers for making this work possible. This work was
supported in part by a Graduate Training Grant awarded to
Carnegie Mellon University by the Department of Education
(R305B090023).

References
Caldwell, J.H., Huitt, W.G., & Graeber, A.O. (1982). Time
spent in learning: Implications from research. The
Elementary School Journal, 82, 470-480.
Checa, P. & Rueda, M. R. (2011). Behavioral and brain
measures of executive attention and school competence in
late childhood. Developmental Neuropsychology, 36(8),
1018-1032.
Choudhury, N. & Gorman, K. S. (2000). The relationship
between sustained attention and cognitive performance in
17-24 month old toddlers. Infant and Child Development,
9, 127-146.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20,
37–46.
Conners, C. K. & Staff, M. (2001). Conners' Kiddie
Continuous Performance Test (K-CPT): Computer

546

