UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sensorimotor Laws, Mechanisms, and Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82v8d2dt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Vernazzani, Alfredo

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sensorimotor Laws, Mechanisms, and Representations
Alfredo Vernazzani (alfredo-vernazzani@daad-alumni.de)
Institut für Philosophie, Am Hof 1
53113 Bonn, Germany

Abstract

Outline of the Sensorimotor Theory

According to the sensorimotor account, vision does not imply
the construction of internally generated representations of the
environment, but it is the skillful exercise of the sensorimotor
contingencies obeying sense-specific laws. In this short study,
I focus on the notion of “sensorimotor law” and characterize
the kind of explanation provided by the sensorimotor theory
as a form of covering law model. I then question the nature of
such sensorimotor laws and describe them as mechanisms. I
show that a mechanistic interpretation provides a better
account of the sensorimotor invariances, which fosters us to
rebalance the explanatory burden of sensorimotor action and
information. Finally, I show that the question of the role of
representations within the sensorimotor theory should be
reconsidered.
Keywords: Sensorimotor theory of vision; representations;
mental mechanisms; explanation.

Introduction
In recent years we have witnessed the emergence of a new
research paradigm in vision studies: the sensorimotor
approach. First put forward in a paper written by Noë and
O’Regan (2001), the sensorimotor account represents an
attempt to explain vision and visual consciousness without
relying on internally generated models of the external world.
Against the Orthodox account of vision (the expression is
due to Noë & Thompson 2005), which claims that to
perceive something visually our brains construct complex
and detailed representations of the external world, defenders
of the sensorimotor account maintain that visual perception
is constituted by the active exercise of our sensorimotor
contingencies which obey a set of sense-specific laws.
In this study, I set out to examine which kind of
explanation of visual consciousness is provided by the
sensorimotor account. I will argue that the appeal to
sensorimotor laws makes the deductive nomological model
a perfect candidate. However, in contrast to the
sensorimotor theorists, I argue that sensorimotor laws are
better described in mechanistic terms. The dichotomy
presented here between a “law” interpretation and a
“mechanistic” interpretation of the sensorimotor invariances
has several relevant consequences. I will argue that if we
characterize such invariances as mechanisms, the role of the
internal information processing and perhaps of
representations has to be reconsidered.
In the following pages I will primarily refer to O’Regan &
Noë (2001) as it is the main source for all subsequent
developments of the sensorimotor account.

In overt contrast with traditional accounts of vision,
defenders of the sensorimotor theory contend that the
purpose of vision is not the construction of internal
representations of the external world, but rather the
exploration of the environment through the active exercise
of the sensorimotor contingencies. Of course,
representationalist thories of vision do not deny that
representations are employed to guide the organism in the
environment. The crucial difference between the two
accounts is that the sensorimotor theorists identify the
coding of vision exactly in the organism’s sensorimotor
response: it is precisely the exercise of the sensorimotor
skills that constitute visual perception.
What the authors call “sensorimotor contingencies” are
the motor actions exhibited by the organism and the
associated changes in sensory input. What distinguishes the
senses from one another, according to the sensorimotor
theory, is therefore not some specific nerve energy (Gorea
1991) that accounts for the diversity of experiences in
different sense modalities thanks to some intrinsic quality of
the signal transmitted by the neurons. The senses are
individuated by a set of rules that govern the sense-specific
sensorimotor contingencies. The distinctive character of
vision is the result of a very specific set of rules or “laws”
(O’Regan & Noë 2001, p. 941) that modulate the motor
actions triggered by the external objects.
There are two kinds or “categories” of sensorimotor
contingencies. The first kind is that of the sensorimotor
contingencies determined by the visual system, whereas the
second kind is specific to the visual attributes such as shapes
and colors. The distinction between two kinds of
sensorimotor contingencies is roughly equivalent to the
distinction between sensation and perception. In fact, the
first kind is “independent of any characterization or
interpretation of objects” (O’Regan & Noë 2001, p. 943)
and can be considered as the fundamental level of visual
sensation, whereas sensorimotor contingencies determined
by visual attributes are specific to visual features at the
higher perceptual level. Later, I will briefly discuss two
examples of such sensorimotor laws.
Noë and O’Regan argue that, in order to perceive
something visually, the organism must not only explore the
environment through the two kinds of sensorimotor
contingencies. The organism must also actively exercise “its
mastery of these laws” (O’Regan & Noë 2001, p. 943). This
implies that the organism must possess a distinctive knowhow of the sensorimotor laws. Moreover, the sensorimotor

3038

contingencies must be activated by an object in the external
world (Noë 2005).
Obviously, the sensorimotor contingencies are not
unknown to visual scientists: the theory’s original claim is
that the laws governing them constitute a representation-free
code of visual perception. O’Regan and Noë do not exactly
deny the existence of representations (2001, p. 1017), yet
they seem to maintain that representations are not
explanatory relevant for visual perception. Allegedly, this
model sidesteps a number of problems summoned by the
Orthodox view. Vision is not the construction of an internal
representation of the world. This way of conceiving vision
would be analogous to some version of Cartesian
materialism (Dennett 1991). Cartesian materialism is not
exactly a philosophical doctrine, but rather a way of
conceptualizing the relation between representations and
consciousness. According to this standpoint, representations
would be conscious once they obtain access to some brain
region(s) whose function is that of producing consciousness.
Sensorimotor theorists claim that the Orthodox standpoint
would lead us to a conceptual dead-end when we try to
explain consciousness and vision. Postulating the existence
of functional regions in the brain that simply make the
representations conscious does not contribute to explain
visual consciousness and gives rise to an insurmountable
explanatory gap.

conclusion of the argument, which ought to be deduced
from the premises.
Let us focus on some key features of the DN model. In
order to have a deductive-nomological explanation, the
following criteria must be met: the explanation must be a
valid deductive argument; the explanans must contain at
least one general law; the explanans must have empirical
content; the sentences in the explanans must be true.
The DN model is today widely considered untenable. In
this context, I will only focus on one specific problem. The
fact is that the explanatory power of the DN model crucially
depends on distinguishing true laws of nature from
accidental generalizations. Only laws of nature are
explanatory, whereas accidental generalizations are not.
Whilst the appeal to laws of nature in physics is rather
common, the case of the special sciences, like psychology
and biology, is quite different.
Cummins (2000) has persuasively argued that what
psychologists sometimes call “laws” are in fact descriptions
of effects: for instance, the Garcia effect, the McGurk effect,
and others. Effects do not have any explanatory relevance:
they merely describe a phenomenon which needs to be
explained. If the sensorimotor theory provides DN
explanations of vision, we need to verify the nature of the
sensorimotor invariances and clarify whether they actually
are laws.

Subsuming Vision under Sensorimotor Laws

A DN Model of Vision?

Consider the sensorimotor theory’s account of vision.
According to this model, when an object is visually “given”,
it triggers the system in such a way that the motor actions
exhibited constitute visual perception, and that such motor
actions obey a set of specific laws.
A rough, albeit intuitive schema for the sensorimotor
explanation could be the following:

From the viewpoint of philosophy of science, there are
several interesting questions. In this context, I focus my
remarks on the notion of explanation, and ask what kind of
explanation is provided by the sensorimotor theory.
Let us briefly recall the main features of this account:
visual perception is the active exercise of the sensorimotor
contingencies; sensorimotor contingencies obey a set of
sense-specific laws; moreover, they must be activated by an
object in the external world. Thus, perception is the action
response triggered by an object and structured according to
the sense-specific laws. Considering such features, it seems
that the model of explanation which best fits the
sensorimotor account is the covering law model.

Sensorimotor Law of Visual Perception
Target Object O
Visual Perception of O

The Covering Law Model
According to the covering law model, or more
appropriately, the deductive-nomological (DN) model
(Hempel & Oppenheim 1948; see also Salmon 1989),
explanations are arguments from premises, the explanans, to
a conclusion, the explanandum phenomenon, which is
deductively entailed by the premises.
The DN model has its roots in the era of logical
positivism, dominated by an anti-metaphysical standpoint.
Hempel’s model contributed to the clarification of the
notion of scientific explanation by describing it as a purely
logical relation. According to the DN model, the explanans
is composed by at least a law of nature and a singular
statement of antecedent condition (boundary condition). The
explanandum phenomenon figures in the DN model as the

It is important to stress that neither Noë nor O’Regan
have explicitly described the sensorimotor account as
providing a covering-law explanation. Moreover, they have
never spelled out the notion of ‘law’ clearly. But the
similarity with the DN model is striking. From the fact that
the motor actions triggered by the distal object O obey a set
of sense-specific laws, it follows that the primary effort
should be that of finding out and to describe the
sensorimotor laws. Once we will have completely described
the sensorimotor laws, we will also have a complete account
of the structure of vision. However, one could rightly ask at
this point: What are the sensorimotor laws?

The Nature of the Sensorimotor Laws
As I have explained above, it is a matter of debate
whether there actually are laws in special sciences such as

3039

biology and psychology. Clearly, if we want to explain
vision through the sensorimotor laws, it is paramount to
determine their nature. According to the DN model, the laws
of nature are sentences, which, as we have seen, are used as
premises of an argument. In this paragraph, I argue that
what O’Regan and Noë call ‘sensorimotor laws’ are actually
better described as mechanisms.
In their paper, O’Regan & Noë (2001) discuss some of
such laws. As I have explained in the first paragraph, there
are two kinds of sensorimotor contingencies: those
determined by the visual system and those determined by
the visual attributes. The first law that I will discuss is of the
former kind, the second one belongs to the latter.

First Example: Eye Rotation
Rotation of the eye alters the stimulation on the retina in a
way determined by the size of the eye movement, the shape
of the retina, and the nature of ocular optics (O’Regan &
Noë 2001, p. 941).

conscious visual phenomenology such as colors and shapes.
This second kind of sensorimotor laws is related to visual
perception whereas the former, as we have seen, are related
to visual sensation.
According to the authors, shape perception would be “the
set of all potential distortion that the shape undergoes”
(O’Regan & Noë 2001, p. 942) when we move in relation to
the object or when it is the object itself which moves in
relation to us. From these movements, the brain abstracts a
set of laws which code the shape perception.
That shape perception depends on the laws abstracted by
the variances produced by body movements would be
illustrated by patients who enjoyed restored visual
perception after being born blind with congenital cataract.
Clinical histories provide plenty of examples. Helmholtz
(quoted in O’Regan & Noë 2001, p. 942) for instance cites
the case of a patient who, after visual restoration, is
surprised that the coin apparently changes its shape when
rotated. According to O’Regan and Noë, the “surprise” this
patient felt would be due to the fact that upon restoration of
sight, the visual phenomenology is dramatically altered in
such a way as to enable abstractions of specific laws
previously inaccessible.

Sensorimotor Mechanisms

Figure 1: Eye Rotation (borrowed from O’Regan & Noë
2001)
As figure 1 shows, eye movement distorts the straight line
in such a way as to describe a greater arc in (a) and a
smaller one in (b). The alteration of the stimulus on the
retina depends not only on the eye rotation, but also on the
structure of the retina. The alteration of the stimulus on the
retina is transmitted in such a way as to deliver different
cortical representations.
O’Regan and Noë maintain that the alterations of the
stimulus and consequent sensorimotor response would be
constrained by different structural laws that are specific to
the sense of vision. The task of the vision scientists, and the
philosophers interested in visual perception, is that of
describing the laws in order to understand how the organism
exhibits a specific sensorimotor response.

Second Example: Visual Shape
The other example of sensorimotor law discussed by the
authors is that of visual shape. As I have explained above,
the second kind of sensorimotor contingencies is determined
by visual attributes, which means by specific features of our

As I have said, according to the DN model propositions
are sentences used as premises in an argument. Yet, the
examples of sensorimotor laws just discussed do not seem
to support this interpretation. I suspect that the appeal to
‘laws’ in the sensorimotor theory reveals the lingering
tendency to provide covering law explanations. The
phenomena just examined are better described as
mechanisms.
The term ‘mechanism’ is often used by biologists and
neuroscientists (Craver 2007), as well as by cognitive
scientists (Bechtel 2008). But what is a mechanism? Bechtel
(2008) defines mechanisms as structures performing a
function in virtue of their component parts, operations, and
their organizations. The way we characterize parts and
operations crucially depends on the field of investigation
and therefore the kind of phenomena studied. For instance,
many fields of biology determine both the explanandum
phenomenon and the operations as involving physical
transformation of material substances. To provide a
mechanistic explanation basically means to show how the
joint interactions of the component parts and operations
results in the production of the explanandum phenomenon. I
will now consider again the two examples of sensorimotor
law described above from the mechanistic standpoint.
Allegedly, the first ‘sensorimotor law’ accounts for the
alterations of the signal on the retina and the consequent
sensorimotor response through vision-specific structural
laws. It is by describing the mechanics of the eye that we
can explain the alteration of the stimulus on the retina. Yet,
it is not clear how we should understand this claim. We
could interpret this observing that eye movements obey the
laws of mechanics. Yet, this interpretation would obviously

3040

be trivial. Moreover, it would be an utter mystery why such
laws should help us explain visual perception.
A better way to figure out how to explain the alterations
of the signal on the retina would be to provide a mechanistic
explanation of the eye’s movements. In mechanistic terms,
the different component parts are physical and the
operations are their movements. The explanandum
phenomenon, the alteration of the signal on the retina, can
be explained by reconstructing the way the specific
mechanism behaves without introducing the inaccurate
notion of ‘law’.
Consider now the second case. Visual shape perception
would depend on ‘laws’ abstracted by the brain on the basis
of the variances produced through bodily movements. The
abstracted laws, as we have seen, define the set of all
potential shape distortion. In this case it remains completely
obscure why we should understand the potential distortions
as ‘laws’, nor is it clear why such ‘laws’ should account for
shape perception. Noë and O’Regan remain silent on this
issue.
The case of shape perception is perhaps more tricky; yet, I
think that this example, too, can be better described from the
mechanistic standpoint. Even if we agree on the
sensorimotor account of shape perception, it would still be
required that the brain ‘recognizes’ and processes the
information concerning the object’s shape. But this would
be better accounted from a mechanistic standpoint, as an
example of a mental mechanism: the component parts are
functional units processing information concerning visual
shape. Accordingly, cases of restored vision could be
reinterpreted as processing information previously
inaccessible, without introducing any mysterious
sensorimotor ‘law’.
If my remarks are correct, I would propose a mechanistic
reformulation of the sensorimotor theory: the sensorimotor
laws are actually sensorimotor mechanisms. This
reformulation of the sensorimotor theory has several
implications that I will now explore.

Sensorimotor Mechanisms and Information:
A Return of Representations?
The way we describe the phenomena considered here is
not only a verbal dispute. Laws and mechanisms are
explanatorily different. I contend that it is precisely the
introduction of the notion of law, vague and never really
clarified in the O’Regan and Noë’s paper, that leads to the
rejection of the explanatory power of representations. Yet, if
we reject the ‘law’ interpretation of the phenomena we have
described, a number of theoretical consequences follow. I
will now consider some of them.
First, and most importantly, a mechanistic reading helps
us solving a confusion within the sensorimotor theory
concerning representations. As I have explained, the theory
does not reject the existence of representation, but it
undermines their explanatory power. It is not through
representations that we can hope to explain vision, but
through the two kinds of sensorimotor laws. Yet, in

O’Regan and Noë (2001) it is not exactly clear what role do
representations play. Noë (2004, p. 22) claims that it is not
possible to deny the existence of representations altogether.
Similarly, in their response against criticisms, O’Regan and
Noë agree that the visual system ‘stores information’ and
that such information influences the perceiver (2001, p.
1017). If we hold a representational interpretation of the
information processing, and this seems to be the authors’
stance (O’Regan & Noë 2001, p. 1017), then the
sensorimotor theory includes representations but deny that
they have any explanatory power. After all, representations
are repeatedly mentioned in their description of the
sensorimotor laws: it is through the sensorimotor laws
governing eye movement that the signal on the retina is
altered thus producing different cortical representations.
The authors put the explanatory burden of vision entirely
on the sensorimotor laws: it is precisely this that leads
O’Regan and Noë to an unclear position concerning the role
of representations. But if we interpret the sensorimotor laws
as mechanisms, the role of representations in perception
needs to be reconsidered.
According to the interpretation that I have laid out, we
should distinguish between two kinds of mechanisms. The
first one provides an example of a physical mechanism
affecting the signal on the retina. The second one provides
an example of a mental mechanism that process
information. In both cases, the notion of information is
central, counterbalancing the focus on the motor actions.
What remains to be questioned is the nature of such
information being processed, and whether it can be defined
as representational or not. In any case, switching the focus
from the sensorimotor laws to the sensorimotor mechanisms
prompts us to reconsider the role of the information
processed in the explanation of vision and its
representational interpretation.

Conclusion
My remarks are not meant to reject the sensorimotor
theory. The crucial question is to understand the nature of
sensorimotor laws, and therefore to understand which role
they play within the sensorimotor account of vision. I have
tried to show that such laws are actually better characterized
as mechanisms. This has some relevant consequences, since
the explanatory structure of the theory dramatically changes
in the two interpretations.
According to the “law” interpretation, the purpose of
vision research is to describe the laws governing the
sensorimotor reactions without relying on representations.
On the contrary, according to the mechanistic interpretation,
the concept of information and, perhaps, of representation,
returns as an important explanatory component.
Finally, there is still another important implication of the
mechanistic interpretation of the sensorimotor theory: a
more balanced account of the relations between action and
perception that does not bind them too tight, but stresses the
relevance of the sensorimotor action to the modulation of
the information processing.

3041

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Prof. Andreas Bartels (University of
Bonn) and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments on an earlier version of this paper.

References
Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental Mechanisms. New York:
Psychology Press.
Craver, C. (2007). Explaining the Brain. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Cummins, R. (2000). “How does it work?” vs. “What are
the laws?”: Two conceptions of psychological
explanations. In F. Keil & R.A. Wilson (Eds.),
Explanation and Cognition, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston:
Little, Brown & co.
Gorea, A. (1991). Thoughts on the specific nerve energy. In
A. Gorea (Ed.), Representation of vision, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hempel, C.G., & Oppenheim, P. (1948). Studies in the
Logic of Explanation. Philosophy of Science, 15, 135175.
Noë, A. & Thompson, E. (2005). Introduction. In A. Noë &
E. Thompson (Eds.), Vision and Mind, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Noë, A. (2005). Real Presence. Philosophical Topics, 33,
235-264.
O’Regan, K.J., & Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account
of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 939-1031.
Salmon, W.C. (1989). Four Decades of Scientific
Explanation. Minneapolis: Pittsburgh University Press.

3042

