UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shifting ground: A definite deficit in adult article production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5n92w07s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hochstein, Lara
Barner, David

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shifting ground: A definite deficit in adult article production
Lara Klainerman Hochstein (Larak@ling.ucsd.edu)

Department of Linguistics, 9500 Gilman Drive
San Diego, CA 92093-0108 USA
David Barner (Barner@ucsd.edu)

Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Drive
San Diego, CA 92093-0109 USA
Abstract

they fail to appreciate the listener’s lack of knowledge about
the large triangle.
These findings have raised the possibility that
perspective-taking in conversation may not be as automatic
or effortless as previously assumed. Horton & Keysar
(1996) proposed a two-step monitoring and adjustment
model of audience design, in which speakers initially
formulate their utterances without taking their interlocutor’s
perspective into account and only later monitor and revise
their output if they have sufficient time and processing
resources. Pickering and Garrod (2004) and Keysar (2007)
have even suggested that adults do not routinely take their
interlocutors’ mental states into account when producing
and comprehending speech: “People don’t rely on the
beliefs and knowledge of their addressees to design what
they say...Of course, sometimes they might. However, such
consideration of the mental state of the other is not done
systematically” (Keysar, 2007; 72). Under this view, adults
are by default egocentric, yet they often appear to be taking
their interlocutor’s mental states into account simply
because speakers and interlocutors typically share the same
knowledge and context.
The
evidence
regarding
adults’
conversational
perspective-taking abilities remains inconclusive, however.
The referential communication tasks which show
perspective-taking failures in adults typically place subjects
in somewhat unnatural communicative situations in which
they are asked to uniquely identify a given object. Since the
primary goal of the task is to be as informative as possible,
and since subjects are made explicitly aware of this goal,
they may resort to unnatural statements that would
otherwise not occur in naturalistic speech. Furthermore,
there is some evidence that adults do in fact show sensitivity
to their interlocutor’s mental states when planning
utterances. For instance, Brennan and Clark (1996) found
that speakers who establish specific terms (e.g., “the high
heel”) with a particular partner switch back to more basiclevel terms (e.g., “the shoe”) when paired with a new
partner – indicating awareness on the part of the speakers
that their new partner lacks knowledge about the more
specific term. Similarly, Heller et al. (2009) show that
speakers tend to provide only the name of an object when
their interlocutor is familiar with this name, yet provide
additional descriptions when their interlocutors are not
familiar with the object’s name, suggesting that they are

Interlocutors are typically thought to keep track of
information that is shared between speaker and listener (i.e.,
common ground) and information that is available only to the
speaker (i.e., privileged ground). In this study, we
investigated whether speakers take their interlocutor’s
knowledge into account when choosing between definite
articles (e.g., the) and indefinite articles (e.g., a) in the
context of object reference. In Experiment 1, we found that a
surprisingly high number of subjects inappropriately use the
definite article to refer to objects in privileged ground,
suggesting that considering interlocutors’ mental states during
language production is effortful and does not always come
naturally. In Experiments 2-6, we explored various factors
that influence whether or not speakers accommodate the
knowledge states of interlocutors.
Keywords: common ground; perspective-taking; audience
design; definiteness; indefiniteness

Introduction
Communication is often described as a cooperative act in
which speakers and listeners work together to achieve
mutual understanding. Speakers tailor the style and content
of their utterances to the specific needs of their listeners – a
process known as audience design – while listeners provide
important feedback such as acknowledgement or requests
for clarification (e.g., Clark & Brennan, 1991). Throughout
this process, interlocutors are thought to keep track of
information that is shared between speakers and listeners,
known as common ground, and information that is available
only to one party, known as privileged ground (e.g., Clark,
1996).
A number of recent studies, however, have found that in
simple referential communication tasks, adults often fail to
take their interlocutor’s perspective into account and instead
inappropriately mention privileged information (e.g., Horton
& Keysar, 1996; Wardlow & Ferreira, 2003). In some of
these studies, for instance, one subject (the speaker) can see
two objects of the same type that differ only in size (e.g., a
small triangle and a large triangle), while the other subject
(the listener) can only see one of these two objects (e.g., the
small triangle). Since only one triangle is visible to the
listener, speakers should refer to the mutually visible object
as simply “the triangle”. However, subjects frequently refer
to this object as “the small triangle”, instead, suggesting that

619

able to successfully track which names are part of common
ground and which are privileged.
In this paper, we address this debate by examining adults’
perspective-taking abilities in a more natural story-telling
setting, in which the speakers are not explicitly directed to
be informative or to take their audience’s knowledge states
into consideration. Also, we explored a more subtle
grammatical indicator of audience design, which, as we
report, subjects are often unaware of when producing
language. Specifically, we investigated whether speakers
take their interlocutor’s knowledge into account when
choosing between definite articles (e.g., the) and indefinite
articles (e.g., a) in the context of object reference. Although
there are many different definitions of definiteness and
indefiniteness (e.g., see Abbott, 2004 for a full discussion of
the roles of uniqueness, familiarity, and specificity in
defining definiteness), by all accounts definite articles
should typically be used to refer to objects in common
ground while indefinite articles should be used to refer to
objects in privileged ground. Therefore, when choosing
between definite and indefinite articles, speakers must take
their interlocutor’s knowledge into account. For instance,
the sentence, “I read the book this morning” is only
appropriate if the book in question is in common ground –
e.g., the speaker has reason to believe that the listener
knows about this book, and it is salient in the discourse
(e.g., a book that was just mentioned in the conversation, or
a book assigned in a book club to which both people
belong). If the speaker has no reason to believe that the
listener has such knowledge, it would be more appropriate
to use the indefinite article: “I read a book this morning”.
Thus, whereas previous studies have examined whether
adults take interlocutor knowledge into account when
making context-specific distinctions that were made very
salient in the task (e.g., deciding whether to say “small
triangle” or just “triangle”), our study focused on a less
salient linguistic distinction, which nevertheless is both
ubiquitous and conditioned on common ground information.
Interestingly, previous research on definite and indefinite
article use has focused primarily on children, and has used
article production as a test of childhood egocentrism. These
studies have shown that children between 2-4 years of age
inappropriately use the definite article to introduce a new
discourse entity – a phenomenon that has been dubbed “theoveruse” (e.g., Karmiloff-Smith, 1979; Maratsos, 1976). For
instance, in Karmiloff-Smith (1979), children were
presented with a scene in which a doll knocked over one of
three identical objects and then were asked, “What did the
doll do?” The 3- and 4-year-olds in this study used the
definite article 39-63% of the time to refer to the item that
had been knocked over – e.g. “The doll knocked over the X”
– even though it was one item of many and had not been
formally introduced into the discourse yet. Similarly,
Schaeffer and Matthewson (2005) presented 2- and 3-yearolds with a picture of an event (e.g., a picture of Mickey
Mouse drawing a picture of a house) and asked them to
describe what happened (e.g. “What did Mickey Mouse just

do?). They found that children overused the definite article
25% of the time to introduce this new entity (e.g. “He drew
the house”), whereas adults almost never did.
It has been proposed that this overuse of the definite
article in children’s production stems from egocentrism, or a
lack of ability to consider the interlocutor’s perspective
(Maratsos, 1976; Schaeffer & Matthewson, 2005).
However, the studies assessing children’s competence with
definite and indefinite articles do not directly manipulate
audience design. Similarly, no studies have directly
manipulated audience design to test adults’ use of the
definite and indefinite articles. Our study therefore explores
whether children’s apparent egocentrism with article use
constitutes a developmental delay or whether it extends to
adults as well.
To test whether adults take their interlocutors’ knowledge
into account when choosing between the definite and
indefinite article to refer to an object, we asked subjects to
describe a scene to either an interlocutor with shared
knowledge about the scene or to an interlocutor with no
shared knowledge (Exp. 1). We hypothesized that if subjects
take their interlocutor’s mental states into consideration
when producing referential expressions, they should use the
definite article to refer to objects in common ground and
switch to the indefinite article when referring to objects in
privileged ground. Contrary to our expectations, we found
that approximately half of our subjects used the definite
article to refer to an object in privileged ground when
speaking to an unknowledgeable interlocutor, suggesting a
failure on the part of many subjects to spontaneously
consider this interlocutor’s lack of knowledge. Five followup studies (Exp. 2-6) replicated and extended these findings
to a variety of contexts, and identify factors which cause
speakers to refresh their discourse models to accommodate
the knowledge states of new interlocutors.

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we investigated whether adults are more
likely to use the definite article to refer to an object if their
interlocutor has shared knowledge about this object (i.e., the
object is in common ground), and more likely to use the
indefinite article if their interlocutor has no knowledge
about this object (i.e., the object is in the speaker’s
privileged ground).

Participants
We recruited 45 adults (32 females) from the UCSD
campus, ranging in age from 18 to 40, with a mean age of
20.7. All subjects were native speakers of English.

Materials & Procedure
There were 2 experimenters in this task: E1 and E2.
Subjects were seated at a table directly across from E1, with
an array of stuffed animals lined up in front of them. This
array consisted of 4 sets of 3 identical animals: 3 identical
bears, 3 identical cows, 3 identical lions and 3 identical

620

monkeys. At the beginning of the session, E1 introduced the
stuffed animals on the table by saying, “Look at all these
animals!” and then asked subjects to “pick one to go on an
adventure”. Once subjects had selected one of the stuffed
animals from the array, E1 removed all the other animals
from the table and presented subjects with 3 sets of 2
identical toy food items: 2 fish, 2 bananas, and 2
strawberries. E1 then asked subjects to, “Pick one of these.”
After subjects had selected a food item, E1 removed all
other items from the table such that only the chosen animal
and the chosen food item were still visible to the subject. E1
then announced that the adventure was about to begin, and
acted out the following simple story: the chosen animal is
walking along when he spots the chosen food item and
instantly devours it. After this story was acted out, all items
were removed from the table. In the Common ground
condition, E1 then asked subjects, “What happened on the
adventure?” In the No common ground condition, E1 told
subjects, “Ok now my friend is going to come in. She didn’t
get to see what happened on the adventure, so she’s going to
ask you to tell her.” E1 then left the room as E2 entered. E2
asked subjects, “What happened on the adventure?”
Responses were coded for use of definite or indefinite
articles in the first mention of the animal protagonist.

walking in and ate the fish” and “The cow came and decided
to eat the strawberry” despite the fact that their interlocutor
had no idea what monkey or cow they were talking about.
The 10 subjects who used the indefinite article to introduce
an unfamiliar referent gave descriptions like, “A dog was
walking, saw a fish, and ate the fish” and, “So there was a
monkey and the monkey was walking along and he saw a
banana just lying there...”
We used Fisher's Exact Test to determine whether the rate
of definite article use was independent of condition, and
found evidence that subjects in the Common Ground
condition used the definite article at a different rate than
subjects in the No Common Ground condition (Fisher’s
Exact, p = .023). This suggests that adults in this task were
more likely to use the definite article to refer to an item that
was part of common ground than one that was part of
privileged ground. Yet despite this difference, adults did not
perform as expected on the No Common Ground: half of
them used the definite article to introduce an item that was
novel and unfamiliar to the listener. This high rate of
definite article use is especially surprising considering the
fact that there were 3 identical lions, bears, etc. originally
presented to the subject, and the indefinite article is
typically used to pick out one item of many. This suggests
that adults often fail to take their interlocutor’s perspective
into account when choosing between definite and indefinite
articles.
It is possible that subjects who answered egocentrically
simply assumed shared knowledge on the part of E2 because
E2 worked in the lab and was therefore familiar with the
experimental setup. However, the experiment was designed
such that E2 could never possibly know which item a
subject picked on any given session. Thus, even if subjects
assumed knowledge on the part of E2 regarding the general
task, they should still have recognized that E2 did not know
which animal ate what and so they should have used
indefinite articles to introduce these unfamiliar referents.
Nevertheless, to rule out the possibility that subjects
overestimated E2’s lack of knowledge due to her
involvement in the lab, and to address concerns regarding
the use of confederates as conversational partners in
language production tasks (see Kuhlen & Brennan, 2012),
we conducted a second experiment in which we had naïve
subjects perform the role of E2.

Results & Discussion

Figure 1. Proportion of definite and indefinite
article use in Experiments 1-6
In the Common Ground condition, 19 of the 22 subjects
(86.4%) used the definite article to refer to the animal
protagonist. These subjects gave responses like, “The bear
ate the fish”, and “The monkey traveled and saw the banana
and ate it”. The 3 subjects who used the indefinite article in
this condition gave descriptions like, “A lion found a banana
and ate it”. Subjects’ performance in this condition therefore
conformed to our expectation that speakers would use the
definite article to refer to items belonging to common
ground between speaker and listener.
In contrast, in the No Common Ground condition, where
subjects were asked to describe the adventure to an
unknowledgeable interlocutor, 12 of the 23 subjects (52.2%)
used the definite article to refer to the animal protagonist.
These subjects gave responses like, “The monkey came

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we investigated whether the high rate of
definite article use that we found in the No Common Ground
condition of Experiment 1 would still hold if we used naïve
subjects instead of confederates as interlocutors in this task.

Participants
We recruited 42 adults (18 females) from the UCSD
campus, ranging in age from 18-26, with a mean age of
20.5. All subjects were native speakers of English.

621

protagonist as “My pet gorilla”. Eight of the remaining 20
subjects (40%) used the definite article (e.g., “The monkey
just came and ran and ate the banana”). We found no
evidence that subjects in this condition used the definite
article at a different rate than subjects in the No Common
Ground condition in Exp. 1 (Fisher’s Exact, p = .54). Thus,
even when explicitly reminded of their interlocutor’s lack of
knowledge, a significant portion of adults in this task still
failed to use the indefinite article to introduce an item that
was not part of common ground.

Materials & Procedure
We used the same materials and procedure as in the No
common ground condition in Exp. 1, except that two naïve
subjects were brought into the lab during each session, and
one was randomly assigned to the role of the primary
subject while the other was assigned to the role of E2.

Results & Discussion
Eight of the 21 primary subjects (38.1%) in this task used
the definite article to refer to the animal protagonist (e.g.,
“The lion ate the banana”) when describing the “adventure”
to another naïve subject with no knowledge of the characters
and events involved. We found no evidence that subjects in
this condition used the definite article at a different rate than
subjects in the No Common Ground condition in Exp. 1
(Fisher’s Exact, p = .38).
These results therefore suggest that the high percentage of
egocentric responses in Exp. 1 cannot be attributed simply
to the fact that we used confederates in that task – and, more
specifically, to an assumption on the part of subjects that E2
shared knowledge about the objects involved in the study.
Subjects used the definite article about 40% of the time in
this task, despite the fact that their interlocutors clearly had
no prior knowledge about the study.
The relatively high rate of definite article use in this task
as well as in Exp. 1 thus suggests that adults do not always
take their interlocutor’s mental states into account when
producing referential expressions. In Exp. 3-6, we attempt to
identify factors that may affect whether speakers take their
interlocutor’s knowledge states into account when
producing referential expressions.

Experiment 4
In this experiment, we examined whether adults would be
more likely to take their interlocutor’s knowledge into
account when they were removed from the room where the
“adventure” had taken place and taken to a completely new
location. We hypothesized that this might encourage
subjects to refresh their discourse model to accommodate
the knowledge states of a new interlocutor.

Participants
We recruited 21 adults (19 females) from the UCSD
campus, ranging in age from 18-22, with a mean age of 20.
All subjects were native speakers of English.

Materials & Procedure
We used the same materials and procedure as in the No
Common Ground condition in Exp. 1, except that after the
“adventure”, E1 asked subjects to follow her out of the lab
and into a completely new room where E2 was sitting at a
computer doing work. E1 then instructed subjects to tell E2
what happened on the adventure, while E1 waited outside.

Experiment 3
In Exp. 3, we investigated whether subjects would be more
likely to use the indefinite article to refer to items in
privileged ground when given the strongest possible explicit
evidence about their interlocutor’s (E2) lack of common
ground.

Results & Discussion
Eleven of the 21 subjects (52%) used the definite article to
refer to the animal protagonist. We found no evidence that
subjects in this condition used the definite article at a
different rate than subjects in the No Common Ground
condition in Exp. 1 (Fisher’s Exact, p = 1). Thus even when
subjects were removed from the location of the adventure,
they still often failed to take their interlocutor’s lack of
knowledge into account when choosing between the definite
and indefinite article to refer to the chosen animal.

Participants
We recruited 21 adults (14 females) from the UCSD
campus, ranging in age from 18-23, with a mean age of
20.3. All subjects were native speakers of English.

Materials & Procedure

Experiment 5

We used the same materials and procedure as in the No
Common Ground condition in Exp. 1, except that E1
emphasized E2’s lack of knowledge by telling subjects, “Ok
now my friend is going to come in. She didn’t get to see
what happened on the adventure so she’s going to ask you
to tell her. Remember, she has no idea what happened, and
she doesn’t even know what animal you picked.”

In all of the experiments described thus far, the cost
associated with inappropriately using the definite article to
refer to an object in privileged ground was relatively low. In
Exp. 5, we investigated whether subjects would be more
careful about their choice of articles when using the definite
article could actually lead to confusion and
miscommunication. At the beginning of the experiment,
subjects and E2 established common ground about a plastic
cow and dog. Then, E2 left the room while E1 came in and
asked subjects to choose one of three stuffed animal dogs or

Results & Discussion
One subject in this task used neither the definite nor the
indefinite article. This subject referred to the animal

622

one of three stuffed animal cows to go on the “adventure”.
We hypothesized that subjects would be less likely to use
the definite article to refer to the animal protagonist of the
“adventure” when speaking to E2, since E2 might
mistakenly think “the dog” or “the cow” referred to the
plastic dog and cow from the beginning of the experiment.

Materials & Procedure
The same materials and procedure were used as in Exp. 1.
However, after E1 acted out the scene with the chosen
animal and food item, she handed subjects a blank piece of
paper and told them to “think of a friend – someone who
doesn’t live in San Diego – and write a letter to that person
explaining what happened on the adventure.” When subjects
finished writing the letter, E1 collected it from them. In the
Common ground condition, E1 then asked subjects, “Now I
want you to tell me: what happened on the adventure?” In
the No common ground condition, E1 told subjects, “Ok
now my friend is going to come in. She didn’t get to see
what happened on the adventure so she’s going to ask you
to tell her.” E1 then left the room as E2 entered. E2 asked
subjects, “What happened on the adventure?”

Participants
We recruited 32 adults (12 females) from the UCSD
campus, ranging in age from 17-23, with a mean age of 20.
All subjects were native speakers of English.

Materials & Procedure
At the beginning of the session, E2 introduced subjects to a
plastic cow and a plastic dog and told them that they were
going to play a quick memory game. E2 then placed the cow
and dog in boxes, moved the boxes around quickly, and then
asked subjects to guess which box each animal was in. Then
E2 told subjects, “Now my friend [E1] is going to come in
and play a different game with you.” E1 came in and the rest
of the study proceeded exactly as in the No Common
Ground condition in Exp. 1.

Results & Discussion
Twenty subjects participated in the Common ground
condition. In the letter to a friend, two subjects used neither
the definite nor indefinite article to refer to the animal
protagonist (e.g., referring to the animal as “my bear friend”
instead). Of the remaining 18 subjects, 5 subjects (27.8%)
used the definite article to refer to the animal protagonist in
their letter. When speaking to E2, 15 subjects used the
definite article (75%) to refer to the animal protagonist.
Twenty-five subjects participated in the No common
ground condition. In the letter to a friend, two subjects used
neither the definite nor indefinite article to refer to the
animal protagonist. Of the remaining 23 subjects, 4 (17%)
used the definite article to refer to the animal protagonist.
When speaking to E2, one subject used neither the definite
nor indefinite article to refer to the animal protagonist. Of
the remaining 24 subjects, 5 (20.8%) used the definite
article.
We found evidence that subjects in the Common Ground
condition in this task used the definite article at a different
rate than subjects in the No Common Ground condition
(Fisher’s Exact; p = .0006). We also found evidence that
subjects in the No Common Ground condition in this
experiment used the definite article at a different rate than
those in the No Common Ground condition from Exp. 1.
(Fisher’s Exact; p = .036), indicating that subjects were
more likely to use the indefinite article to refer to the animal
protagonist in the adventure when addressing an
unknowledgeable interlocutor if they had been previously
asked to write a letter describing this adventure to a friend.
This suggests that the act of writing the letter broke the
established discourse or made the interlocutor’s lack of
knowledge more salient to speakers. Crucially, though,
subjects did not persist in using the indefinite article when
addressing their interlocutor in the Common Ground
condition.

Results & Discussion
Two subjects in this task used neither the definite nor the
indefinite article to refer to the animal protagonist. One of
these subjects used no article at all (“Cow was walking
along...”) while the other referred to the animal as “Mr.
Dog”. Eight of the remaining 19 subjects (42.1%) used the
definite article to refer to the dog or cow in the adventure,
despite the fact that they and E2 shared common ground
about a different dog and cow. We found no evidence that
subjects in this condition used the definite article at a
different rate than subjects in the No Common Ground
condition in Exp. 1 (Fisher’s Exact, p = .186). Thus, adults
continued to use the definite article about half of the time
when addressing an unknowledgeable interlocutor, despite
the fact that doing so could lead to miscommunication.

Experiment 6
In this experiment, we investigated whether subjects would
be more likely to use the indefinite article to refer to items
in privileged ground when first asked to write a letter to a
friend describing the adventure. We hypothesized that in
writing a letter to an interlocutor who clearly was not
present and therefore had no common ground whatsoever
about the experiment, subjects would be forced to create a
completely new discourse model.

Participants
We recruited 45 adults (35 females) from the UCSD
campus, ranging in age from 18 to 23, with a mean age of
21.0. All subjects were native speakers of English.

General Discussion
In Exp. 1, we found that about half of our adult subjects
used the definite article to refer to an item that was new and
unidentifiable to their listener when retelling the events of a

623

Acknowledgements

short scene. In Exp. 2, we ruled out the possibility that this
high rate of failure was due to the fact that we used a
confederate in Exp. 1. In Exp. 3, 4, and 5, respectively, we
showed that this high rate of egocentric uses of the definite
article persisted even when subjects were explicitly
reminded of their interlocutors’ ignorance, when they were
taken out of the experiment room to a new location, and
when using the definite article had the potential to lead to
miscommunication. Finally in Exp. 6, we showed that
subjects’ were more likely to use the indefinite article when
addressing an unknowledgeable interlocutor if they were
asked to write a letter to a friend beforehand.
Our finding that English-speaking adults often use the
definite article to refer to an object in privileged ground thus
suggests that considering interlocutors’ mental states during
language production is effortful and does not always come
naturally. This is consistent with models of language
production which posit that utterance formation is initially
egocentric, and that it is only at a secondary and more
effortful stage that speakers correct their utterances by
taking other peoples’ perspectives into account. However, as
Wardlow Lane and Ferreira (2008) point out, these models
do not really explain why adults fail to take interlocutor
knowledge into account when they are not faced with any
time constraint or additional processing load, as in our
experiments. These models also do not fully explain the
variability present in our study – i.e., the fact that
consistently half of the adults in our studies failed to take
their interlocutors’ lack of knowledge into account while the
other half succeeded.
However none of these accounts can explain why adults
failed to take their interlocutor’s perspective into account in
Exp. 3, where they were explicitly reminded of E2’s lack of
knowledge. In this experiment, subjects did not have to
expend any additional cognitive resources determining what
information was part of common ground and what
information was privileged – they were told outright that
their interlocutor lacked knowledge about the characters and
events in the adventure. One possible explanation for this
behavior is that the ability to create new discourse models is
not under conscious control. Another possibility is that, as
Wardlow-Lane and Ferreira (2008) suggest, speakers simply
choose to leave some of the burden of establishing reference
to the listener. This idea may be consistent with evidence
suggesting that speakers do not typically go out of their way
to accommodate their speakers by, for instance, avoiding
syntactic ambiguity (e.g., Arnold et al., 2004).
Finally, the results of our studies have important
implications for research on child language acquisition. The
fact that a high proportion of adults failed to take their
interlocutor’s perspective into account when choosing
between definite and indefinite articles suggest that
children’s apparent egocentrism with these articles (e.g.,
Karmiloff-Smith, 1979, Maratsos, 1976) is not necessarily
indicative of a developmental delay.

This work was supported by a Jacob K. Javits Fellowship.

References
Abbott, B. (2004). Definiteness and Indefiniteness. In Horn,
L., & Ward, G. (Eds.). The handbook of pragmatics,
Wiley-Blackwell.
Arnold, J. E., Wasow, T., Asudeh, A., & Alrenga, P. (2004).
Avoiding attachment ambiguities: The role of constituent
ordering. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 55-70.
Brennan, S. & Clark, H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 22, 1482.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. Perspectives on socially shared
cognition, 13, 127-149.
Clark, H. (1996). Using language (Vol. 4). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Heller, D., Skovbroten, K. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2009).
Experimental evidence for speakers’ sensitivity to
common vs. privileged ground in the production of
names. In K. van Deemter, A. Gatt, E. Krahmer & R. van
Gompel (eds.) Workshop on the Production of Referring
Expressions: Bridging the gap between computational
and empirical approaches to reference (PRE-CogSci
2009), Amsterdam.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1979). A functional approach to child
language: A study of determiners and reference.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Keysar, B. (2007). Communication and miscommunication:
The role of egocentric processes. Intercultural
Pragmatics, 4, 71-85
Kuhlen, A. K., & Brennan, S. E. (2013). Language in
dialogue: when confederates might be hazardous to your
data. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 20, 54-72.
Maratsos, M. (1976). The use of definite and indefinite
reference in young children: an experimental study of
semantic acquisition. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Pickering, M., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and brain sciences,
27, 169-190.
Schaeffer, J., & Matthewson, L. (2005). Grammar and
pragmatics in the acquisition of article systems. Natural
Language & Linguistic Theory, 23, 53-101.
Wardlow, L., & Ferreira, V.S. (2003). Finding common
ground: How do speakers block privileged information?
Poster presented at the Architectures and Mechanisms for
Language Processing conference, Glasgow, Scotland.
Wardlow Lane, L., & Ferreira, V. (2008). Speaker-external
versus speaker-internal forces on utterance form: Do
cognitive demands override threats to referential success?
Journal of experimental psychology. Learning, memory,
and cognition, 34, 1466.

624

