UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
SQUARELAND 2.0: A flexible and realistic virtual environment for investigating cognitive
processes in human wayfinding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7xt7297k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hinterecker, Thomas
Roser, Florian
Strickrodt, Marianne
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

SQUARELAND 2.0:
A flexible and realistic virtual environment for investigating cognitive processes in
human wayfinding
Thomas Hinterecker (thomas.hinterecker@psychol.uni-giessen.de )
Florian Röser (florian.roeser@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Marianne Strickrodt (marianne.strickrodt@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Kai Hamburger (kai.hamburger@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University Giessen, Department of Psychology,
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science
Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10 F
35394 Giessen, Germany
Abstract

In general, a landmark can be any object that stands out
from the surroundings and aids navigation (Lynch, 1960;
Presson & Montello, 1988; Janzen & van Turennout, 2004;
Caduff & Timpf, 2008). Landmarks are often used in route
descriptions and increase their quality (Denis, Pazzaglia,
Cornoldi, & Bertolo, 1999).
However, what makes a certain landmark “useful” or
“good” in comparison to other objects? Previous research
found that landmarks at street intersections with a change of
direction are better remembered (Lee, Tappe, & Klippel,
2002; Lee, Klippel, & Tappe, 2003). At most decision
points, however, there is more than just one object (e.g.,
building) that may be used as a landmark. For instance, at a
prototypical cross intersection (figure 1) there are four possible landmark positions next to the pathway (Röser,
Krumnack, & Hamburger, 2013) and some landmarks probably possess a higher quality (salience) than others.

We introduce the new version of our virtual environment
(VE) SQUARELAND . As its predecessor it enables researchers
to create human wayfinding experiments with variations in
route length and complexity, as well as in the availability of
route information and landmarks. A newly developed aspect
is that test participants can be given active movement control.
Now it also is much easier to create experiments in which participants are passively moved through the virtual environment. SQUARELAND 2.0 comes as a standalone executable file
with easy setup controls. It was programmed in the game engine Unity (Unity Technologies©) and is licensed under the
General Public License (GNU). It is highly adjustable and usable for many research questions in spatial cognition science.
Keywords: virtual environment, wayfinding, landmarks, salience, spatial cognition, spatial information processing,
spatial learning, memory

Introduction
In spatial cognition research human navigation and spatial
orientation are two of the core topics. According to Montello (2005) navigation can be divided into two components :
locomotion and wayfinding. Locomotion is the pure active
or passive (i.e., to which amount a person can control the
speed and direction) movement through an environment.
Wayfinding is the related but planned movement to a certain
destination (cognitive component).
Without the help of any means (e.g., maps and/or navigation systems) it is unlikely to reach distant goals if no mental representations of route knowledge can be retrieved from
memory. By definition, such route knowledge
“describes the path that one must walk to
reach the goal by telling the individual what
to do at the decision points on the route, e.g.
turn right at the church, then the second street
to the left. It is one-dimensional or „stringlike‟ and it does not necessarily involve the
knowledge of the exact location of the goal.”
(Meilinger & Knauff, 2008, p. 14).
Since route knowledge includes a sequence of landmarks
(Siegel & White, 1975) it becomes clear why landmarks are
necessary for its acquisition (e.g., Daniel & Denis, 1998).

Figure 1. A prototypical cross intersection with four poss ible landmark positions represented by different colours .
To specify the quality of a landmark, several different
theories were introduced in the past (e.g., Sorrows & Hirtle,
1999, Klippel & Winter, 2005; Caduff & Timpf, 2008;
Röser, Krumnack, Hamburger, & Knauff, 2012). In these
theories the term landmark salience is of central importance.
This salience is often described as how much an object
stands out from its immediate surroundings (Presson &
Montello, 1988). Commonly, the salience of a landmark is
divided into three dimensions:
Visual or perceptual salience refers to colour, size,
shape, etc. (Caduff & Timpf, 2008; Hamburger &
Knauff, 2011; Röser, Krumnack, et al., 2012).

2363

Semantic or cognitive salience refers to knowledgerelated features of a landmark like its meaning, function and name (Caduff & Timpf, 2008; Hamburger &
Röser, 2011).
Structural salience refers to a landmark‟s position
along a route (Hamburger & Knauff, 2011). It can be
either close to the route or more distant (for a detailed
overview see Klippel & Winter, 2005). Further, the
structural salience can be defined as “a preference of a
wayfinder for a landmark to be located at a specific
position at an intersection.” (Röser et al., 2013, p.
3315).
Caduff and Timpf (2008) postulated a trilateral relationship between a potential landmark, its surroundings and the
observer. This implies that the landmark‟s salience strongly
depends on the context and on the perceiver (e.g., in an
environment with black houses a red house is highly salient). To investigate each component of the trilateral relationship during a wayfinding task, as well as the landmark
saliences in detail, a 3D virtual environment (VE) can have
various advantages (e.g., higher controllability, replicability,
etc.).
In the context of spatial cognition many researchers have
already used virtual environments (e.g., Gillner & Mallot,
1998; Ekstrom et al., 2003; Janzen & van Turennout, 2004;
Wolbers, Weiller, & Büchel, 2004; Stankiewicz, Legge,
Mansfield, & Schlicht, 2006; Newman et al., 2007; Buchner
& Jansen-Osmann, 2008; Hassabis et al., 2009; Wiener,
Kmecova, & de Condappa, 2012). For their wayfinding
studies Hamburger and colleagues were in the need of a
cost-saving VE which is easy to use and consists of orthogonal street intersections. For instance, the VE Hexatown
created by Gillner and Mallot (1998) was already used in
wayfinding experiments, but is based on a hexagonal street
raster (with 120 degree turns) which is suboptimal for at
least one of the investigation purposes of Hamburger and
colleagues: the structural saliences of landmarks . However,
other VEs that consist of orthogonal intersections (e.g.,
Buchner & Jansen-Osmann, 2008) were created with commercial software or required special programming skills
(e.g., Buchner & Jansen-Osmann, 2008).
Thus, Hamburger and Knauff (2011) created a VE called
SQUARELAND which should serve for the investigation of
landmarks and their salience in human wayfinding, as well
as for many other research questions (e.g., route length and
complexity, neural correlates of wayfinding, etc.). Their VE
was developed in the freeware Google Sketchup 6.0©. It is
easy to use, cost-saving, and offers a high standardisation,
controllability and comparability. Due to its structure
(10x10 block maze) each intersection in this virtual environment is constructed according to the layout depicted in
figure 1. The tools in Google Sketchup © allow for placing
landmarks at any location in the maze. These characteristics
enabled a growing amount of spatial cognition research
(e.g., Hamburger & Röser, 2011; Röser, Hamburger, &
Knauff, 2011; Röser, Hamburger, Krumnack, & Knauff,
2012; Röser, Krumnack, et al. 2012; Bucher, Röser, Nejas-

mic, & Hamburger, 2014; Hamburger, Dienelt, Strickrodt,
& Röser, 2013).
However, some limitations or difficulties with the use of
SQUARELAND occurred. For instance, it is very time consuming to create a video sequence of passive maze
walkthroughs, since no programmed coordinates can be
used for defining the route. Hence, some of the experiments
used a simple sequence of pictures for the presentation of
routes (e.g., Hamburger et al., 2013). It can be argued that
this type of implementation represents a rather unrealistic
setup which may have an impact on an observer‟s performance. For example, compared to a static presentation of
hallways with landmarks, a dynamic learning condition
leads to a better recall of landmark information (e.g., sequential learning; Buchner & Jansen-Osmann, 2008). Furthermore, it was recently suggested that video sequences
instead of a sequence of decision point pictures lead to significant effects concerning the structural salience of landmarks (Hamburger et al., 2013). These findings imply that
the acquisition of route and landmark knowledge highly
depends on the type of learning condition.
Another limitation of SQUARELAND lies in the impossibility to give active movement controls to a participant. If for
instance, the indication of the direction of turn at a decision
point is a subject of investigation, further software is needed. In the past such experiments were often setup using
software like SuperLab (Cedrus Corporation©). However,
this procedure included other limitations. On the one hand
the creation of appropriate video material is even more time
consuming (because the video sequences had, first of all, to
be prepared and recorded and then to be split into many
pieces). On the other hand it is too time-consuming and not
very economical to implement full active movement controls. This implies, for example, that it is not possible to
enable a participant with control of how fast he or she is
moved or moving through a route. Since it was shown that
active (self-directed) exploration can play an important role
in the acquisition of spatial information (Feldman &
Acredolo, 1979) this might be a critical feature of a VE.
Furthermore, some research questions require combining
the exposure of a route with textual or even auditory information (e.g., presenting the direction of turn at an intersection). Tasks like the creation of verbal route directions or
explaining the used wayfinding strategies could also be a
subject of investigation. With SQUARELAND experimental
setups like these were possible but limited.
The points mentioned above inspired and motivated us to
develop a new, more powerful SQUARELAND. In this second
version active as well as passive movement controls are
available without the need for complex experimental setups.
Moreover, a series of additional, useful tools was implemented. These tools and how SQUARELAND 2.0 was developed is explained in detail in the following.

2364

The virtual environment SQUARELAND 2.0
General
SQUARELAND 2.0 was developed with the free version of the
software Unity 4.3 (Unity Technologies©). Unity is a crossplatform game engine with integrated development environment (IDE, figure 2).

(for an example see figure 3). Some of these elements have
the purpose to change or declare basic settings like appearance or routes. Others are commands or actions that are
executed at a certain moment of the experiment.

Figure 3. Excerpt of a SQUARELAND 2.0 markup language
file.
Figure 2. The SQUARELAND 2.0 project in the Unity IDE.
The purpose of SQUARELAND 2.0 is to simplify creating
experiments in the field of spatial cognition and human
wayfinding. Hence, it comes as a standalone executable file
(for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS) with easy setup controls which means that Unity or any other software is not
needed if the standard features are sufficient. The VE including an example experiment can be downloaded on the
following webpage:
http://www.uni-giessen.de/cms/fbz/fb06/psychologie/abt/
kognition/Forschung/weitere/squareland20.

Standard geometrical and textural properties
Like its predecessor SQUARELAND 2.0 consists of a ten by
ten raster of cuboids. Each cuboid has a default size of 20 x
20 x 3.5 metres (LxWxH). A section of the facades of these
blocks serves as possible landmark surfaces. At an intersection the visible corners of every block have two possible
landmark facades resulting in eight surfaces which can be
controlled individually. These two-dimensional surfaces
have a standard size of 3.5 x 3.5 metres.
Moreover, the paths between the blocks have a default
width of four metres and serve as routes in every possible
manner. The bottom surface is textured with a brick texture.
The blocks are coloured in light grey and the sky in light
blue (see also figure 5). If the experiment is meant to be an
indoor experiment, a grey ceiling is inserted.

However, in this paper we will not disclose the structure
of the SQUARELAND 2.0 markup language. For a detailed
documentation we refer to the above mentioned web address. Nevertheless, we will now introduce some of the
possibilities and functions in SQUARELAND 2.0 which can be
controlled by the XML file. This introduction will be split
into two topics. The first topic will be about the main settings and properties that can be used and modified to fit
individual needs. The second one will address the composition of an experimental procedure which can consist of
elements (commands or actions) in various combinations .

Main settings and properties
Routes. In our VE a single route is defined by several intersections. Every intersection in the VE comes with an identifier that refers to the exact position of the intersection in the
maze. For instance, the identifier 2;3 refers to the crossroad
located in the second row and third column in the maze
(figure 4). With the help of these identifiers multiple routes
with different lengths and complexities can be created.

The SQUARELAND 2.0 markup language
For controlling an experiment in SQUARELAND 2.0 (basic
settings and the experimental procedure) an extensible
markup language (XML) file is used. XML helps to create
documents which can be easily analysed using a computer
program but simultaneously are human-readable and easy to
change. This XML file contains specific elements which,
taken together, form the SQUARELAND 2.0 markup language

2365

Figure 4. Excerpt of the SQUARELAND 2.0 maze in allocentric view. Each intersection contains its own identifier that
refers to the position in the maze (for instance 1;2 for first
row and second column). These identifiers are used for
defining routes.

Moreover, at each intersection of the route, a maximum of
eight (potential) landmarks can be implemented via the
above mentioned block facades. Therefore, a landmark can
only consist of either a RGB colour value or a picture file
(e.g., jpeg) which is projected on the block facade.
Movement settings. In SQUARELAND 2.0 it is possible to
choose from two different movement modes: active and
passive. The active movement mode enables the participants
to move self-directed on a given route. This movement,
however, follows predefined invisible tracks which prevent
participants from walking too close to a block or from
bumping into it. As user interface the arrow keys of the
keyboard as well as a Joystick or similar devices can be
used. If the passive mode is chosen, however, the participants are moved through the maze. For both modes a
movement speed can be defined (by default, the movement
speed is 5 km/h).
Camera properties. A camera captures and displays the
three dimensional virtual world to its observer. Within the
SQUARELAND 2.0 markup language it is possible to modify
the primary settings of a camera. These are the camera‟s
field of view in its width and length and the distance between the camera and the bottom surface (or eye height). By
default, the eye height has got a value of 170 cm which
should fit for the majority of participants.
Haze. In order to prevent participants from seeing more
than one intersection at once a haze can be implemented
(figure 5). While the participant actively or passively moves
through the maze, this fog remains in a constant distance in
front of the observer at all times. The distance between the
fog and the observer is exactly the distance which is necessary to see an intersection in total (with landmarks). If required, the distance of the haze can be modified with help of
the XML file.
Overlays. It is possible to present information (e.g., route
information like the direction of turn, see figure 5) to the
participant while he or she moves through the maze. Such
overlays can consist of simple text or pictures. By default,
the text overlays consist of a black background and white
letters. Because the position of an overlay much depends on
the resolution of the used monitor, the exact location on the
screen can be modified.
Geometrical and textural settings. It is possible to modify
the size of the cuboids and of the landmarks. Also, the path
width between the blocks can be changed. Furthermore, the
colour of the sky as well as the block, surface and ceiling
textures can be specified.

Figure 5. A typical intersection with four different potential
landmarks. A haze is preventing from seeing more than one
intersection. As the participant approaches the crossroad a
text overlay at a predefined position can be displayed (here
a route instruction).

The experimental procedure
S Q UARELAND. The main feature of SQUARELAND 2.0 is the
usage of the maze and the routes. This can be done as often
as required and therefore it enables to implement various
kinds of learning and retrieval tasks . For instance, it can be
specified whether a route should be traced in the initially
declared sequence of intersections or in opposite direction.
This feature can be useful for experiments which want to
systematically investigate the retrace of routes (initial versus
return path).
It is also possible to declare whether a walkthrough
should stop at intersections or not. If such stops are required, it can be chosen between a simple time stop and a
decision stop. With a time stop the walkthrough stops for a
given time at all intersections. Such a stop can be useful in
combination with a text overlay asking to indicate the direction of the turn. With a decision stop, the participant has to
indicate the direction of movement. For this purpose input
controls can be specified. By default, the arrow keys of the
keyboard are used. In the current version the walkthrough
continues in the correct direction independently of what has
been entered.
For each trial and participant a data file is created. In these files each keyboard response and the time of the response
since the start is recorded as well as any other dependent
variable.
Instructions. For almost any kind of research instructions
are an important part of the experiment. In SQUARELAND 2.0
there is the possibility to display instructions in form of
pictures as well as simple text. Instructions can be presented
at any step of the experimental procedure. To prevent participants from accidentally skipping an instruction by pressing
the space bar right after the text is shown, a minimum
presentation time can be set.
Forms. In many cases different forms are needed to collect
data from participants. In SQUARELAND 2.0 it is possible to

2366

build forms that consist of input fields for text as well as
checkboxes (figure 6). This offers the opportunity to retrieve
data from the participant without interrupting the experimental procedure.
Again, forms can be used at any step of the experiment.
The data of each form (the inputs of the participant and the
time needed for completion) is saved into a separate text file
which can be analysed easily (e.g., with Microsoft Excel).

integrated, if orthogonal cross intersections are used. A goal
for future versions could be to as well allow routes with
non-orthogonal crossings or even curved paths .
Beside the overlays it could be interesting to present auditory stimuli while the participant moves through the maze
(e.g., Hamburger & Röser, 2011). This could simulate
commands of a navigation system or could serve to further
investigate the role of different modalities (e.g., acoustic
versus visual stimuli) in human wayfinding (see Hamburger
& Röser, 2011 for further details).
It might also be of interest that a participant‟s decision
while exploring a route leads to adaptations in the maze
(e.g., changes in landmarks and their position, etc.). With
such a feature the participant could be left uninformed about
his or her wrong decisions concerning the direction of turn
(adaptive testing).

Possible research questions
Figure 6. An example form in SQUARELAND 2.0 with a text
area and a checkbox.
Fixation cross. Between a series of intersections or between
instructions it is often required to display a fixation cross for
a certain amount of time. This can be done in SQUARELAND
2.0 very easily.

Possible features in the future
The development of SQUARELAND 2.0 will be continued
steadily, and, more features will be implemented in the
future.
For instance, it might be of use to be able to present objects as landmarks for example in the middle of an intersection (e.g., Hamburger et al., 2012; Wiener et al., 2012) or
somewhere along the route (e.g., Janzen & van Turennout,
2004). In the current version this was not a central issue
because it was the purpose to create a tool for investigating
the structural salience of landmarks at an intersection in the
first place (see figure 1). However, if one is able to import
and place objects in Unity, any kind of landmarks and
landmark positions (also distant or global landmarks) can be
implemented. In future versions of our VE objects might
also be positioned with the help of the SQUARELAND 2.0
XML file, which would simplify creating experiments with
any kind of landmark position.
Some might argue that the appearance of the
SQUARELAND 2.0 maze is not quite a realistic setup. As in
its predecessor the benefit of the chosen structure can be
seen in its satisfying variable control (Hamburger & Knauff,
2011). As done in a study by Bucher et al. (2014) the blocks
in the Google Sketchup © version of SQUARELAND may be
substituted by another object (e.g., building), leading to a
more realistic environment. The Unity game engine allows
researchers to implement complex worlds (e.g., worlds with
buildings, lakes, trees, mountains, cars, etc.). In such environments the current SQUARELAND 2.0 functions may be

According to Hamburger and Knauff (2011) the major aim
of the first version of SQUARELAND was to develop a “neuro-cognitive theory of landmark salience in human wayfin ding” (p. 152). This aim was divided into the following subgoals:
What determines a landmark‟s salience in human wayfinding?
Can the salience of a landmark be defined solely by the
three mentioned forms (visual, semantic and structural)? And if so, which one is most important?
How can the different forms of salience be measured
quantitatively?
What are the neural processes and representations behind wayfinding with landmarks?
These goals may also be addressed with SQUARELAND
2.0. Some of these questions were already examined empirically with its predecessor (e.g., Röser et al., 2011; Röser,
Krumnack, et al. 2012, Röser et al., 2013). However, the
new version of our VE can now be used to investigate
whether the results in these studies also occur if active
movement controls or a dynamic presentation of the routes
are used (if this was not the case). The VE can also be used
to investigate new research questions and again we would
like to invite the community to use this tool for future empirical studies on human spatial cognition.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sarah J. Abbott and Carolina A. Bosch for proofreading the manuscript. Further, we thank the anonymous
reviewers for their critical comments on the manuscript.

References
Bucher, L., Röser, F., Nejasmic, J., & Hamburger, K.
(2014). Belief revision and way-finding. Cognitive Processing, 15, 99-106.
Buchner, A., & Jansen-Osmann, P. (2008). Is route learning
more than serial learning? Spatial Cognition & Computation, 8, 289-305.

2367

Caduff, D., & Timpf, S. (2008). On the assessment of landmark salience for human wayfinding. Cognitive Processing, 9(4), 249-267.
Daniel, M. P., & Denis, M. (1998). Spatial descriptions as
navigational aids: a cognitive analysis of route directions.
Kognitionswissenschaft, 7, 45-52.
Denis, M., Pazzaglia, F., Cornoldi, C., & Bertolo, L. (1999).
Spatial discorse and navigation: an analysis of route directions in the City of Venice. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 145-174.
Ekstrom, A. D., Kahana, M. J., Caplan, J. B., Fields, T. A.,
Isham, E. A., Newman, E. L., & Fried, I. (2003). Cellular
networks underlying human spatial navigation. Nature,
425, 184-187.
Feldman, A., & Acredolo, L. (1979). The Effect of active
versus passive exploration on memory for spatial location
in children, Child Development, 50(3), 698-704.
Gillner, S., & Mallot, H. A. (1998). Navigation and Acquis ition of Spatial Knowledge in a Virtual Maze. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 445-463.
Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M. (2011). SQUARELAND: A
virtual environment for investigating cognitive processes
in human wayfinding. PsychNology Journal, 9(2), 137163.
Hamburger, K., & Röser, F. (2011). The meaning of Gestalt
for human wayfinding – How much does it cost to switch
modalities? Gestalt Theory, 33(3/4), 363-382.
Hamburger, K., Dienelt, L. E., Strickrodt, M., & Röser, F.
(2013). Spatial cognition: the return path. In M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 537-542). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Hassabis, D., Chu, C., Rees, G., Weiskopf, N., Molyneux,
P. D., & Maguire, E. A. (2009). Decoding neuronal ensembles in the human hippocampus. Current Biology, 19,
546-554.
Janzen, G., & van Turennout, M. (2004). Selective neural
representation of objects relevant for navigation. Nature
Neuroscience, 7, 673-677.
Klippel, A., & Winter, S. (2005). Structural salience of
landmarks for route discrimination. In A. G. Cohn & D.
Mark (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory. International
Conference COSIT (pp. 347-362). Berlin: Springer.
Lee, P. U., Tappe H., & Klippel, A. (2002). Acquisition of
landmark knowledge from static and dynamic presentation of route maps. KI Special Issue Spatial Cognition, 2,
32-34.
Lee, P., Klippel, A., & Tappe, H. (2003). The effect of motion in graphical user interfaces. In A. Butz, A. Krüger &
P. Oliver (Eds.), Smart Graphics (pp. 12-21). Berlin:
Springer.
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Meilinger, T., & Knauff, M. (2008). Ask for your way or
use a map: A field experiment on spatial orientation and

wayfinding in an urban environment. Journal of Spatial
Science, 53, 13-24.
Montello, D. R. (2005). Navigation. In P. Shah & A.
Miyake (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of visuospatial
thinking (pp. 257–294). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Newman, E. L., Caplan, J. B., Kirschen, M. P., Korolev, I.
O., Sekuler, R., & Kahana, M. J. (2007). Learning your
way around town: How virtual taxicab drivers learn to use
layout and landmark information. Cognition, 104, 231253.
Presson, C. C., & Montello, D. R. (1988). Points of reference in spatial cognition: Stalking the elusive landmark.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6(4), 378381.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M. (2011). The Giessen virtual environment laboratory: Human wayfinding
and landmark salience. Cognitive Processing, 12, 209214.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., Krumnack, A., & Knauff, M.
(2012). The structural salience of landmarks: Results from
an on-line study and a virtual environment experiment.
Journal of Spatial Science, 57(1), 37-50.
Röser, F., Krumnack, A., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M.
(2012). A four factor model of landmark salience – A new
approach. In N. Rußwinkel, U. Drewitz & H van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Cognitive Modeling (ICCM) (pp. 82-87). Berlin.
Röser, F., Krumnack, A., Hamburger, K. (2013). The influence of perceptual and structural salience. In M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 3315-3320). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Siegel, A. W., & White, S. H. (1975). The development of
spatial representations of large-scale environments. In H.
W. Reese (Eds.), Advances in child development and behaviour (10th ed., pp. 9–55). New York: Academic Press.
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The nature of landmarks for real and electronic spaces. In C. Freksa & D.
M. Mark (Eds.). Spatial Information Theory: Cognitive
and Computational Foundations of Geographic Info rmation Science, International Conference COSIT 1999
(pp. 37-50). Stade: Springer.
Stankiewicz, B. J., Legge, G. E., Mansfield, J. S., &
Schlicht, E. J. (2006). Lost in virtual space: Studies in
Human and ideal spatial navigation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performa nce,
32, 688-704.
Wiener, J. M., Kmecova, H., & de Condappa, O. (2012).
Route repetition and route retracing: effects of cognitive
aging. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 4(7), 1-7.
Wolbers, T., Weiller, C., & Büchel, C. (2004). Neural foundations of emerging route knowledge in complex spatial
environments. Cognitive Brain Research, 21, 401-411.

2368

