UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Subjective Hazard Rates Rationalize “Irrational” Temporal Preferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8q0511km

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Luhmann, Christian
Bixter, Michael

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Subjective Hazard Rates Rationalize “Irrational” Temporal Preferences
Christian C. Luhmann (christian.luhmann@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA

Michael T. Bixter (michael.bixter@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA

Abstract

discount rate, and represents the undiscounted subjective
value of that same reward (i.e., the value of that reward if it
were available immediately). This expression suggests that
the subjective value drops by a fixed percentage for each
unit of time that those goods are delayed. If a decision
maker’s discount rate is 0.1 (and D is measured in years),
then $100 available in a year is only worth $90 right now, or
90% of its immediate value. This reward delayed an
additional year is only worth $81, reflecting an additional
10% drop in value.
Given that exponential discounting represents an obvious
normative standard, there has been a large amount of work
designed to carefully evaluate how the behavior of human
decision makers compares (Ainslie, 1992; Ainslie &
Herrnstein, 1981; Green, Fristoe, & Myerson, 1994; Kirby,
1997; Kirby & Herrnstein, 1995; Loewenstein & Thaler,
1989; Rachlin, 1995). Nearly all of this work has
demonstrated that decision makers do not discount
exponentially. Instead, researchers have largely advocated
hyperbolic discount functions as a superior descriptive
account. Under hyperbolic discounting, the subjective value
of a delayed reward can be expressed as below, with the
quantities defined as above.
(2)
The critical difficulty with hyperbolic discounting is that
it tends to result in contradictory preferences. For example,
a hyperbolic discounter might prefer $200 delivered in nine
years rather than $100 delivered in six years (a patient
preference) but also prefer an immediate $100 rather than
$200 delivered in 3 years (an impatient preference). The
problem, of course, is that the first pair of rewards will
become the second pair of rewards in six years time. Such
contradictory preferences violate the axiom of stationarity
(Koopmans, 1960), and their predictable nature means that
such decision makers may be exploited. That is, an
exponential discounter can continually offer the hyperbolic
discounter a choice between delayed pairs of rewards, only
to later offer (sell) the hyperbolic discounter an opportunity
to change their selection and profit from the reliable reversal
of preference. For this reason, hyperbolic discounting has
been characterized as irrational (Kirby, 1997; Soman et al.,
2005). Real-world examples of these preference reversals
are not difficult to find. For example, the preferences
reflected in our New Year’s resolutions (e.g., exercising
over the next 12 months) reliably shift once the time comes

Delay discounting refers to decision makers’ tendency to treat
immediately consumable goods as more valuable than those
only available after some delay. Previous work has focused
on a seemingly irrational feature of these preferences: the
systematic tendency to exhibit more patience when
consequences are far in the future but less patience about
those same, identical rewards as time passes.
One
explanation for delay discounting itself appeals to the risk
implicitly associated with delayed rewards. The current study
investigates whether the implicit risk hypothesis is capable of
explaining the seemingly irrational shifts in patience by
having participants make subjective risk judgments regarding
a variety of real-world scenarios. To reduce the possibility of
task demands, participants judged hazard rates rather than
survival rates. Results suggest that the seemingly irrational
shifts in patience are quite reasonable once participants’
beliefs about the relationship between delay and risk are taken
into account.
Keywords: discounting; implicit risk; hazard function

People must frequently make choices that involve
temporal considerations. For example, would you prefer a
job with the higher starting salary or a job with greater
opportunity for future advancement? Prior work on such
temporal decisions has primarily focused on exploring the
phenomenon of delay discounting, in which decision makers
behave as though immediately consumable goods are more
valuable than those only available after some delay. This
phenomenon is powerful enough that decision makers are
frequently willing to forgo delayed rewards in favor of
immediate rewards even when the delayed rewards are
objectively more valuable. For example, a decision maker
might choose an immediately-available $100 over $200 that
would only be delivered in three years. Such a preference is
assumed to reflect the subjective value of the $200 option,
discounted by the associated three-year delay. The sway of
negative events is similarly blunted by delay. For example,
working on your taxes next month is likely preferred over
working on them tonight.
Classical economics has viewed delay discounting from
within the framework of discounted utility theory
(Samuelson, 1937), according to which the subjective value
of goods drops exponentially:
(1)
where
represents the current value of a reward that will
be delivered at time D, k represents the decision maker’s

904

to face consequences (e.g., getting up this morning to go to
the gym). These preference reversals have also been
blamed for a variety of undesirable patterns of behavior
such as drug addiction and procrastination (Ainslie, 2001).

beliefs about risk are independent of delay (see Figure 1).
This explains why exponential discounters exhibit stationary
preferences. The probability of a delayed reward
disappearing between now and 12 months from now is
identical to the probability of a delayed reward disappearing
between 12 months from now and 24 months from now. As
a consequence, if $200 in two years is preferred to $100 in a
year, $200 in a year will also be preferred over $100
immediately.
In contrast, hyperbolic discounting suggests at least two
different conceptions of risk. First, hyperbolic discounting
is consistent with the belief that the hazard rate declines
over time (see Figure 1). That is, hyperbolic discounting
may suggest that the probability of a delayed reward
disappearing between now and 12 months from now is
greater than the probability of a delayed reward
disappearing between 12 months from now and 24 months
from now. The second possibility is that hyperbolic
discounters may believe a constant hazard rate, h(t)=λ, but
may be uncertain about the true value of λ (Azfar, 1999).
For example, imagine a decision maker offered a choice
between an immediate $100 and $200 to be delivered in a
year. A decision maker might be uncertain about the hazard
rate (i.e., it might be quite high) and thus might prefer the
immediate $100. Now imagine that this same decision
maker is faced with a choice between $100 in a year and
$200 in two years. Should the decision maker still prefer
the more immediate $100? It is conceivable that, if the true
hazard rate is low enough for the $100 to survive for 12
months, it might also be low enough for the $200 to survive
24 months. Such reasoning would thus justify the violations
of stationarity underlying many of decision makers’
inconsistent preferences (though not all, Dasgupta &
Maskin, 2005).

Implicit Risk Hypothesis
Despite the strong interest in the general phenomenon,
there has been surprisingly little work exploring why
decision makers exhibit delay discounting in the first place.
That is, why should a decision maker behave as though
$100 were worth any less than $100 regardless of when it
would be delivered? The predominant explanation in
economics (Azfar, 1999; Benzion, Rapoport, & Yagil, 1989;
Dasgupta & Maskin, 2005; Prelec & Loewenstein, 1991;
Sozou, 1998; Yaari, 1965), ecology (Kacelnik, 2003), and
psychology (Mazur, 1989, 1995, 1997; Mischel, 1966;
Rachlin, Raineri, & Cross, 1991; Stevenson, 1986) is that
the delay associated with postponed consequences renders
them inherently uncertain. This has been referred to as the
implicit risk hypothesis (Benzion et al., 1989) and justifies
the general phenomenon of delay discounting. For example,
a decision maker confronted with a typical intertemporal
dilemma might prefer a more immediate reward if it were
believed that the delayed reward’s future availability could
not be guaranteed (i.e., the promisor could go bankrupt, the
decision maker could die, etc.). Furthermore, if decision
makers believe that longer delay intervals imply lower
probabilities of receipt, then discounted value should
decrease monotonically as delay increases. This hypothesis
suggests that delay discounting behavior always involves
considerations about risk, even when information about
information about risk is omitted (as in standard
intertemporal choice tasks) and even if experimenters
attempt to “guarantee” rewards (e.g., it’s not clear how to
“guarantee” that the decision maker will survive until
receipt).
Under the implicit risk hypothesis, decision makers’
discounting preferences stem directly from their beliefs
about the relationship between risk and delay. In particular,
discounting functions can be thought of as reflecting the
survival rate, s(t), of the delayed reward. The survival rate
specifies the probability with which a promised reward
“survives” until time t. Alternatively, it can be thought of as
the probability with which a promised reward can be
successfully consumed at time t. Intuitively, higher survival
rates should encourage smaller discount rates (patience)
whereas lower survival rates should encourage larger
discount rates (impatience). Frequently, it is more
convenient to instead work with the hazard function,
( )
(3)
which specifies the probability of a reward being lost
between time t and time t+dt, given that it has survived until
time t. The hazard function is particularly useful when
assessing the shape of the discount function (Sozou, 1998).
For example, under the implicit risk hypothesis, exponential
discounting suggests a constant hazard rate, h(t)=λ. That is,
exponential discounting suggests that decision makers’

Perceived Risk
Non-exponential discounting has been deemed irrational
because of the contradictory preferences it generates.
However, the dominant explanation for discounting, the
implicit risk hypothesis, suggests that discounting should
strongly depend on decision makers’ beliefs about the risk
they face. If decision makers believe in declining hazard
functions, or if they are uncertain about the true hazard rate,
then non-exponential discounting may actually be
justifiable. Thus, direct empirical evaluation of decision
makers’ beliefs about risk could illuminate the extent to
which violations of stationarity, and hyperbolic discounting
more broadly, are rational.
Recent work has begun to investigate the quantitative
relationship between perceived risk and delay discounting.
For example, Patak and Reynolds (2007) asked participants
to assess the certainty associated with various delayed
rewards. Results indicated that perceived certainty declined
as the length of the delay intervals increased. In addition,
participants’ certainty judgments were predictive of their
discount rates. Takahashi, Ikeda, and Hasegawa (2007)
used a similar method to investigate whether subjective risk

905

could explain non-exponential discounting. Not only did
results indicate that more delayed rewards were less certain,
but the subjective probability of delayed rewards was found
to drop hyperbolically as a function of delay. Thus, the
subjective probability results were exactly what the implicit
risk hypothesis would predict.
There are several reasons to treat these findings with
caution, however. For example, Takahashi et al. (2007)
employed a within-subject design in which participants
always completed the subjective probability questionnaire
after completing the choice task and were explicitly
instructed to consider their earlier value judgments when
making their probability judgments. Thus, the strong
relationship between the subjective value and discounted
value may have been induced by the task itself.
The current study is designed to provide an empirical
evaluation of the relationship between delay discounting and
the beliefs about risk in the real world. However, given our
concerns about prior, similar investigations, the current
study takes a different strategy. Instead of assessing the
survival rate, participants in the current study provide
judgments of the hazard rate; the probability of a reward
being lost between time t and time t+dt given that it has
already survived an interval of length t. If participants
believe that the hazard rate is constant, judgments should be
insensitive to the specific value of t. If, on the other hand,
decision makers believe that the hazard rate drops over time,
then we would expect judgments to increase as t increases.
Similarly, if decision makers are uncertain about the true
value of the underlying hazard rate, then we would also
expect probability judgments to increase as t increases. This
latter prediction is due to the idea that the continued survival
of delayed rewards provides information about the hazard
rate, suggesting that it may be lower than previously
believed (Azfar, 1999; Sozou, 1998). Finally, we believe
that evaluating hazard rates rather than survival rates
reduces the possibility of task demands because the nature
of the relationship between a given discounting function and
its corresponding hazard function is unlikely to be obvious
to participants (whereas discounting functions and survival
functions are essentially equivalent).

judgments. Each conditional probability judgment
requested a probability of the form, “How likely will X
continue to be true for the next t + dt given that it has been
true for the last t?” where X was some proposition and t and
dt were temporal intervals (e.g., 3 weeks). This judgment
provides information about the hazard rate associated with
the interval from t to t+dt. Specifically, this judgment gives
us the complement of the hazard rate (i.e.,
). The
three conditional probabilities differed only in the value of t.
Each scenario had a Short, Medium, and Long version, each
of which employed a large, medium, or small value t.
Importantly, the value of dt used for each scenario was such
that
.
Instead of asking for the conditional probability
judgments in isolation, these judgments were always
immediately preceded by a related, unconditional
probability judgment. For example, one item asked 1) how
likely it was that an open seat in a college course would still
be open in one week and 2) how likely it was that an open
seat would still be open knowing that it had been open for
the last 12 weeks1. The first, unconditional probability
judgment represented an assessment of the survival rate.
That is, this judgment requested the probability that the
proposition was true at time t given no information about
how long that proposition had been true for (alternatively,
one can interpret this as the probability that the proposition
would continue to be true for the next t + dt given that it has
been true for the last t, where t is interpreted to be zero).
Importantly, the unconditional probability judgment always
queried the survival function at time
. This, along
with the specific values of
,
,
, and
allow
us to reconstruct the full survival function (described
below). Including the unconditional judgments also ensured
that participants did not misinterpret the request for
conditional probability judgments as requests for
unconditional probability judgments. To emphasize the fact
that each unconditional and conditional judgment formed a
pair, the inter-trial interval (ITI) between the two halves of
the pair was 500ms whereas the ITI between two different
pairs was 4 seconds.
The items were sequenced such that each of the six
scenarios was presented once in each of three blocks. The
order in which the different scenarios had their Long,
Medium, and Short conditional probability judgments made
was pseudorandom and counterbalanced across participants.
In the first block, each participant would see each of the six
scenarios, making two Long conditional probability
judgments, two Medium conditional probability judgments,
and two Short conditional probability judgments. The
remaining blocks were similar, allowing each participant to
provide all judgments for all scenarios. Because the
unconditional probability judgment always preceded the
conditional probability judgment, this meant that each

Method
Participants
Forty-three Stony Brook University undergraduates
participated for partial course credit. One participant
exclusively used the extremes of the response scale (all
probabilities were judged to be either 0 or 1) and was not
included in subsequent analyses.

Probability Judgment Task
The study consisted of a set of 36 probability judgments,
each concerning six scenarios. Each judgment asked
participants about the probability of some proposition being
true at some specific time in the future. For each scenario,
we constructed three different conditional probability

1
Other scenarios concerned: whether a specific movie was
showing, whether an employment opportunity was filled, whether
a coupon was valid, whether tickets to the zoo were available, and
whether an item was on sale at Macy’s.

906

participant made the unconditional probability judgment for
each scenario three times (once per block). For the purposes
of data analysis, we only considered the first unconditional
judgment from each scenario. This way, the unconditional
judgments are uncontaminated by any subsequent
judgments.

longer the reward has survived, the more likely it was
expected to survive an additional dt delay. This pattern is
also consistent with Sozou’s (1998) suggestion that
prolonged survival allows decision makers to revise (i.e.,
lower) their uncertain estimates of a fixed hazard rate. In
either case, participants’ judgments are entirely consistent
with the violations of stationarity typically observed in
discounting behavior.

Discounting Task
The discounting task consisted of 12 trials, each of which
presented two rewards. Each reward included a magnitude
(in dollars) and a delay until the reward would be received
(in months). Importantly, each trial omitted the reward
magnitude of the sooner option. Participants’ task was to
supply this missing reward magnitude with a value that
would render them indifferent between the two options.
Half the trials included an immediate reward (e.g., what
amount delivered today would be equivalent to $30
delivered in 6 months?) and half involved two delayed
rewards (e.g., what amount delivered in 3 months would be
equivalent to $75 delivered in 9 months?).

Characterizing Survival and Discount Functions
To further illustrate the implications for delay
discounting, we reconstructed the survival function (i.e.,
discount functions) implied by participants’ probability
judgments. We first assumed that s(0) = 1.0. As described
in the method section, the unconditional judgments provided
(
). The conditional probability judgments provided
information about the hazard function, h, which allowed us
to estimate three additional points of the survival function.
)
For example, (
) can be estimated as (
[
], where [
] is provided by the
Short conditional probability judgment. In other words, the
probability of the reward surviving the interval [0,
] requires the reward to first survive the initial period,
)) and
, (which occurs with probability (
additionally survive the next interval,
(which is judged to
]). Similarly, (
occur with probability [
]
) can be estimated as (
) [
and (
) can be estimated as (
)
[
]. These quantities were computed separately
for each scenario and for each participant.
Thus, each participant had six survival functions,
reconstructed as described above, plus their judgments from
the delay discounting task. Each of these seven sets of data
was separately fitted with a generalized hyperbolic discount
function.

Procedure
After completing consent paperwork and receiving brief
instructions, participants completed a single practice item.
The item allowed participants to see how each probability
judgment would be paired with a related, conditional
probability judgment. It also allowed practice with the
probability response scale which was a visual analog scale
with left end labeled as, “Very Unlikely” and the right end
labeled as, “Very Likely”, but otherwise unmarked.
Participants used the left and right arrow keys to move a
cursor to some location on the scale and pressed the enter
key to move on to the next item. Responses were converted
to probabilities by scaling the final cursor position such that
zero represented the left end of the scale (very unlikely) and
one represented the right end of the scale (very likely). The
entire procedure took approximately 15 minutes.

) ( )]
[(
(4)
This parametric function represents a family of discounting
functions that includes both traditional exponential and
hyperbolic functions as special cases. Importantly, we

Results
To explore participants’ judgments (Figure 1), we
performed a six (scenario) by four (judgment:
Unconditional, Short, Medium, Long) repeated measures
ANOVA. As predicted, we observed a main effect of
judgment type (F(3, 126)=6.96, p<.0001). We also
observed a significant interaction between scenario and
judgment (F(3, 126)=1.34, p<.0001). The main effect of
judgment was due to the fact that unconditional judgments
(M=.44, SD=.12) were less than conditional judgments
(M=.50, SD=.12, t(41)=2.48, p<.05). Furthermore, the
conditional judgments in the Long condition (M=.53,
SD=.16) were higher than those in the Medium condition
(M=.50, SD=.13, t(41)=2.79, p<.01) and those in the Short
condition (M=.48, SD=.12, t(41)=2.17, p<.05). Judgments
in the Medium were greater than those in the Short
condition, though not significantly so.
The fact that these probability judgments increased as t
increased is consistent with a decreasing hazard rate; the

Figure 1 – Average probability judgments. Judgments
increased from Short to Long, a pattern consistent with
commonly observed violations of stationarity.

907

employ a specific characterization of the generalized
hyperbolic (Benhabib, Bisin, & Schotter, 2010). This
characterization has a parameter, , that controls where
along the exponential-hyperbolic continuum the resulting
function falls. When
, Equation 4 is equivalent to
Equation 2 (the hyperbolic function). As approaches zero,
Equation 4 approaches Equation 1 (the exponential
function). Thus, the estimated value of quantifies the
degree to which a discounting function violates the axiom of
stationarity. We found values of and k that maximized the
log-likelihood of the data, separately for each scenario and
for the discounting data.

Discussion
In the current study we have attempted to evaluate the
implicit risk hypothesis as an explanation of the nonstationary preferences typically exhibited by decision
makers. We evaluated subjective beliefs about the hazard
function present in real world situations. Specifically,
participants were asked for the probability of a reward
surviving the interval between now and time dt given that it
has survived for t. Results indicate that these judgments
increased as t increased. This finding is consistent with a
decreasing hazard function; the longer the reward has
survived, the more likely it was expected to survive an
additional dt delay. Alternatively, the pattern of judgments
is also consistent with Sozou’s (1998) suggestion that
prolonged survival would allow decision makers to revise
(lower) their uncertain estimates of a fixed hazard rate.
These findings suggest a parsimonious explanation of a
problematic and seemingly irrational pattern of behavior.
Roughly speaking, the reason that violations of stationarity
are so unpalatable to standard economic theory is because a
delay of fixed length is assumed to be identical regardless of
where in time this interval happens to fall. Thus, if $200
delivered in nine years is preferred over $100 delivered in
six years (a difference of 3 years), then an immediate $100
must also be preferred over $200 delivered in 3 years (also a
difference of 3 years)The current results suggest that there
are legitimate reasons for decision makers to treat these 3year intervals differently.
The more pragmatic reason that hyperbolic discounting
has been deemed irrational is that such decision makers can
be exploited by “rational”, exponential discounters.
However, if our participants’ beliefs are accurate and hazard
rates truly decline, then this arbitrage relationship actually
goes the opposite direction; hyperbolic discounters can
exploit exponential discounters. Alternatively, if the current
results stem from our participants’ uncertainty about a
constant hazard rate (Azfar, 1999; Sozou, 1998), then
exponential discounters will only have an advantage if they
hold accurate beliefs about the risk present in their
environment (i.e., they use a discount rate that is perfectly
calibrated for the ambient level of risk). However it is
important to note that this superiority would derive almost
entirely from an informational advantage (i.e., somehow
having knowledge of the true hazard rate).
The current results support the implicit risk hypothesis as
a prime factor in discounting behavior and dovetail with
recent work that has attempted to find direct evidence in
favor of the implicit risk hypothesis. For example, Bixter
and Luhmann (2014) asked decision makers in the DelayFirst condition to choose between an immediate, guaranteed
$16 and a larger, delayed reward (e.g., $44 delivered in 12
days). They were then immediately asked about the same
reward pair, with the larger reward modified to now be
explicitly risky (e.g., an 85% chance of receiving $44
delivered in 12 days). In the Risk-First condition, the delay
and risk information were added to the larger reward in the
opposite order (e.g., the larger reward was first risky, and

Relating Survival and Discount Functions

Rank (Probability Judgment Task)

For each participant, we computed the median value of
across the six survival functions. As shown in Figure 2,
these median values were significantly correlated with the
values of inferred from the discounting task (Spearman
rank-order, r= 0.37, p<.05). This relationship suggests that
violations of stationarity implied by participants’
discounting behavior was explained to a large extent by
their beliefs about risk. Similar analyses with estimated
values of the discount rate revealed no significant
relationship.
We also investigated the relationship between the survival
functions estimated for each scenario. Specifically, we
computed all the pairwise correlations between the values of
inferred from each of the scenarios. The average
correlation between scenarios was quite strong (r=.22), with
coefficients ranging from 0 to .47. In contrast, similar
analyses found that estimates of the discount rate were not
as strongly correlated across scenarios (average r=.15), with
many coefficients being negative (ranging from -.14 to .41).
This suggests that the tendency to violate stationarity
(captured by and rationalized by a decreasing hazard
function) may reflect a relatively domain-general belief
about the relationship between risk and delay in one’s
environment. In contrast, beliefs about the overall level of
risk in the environment (reflected by the discount rate) may
vary across domains.

Rank (Discounting Task)

Figure 2 – Relationship between the value of theta
estimated from the discounting task and the median value
of theta estimated from the probability judgment task.

908

then modified to be both risky and delayed). Despite the
second halves of these two choices being identical choices
(e.g., $16 vs. an 85% chance of receiving $44 delivered in
12 days), decision makers were more likely to accept the
delayed, uncertain reward when the delay information was
presented before the risk information than the opposite
order. Not only were participants more likely to accept the
rewards when presented in this order, their reaction times
were faster when the delay information was presented first.
Taken together, these results were interpreted to represent a
sort of “priming” effect in which the contemplation of
delayed rewards automatically invoked beliefs about risk,
but not the other way around. These findings also reinforce
a basic premise of the implicit risk hypothesis: decision
makers do not believe that delayed rewards can be
guaranteed, even when explicitly told that they will be
delivered with 100% certainty. The current results extend
this demonstration by providing information about the
nature of decision makers’ uncertainty. Furthermore,
because we elicited beliefs about hazard rates, rather than
survival rates, we believe that the current study captured
participants’ beliefs in a relatively neutral manner.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 126(1),
54-70.
Kirby, K. N., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1995). Preference
reversals due to myopic discounting of delayed reward.
Psychological Science, 6(2), 83-89.
Koopmans, T. C. (1960). Stationary ordinal utility and
impatience. Econometrica, 287-309.
Loewenstein, G., & Thaler, R. H. (1989). Anomalies:
Intertemporal choice. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 3(4), 181-193.
Mazur, J. E. (1989). Theories of probabilistic reinforcement.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 51(1),
87-99.
Mazur, J. E. (1995). Conditioned reinforcement and choice
with delayed and uncertain primary reinforcers. Journal
of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 63(2), 139-150.
Mazur, J. E. (1997). Choice, delay, probability, and
conditioned reinforcement. Learning & Behavior, 25(2),
131-147.
Mischel, W. (1966). Theory and research on the antecedents
of self-imposed delay of reward. Progress in
Experimental Personality Research, 3, 85-132.
Patak, M., & Reynolds, B. (2007). Question-based
assessments of delay discounting: Do respondents
spontaneously incorporate uncertainty into their
valuations for delayed rewards? Addictive behaviors,
32(2), 351-357.
Prelec, D., & Loewenstein, G. (1991). Decision Making
over Time and under Uncertainty: A Common Approach.
Management Science, 37(7), 770-786.
Rachlin, H. (1995). Self-control: Beyond commitment.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18(1), 109-159.
Rachlin, H., Raineri, A., & Cross, D. (1991). Subjective
probability and delay. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 55(2), 233-244.
Samuelson, P. A. (1937). A note on measurement of utility.
The Review of Economic Studies, 155-161.
Soman, D., Ainslie, G., Frederick, S., Li, X., Lynch, J.,
Moreau, P., et al. (2005). The psychology of
intertemporal discounting: Why are distant events valued
differently from proximal ones? Marketing Letters, 16(3),
347-360.
Sozou, P. D. (1998). On hyperbolic discounting and
uncertain hazard rates. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London B, 265(1409), 2015-2020.
Stevenson, M. K. (1986). A discounting model for decisions
with delayed positive or negative outcomes. Journal of
experimental psychology. General, 115(2), 131-154.
Takahashi, T., Ikeda, K., & Hasegawa, T. (2007). A
hyperbolic decay of subjective probability of obtaining
delayed rewards. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 3(1),
52.
Yaari, M. E. (1965). Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and
the theory of the consumer. The Review of Economic
Studies, 137-150.

References
Ainslie, G. (1992). Picoeconomics: The Strategic
Interaction of Successive Motivational States Within the
Person: Cambridge University Press.
Ainslie, G. (2001). Breakdown of Will. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ainslie, G., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1981). Preference reversal
and delayed reinforcement. Animal Learning and
Behavior, 9(4), 476-482.
Azfar, O. (1999). Rationalizing hyperbolic discounting.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 38(2),
245-252.
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., & Schotter, A. (2010). Present-bias,
quasi-hyperbolic discounting, and fixed costs. Games and
Economic Behavior, 69(2), 205-223.
Benzion, U., Rapoport, A., & Yagil, J. (1989). Discount
rates inferred from decisions: An experimental study.
Management Science, 35(3), 270-284.
Bixter, M. T., & Luhmann, C. C. (2014). Evidence for
implicit risk: Delay primes the processing of uncertainty,
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Dasgupta, P., & Maskin, E. (2005). Uncertainty and
hyperbolic discounting. American Economic Review,
95(4), 1290–1299.
Green, L., Fristoe, N., & Myerson, J. (1994). Temporal
discounting and preference reversals in choice between
delayed outcomes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1(3),
383-389.
Kacelnik, A. (2003). The evolution of patience. In G.
Loewenstein, D. Read & R. F. Baumeister (Eds.), Time
and decision: Economic and Psychological Perspectives
on Intertemporal Choice (pp. 115–138).
Kirby, K. N. (1997). Bidding on the future: Evidence
against normative discounting of delayed rewards.

909

