UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Supramodal Representations in Melodic Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vf8c2c1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Lim, Ahnate
Doumas, Leonidas
Sinnett, Scott

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Supramodal Representations in Melodic Perception
Ahnate Lim (ahnate@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Leonidas A. A. Doumas (alex.doumas@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh
7 George Square, Edinburgh, Midlothian EH8 9JZ, UK

Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Abstract

explicit learning of grammatical structures (Rohrmeier &
Rebuschat, 2012), and complex event sequencing (Tillmann,
2012), to name but a few. Other approaches have sought to
uncover links between musical training and performance in
other domains such as mathematics, language, spatialtemporal abilities, and verbal memory (for a summary, see
Rauscher, 2003). Thus it is clear that gaining a better
understanding of the underlying processes and building
blocks in music perception can aid towards understanding
the underlying mechanisms and resources used in other
cognition domains as well.

Music is highly relational and in this manner shares much in
common with other characteristically human behavior. While
this may suggest that the processes used in music perception
could be domain general, the nature and flexibility of these
representations remain less understood. If the underlying
representations and manipulations required for perceiving
music overlap with those in other cognitive domains, it should
be fairly easy to map such representations across domains.
This hypothesis was tested and supported using a novel
experiment with melodic stimuli in the auditory modality and
analogous visual sequential stimuli (Gabor sequences) in the
visual modality. Testing for transfer across the two modalities
and for the two types of representations (contour and
intervallic) was done through four counterbalanced
conditions. Cross-modal mapping was successful in three out
of the four conditions, implying general flexibility of
representational transfer. Implications for representational
flexibility, sequential learning and future studies are
discussed.

The Melody

Keywords: Melodic perception; relation learning; crossmodal mapping; representations; categorization.

Introduction
As research techniques for studying human behavior and the
brain have evolved, the underlying processes of music
perception have continued to fascinate cognitive scientists
and spur much research. Recent advances in neuroscience
for example, have shown that the simple act of perceiving
music involves distributed activity throughout the brain,
including diverse regions such as Broca’s area (Fadiga,
Craighero, & D’Ausilio, 2009), the pre-frontal cortex
(Bengtsson, Csíkszentmihályi, & Ullén, 2007), as well as
the amygdala (Limb, 2006). Indeed, many if not all of these
regions are used in other tasks such as speech processing,
for example (Koelsch et al., 2004). Given the integrated and
distributed neurological underpinnings of music, it should
come as no surprise that a host of relationships has been
made between music and other areas of cognition. Aside
from the common comparisons made between music and
language, many have suggested that music may also help to
aide us in understanding other behavior such as domaingeneral aesthetic preferences (Marcus, 2012), implicit and

One of the most fundamental and salient aspects of music is
the melody. Simple melodies consist of discrete units or
notes, where each note is characterized by a pitch, or
fundamental frequency (e.g., Hertz value). The core strategy
humans use to process and store familiar melodies is
through a relative pitch code (Attneave & Olson, 1971;
Page, 1994). This relative pitch code stores the pitch
sequence of a melody in terms of the relations or intervals
(specific frequency differences) between each note. For
example, the song Happy Birthday is immediately
recognizable due to the unique intervals between each of the
notes. That is, one immediately recognizes this song
regardless of whether it starts on a low or high note due to
the unique intervallic pattern between all subsequent notes.
There is considerable evidence on the use of relative pitch
information in adults through both behavioral (Dowling,
1978, 1988) as well as neuroimaging studies (Fujioka,
Trainor, Ross, Kakigi, & Pantev, 2004; Trainor, McDonald,
& Alain, 2002).
In addition to relative pitch, the contour (general shape, or
sequence of up and down movements in frequencies from
note to note) is another characteristic upon which melodies
can be categorized. Given the existence of these
characteristics, the question remains as to how they
contribute to a listener’s mental representation of a melody.
Note that while a melody with the same contour as Happy
Birthday but with a different intervallic sequence would be
perceived as a completely different song, it would still have
the same general “shape”, or up and down pattern. Although

2573

the intervallic pattern may be the most overtly salient and
representative feature of a melody to humans, studies have
shown that human adults are also sensitive to melodic
contour, at least in the short term (Bartlett & Dowling,
1980; Dowling, 1978). Furthermore, sensitivity to
intervallic and contour properties is present even in young
infants (Trehub, 2001; Trehub, Bull, & Thorpe, 1984;
Trehub, Trainor, & Unyk, 1993).
Despite the difference in informational content between
intervallic and contour properties, there is a fundamental
similarity in the relational nature of this information. That
is, these representations depend on the relationship (whether
it is the precise intervallic distance or the general contour
shape) between each pitch, and not on the actual pitch
frequencies themselves. It is within this relational capacity
that melodic perception can be said to share a cornerstone
property with many other cognitive processes.

The Role of Relations in Cognition
The ability to process relational properties has been
proposed as a fundamental mechanism underlying a wide
range of cognitive phenomena. This includes not only
higher level reasoning skills such as analogy-making
(Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995), language (Kim,
Pinker, Prince, & Prasada, 1991), and rule based learning
(Lovett & Anderson, 2005), but also extend to perceptual
processes such as the detection of similarities (Medin,
Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993).
Given that melodic processing appears to require
extracting relational information from melodies, it is
reasonable to hypothesize that the same mechanisms used in
other relational tasks may also operate when processing
melodies. Common to the approaches (e.g., intervallic and
contour) that both adults and infants use to encode melodies
is the underlying relations between individual notes. That is,
the ability to recognize a melody (or its shape) involves the
processing of the relationships between pitches, and not just
the specific frequencies of individual pitches.

Domain General or Domain Specific?
When speaking of mechanisms that enable the perception
and processing of music, a central question is whether these
may be specific to music, or if they underpin other cognitive
mechanisms (i.e., domain-specific or domain-general) as
well. One of the approaches to answering this question has
been to look at musical behavior in infants, since abilities
that are present at infancy are less likely to be acquired
through experience or specialization and more likely
attributable to innate core cognitive functions. The brunt of
the work on infant music perception suggests that many of
the cognitive subsets used for processing music are indeed
domain-general mechanisms (Hannon & Trainor, 2007;
Patel, 2008; Trehub & Hannon, 2006).
Despite the existing body of evidence pointing towards
domain-general mechanisms for music, the true underlying
nature of the mechanisms and representations of music
perception remain elusive and much less understood. While

listening to music, how are representations stored and
subsequently manipulated? Evidence from behavioral
studies with adults have shown that musical pitch can be
mapped to a wide variety of representations, including
vertical space (Melara & O'Brien, 1987), luminosity and
loudness (Hubbard, 1996; McDermott, Lehr, & Oxenham,
2008), as well as words related to emotion, size, sweetness,
texture and even temperature (Eitan & Timmers, 2010;
Nygaard, Herold, & Namy, 2009; Walker & Smith, 1984).
For instance, a recent study using video clips of singers
performing different types of hand motions (as primes for
musical stimuli) demonstrated that pitch processing shares
representations with spatial processing (i.e., higher spatial
movements in the visual modality primed the perception of
higher pitches; see, Connell, Cai, & Holler, 2013). Evidence
of such cross-modal mappings is interesting and could
perhaps be explained from an associative learning
perspective (where learning context and environmental
regularities may promote such cross-domain associations).
To gain a better understanding of the representational
content of melodies, a more direct and precise approach
may be helpful. For instance, are the representations of
contour (up or down direction between notes) and intervals
(frequency distance between notes) unique to music, or are
they used in other areas of cognition as well? Although
evidence of crossmodal correspondences between pitch and
spatial frequency has been previously demonstrated (Evans
& Treisman, 2010; for a review of correspondence in
general, see Spence, 2011), the full automaticity of such
correspondence is still under debate (Spence & Deroy,
2013). Furthermore, to our awareness there are no studies
that have utilized sequences of stimuli (as direct analogs to
melodies) to examine correspondences in representational
content1, an important point considering the inherently
sequential nature of music (all music unfolds through time).
In this experiment we examined whether the
representations used for melodic perception can be mapped
to visual sequences. We define domain-generality here as
the extent to which melodic representations can be flexibly
mapped to other senses (e.g., Doumas, Hummel, &
Sandhofer, 2008). Although other mapping tasks (e.g.,
Connell et al., 2013) have been used previously, such
findings are more speculative due to the possibility of
indirect priming. In order to examine the transfer of melodic
sequences to visual spatial frequency sequences, as well as
the crossmodal processing of melodic representations, visual
stimuli with analogous dimensions (i.e., frequency and
duration) were created for this study.
The representational characteristics of melodic perception
were investigated using a novel paradigm consisting of
matched sequential auditory and visual stimuli analogous on
several basic dimensions. Gabor patches (i.e., sinusoidal
gratings) were used as the visual analogue to auditory pitch
1

Although auditory pitch and visual gabor sequences have been
previously used to study asynchrony and temporal recalibration
mechanisms (Heron, Roach, Hanson, McGraw, & Whitaker,
2012).

2574

vary depending on whether the participant was placed under
the contour or intervallic discrimination condition
(described below). The presentation stream was continuous,
with each pitch and Gabor pattern being presented for one
second (with no pauses in between pitches). Thus each
melodic or Gabor sequence would have a total duration of
three seconds.
Contour Discrimination In this condition, the property
that differentiated the two types of sequences to be
categorized was the contour. One type of sequence would
have a steadily increasing contour, where if the first note
was n, the second note would be n + 2, and the third would
be n + 4 (see Figure 1). The other type of sequence would
have an up-down frequency relationship, where if the first
note was n, then the second note would be n + 2, and the
third would be n – 2.

Methods
Participants

Figure 1: Example stimuli for the contour discrimination
condition. The solid lines represent individual notes in the
melody. In a) the contour is up-up, and in b) up-down.
a)
Frequency

Frequency

Time

Figure 2: Example stimuli for the intervallic discrimination
condition. Note the different intervals (but similar contours)
for the last notes in the sequences.

Stimuli were presented on a 21inch Core2Duo 2.4 GHz
iMac computer using the Psychophysics Toolbox extension
for Matlab. Participants were seated at an eye to monitor
distance of approximately 60cm. From this distance, all
presented auditory stimuli occurred at approximately 75
decibels, as measured by a sound meter. Responses were
made via key presses to one of two buttons on a keyboard.
Auditory stimuli consisted of sinusoidal sound waves at
different frequencies determined by the equation
𝐹 = 𝑓 ∙ 2 !"
where n could vary from 0 to 11, producing the range of 12
semitone pitches contained within an octave, and f was set
to 440 Hz (A4).
Visual stimuli consisted of Gabor patches generated with
Gaussian envelopes and rotated at a 45° angle. Selection of
the spatial frequency followed an analogous process
determined by the equation
!

b)

Time

Stimuli and apparatus

𝐹 = 𝑠 ∙ 2 !"
where s represents the spatial frequency.
Each melodic and visual sequence consisted of three
items. The relationship between these three items would

Time

Time

Fifty-two participants (mean age = 21±5; 32 females) were
recruited from undergraduate courses at the University of
Hawaii at Manoa and offered course credit for their
participation. Each participant was randomly allocated into
one of the four conditions for a total of 13 participants in
each condition. Each group did not significantly differ from
one another on either age (F(3,41) = 2.0, p = 0.1) or sex
statistics (χ² = 6.9, df = 6, p = 0.3). All participants were
naïve to the purpose of the experiment and ethical approval
was obtained from the University’s Committee on Human
Subjects.

!

b)
Frequency

a)
Frequency

stimuli, as they can be defined by both frequency and
duration (how long stimuli is presented). Thus, any learning
transfer of relational properties from melodies to visual
sequences (and vice versa) could be observed. In theory, if
learning relations in one modality could transfer to stimuli
in a separate modality, this would be evidence for the
flexible use (or mapping) of relations in a domain-general
manner (Doumas et al., 2008; Gentner, 1983; Holyoak &
Thagard, 1995). In this study we tested for the transfer of
both contour and intervallic properties important for
processing melodies. Due to the fact that an intervallic
relation may carry with it more information (magnitude)
than contour (direction), it is hypothesized that the transfer
of intervallic relations may be harder than for contour
relations. In light of considerable evidence on the domain
general characteristics of music, it is also predicted that
simple melodic representations should map fairly easily to
the visual domain, and vice versa.

Intervallic Discrimination For intervallic discrimination,
the property that differentiates the two types of sequences is
the interval or distance between each element in the
sequence. One sequence would have a steadily decreasing
contour, where if the first note was n, the second note would
be n – 2, and the third would be n – 4. The other sequence
would have a non-steady (exponential) decrease, where if
the first note was n, the second note would be n – 2, and the
third would be n – 8 (see Figure 2).

Procedure
Participants were randomly allocated into one of two groups
and received either the melodic or the visual sequence
training. Within each of those groups, half (n=13) would
perform the contour discrimination task, and the other half
would perform the intervallic discrimination task.
Within these four sub-groups, the procedure was identical
and started off with an introduction screen on the computer
providing participants with instructions for the task. Next,

2575

participants would either hear or see a sequence of three
auditory pitches or Gabor patches (respectively, see Figure
3), depending on the condition they were placed in. Stimuli
were presented in the same modality throughout the learning
phase. Participants were then instructed to categorize each
stimuli sequence into one of two categories using the
keyboard. Since the purpose was for participants to discover
the categories for themselves via feedback provided at the
end of the trial, they were instructed to guess on the initials
trials and to then use the received feedback to guide their
categorization on subsequent trials. This learning phase
continued until the participant answered correctly 12 times
in a row, whereupon the experiment would proceed to the
testing phase.
Explicit Learning Paradigm
Visual Condition

Auditory Condition

(same as auditory, except
with visual stimuli)

750 ms
Freq. 1
1000 ms
Freq. 2
1000 ms

Freq. 3
1000 ms

Until response

* Learning trials were
repeated until 12
consecutive correct
answers were obtained

2000 ms

the four conditions (overall M = 31, SD = 22, F(3,43) = 1.5,
p = 0.2)
To determine whether participants subsequently
categorized the test stimuli better than chance (detection of
any difference between the two stimuli categories,
regardless of correct mapping of the corresponding
categories from one modality to the other), one-sample ttests were conducted on the absolute accuracy difference
from chance (|accuracy – 0.5|) of each of the four
conditions. Results indicate that in all testing conditions
participants detected differences between the two types of
categories significantly better than chance (overall
discrimination accuracy M = 0.83, SD = 0.15, all p < .001).
Of crucial interest to this study was whether participants
could map categorical representations from one modality to
another. One-sample t-tests were conducted on mean
accuracy scores to determine if accuracy was greater than
chance (0.5). In the contour discrimination condition,
mapping accuracy was significantly better than chance for
transfer from Gabor patches to melodies (M = 0.78, SD =
0.18, t(12) = 5.7, p < .001), as well as for transfer from
melodies to Gabor patches (M = 0.72, SD = 0.37, t(12) =
2.1, p = .055). In the intervallic discrimination condition,
mapping accuracy was significantly better than chance only
for transfer from Gabor patches to melodies (M = 0.70, SD
= 0.29, t(11) = 2.4, p = .03), and not for transfer from
melodies to Gabor patches (M = 0.62, SD = 0.33, t(8) = 1.1,
p = .3). To compare performance across the different
conditions, a two by two ANOVA was conducted. No
significant main effects were found for either factors of
category type (F(1,43) = 1.1, p = 0.3) or modality (F(1,43) =
0.7, p = 0.4).

Discussion

Correct/Incorrect feedback

Figure 3: Time course schematic of the experiment.
In the testing phase, participants were presented with 20
exemplars in the opposite sensory modality than the
learning phase. Half of these exemplars were from one
category, and the other half was from the other category
(previously learned, albeit in a separate modality).
Presentation order of the 20 exemplars was randomized. No
feedback was provided during the testing phase. Participants
were instructed to categorize in the same manner as they
had done during the learning phase, but were provided no
other directions.

Results
Of the 13 participants allocated into each of the four
conditions, one participant failed to reach training criterion
in the intervallic discrimination condition with Gabor patch
training and four participants failed to reach criterion in the
intervallic discrimination with melodic training. The rest of
the analyses were conducted only on participants that
completed the training section. The number of training trials
until criterion was reached did not significantly differ across

The purpose of this study was to 1) determine whether
representations for short melodic sequences can be mapped
to representations in the visual modality, and 2) examine
whether mapping performance differs across different
classes of melodic representations (contour and intervals)
and their visual counterparts. A novel experimental
paradigm involving active categorization with feedback and
subsequent cross-modal testing was employed.
Overall, tentative evidence for shared representational
resources was provided by successful cross-modal mappings
in three out of the four conditions. In the contour
discrimination condition, cross-modal mapping occurred in
both directions (for visual sequences to melodies as well as
for melodies to visual sequences). In the intervallic
discrimination condition, on the other hand, successful
mapping occurred only for transfer from visual sequences to
melodies, and not from melodies to visual sequences. This
finding, in conjunction to the higher rate of failure to reach
training criterion and overall lower accuracy scores for the
intervallic condition compared to contour (see Figure 4),
may suggest that intervallic discrimination is harder than
contour discrimination. These findings may also provide
tentative support for the notion that discriminating change in

2576

frequency direction is easier than discriminating change in
frequency magnitude (Lim, Doumas, & Sinnett, 2012;
Trehub et al., 1984).
It is worth noting a trend in the current data suggesting
that mapping transfer may not be bi-directional. That is,
transfer could have been slightly easier from Gabor patches
to melodies than the opposite. Although not significant,
lower accuracy scores for transfer from melodies to visual
sequences, compared to the opposite, could suggest a
possible bias or difference in representational flexibility of
melodies versus visual sequences. Whether this possible
difference may arise during the acquisition or transfer stage
of representations is an open question. Furthermore, the
methodology used here would be strengthened by models
demonstrating how such domain generalizability is
achieved, given that the question remains as to what
precisely is learned from exposure to such melodic and
visual sequences.
In addition to previous studies indicating shared resources
between pitch and space, this experiment extends such
findings in a more experimentally controlled design to
visual temporal sequences. Further, the present results
supplement existing findings on the domain-general aspects
of musical processing. When discussing the domain-general
nature of music, perhaps the most frequent comparisons are
made between music and language, since the two domains
do share many commonalities. Relevant to this study, the
role of sequential learning is fundamental to both music and
language. It has been suggested that the processing of sound
is an important opportunity during development that
subsequently aids the brain in learning how to process
sequential stimuli in general (Conway, Pisoni, &
Kronenberger, 2009). This notion is consistent, for example,
with a study that used an implicit learning task to measure
visual sequencing abilities in deaf children with cochlear
implants. It was found that deaf children exhibited general
sequencing deficits that were correlated to deficits in
language outcomes, leading the investigators to hypothesize
that deprivation of early sequential learning opportunities in
deaf children may explain their continued difficulties in
language even after receiving cochlear implants (Conway,
Pisoni, Anaya, Karpicke, & Henning, 2011). It has been
proposed that temporality and sequential processes may also
separate music from other art forms. Although music may
rely on domain-general mechanisms, its unique appeal may
lie in its inherently temporal nature that allows for the close
interaction of prediction and novelty (Kivy, 1993; Marcus,
2012).
Given that most people can perceive music despite having
little to no formal musical training (Bigand & PoulinCharronnat, 2006; Koelsch, Gunter, Friederici, & Schröger,
2000), it has been suggested that musical experience and
knowledge for most is acquired through implicit learning
(for a recent review on the topic as it relates to music, see
Rohrmeier & Rebuschat, 2012). That is, similar to language,
mere exposure to music is adequate for the development and
acquisition of knowledge about fairly complex sets of

regularities and relationships. In the real world
representations may be acquired through different means
where learning could in fact occur either explicitly or
implicitly (with or without awareness, supervision, or direct
knowledge). Although this experiment used a more explicit
learning routine through active categorization and feedback,
future studies may provide a more ecological examination
on musical behavior by incorporating implicit learning
paradigms (i.e., passive observation), in order to more
holistically account for domain generalizability of music, as
well as any differences in representational content that may
arise due to different learning approaches.

References
Attneave, F., & Olson, R. K. (1971). Pitch as a medium: A
new approach to psychophysical scaling. The American
journal of psychology, 84, 147-166.
Bartlett, J. C., & Dowling, W. J. (1980). Recognition of
transposed melodies: A key-distance effect in
developmental perspective. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 6(3),
501.
Bengtsson, S. L., Csíkszentmihályi, M., & Ullén, F. (2007).
Cortical regions involved in the generation of musical
structures during improvisation in pianists. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(5), 830-842.
Bigand, E., & Poulin-Charronnat, B. (2006). Are we
“experienced listeners”? A review of the musical
capacities that do not depend on formal musical training.
Cognition, 100(1), 100-130.
Connell, L., Cai, Z. G., & Holler, J. (2013). Do you see
what I’m singing? Visuospatial movement biases pitch
perception. Brain and cognition, 81(1), 124-130.
Conway, C. M., Pisoni, D. B., Anaya, E. M., Karpicke, J., &
Henning, S. C. (2011). Implicit sequence learning in deaf
children with cochlear implants. Developmental Science,
14(1), 69-82.
Conway, C. M., Pisoni, D. B., & Kronenberger, W. G.
(2009). The Importance of Sound for Cognitive
Sequencing Abilities The Auditory Scaffolding
Hypothesis. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
18(5), 275-279.
Doumas, L. A. A., Hummel, J. E., & Sandhofer, C. M.
(2008). A theory of the discovery and predication of
relational concepts. Psychological Review, 115(1), 1.
Dowling, W. J. (1978). Scale and contour: Two components
of a theory of memory for melodies. Psychological
Review, 85(4), 341.
Dowling, W. J. (1988). Tonal structure and children's early
learning of music. In J. Sloboda (Ed.), Generative
Processes in Music. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eitan, Z., & Timmers, R. (2010). Beethoven’s last piano
sonata and those who follow crocodiles: Cross-domain
mappings of auditory pitch in a musical context.
Cognition, 114(3), 405-422.

2577

Evans, K. K., & Treisman, A. (2010). Natural cross-modal
mappings between visual and auditory features. Journal
of vision, 10(1), 6.
Fadiga, L., Craighero, L., & D’Ausilio, A. (2009). Broca's
area in language, action, and music. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 1169(1), 448-458.
Fujioka, T., Trainor, L. J., Ross, B., Kakigi, R., & Pantev,
C. (2004). Musical training enhances automatic encoding
of melodic contour and interval structure. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(6), 1010-1021.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive science, 7(2), 155-170.
Hannon, E., & Trainor, L. (2007). Music acquisition: effects
of enculturation and formal training on development.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 11(11), 466-472.
Heron, J., Roach, N. W., Hanson, J. V., McGraw, P. V., &
Whitaker, D. (2012). Audiovisual time perception is
spatially specific. Experimental brain research, 218(3),
477-485.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hubbard, T. L. (1996). Synesthesia-like mappings of
lightness, pitch, and melodic interval. The American
journal of psychology, 219-238.
Kim, J. J., Pinker, S., Prince, A., & Prasada, S. (1991). Why
no mere mortal has ever flown out to center field.
Cognitive science, 15(2), 173-218.
Kivy, P. (1993). The fine art of repetition: Essays in the
philosophy of music. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
Univ Press.
Koelsch, S., Gunter, T., Friederici, A. D., & Schröger, E.
(2000). Brain indices of music processing:“nonmusicians”
are musical. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(3),
520-541.
Koelsch, S., Kasper, E., Sammler, D., Schulze, K., Gunter,
T., & Friederici, A. D. (2004). Music, language and
meaning: brain signatures of semantic processing. Nature
Neuroscience, 7(3), 302-307.
Lim, A., Doumas, L. A. A., & Sinnett, S. (2012). Modeling
Melodic Perception as Relational Learning Using a
Symbolic-Connectionist Architecture (DORA). Paper
presented at the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, Sapporo, Japan.
Limb, C. J. (2006). Structural and functional neural
correlates of music perception. The Anatomical Record
Part A: Discoveries in Molecular, Cellular, and
Evolutionary Biology, 288(4), 435-446.
Lovett, M. C., & Anderson, J. R. (2005). Thinking as a
production system. In K. J. Holyoak & R. Morrison
(Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and
reasoning (pp. 401–429). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Marcus, G. F. (2012). Musicality: Instinct or Acquired
Skill? Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 498-512.
McDermott, J. H., Lehr, A. J., & Oxenham, A. J. (2008). Is
relative pitch specific to pitch? Psychological Science,
19(12), 1263-1271.

Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2),
254.
Melara, R. D., & O'Brien, T. P. (1987). Interaction between
synesthetically corresponding dimensions. Journal of
experimental psychology: General, 116(4), 323.
Nygaard, L. C., Herold, D. S., & Namy, L. L. (2009). The
semantics of prosody: Acoustic and perceptual evidence
of prosodic correlates to word meaning. Cognitive
science, 33(1), 127-146.
Page, M. P. A. (1994). Modelling the perception of musical
sequences with self-organizing neural networks.
Connection Science, 6(2-3), 223-246.
Patel, A. D. (2008). Music, language, and the brain.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Rauscher, F. (2003). Can Music Instruction Affect
Children's Cognitive Development? ERIC Clearinghouse
on Early Education and Parenting.
Retrieved 10
October, 2011, from http://www.ericdigests.org/20043/cognitive.html
Rohrmeier, M., & Rebuschat, P. (2012). Implicit learning
and acquisition of music. Topics in Cognitive Science,
4(4), 525-553.
Spence, C. (2011). Crossmodal correspondences: a tutorial
review. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 73(4),
971-995.
Spence, C., & Deroy, O. (2013). How automatic are
crossmodal correspondences? Consciousness and
cognition, 22(1), 245-260.
Tillmann, B. (2012). Music and Language Perception:
Expectations, Structural Integration, and Cognitive
Sequencing. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(4), 568-584.
Trainor, L. J., McDonald, K. L., & Alain, C. (2002).
Automatic and controlled processing of melodic contour
and interval information measured by electrical brain
activity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14(3), 430.
Trehub, S. E. (2001). Musical predispositions in infancy.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 930(1), 1.
Trehub, S. E., Bull, D., & Thorpe, L. A. (1984). Infants'
perception of melodies: The role of melodic contour.
Child Development, 55(3), 821-830.
Trehub, S. E., & Hannon, E. E. (2006). Infant music
perception:
Domain-general
or
domain-specific
mechanisms? Cognition, 100(1), 73-99.
Trehub, S. E., Trainor, L. J., & Unyk, A. M. (1993). Music
and Speech Processing in the First Year of Life. Advances
in Child Development and Behavior (Vol. 24, pp. 1-35).
New York: Academic Press.
Walker, P., & Smith, S. (1984). Stroop interference based
on the synaesthetic qualities of auditory pitch. Perception,
13(1), 75-81.

2578

