UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Supra-individual consistencies in navigator-driven landmark placement for spatial learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/57w013rq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Von Stulpnagel, Rul
Kuliga, Saskia
Buechner, Simon J.
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Supra-individual consistencies in navigator-driven landmark placement for spatial
learning
Rul von Stülpnagel (rul.von.stuelpnagel@cognition.uni-freiurg.de)
Abteilung für Kognitionswissenschaft, IIG, Friedrichstr. 50
Freiburg 79100, Germany

Saskia Kuliga (saskia.kuliga@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Abteilung für Kognitionswissenschaft, IIG, Friedrichstr. 50
Freiburg 79100, Germany

Simon J. Büchner (buechner@ucf.uni-freiburg.de)
University College Freiburg, Bertoldstr. 17
Freiburg 79085, Germany

Christoph Hölscher (christoph.hoelscher@gess.ethz.ch)
Professur Kognitionswissenschaft, Clausiusstr. 59
Zürich 8092, Switzerland

Abstract
Landmarks are an essential part of human navigation. In most
situations, landmarks used for navigation are available in the
environment. However, landmarks can also be set up
deliberately to facilitate future orientation. The question how
such navigator-driven and individual landmark placement
affects spatial learning and what strategies are used has rarely
been examined. We addressed this question with two
experiments. Participants explored virtual environments and
placed landmarks with the aim of developing a mental map of
the environment (measured by sketch mapping, Study 1) or to
facilitate wayfinding (Study 2). Their performance was
compared to participants who did not place landmarks.
Landmarks were detrimental to sketch mapping (Study 1),
and provided no significant advantage for wayfinding (Study
2). However, we found strong supra-individual consistencies
of landmark placement strategies in both studies, implying a
"wisdom of the crowd" for critical landmark locations.
Keywords: virtual reality, landmarks, wayfinding, spatial
learning strategies.

Landmarks in human spatial learning
Every sufficiently complex environment can turn into a
confusing maze where one can easily get lost. This is
especially true if the environment is visually sparse and
lacks of visual elements -such as landmarks- that distinguish
one location from another. Several ancient myths (e.g.,
Theseus and the Minotaur) and classic fairy-tales (e.g.,
Hansel and Gretel) tell us about such challenges and
approaches to overcome them.
Research on spatial cognition has emphasized the role of
landmarks as an essential aspect of human orientation and
spatial learning. Golledge (1999) stated that “landmarks
usually act as anchor points for organizing other spatial
information into a layout.” Despite their central role in
human orientation, it has turned out to be surprisingly
difficult to pinpoint the defining characteristics of a

landmark. Several findings indicate that landmarks at
decision points are more important for human navigation
than landmarks at other locations (e.g., Michon & Denis,
2001), whereas other studies report rather contradictory
findings (Schwering, Li, & Anacta, 2013). More formal
frameworks attempt to characterize the importance of
landmarks according to their visual, structural, and semantic
salience and distinctiveness (Raubal & Winter, 2002). In the
optimal case, this would allow the automatic assessment of
the most relevant landmark in a given location. Orientation
in built environments can also rely on a special form of
landmarks: Signs are deliberately set up to reduce the
cognitive demands of wayfinding in a building into a simple
matching of pictograms (Hölscher, Büchner, Brösamle,
Meilinger, & Strube, 2007). Signs can serve different
purposes (see Passini, 1984). For example, they are (similar
to landmarks) considered more relevant for orientation when
positioned at decision points. However, signs may also
suffer under a number of deficiencies such as poor
positioning, which may affect their probability to be
detected at all (Xie, Filippidis, Galea, Blackshields, &
Lawrence, 2012). Thus, a sophisticated rationale for sign
positioning is desirable.
These considerations concern landmarks already available
in the environment. However, landmarks can also be set up
by an individual in order to facilitate orientation. For
example, hikers and scouts sometimes deliberately create
landmarks to find their way back. But contrary to the
popularity of Hansel and Gretel and their breadcrumb trace,
there is almost no research that has investigated how people
make use of such individually placed landmarks. Ruddle
(2008) describes a computational method for generating
trails, but not distinctive landmarks, in a virtual
environment. Supportive evidence is reported by Cliburn,
Winlock, Rilea, and Van Donsel (2007), who found that
participants with individually or preplaced landmarks

1706

needed less navigation time and covered less distance in an
artificial grid-like virtual environment than participants
without landmarks. In a related research field, the placement
of landmarks has been shown to foster the mapping abilities
of robots (Beinhofer, Kretzschmar, & Burgard, 2013). Thus,
there is some evidence that individually placed landmarks
may help to mark previously visited places, disambiguate
similar places and provide reference points for the
integration of partial views. In other words, if such
landmarks serve as anchor points for the organization of
spatial information as claimed by Golledge (1999), we can
expect an increase in spatial learning as compared to
individuals who are not allowed to place landmarks.
However, the development of a mental map of an
environment is a cognitively demanding task, and requires
the switch between egocentric and allocentric perspective
(Shelton & McNamara, 2004). Thus, it is also possible that
this cognitive effort limits potential advantages of
individually placed landmarks for the development of
survey knowledge. Moreover, the findings of Shelton and
McNamara (2004) imply that a task involving landmarks
may result in a landmark-centered orientation strategy.
Thus, the facilitation of spatial learning by individually
placed landmarks may be more pronounced in a setting that
requires route knowledge.
Taken together, the present research addresses the
following questions: First, does the placement of landmarks
at individually chosen places in an environment support the
development of a mental map of this environment (Study 1),
respectively the ability to locate specific locations in a
wayfinding task (Study 2)? Second, can we identify supraindividual strategies and patterns in the placement of
landmarks in both scenarios?

was executed by pressing a button. Participants explored the
first environment with the instruction to remain in the
environment until they were sure to be able to draw a sketch
of this environment, with a max time limit of eight minutes 1.
In the individual landmarks condition, participants were
allowed to place up to four landmarks while they explored
the environment. The landmarks were four differently
colored balls hovering in space. In the preplaced landmarks
condition, four landmarks were placed a priori in the way
that from any point in the environment at least one landmark
was visible. This was pointed out to participants before they
explored the environment. In the no landmarks condition,
participants explored the empty environment. After the
exploration, participants from all conditions drew a sketch
map of the environment without a time limit. This procedure
was repeated for all environments.

Study 1
Study 1 examined whether individually placed landmarks
support the development of a mental map of an
environment. In order to avoid floor effects, we decided to
use artificial but rather simple environments. One group of
participants placed landmarks individually during the
exploration, whereas another group of participants explored
the environments without the help of landmarks. Similar to
Cliburn and colleagues (2007), we included a third
condition with preplaced landmarks. This allowed us to
compare potential advantages of individually placed
landmarks as compared to existing landmarks.

Method
Participants were 115 students (36 of them male; age: 1933, M = 23, SD = 3).
Materials and Procedure. We created three environments
based on simple geometric shapes ('Overlapping squares',
'Shifted stop sign', and 'Z in a box'), displayed in Figure 1.
Participants were individually tested on three 24'' monitors
arranged in a semi-circle. Movement was controlled with a
gamepad (left analogue stick: body movement; right
analogue stick: head movement). Placement of landmarks

Figure 1: Layouts of the environments used in Study 1
(top left: Overlapping Squares; top right: Z in a Box;
bottom: Shifted stop sign). Black dots indicate all landmarks
placed in the individual landmarks condition. Blue arrows
indicate landmark positions in the preplaced landmarks
condition.
Design. The independent variables was landmark type
(individual landmarks vs. preplaced landmarks vs. no
landmarks), manipulated between subjects. The dependent
variable were additional and missing segments in the sketch
maps, as well as a rating of their overall quality.

Results
For all statistical analyses throughout this paper, the
Type-I-error was set at  = .05. As an indicator of effect
1

Exploration time between the experimental groups was
comparable for all environments, all F < 1.50, ns.

1707

size, partial η2 (η2p) is reported for statistically significant
effects (Cohen, 1977).
Sketch map analysis. Two independent raters analyzed the
sketch maps for number of additional segments (i.e.,
segments a participant sketched not existing in the original
layout), number of missing segments (i.e., the number of
connections between turns and intersections a participant
did not sketch), as well as for their overall quality (1 = very
good to 6 = very bad). Mean values were computed after a
sufficient inter-rater correlation was confirmed, rt > .66 for
all measures and environments. All descriptive data are
presented in Table 1.
First, we computed a (individual landmarks vs. preplaced
landmarks vs. no landmarks) MANOVA for additional
segments, F(6,162) = 4.32, η2p = .14, p < .001. There were
significant differences for 'Overlapping squares', F(2,82) =
10.96, η2p = .21, p < .001, and 'Z in a box', F(2,82) = 3.22,
η2p = .07, p < .05, but not for 'Shifted stop sign', F = 2.18,
ns. Participants in the no landmarks condition draw fewer
additional segments than the other experimental conditions,
indicating a better comprehension of the environments'
layouts.
Table 1: Mean number (and standard errors) of missing
and additional segments in the sketch maps, as well as their
overall quality ratings (ranging from 1 = very good to 6 =
very bad), separately for all conditions and environments.
Individual
Preplaced No
Landmarks
landmarks landmarks
Additional segments
Overlapping
3.14 (.60)
3.86 (.50)
.95 (.36)
squares
Shifted stop sign
1.08 (.70)
3.14 (.70) 1.92 (.43)
Z in a box
.64 (.27
.72 (.23)
.15 (.14)
Missing segments
Overlapping
1.47 (.26)
1.14 (.26)
.52 (.16)
squares
Shifted stop sign
2.28 (.53)
1.67 (.53) 1.59 (.32)
Z in a box
.36 (.13)
.28 (.13)
.11 (.08)
Overall grade
Overlapping
3.53 (.34)
4.06 (.33) 1.97 (.21)
squares
Shifted stop sign
3.41 (.36)
3.47 (.35) 3.04 (.22)
Z in a box
1.99 (.24)
2.13 (.24) 1.51 (.15)

= 17.45, η2p = .30, p < .001, and 'Z in a box', F(2,82) = 3.09,
η2p = .07, p = .05, but not for 'Shifted stop sign', F < 1, ns.
The data depicted in Table 1 imply that the overall quality
of the sketch maps drawn by participants in the no
landmarks condition were higher as compared to sketch
maps from participants in the two conditions with
landmarks.

Discussion
The findings of Study 1 are quite clear: Landmark, even
when placed at individually chosen locations, are rather
detrimental to the development of a mental map, as
indicated by sketch mapping (although this effect was less
pronounced for the more complex 'Shifted stop sign' shape).
It appears likely that the presence of landmarks primed
participants towards a respective spatial orientation (Shelton
& McNamara, 2004). Thus, individually placed landmarks
may be more advantageous for a wayfinding task than for a
mapping task. This assumption was tested in Study 2.
Although we found that the individual placement of
landmarks did not facilitate sketch mapping, there was a
remarkably high supra-individual conformity where
participants placed their landmarks. This conformity is
impressive, considering that participants had explored the
environments from an egocentric perspective only. It
appears that participants tended to place their landmarks at
the most central and most visible locations within each
environment. This finding will also be scrutinized more
closely in Study 2.

Study 2

A second MANOVA for missing segments missed
significance, F(6,162) = 2.06, p = .06. However, a
descriptive analysis of Table 1 implies that for 'Overlapping
squares', participants in the no landmarks condition missed
less segments than participants in the other conditions. This
impression was confirmed by a significant univariate effect,
F(2,82) = 5.70, p < .01. This effect did not extend to the
other two environments, both F < 1.71, both p < .18, ns.
Third, we evaluated the overall quality ratings of the
sketches. The MANOVA revealed a multivariate effect,
F(6,162) = 4.87, η2p = .15, p < .001. Again, there were
significant differences for the 'Overlapping squares', F(2,82)

Study 2 examined the effects of individual landmark
placement for wayfinding for a more complex environment
as used by Cliburn and colleagues (2007). Thus, participants
were required to explore a virtual model of the Tate Gallery
in London (Conroy-Dalton, 2001) and find three goal
locations in the otherwise visually sparse environment. One
group placed non-directional landmarks (i.e., arrows
pointing towards the ground). A second group placed
directional landmarks (i.e., arrows pointing into a chosen
direction), similar to signs indicating a direction. A control
group was not allowed to place landmarks. Given the
complexity of the environment, we did not include a
condition with preplaced landmarks.
If placing landmarks for future wayfinding induces a
landmark- and route-based orientation, it is more likely that
placing landmarks is advantageous to spatial learning.
Furthermore, directional landmarks should reduce more
spatial ambiguity than non-directional landmarks and thus
have additional benefits to wayfinding performance.

Method
Participants were 53 first-year students (about 50% of
them male; age: 18-48, M = 25, SD = 5).
Materials. The apparatus was identical to Study 1.
A virtual model of the Tate Gallery consisted of no
distinctive objects or textures but three goal locations

1708

marked with images on the wall ('Ball', 'Dog', and 'Mouse').
The only other exception was the entrance area (at the very
bottom of Figure 2) with a blue texture. The general layout
of the environment and the locations of these goal locations
are displayed in Figure 2.
Landmarks were five 3D-arrows with a differently
colored point each. In the directional landmarks condition,
the arrows had a horizontal orientation, thus pointing into a
direction chosen by the participant. In the non-directional
landmarks condition, the same arrows had a vertical
orientation, thus pointing towards the floor. Directional
landmarks pointed into the direction of view during the
moment of placement. In order to avoid unintentional and
miss-oriented landmark placements, participants could
retract a landmark for thirty seconds after the initial placing
and place it again.

experiment. In the subsequent landmark placement phase,
participants in the directional and the non-directional
landmark condition were instructed to place up to five
landmarks within ten minutes, so that the landmarks would
support the localization of the goal locations in the next
experiment phase. Participants in the no landmarks
condition continued to explore the building in this phase. In
the wayfinding phase, all participants were positioned at a
predefined location in the environment and instructed to
find the goal location 'Mouse' within three minutes. Once
the goal location or the time limit was reached, participants
were automatically positioned at another predefined
location, and the wayfinding task was, in this order,
repeated for the goal locations 'Dog' and 'Ball'. Finally, selfreported sense of direction was conducted before
participants were thanked and debriefed.
Design. The independent variable was landmark type
(directional landmarks vs. non-directional landmarks vs. no
landmarks) in a between subjects design. The dependent
variables were time and distance in the wayfinding tasks.

Results
Wayfinding performance. The overall probability to find
the goal location within the time limit was 67% for 'Mouse',
81% for 'Dog', and 73% for 'Ball', but these differences were
not significant, p > .15. The maximal time of three minutes
and the distance travelled up to that point of time,
respectively, were used for analysis if participants had not
found a goal location.
First, we analyzed the time participants needed to find the
three goal locations in a 3 (landmark condition: directional
landmarks vs. non-directional landmarks vs. no landmarks)
x 3 (goal location: Mouse vs. Dog vs. Ball) ANOVA with
repeated measures on the second factor (see Table 2). We
found a main effect of goal location, F(2,50) = 15.39, η2p =
.24, p < .001, indicating that participants required less time
to find 'Mouse' than 'Dog' and 'Ball'. However, there was no
difference between the experimental conditions and no
interaction effect, both F < 1.76, ns. In other words, the
placement of directional and non-directional landmarks did
not enhance the participants' wayfinding performance as
compared to participants in the no landmarks condition.

Figure 2: Layout of the Tate Gallery and goal locations.
Dots represent landmarks placed by participants in the
directional (red) and non-directional (blue) condition.
Procedure. In the practice phase, participants practiced
movement with the gamepad for two minutes and the
placement and retraction of landmarks for three minutes in a
separated part of the environment. Participants in the no
landmarks condition continued to practice movement. In the
exploration phase, all participants started at the main
entrance of the building, viewing into the direction of the
main corridor. They were instructed to explore the building
and locate the three goal location within 15 minutes.
Participants in the two conditions with landmarks were also
informed that they could place landmarks later in the

Table 2: Mean time in seconds (and standard error) in the
wayfinding task, separately for all conditions and all goal
locations (as well as the mean average for all locations).
Directional
Non-directional No
Landmarks
Landmarks
Landmarks
Mouse
121s (8s)
136s (8s)
139s (9s)
Dog
84 (10s)
112s (7s)
105s (11s)
Ball
112s (9s)
117s (10s)
123s (11s)
Mean
106s (7s)
122s (7s)
122s (7s)
This result could be biased by participants who spend
more time looking around in order to locate the next
landmark, thus scoring a high time despite an efficient path

1709

choice. In order to account for this possibility, we analyzed
the travelled distance in an equivalent ANOVA (see Table
3). The results corroborated the previous analysis with a
main effect of goal location, F(2,50) = 12.42, η2p = .20, p <
.001. Again, there was neither an effect of landmark
condition nor an interaction effect, both F < 1.52, ns. Thus,
there was also no positive effect of placing landmarks with
regard to the travelled distance as compared to wayfinding
without landmarks.
Table 3: Mean distance in the wayfinding task (and
standard error), separately for all conditions and all goal
locations (as well as the mean average for all locations).
Directional
Non-directional No
Landmarks
Landmarks
Landmarks
Mouse
260 (15)
278 (15)
288 (14)
Dog
184 (20)
238 (22)
224 (19)
Ball
240 (18)
250 (19)
258 (17)
Mean
228 (13)
255 (13)
256 (12)

Put differently, we computed how much an individual
participant's landmarks deviated from the 'wisdom of the
crowd'. This deviation correlated significantly with the
wayfinding performance measures time (r = .51, n = 33, p =
< .01) and distance (r = .37, n = 33, p = < .04): The closer
individual participants placed their landmarks to the cluster
centers derived from the placements of all participants, the
better their wayfinding performance. Thus, although there
was no benefit of landmark deployment for wayfinding
performance per se, landmarks placed at the 'right' locations
appear to be supportive in this regard. Furthermore, the
deviation from the from the cluster centers also correlated
with the self-reported sense of orientation (r = -.45, p = <
.01): Participants with a good sense of orientation deployed
their landmarks closer to the cluster centers. These
correlations provide convincing evidence that the cluster
centers represent indeed 'good' landmark locations for
finding the given goal locations.

Discussion
This findings imply that placing landmarks does not
support wayfinding in a complex virtual building. To test
this implication further, we will now turn to a more detailed
analysis of the distribution of the deployed landmarks.
Distribution of landmark placements. As can be derived
from Figure 2, there are several visible clusters where
participants from both landmark conditions2 preferred to
place their landmarks. Some of these clusters are clearly
related to a specific goal location (e.g., the clusters most
closely located to the goal locations 'Mouse' and 'Dog' on
the left side of the environment). However, other clusters
are rather superfluous from a data processing point of view:
they are located far from the next goal, and at central areas
of the building that are already identifiable by their unique
configurational layout (e.g., in the central part of the main
corridor).
Considering that we found no significant wayfinding
performance advantage of the conditions placing landmarks
as compared to the no landmarks condition: Are the
observed clusters meaningful and supportive in regard to
wayfinding? In order to address this question, we used a kmeans clustering algorithm (see MacKay, 2003), thus
identifying the 'best' locations for deploying a landmark
according to the 'wisdom of the crowd'. Next, we developed
a formula to compute the mean distance of each participant's
individually placed landmarks to the closest centroid (i.e.,
the central point of a landmark cluster), where let C be the
set of centroids of the five largest clusters, and let D be the
set of landmarks of one participant:

2

As there were no significant wayfinding performance
differences between the two experimental conditions with
landmarks, and since the visual inspection suggested highly similar
placement patterns, all results reported in this paragraph are
computed with data merged from both conditions.

The results of Study 2 suggest that wayfinding
performance of participants who placed landmarks
individually was not facilitated as compared to participants
who did not place landmarks. This was observed for
directional landmarks that pointed into a specific direction
as well as for non-directional landmarks. Several reasons
may have contributed to this rather unexpected finding.
First, the Tate Gallery may have been too complex for the
number of available landmarks or not complex enough to
require the placement of landmarks for successful
wayfinding. However, directional landmarks appeared to
have a positive effect on wayfinding performance
descriptively, as compared to both the non-directional and
the no landmarks condition, but the effect was not strong
enough to reach significance in our study. In this regard, it
would be a challenging task to analyze how the directional
landmarks were used in regard to the goal locations,
although we were not able to identify obvious patterns in
our study. Second, many rooms had -despite the absence of
distinctive features or objects- a unique configurational
layout that may have supported the self-localization of
participants in the no landmarks condition (i.e., the pillars in
the entrance hall make this area identifiable without any
additional landmarks). Additionally, we assumed that
participants would made use of all landmarks they had
placed. However, it is possible that they actually did not
detect relevant landmarks when searching a goal location
(Xie et al., 2012). Third, participants may have placed
landmarks at locations that were disadvantageous for
wayfinding. The analysis of the landmark placement
distribution speaks against this assumption: although the
participants had neither seen a map of the environment nor
an opportunity to discuss their strategies with other
participants, there was a strong consistency in the
placements. This consistency appears to represent a 'wisdom
of the crowd', as participants who placed their landmarks in
accordance with these cluster centers showed better

1710

wayfinding performance and indicated a better sense of
orientation.

References

General Discussion
The research at hand is one of the first to examine the
effects of navigator-driven placement of landmarks for
different levels of spatial learning. Our findings imply that
placing landmarks distracts from the development of a
mental map of an environment as indicated by sketch
mapping (Study 1). At the first glance, this result appears
rather surprising, as landmarks should help to reduce
ambiguity in the environment and enable the integration of
partial views, similar to effects demonstrated in robotic
environment mapping (Beinhofer et al., 2013). However,
our findings are in line with previous research that implies
that the focus on landmark placement induces a respective
spatial orientation mode, thus inhibiting survey perspective
taking (Shelton & McNamara, 2004). Future research
should further address similarities and differences in robot
and human use of landmark for enhancing an environmental
representation.
In contrast to our hypothesis, we found no advantage of
individual landmark placement for wayfinding performance,
either, although the placing landmarks fits the spatial
orientation required for wayfinding (Study 2). However, we
do not claim that such an effect does not exist at all.
Additional research on familiarity and complexity of the
environment as well as on the number of available
landmarks is required to draw this conclusion.
The most interesting finding of this research concerns the
strong supra-natural consistencies in the placement of
landmarks. Independently from each other, participants
placed their landmarks at similar locations. Some of these
clusters appeared to relate to the most central and visible
areas in the environments (Study 1+2). Other clusters stand
in clear relation to a specific goal location (Study 2). Strong
correlations with wayfinding performance and self-reported
sense of orientation suggest that on average, humans appear
to have an intuitive understanding of configurational aspects
of space, even when experienced from an egocentric
perspective. We are currently aiming to relate our findings
on the placement of landmarks to space syntax measures
(Hillier, 2008). Space syntax has been found to be a strong
predictor of pedestrian movement in the real as well as in a
VR model of the Tate Gallery (Conroy-Dalton, 2001). Our
findings could be a first step to establish how to use space
syntax to understand and predict where humans require and
expect wayfinding information, and thus develop a
sophisticated rationale for good sign positioning in complex
buildings.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sebastian Dufner for his expertise on clustering
algorithms, and Tobias Faaß, Katja May, and Julian Schmid
for their help with the data collection of Study 2. We are
greatly indebted to Ruth Conroy-Dalton for providing us
with the VR model of the Tate Gallery.

Beinhofer, M., Kretzschmar, H., & Burgard, W. (2013).
Deploying artificial landmarks to foster data
association in simultaneous localization and
mapping. In ICRA (pp. 5235–5240). IEEE.
Cliburn, D., Winlock, T., Rilea, S., & Van Donsel, M.
(2007). Dynamic landmark placement as a
navigation aid in virtual worlds. In Proceedings of
the 2007 ACM symposium on Virtual reality
software and technology (pp. 211–214). ACM.
Cohen, J. (1977). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences (Vol. Rev). Hillsdale, NJ:
LawrenceErlbaumAssociates, Inc.
Conroy-Dalton, R. (2001). Spatial Navigation in Immersive
Virtual Environments. University of London.
Golledge, R. G. (1999). Wayfinding Behavior: Cognitive
Mapping and Other Spatial Processes. JHU Press.
Hillier, B. (2008). The Social Logic of Space (Reprint.).
Cambridge University Press.
Hölscher, C., Büchner, S. J., Brösamle, M., Meilinger, T., &
Strube, G. (2007). Signs and maps–Cognitive
economy in the use of external aids for indoor
navigation. In Proceedings of the 29th annual
cognitive science society (pp. 377–382). Cognitive
Science Society Austin, TX.
MacKay, D. J. C. (2003). Information Theory, Inference and
Learning Algorithms. Cambridge University Press.
Michon, P.-E., & Denis, M. (2001). When and Why Are
Visual Landmarks Used in Giving Directions?
Spatial Information Theory. In D. Montello (Ed.),
(pp. 292–305). Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Passini, R. (1984). Wayfinding in architecture. Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
Raubal, M., & Winter, S. (2002). Enriching Wayfinding
Instructions with Local Landmarks. In Proceedings
of the Second International Conference on
Geographic Information Science (pp. 243–259).
London, UK, UK: Springer-Verlag.
Ruddle, R. A. (2008). Generating trails automatically, to aid
navigation when you revisit an environment.
Presence:
Teleoperators
and
Virtual
Environments, 17(6), 562–574.
Schwering, A., Li, R., & Anacta, V. J. A. (2013).
Orientation information in different forms of route
instructions. In Short Paper Proceedings of the
16th AGILE Conference on Geographic
Information Science, Leuven, Belgium.
Shelton, A. L., & McNamara, T. P. (2004). Orientation and
perspective dependence in route and survey
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30(1), 158–170.
Xie, H., Filippidis, L., Galea, E. R., Blackshields, D., &
Lawrence, P. J. (2012). Experimental analysis of
the effectiveness of emergency signage and its
implementation in evacuation simulation. Fire and
Materials, 36(5-6), 367–382.

1711

