UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The hands that guide the thinking: Interactivity in mental arithmetic

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dx969jj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Guthrie, Lisa
Mayer, Julia
Vallee-Tourangeau, Frederic

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Hands That Guide the Thinking: Interactivity in Mental Arithmetic
Lisa G. Guthrie (l.guthrie@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University,
Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UNITED KINGDOM

Julia K. Mayer (j.mayer@kingston.ac.uk)
Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University
6200 MD Maastricht, THE NETHERLANDS

Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau (f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University,
Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UNITED KINGDOM

Abstract
Whether it is in mining distal cultural influences or using more
proximal artefacts, problem solving in the wild routinely
scaffolds on the basis of interacting with resources outside the
head. Individuals often gesture, point or use objects as an aid to
solving quotidian arithmetic problems. Interactivity has been
linked to better performance in problem solving, possibly due to
a more efficient allocation of attentional resources and better
distribution of cognitive load. Previous research suggests an
interplay between the cognitive and motor system whereby the
later can lighten the strain on working memory capacity (GoldinMeadow, Nusbaum, Kelly & Wagner, 2001; Carlson,
Avraamedes, Cary & Strasberg, 2007; Vallée-Tourangeau,
2013). In attempting to simulate these moves made in the world,
different levels of interactivity were examined with a series of
mental arithmetic problems. Participants were also profiled in
terms of attitude to varying problem presentations as an
assessment of their engagement in the task. The integration of
artifacts, such as tokens or a pen, provided individuals with the
possibility to explore the opportunities afforded by a dynamic
modification of the problem. Mental arithmetic performance was
more accurate and more efficient under these conditions.
Participants also felt more positive about and better engaged
with the task when they could reconfigure the problem
presentation through interactivity. These findings underscore the
importance of engineering task environments that support
distributed problem representation and adequate levels of
interactivity that creates a dynamically shifting topography of
action affordances.
Keywords: Interactivity; Mental arithmetic; Problem
solving; Distributed Representation; Task engagement.

Introduction
Mathematical problems are embedded in everyday life in
a variety of different shapes and forms. When confronted
with an arithmetic task, people often rearrange the
physical display by interacting with the environment.
They might move coins while counting their money, note
subtotals with a pen or use their hands to gesture, point or
count (Kirsh, 1995; Neth & Payne, 2001).
Mental arithmetic tasks often entail strategic thinking
and deliberate information processing, which require time
and effort (Vallée-Tourangeau, 2013). Besides basic,
well-rehearsed sums, computations are generally said to

pose a relatively high cognitive load on an individual’s
internal resources, such as working memory (Ashcraft,
1995; DeStefano & Lefevre, 2004). Numbers are held,
added and manipulated in order to solve the problem
employing different working memory subsystems,
including storage, retrieval and allocation of attentional
resources. Dependent on the complexity and length of a
mental arithmetic task, the demands of finding a solution
may impose a relatively low or high cognitive load,
potentially imposing substantial demands on working
memory capacity. This capacity may, however, be
stretched or reduced by certain internal or external factors,
which can subsequently paint a misleading profile of an
individual’s true arithmetic capabilities (Ashcraft &
Moore, 2009).

Interactivity
The internal cognitive and physical resources deployed to
tackle a problem may be taxed by various features of the
task—such as time pressure, level of difficulty, and
fatigue. Reasoners naturally recruit artefacts and use the
physical space to make thinking easier and more efficient.
Increased levels of interactivity have been linked to better
performance, possibly due to a stronger focus of attention
and better distribution of cognitive load (Goldin-Meadow
et al., 2001; Carlson, Avraamides, Cary & Strasberg,
2007; Vallée-Tourangeau, Sirota & Villejoubert, 2013).
Previous research implicates an interplay between the
cognitive and motor system whereby the later can lighten
the strain on working memory capacity reducing the
expenditure of internal
resources (Goldin-Meadow,
Alibali & Church, 1993).
Improved effectiveness, indicated by increased accuracy
and speed, has also been related to movement execution,
such as nodding and pointing (Goldin-Meadow et al.,
2001), as well as manipulations of the problem’s spatial
arrangement (Vallée-Tourangeau, 2013). So it seems that
the shaping and re-shaping of the problem presentation
can help surpass the original limitations of working
memory capacity by lowering the expense of internal
resources necessary to solve the task and guide attention.
This
could
subsequently
increase
efficiency.

3014

Figure 1: The board on the top left is an example of a standard template used for all four conditions. The board on the top
right shows the participant undertaking the pen-paper condition. The board on the bottom left is an example of the
wooden tokens in preparation for the participant. On the bottom right the same board after the participant has completed
the task. Note the congenial groups of the numbers.
Thus, interacting with the environment and utilizing
artefacts can increase efficiency by distributing the
storage and computational demands of the task across
resources internal and external to the reasoner. Such
distributed cognitive processes shift the cognitive load
from the reasoner onto a system in which she is embedded
(Vallée-Tourangeau, 2013).
Mathematical tasks are frequently assessed in terms of
accuracy and efficiency. Accuracy measures the precision
of the calculated solution in relation to the correct answer.
Efficiency, on the other hand, involves a relation between
invested effort and resulting performance (ValléeTourangeau, 2013). Yet, it is not only the problem itself or
its complexity that impacts how accurately or efficiently
an individual performs in a mathematical task. The
presentation of a problem can guide behaviours and
strategic choices in the path to a solution (ValléeTourangeau et al., 2011). Embedded in this problem
presentation are the varying possibilities for interaction,
the dynamic loop of information and action flowing
between a person and the outside world, the nature of
these interactions having the potential to direct strategic
choices (Neth & Payne, 2001; Kirsh 2013). Kirsh (1995)
describes an organizing activity that recruits external
elements such as the hands, coins and pen and paper to
reduce cognitive load as a complimentary strategy to the
internal processes of cognition. In turn this coupling of the
mental and external space configures a distributed
thinking system.
Attitude Toward the Task. Student engagement in
performing academic tasks may be an influential factor in
learning and achievement, with the suggestion that the
activity by which learning is experienced may provide a
stimulus for this engagement (Shernoff, Csikszentmihalyi,
Schneider, & Shernoff, 2003). It is also possible that a

task that offers a student a sense of connection to the real
world is more likely to maximize student engagement
(Newmann, Wehlage, & Lamborn, 1992). Furthermore
Schiefele and Csikszentmihaly (1995) discuss the
importance of the affective experience on performance,
while engaging in mathematics in the classroom. Positive
emotions elicited by the task experience may contribute to
increased problem-solving capacities (Shernoff et al.,
2003).

The Current Experiment
Previous research has investigated gesturing (GoldinMeadow et al., 2001), interactivity and additions utilising
a PC interface (Neth & Payne, 2001), interactivity and
working memory (Vallée-Tourangeau, 2013) and simple
coin counting strategies (Kirsh, 1995). Results indicated
that interactivity potentially influences the ability to solve
problems. However, the picture is piecemeal, and no study
as yet has compared a wide range of different types of
interactive behavior using artifacts. Consequently, the
current experiment explored the role of interactivity in
adult participants using tangible artefacts with which the
problem presentation can be modified as participants
complete the arithmetic task. Thus the external problem
presentation tracks the dynamic interface between the
agent’s internal representation and the world. Previous
research on the role of interactivity in mathematical
reasoning and learning has generally presented material
either on paper on a computer display. Interactivity and
the potential to re-shape the problem presentation was
manipulated in terms of four conditions. In the first,
participants added a sequence of single-digit numbers
with their hands down and in a second they were allowed
to point at the numbers. Thus in these two conditions, the
problem presentation can not be modified, but participants

3015

can engage in some complementary actions in the latter.
In the other two conditions participants could re-shape the
problem presentation. For the third, they were given a
pencil and could recast the sum as they saw fit in arriving
at a total. In the fourth, the sums were presented as a
randomly arrayed set of wooden tokens that participants
were invited to move to arrive at the correct sum. Across
these four different levels of interactivity, performance
was measured in terms of accuracy and efficiency. Not
only did we expect accuracy to be influenced by
interactivity, but efficiency should be related to the degree
to which participants can modify the problem presentation
as they compute the totals. We defined efficiency in terms
of the degree of accuracy relative to the resources invested
in completing the sum; the latter was operationalized as
the time taken to do the sum. We expected that
interactivity conditions that made it possible for
participants to manipulate the problem presentation in a
manner that reflected and complemented their internal
processing to yield the highest level of accuracy and
efficiency.

Method
Participants
Sixty participants (40 females, mean age 23.32, SD =
4.41) were recruited for this experiment.

Materials and Measures
Arithmetic Task. All participants were presented with
five sets of numbers in four conditions and asked to
calculate the sum of the numbers. Therefore each
participant calculated 20 sums over the experimental
session. They were requested to calculate each set as
quickly and accurately as possible. Each set consisted of
11 single-digit numbers. For the purpose of the present
study, single-digit numbers between one and nine were
first categorized as low (1-4) or high (5-9) in order to
generate the range of possible sums in a more principled
manner. Four groups of sums were created: Group I (5
low, 6 high), Group II (only high), Group III (3 low, 8
high) and Group IV (4 low, 7 high). A set of only low
numbers was not included to reduce ceiling effects. The
sets of sums presented to participants consisted of two
sums from group I and three from groups II –IV. Each of
these groups was assigned to one of the four interactivity
conditions, and this assignment was counterbalanced
across conditions. As a result each participant was
presented with a unique set of sums in each condition.
Sums were configured with templates consisting of 11
circles (1.2cm) covering between half and ¾ of a side of
A4, that was delineated by a 39cm by 34cm varnished
wooden board on which participants carried out all the
additions (see Fig 1). By altering the order of the
templates within each group, the visual presentation of the
sums was additionally randomized for each set. For the
tokens condition, templates of tracing paper were created
with the same configurations of the constituent numbers
as the paper version of the other conditions. Wooden
tokens were placed in the corresponding position and the
tracing paper was removed before the start of the task.
The numbers were not revealed to the participant until all

tokens were in place. Performance was measured in terms
of accuracy (the correct answer), absolute error (the
absolute deviation from the correct answer) latency (time
taken until answer verbalised) and efficiency.
Efficiency was calculated as a ratio of the proportion of
correct answers for a given problem set over the
proportion of time invested in solving that set (out of the
longest time the slowest participants invested in solving
that set). For each of the four conditions, participants were
first ranked according to their averaged latencies. The
average of the slowest 25% served as a reference point
and represented the maximum effort one could expend in
that condition. Thus the efficiency ratio denominator was
a given participant’s latency over the average latency for
the slowest quartile; the numerator was that participant’s
proportion correct solutions in that condition. For
example, a participant in a given condition may have
solved three out of the five sums, for a proportion .6
correct. In turn, the participant’s average latency for
completing the five sums in that condition might have
been 30 seconds. If the average latency for the slowest
quartile was 40 seconds, then that participants invested
75% (30/40) of the total possible time for completing the
sums in that condition. The efficiency ratio for that
participant would then be .6/.75, or .8.
Level of Interactivity. Interactivity was manipulated in
terms of four experimental conditions; namely (i) static,
(ii) pointing, (iii) pen-paper and (iv) tokens. Tokens were
used as a close representation of coins as everyday
artefacts; the decision to use tokens rather than coins was
made in order to maintain the simplicity of the sums by
using the tokens numbered 1-9. In the static condition,
participants were asked to compute the sum mentally with
their hands flat on the table. In the pointing condition,
there were no restrictions on movement, other than to
exclude the use of the pen to make notes. Hence,
participants were allowed to use their fingers to point to
the numbers that composed the sum. In the pen and paper
condition, participants were given a pen and were allowed
to write on the sheet provided by the experimenter
containing the number set. Finally, in the tokens
condition, the sums were presented in the form of round
numbered wooden tokens (1cm in diameter, with black
digits 1-9), which could be moved by the participants. The
format of the presentation was visually constant and the
material was always presented on the same surface.
Attitude Toward Task Assessment (ATTA). Shernoff et
al. (2003) used the Effective Sample Method (ESM) to
measure a number of factors including affective
experiences. This affective experiences component of the
ESM questionnaire was used as the basis for a scale,
Attitude Toward Task Assessment (ATTA) designed to
assess the engagement of participants in the tasks
undertaken in this study. The primary purpose of ATTA
was to assess the affect of abstract versus concrete
methods in mental arithmetic rather than an individual’s
preference for or reliance on external aids, such as a
calculator or pen and paper in daily life.
A scale composed of eight items was created to assess
an individual’s attitude towards completing the sums in
each experimental condition. The eight items asked

3016

80%

3.5

Accuracy

3.0

Mean Absolute Error

Mean Percent Correct

75%

Deviation

70%
65%
60%

2.5

2.0

1.5

55%

50%

1.0
Static

P&P

30

Pointing

Tokens

Static

P&P

1.4

Latency

Pointing

Tokens

Efficiency

1.3

Mean Effieicncy

Mean Latency (s)

28

26

24

1.2

1.1

22

20

1.0
Static

P&P

Pointing

Tokens

Static

P&P

Pointing

Tokens

Figure 2: Mean percentage correct sums (top right panel), absolute calculation error (top left panel), latency to solution
(bottom left panel) and mean calculation efficiency (bottom right panel) in the four experimental conditions. Error bars
are standard errors of the mean.
participants to rate how easy, pleasurable, fun,
threatening, stressful, tiresome or effortful the task was
and how motivated they were to perform well in the task.
Each item was scored on an 8-point Likert scale, labeled
from zero (definitely not) to seven (definitely yes). Total
scores could range from zero to 56-the higher the score
the more positive the attitude toward the task. Each
participant completed the same ATTA scale four times
once following each of the four conditions. The alpha
reliability of the eight-item scale for each experimental
condition indicated that the scale had good reliability
(Static, Cronbach’s α = .80; Pen-paper, Cronbach’s α =
.77; Pointing, Cronbach’s α = .78; Tokens, Cronbach’s α
= .77).

Results
Accuracy
The mean number of correct answers, as shown in the top
left panel of Figure 2, was greatest in the tokens (M = .69,
SD = .22) and the pen-paper (P&P, M = .69, SD = .23)
conditions. The pointing condition (M = .66, SD = .26)
indicated slightly less accurate calculations, with the static
condition resulting in the weakest performance (M = .60,
SD = .30). A one-factor repeated measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) indicated a significant difference
between the conditions, F(3,177) = 3.12, p = .027, 2 =
.050. Post-hoc tests revealed a significant difference
between the static and the pen-paper conditions (p = .006)
and the static and tokens conditions (p = .020).

Absolute Error
Deviation from the correct answer was greatest in the
static condition (M = 2.64, SD = 2.39); the pointing (M =
1.90, SD = 2.43) and pen-paper (M = 1.61, SD = 1.65)

conditions produced lower deviations than the static
condition while the lowest deviations from the correct
answer were observed in the tokens condition (M = 1.41,
SD = 1.69; see top left panel of Fig. 2). The one-factor
repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant
difference between interactivity conditions, F(3,177) =
6.34, p < .001, 2 = .097, with post-hoc tests indicating a
significant difference between the pen-paper and the
tokens conditions when compared to the static condition
(p = .005, p < .001 respectively).

Latency
The latency data are shown in the bottom left panel of
Figure 2. Participants generally took about the same
amount of time to complete the task across the four
conditions (static M = 26.79, SD = 9.88; pen-paper M =
27.26, SD = 9.73; pointing M = 25.70, SD = 10.09; tokens
M = 26.58, SD = 10.41). The main effect of interactivity
in the one-way repeated measures ANOVA was not
significant, F < 1.

Efficiency
As illustrated in the bottom right panel of Figure 2,
performance was most efficient in the tokens (M= 1.20,
SD = .62) and the pen-paper conditions (M = 1.15, SD =
.60) with the static (M = 1.05, SD = .71) and the pointing
(M = 1.12, SD = .59) conditions being least efficient. The
main effect of interactivity, however, was not significant,
F (3,177) = 1.39, p = .247

Attitude Toward the Task
The attitude of participants was more positive toward the
pen-paper (M = 37.98, SD = 8.38) and the tokens (M =
37.78, SD = 8.94) conditions, than the pointing condition
(M = 34.12, SD = 8.76) and least favourable for the static

3017

condition (M = 31.63, SD = 9.13; see Fig. 3). The main
effect of interactivity was significant, F(3,117) = 17.07, p
< .001, 2 = .231. Post-hoc tests further identified highly
significant differences between the static and the tokens
conditions and the static and pen-paper conditions (p <
.001 for both conditions). The static and pointing
conditions were also significantly different (p = .025).
Feelings toward the pointing condition differed
significantly from those in the pen-paper (p < .001) and
tokens conditions (p = .008). The correlation between
ATTA scores and efficiency was positive, although only
marginally significant in the pen and paper and tokens
conditions: Static, r(58) = .197, p = .131; pen and paper,
r(58) = .260, p = .045; pointing, r(58) = .174, p = .185;
and tokens, r(58) = .248, p = .056.
42
Mean Task Attitude Score

40

38
36
34
32
30
28
26
Static

P&P

Pointing

Tokens

Figure 3: Mean attitude toward task assessment score in
the four interactivity conditions. Error bars are standard
errors.

Discussion
The present experiment was designed to explore the
effects of different levels of interactivity on arithmetic
performances for single-digit additions. The degree of
engagement with and attitude towards completing the task
as a function of the level and nature of interactivity was
also investigated. The results indicated that the use of
artefacts enhanced performance in simple arithmetic
problems, supporting the hypothesis that interactivity
benefits performance. When participants were given the
opportunity to use artefacts such as tokens, accuracy
improved and deviation from the correct answer
decreased. The increase in interactivity generally required
no more time to announce an answer, confirming similar
findings in previous research (Neth & Payne, 2011;
Vallée-Tourangeau, 2013). Accuracy increased with
greater interactivity, while latencies remained unchanged;
as a result, performance tended to be most efficient in the
tokens condition. Although the overall main effect of
interactivity on efficiency was not significant, the
difference between the tokens and static condition was
nearly significant, t(59) = 1.92, p = .060 Conversely,
when participants were asked to rely primarily on internal
cognitive resources, as in the static condition, accuracy
was impaired. In the higher interactivity conditions
participants were given the opportunity to recruit external
resources to aid in calculating the answer. The opportunity
to engage with the environment enabled the distribution of
cognitive load, augmented working memory resources and
delegated the control of attention in part to the dynamic

environment that cued the next action. In addition, the
possibility of modifying the physical presentation of the
problem, enabled participants to reconfigure the problem.
This improved the cognitive congeniality of the problem
(Kirsh, 1995), but also provided a more dynamic set of
action affordances that supported more efficient problem
solving. Contrary to previous literature (Goldin-Meadow
et al., 2001) the opportunity to gesture, point or even use
the fingers to count in the pointing condition did not offer
any significant benefit to the performance in solving the
simple maths sums. This is possibly due to the focus of
Goldin-Meadow et al. (2001) on memory rather than
accuracy of results. Thus the beneficial effect of
interactivity on reasoning is not simply a function of offloading working memory, but also reflects better
executive function skills that are cued and prompted by
the shifting affordances offered by a dynamic problem
environment.
The data on the participants’ attitude towards
completing the sums in the different conditions paralleled
the impact of interactivity on performance. Conditions
involving external resources, pens or tokens, seemed to
elicit a more positive, engaged attitude towards the simple
arithmetic problems, than the restricted, static condition.
Of course, participants were also more accurate in the
interactive conditions. But the more positive attitudes
towards the problems cannot be attributed to task success
since participants were not given feedback about their
performance, that is, after announcing each sum, the
experimenter did not tell the participants whether their
answer was right or wrong. However, results also showed
that as the ATTA scores increased efficiency increased,
with marginally significant correlations in the tokens and
pen and paper. These being the two conditions in which
participants exerted some control over the problem
configuration. This suggests that engagement with the
task tended to encourage more efficient performance.
These findings are in keeping with the notion that higher
levels of personal involvement positively affect
performance (Shernoff et al., 2003). Also, changing the
visual display may ease the task and thereby lighten the
cognitive load, which increases effectiveness and alters
attitudes (Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 2013).
In calculating simple arithmetic sums, an individual
presented with the opportunity to use a complimentary
strategy, such as manipulating tokens, is embedded in a
distributed cognitive environment. Studying systems
rather than individuals poses theoretical and
methodological challenges. Theoretically, the nature of
the problem representation and the trajectory of the
solution as it evolves from an embryonic to a fully formed
answer, should perhaps be understood as being distributed
and configured in terms of a transaction between the
participants’ internal resources and the shape and nature
of the resources in the external environment. What a
participant is ‘thinking’ is not independent of the state of
the environment, and as the environment is shaped by the
participants, understanding that environment is not
independent from the participant. The methodological
implications of this transactional perspective are
important. Of course, systems can be more complex, and
composed of a much wider range of functional elements,

3018

which challenges the traditional toolkit of experimental
cognitive psychologists designed to deal with a
cognitively sequestered individual in a laboratory
environment that generally prevents interactivity. But
beyond issues of complexity and computational
promiscuity (Wilson & Clark, 2009), a participantenvironment transactional link specifies a more qualitative
idiographic cognitive science supported by an
observational toolkit that can code at a much smaller time
scale the evolution of a problem representation and its
solution (for an excellent example of how such a toolkit
can be developed, see Steffensen, 2013). Finally, adapting
the cognitive psychologist’s laboratory to permit the
physical manipulation of a problem presentation offers a
more representative window onto thinking outside the
laboratory. To be sure, people can simulate and think in
their head without physically interacting with the outside
world (although this internal cogitation may well reflect
the internalization of much interactivity); but they often
“go to extraordinary lengths to avoid having to resort to
(…) fully environmentally detached reflection(s)” (Clark,
2010, p. 24, emphasis in the original). The data presented
here reveals the importance of engineering task
environments in the lab that support distributed problem
representations to better understand the engagement of
individuals as they explore and manipulate the external
world to solve problems.

References
Ashcraft, M. H. (1995). Cognitive psychology and simple
arithmetic: A review and summary of new directions.
Mathematical Cognition, 1, 3-34.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Moore, A. M. (2009). Mathematics
anxiety and the affective drop in performance. Journal
of Psychoeducational Assessment, 27, 197-205.
Carlson, R. A., Avraamides, M. N., Cary, M., &
Strasberg, S. (2007). What do the hands externalize in
simple arithmetic? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33,
747–756.
Clark, A. (2010). Material surrogacy and the supernatural:
Reflections on the role of artefacts in ‘off-line’
cognition. In L. Malafouris and C. Renfrew (Eds.),
The cognitive life of things: Recasting the boundaries
of the mind (pp. 23-28). Cambridge: McDonald
Institute for Archaeological Research.
DeStefano, D., & LeFevre, J.-A. (2004). The role of
working memory in mental arithmetic. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 16, 353386.European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 16,
353-386.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Alibali, M. W., & Church, R. B.
(1993). Transitions in concept acquisition: Using the
hand to read the mind. Psychological Review, 100, 279
- 297.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S. D., &
Wagner, S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing
lightens the load. Psychological Science,12, 516-522.

Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73, 31–68.
Kirsh, D. (2013). Thinking with external representation.
In S. J. Cowley, & F. Vallée-Tourangeau (Eds.),
Cognition
beyond the brain:
Computation,
interactivity and human artifice (pp. 171-194).
London: Springer-Verlag.
Neth, H., & Payne, S. J. (2001). Addition as Interactive
Problem Solving. In J.D. Moore, & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-third Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.(pp. 698703). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Neth, H., & Payne, S. J. (2011). Interactive coin addition :
How hands can help us think. In J.D. Moore, & K.
Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.(pp. 279-284). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society
Newmann, F. M., Wehlage, G. G., & Lamborn, S. D.
(1992). The signifiance and sources of student
engagement. F. M. (Ed.) Student engagement and
schievment in American secondary schools (pp. 1139). New York : Teachers College Press Columbia
University.
Schiefele, U., & Csikszentmihaly, M. (1995). Motivation
and ability as factors in mathematics experience and
achievement. Journal for Research into Mathematics
Education, 26, 163-181.
Shernoff, D. J., Csikszentmihaly, M., Schneider, B., &
Shernoff, E. S. (2003). Student engagement in high
school classrooms from the perspective of flow theory.
School Psychology Quarterly, 18, 158-176.
Steffensen, S. V. (2013). Human interactivity: Problemsolving, solution probing and verbal patterns in the
wild. In S. J. Cowley, & F. Vallée-Tourangeau (Eds.),
Cognition
beyond the brain:
Computation,
interactivity and human artifice (pp. 195-221).
London: Springer-Verlag.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Sirota, M., & Villejoubert, G.
(2013). Reducing the impact of math anxiety on
mental arithmetic: The importance of distributed
cognition. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
3615-3620). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2013). Interactivity, Efficiency,
and individual differences in mental arithmetic.
Experimental Psychology, 60, 302-311.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Euden, G., & Hearn, V. (2011).
Einstellung defused: Interactivity and mental set. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64,
1889–1895.
Wilson, R. A., & Clark, A. (2009). How to situate
cognition: Letting nature take its course. In P. Robbins
and M. Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of
situated cognition (pp. 55-77). New York: Cambridge
University Press.

3019

