UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Statistical Training on Children's Inductive Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8ww701bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Stanley, Susan
Lawson, Chris

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Statistical Training on Children’s Inductive Reasoning
Susan L. Stanley (shlocke@uwm.edu)
Chris A. Lawson (lawson2@uwm.edu)
University of Wisconsin – Milwaukee
Department of Educational Psychology
Milwaukee, WI USA

Abstract
Regardless of age there are mixed findings concerning the extent to
which individuals utilize statistical features of input to make
inductive inferences. Direct instruction seems to be one important
factor in linking one’s understanding of statistical properties with
their reasoning. In the present study we examined the extent to
which explicit training on some statistical principles would
influence preschoolers’ inductive reasoning. The results indicate that
a short training about random selection and the match between
samples and populations increased children’s use of these principles
to make inductive generalizations. Critically, the training effects
were observed in a different domain than was presented in the
training and for statistical principles not presented in the training.
Thus, the present results suggest that the training had a broad impact
on children’s reasoning. These results have important implications
for understanding the nature of the statistical principles employed
during induction.
Keywords: statistical training; sample size; inductive reasoning;
cognitive development; generalization

Introduction
Most decisions involve inductive generalizations, the use of
specific information to draw general conclusions. Induction
is interesting to cognitive scientists because, despite the
apparent uncertainty of predictions, people are quite good
inductivists. Among other things, our inductive reasoning is
anchored by careful attention to statistical features of
evidence. For example, recent advances in Bayesian models
of induction suggest the inductive inferences of even the
youngest learners are closely aligned with the most
(statistically) optimal predictions (e.g., Xu & Kushnir,
2013). However, there are many cases in which children
(Lopez, Gelman, Gutheil, & Smith, 1992) and adults
(Kahneman, Slovis, & Tversky, 1982) fail to adhere to
statistical properties of evidence and instead rely on other
sources of information to make predictions. The present
study focused on conditions in which children have yet to
acquire the statistical principle that will support induction.
We were particularly interested in understanding whether
children could acquire such skills with minimal instruction,
and whether learning about specific statistical principles
(e.g., random sampling) would have a narrow effect on
induction (e.g., to inferences regarding random selection) or
a broader effect (e.g., to inferences concerning other
statistical principles such as sample size).

There is mixed evidence regarding the extent to which
young children incorporate statistical evidence into their
inductive inferences. On the one hand, recent studies
indicate that prior to their first birthday infants exhibit an
intuitive set of skills that enable them to generate
expectations in-line with the statistical features of evidence
(Xu & Garcia, 2008; Teglas, Girotto, Gonzalez, & Bonatti,
2007). For example, 8-month-olds expect a randomly
selected sample will have the same distribution of white and
red balls as the population from which it was chosen.
In addition to exhibiting the intuition that samples match
the distributions of the populations from which they were
chosen, young infants also appear to be aware of the likely
outcomes of the procedures used to yield samples. For
example, infants expect the distribution of a sample to be
similar to that of the population from which it was drawn
when an actor randomly selected items from the sample, but
not when the actor engaged in deliberate sampling (Xu &
Tenenbaum, 2007; Denison, Reed, & Xu, 2011; Gweon &
Schulz, 2011). Overall, by the end of the first year infants
appear to exhibit some powerful expectations about the
statistical properties of evidence.
However, children appear limited in their ability to
effectively use statistical properties to evaluate which
samples provide the best support for induction. Some
studies have shown that children are insensitive to the
sample size principle of induction until after age 8 or 9 years
of age (Gutheil & Gelman, 1997; Li, Cao, Li, Li, & Deak,
2009; Lopez et al., 1992; cf. Lawson, 2014; Lawson &
Fisher, 2011). For example, Gutheil and Gelman (1997)
presented children evidence about a single exemplar (e.g.,
“This butterfly has blue eyes”) and a sample of five
exemplars (e.g., “These five butterflies have gray eyes.”)
and asked them to generalize a property from one of the
samples to an evidence target (e.g., “Do you think this
butterfly has blue eyes like this butterfly, or gray eyes like
these butterflies?”). Children younger than 8 years of age
responded randomly, indicating they failed to recognize that
the larger sample provided better evidence to support
induction. In contrast, children older than 8 consistently
prefer to generalize from large, rather than small samples of
evidence (see also Li et al., 2009; Lopez et al., 1992).

1521

These mixed findings do not necessarily reflect
developmental change in inductive skills. Indeed, there is
considerable variability in adults’ use of sample size to
make inductive generalization (e.g., Sedlmeier &
Gigerenzer, 1997). Classic studies in the heuristics and
biases literature suggest that adults fail to obey the sample
size principle of induction when reasoning about everyday
problems or when evidence is framed in probabilistic terms
(e.g., Kahneman & Tversky, 1972). However, when
problems are posed in a format that makes sample size
information salient to them (e.g., frequencies) adults
recognize the inductive value of larger samples (Sedlemeier
& Gigerenzer, 1997). Likewise, adults obey the sample size
principle to generalize properties in a category-based
induction task (Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, Lopez, & Shafir,
1990).
One conclusion from this work is that the ability to use
statistical features in the evidence depends, at least in part,
on an understanding of the inductive value of these features.
For example, older children and adults may understand the
value of larger samples for making predictions, but fail to
see the connection to making judgments about variability.
Similarly, because infant studies examine preferential
looking, it is not entirely clear how, or whether, early
emerging expectations about statistical principles impacts
performance on evaluative reasoning tasks.
From this perspective it is natural to ask how people
develop an understanding of the inductive value of
statistical evidence. One answer is that such an
understanding is the product of direct instruction. In an
extensive body of work, Nisbett and colleagues showed that
training adults to attend to statistical features they otherwise
ignore caused adults to incorporate these features into their
inductive inferences (Nisbett, Krantz, Jepson, & Kunda,
1983; Fong, Krantz, & Nisbett, 1986; Nisbett, Fong,
Lehman, & Cheng, 1987; Lehman & Nisbett, 1990; Fong &
Nisbett, 1991). For example, Fong et al. (1986) provided
participants in the training condition with a four-page
description of the law of large numbers and the statistical
principle of sampling. The written descriptions of the
concepts were supplemented with a live demonstration of
the law of large numbers using blue and red gumballs in a
glass container. Samples of 1, 4, and 25 gumballs were
drawn from the container and results were recorded on a
blackboard. The experimenter noted sample size differences
by describing that the larger sample deviates less from the
population of gumballs than did the smaller sample. Those
who received the training were more likely to use statistical
reasoning when asked to solve problems that covered a wide
range of domains, such as decisions made at one’s job,
buying a car, and choosing which college to attend. Thus,
statistical training seems to have general, rather than
specific, effects on reasoning.
Only one study examined the effects of statistical
training on children’s reasoning. Kosonen and Winne
(1995) assessed college, high school, and middle school
students’ skills in solving everyday problems after being

taught the law of large numbers in a regular classroom
setting. After reading a text that introduced the concepts of
the law of large numbers, students were shown a live
demonstration of the outcomes of random sampling. The
demonstrator drew gumballs from a large urn and recorded
the colors on a blackboard. After the training, students at all
grade levels demonstrated improvements in their use of
statistical reasoning to solve real-life scenarios. Participants
were able to transfer the statistical rules they were taught to
a broad range of topics such as decisions of hiring
prospective employees, choosing a restaurant, playing a
board game, and judging someone’s personality after a
quick interaction.
The present study extends this work by examining the
effects of statistical training on preschoolers’ use of
statistical information to make inductive inferences. We
expected that providing young children with a short lesson
about some basic statistical principles (e.g., random
sampling) would increase their use of statistical properties
of evidence to make inductive generalizations. In particular,
we were interested to see whether teaching children about
the likely outcomes of random sampling and the
distributional likeness between samples and populations
would cause them to use these principles when making
inductive generalizations.
An additional goal of this study was to examine the
scope of the impact of statistical training on children’s
reasoning. In our study we used a container of ping pong
balls to teach children statistical principles. Does a lesson of
this sort increase children’s attention to other statistical
properties, such as sample size, to make inferences? In
addition to including items that required attention to sample
size, the test items examined generality of training effects
by asking children to make predictions in a range of
domains involving social actors and biological categories.
Does learning about abstract statistical principles applied to
a sample of ping pong balls generalize to reasoning about
everyday problems that involve people and animals?

Experiment
Method
Participants. Fifteen preschoolers (M= 5.01, SD = 0.54; 8
females, 7 males) participated in the training group and
fourteen preschoolers (M=5.23, SD=.46; 8 females, 6 males)
participated in the control group. Participants were recruited
from local preschools. They were from diverse racial
backgrounds and were representative of the city of
Milwaukee. Schools received a small monetary gift for their
participation.
Design and Materials. The training condition employed a
pre-posttest design that was conducted over the course of
three days. Over the three days, participants responded to
three types of questions that involved an appreciation of the
following statistical properties of evidence. These questions
were modeled after those used in the adult and

1522

Table 1
Experimental design.
Item Type

Random Sampling

Sample-to-Population

Sample Size

Exemplars

Script
There are five peanut butter cookies and two chocolate chip cookies
in this box. Donna reached into the box without looking and picked
the first cookie she touched. Which cookie do you think Donna
picked – peanut butter or chocolate chip?
Ms. Hansen was trying to decide what to get for lunch for the
whole class. When she asked the first five students who came to
school four students said they wanted peanut butter and jelly
sandwiches and one student said they wanted pizza. What about all
the other students? Will more students want peanut butter and jelly
or will more students want pizza for lunch?

These cows
have Type A
blood.

This cow has
Type B blood.

Do you think
this cow has
Type A or Type
B blood?

Note. Five questions of each item type were presented in random order to participants at the pretest and posttest.

developmental literature on statistical reasoning. The
following types of items were administered to children (see
Table 1 for sample items):
1.

Random sampling items measured the extent to which
children expected that random selection of an item
would yield a high probability instance.

2.

Sample-to-population items measured whether
children recognized that the distribution of a sample
would match that of the population from which it was
drawn.

3.

Sample size items assessed whether children
recognized that a large sample of evidence provided
better support for induction than a small sample of
evidence.

Procedure. All testing sessions were conducted in a quiet
location at each child’s preschool. In the Training group the
experiment was conducted over three days, each of which is
described below.
Day 1 – Pretest: Children were given five questions
from each of the three item types (random sample, sampleto-population, and sample size) yielding a total of 15 pretest
questions. Participants were told that there were no wrong
answers. Each item was accompanied by a picture to help
children pay attention during the task.
Day 2 - Training: During the training session a box
containing white and orange ping pong balls was used to
demonstrate the consequences of random sampling and the

similarities between a sample and the population from
which it was selected. The population included 140 white
ping pong balls and 12 orange ping pong balls all of which
were presented in a large box with a clear window so
participants could see the ping pong balls. A smaller, clear
box was used to hold the sample of ping pong balls that was
drawn from the larger box.
During the training, the researcher reached into the large
box without looking and picked out a ping pong ball. The
researcher repeated this procedure five times and placed
each ping pong ball in the smaller box. The large box was
rigged with a small compartment (not observable to the
participants) to assure the experimenter could select one
orange ball and four white balls from the box. After the
selection of each ping pong ball from the larger sample, the
researcher mentioned the similarity between the small box
and large box, describing that there were mostly white balls
in both of the boxes. It was also highlighted that the
researcher did not look while reaching into the large box,
but instead, “just reached in and grabbed the first ball I
touched.” This procedure was repeated until there was a
sample of five ping pong balls (four white and one orange).
After the five balls had been selected the researcher
highlighted that the sample and the population both looked
similar because they both had more white balls than orange
balls. The researcher than noted that if she wanted to she
could have looked inside the box and chosen orange balls,
but that by just picking the balls “without looking” both
boxes had more white balls than orange halls.
After the training, participants were asked two random
sample questions and two sample-to-population questions.

1523

Results
Responses were scored on the basis of whether participants
obeyed the statistical principles in each item. A “1” was
given for a response that was consistent with the statistical
principle (e.g., preference to generalize from the large,
rather than small sample; judgment that the population
would yield a sample that resembled the population; and
responding that random sampling would yield a high
probability outcome), and a “0” was given for a response
that was inconsistent with the statistical principle. To test
the two main predictions the mean statistics-based responses
were submitted to a Day (Pretest, Posttest) x Item Type
(sample-to-population, random sampling, sample size)
analysis of variance with repeated measures. Consistent
with the hypothesis that training would increase children’s
statistics-based responses prediction there was a main effect
of Day, F(1, 27) = 12.12, p = 0.002, = 0.31 and a Day by
Condition interaction, F(1, 27) = 11.29, p = 0.002, = 0.26
(see Figure 1). This interaction was due to an increased rate
of statistics-based responses during the posttest in the
Training group than in the Control group. This result
indicates that the training, rather than extraneous factors
associated with the prolonged testing, significantly
increased children’s use of statistical principles to make
inductive inferences.

1
Mean statistics-based responses

After they gave their response, the experimenter provided
feedback, drawing the children’s attention back to the ping
pong balls to help identify the correct response and to
mention the principle that justifies this response. The
training session took between 10-15 minutes for each
participant.
Day 3 - Posttest: Similar to Day 1 except participants
were given a second set of test items from each of the three
question types (five from each) presented in random order.
The Control condition used the same design and
materials as the Training condition with the exception that
participants in this group did not receive any training or
feedback on responses to questions.
In the training condition all three sessions were
conducted within 5 days; critically, there were no more than
3 days between the training and posttest sessions. In the
control condition the testing took place over two
consecutive days instead of three.
Two sets of items were designed for presentation in the
pretest and posttest. Each set contained a randomly selected
set of questions from the three item types. The sets were
counterbalanced so that an approximately equal number of
sets appeared as the pretest of posttest. Initial analyses
confirmed that neither set of questions was more prone to
elicit adherence to the statistical principles in the evidence.

Pretest
Posttest

0.5

0
Control
Training
Condition
Fig.1. Mean statistics-based responses during Pretest and Posttest
in the Control and Training conditions. Bars indicate one standard
error from the mean.

The second hypothesis was that the training effects
would generalize beyond the principles introduced during
training. Some support for this prediction comes from the
overall ANOVA for which the Item by Condition
interaction was not significant, F < 1.0,
< 0.10. Thus, the
heightened rate of statistics-based responses in the posttest
was not due to the two items that included statistical
principles embedded in the training (random selection,
sample-to-population), but instead was consistent across all
items.
Table 2
Mean statistics-based responses for each of the item types in
the Training and Control conditions
Pretest
Posttest
Item Type
M
SD
M
SD
Training (n =15)
Random
Sample
Sample-toPopulation
Sample Size

0.45

0.20

0.75

0.26

0.56

0.23

0.71

0.28

0.49

0.26

0.65

0.21

Control (n = 14)
Random
Sample
Sample-toPopulation
Sample Size

1524

0.57

0.31

0.56

0.28

0.64

0.26

0.64

0.21

0.50

0.29

0.53

0.24

A more direct test of this second hypothesis involved
one-way ANOVAs to determine if there was a significant
difference from pretest to posttest for each of the items
(Table 2). The tests revealed no significant difference
among the item types in the Control group, all pairs revealed
F(1, 27) < 0.061, p > 0.80. Among the item types in the
Training group, random sampling, F(1, 28) = 11.93, p =
0.002, showed a significant difference from pretest to
posttest. However, the sample-to-population, F(1,28) =
2.448, p=0.129, and sample size, F(1, 28) = 3.476, p =
0.073, did not reveal any significant differences over time.
Finally, we looked at comparisons to chance (M=.50) to
examine the consistency of responses before and after the
training. Results of one-sample t-tests showed responses to
all item types were consistently better than chance after
training (random sampling, t(14) = 3.73, p = 0.002; sampleto-population, t(14) = 2.84, p = 0.013; sample size, t(14) =
2.88, p = 0.012). The participants in the Control group
consistently answered better than chance on the posttest
(t(13) = 2.543, p = 0.025) on the sample-to-population
items. The results on the pretest (t(13) = 2.04, p = 0.062) for
sample-to-population items were trending toward
significance. However, the responses on the random sample
and sample size items were no different from chance on the
pre- and posttest in the Control group.

Discussion
There are mixed reports on the extent to which children and
adults are able to incorporate statistical properties into their
inductive decisions. One explanation for these mixed
findings is that they reflect differences in exposure to the
rules that govern the use of statistical information. Prior
work by Nisbett and colleagues supports this interpretation
– the extent to which adults incorporate statistical principles
into their inductive decisions is mediated by training on
these statistical principles (Fong et al., 1986; Nisbett et al.,
1983; 1987). The goal of the present study was to examine
whether similar effects could be demonstrated in
preschoolers.
The results from this study confirmed that a brief
training on the statistical principles of random sampling and
the match between samples and the populations from which
they were selected influenced children’s use of these
principles to make inductive judgments. The observed
training effects are particularly interesting for two reasons.
First, because the content of the training (e.g., lottery type
events with ping pong balls) and the test items (e.g.,
outcomes in social and biological scenarios) were quite
different, these training effects suggest there was
considerable transfer of the statistical principle from training
to posttest.
The second, related, observation is that the training
effects had a broad effect on induction. Thus, in addition to
enhancing performance on items that required awareness of
sample-to-population statistics and random selection the
training influenced performance on items that required use
of the sample size principle. One interpretation of this

finding is that some aspect of the training primed children’s
attention to sample size. For example, comparison of the
sample and population during training may have highlighted
sample size differences. Another interpretation is that rather
than teaching children about specific properties of evidence,
the training taught children about general principles of
reasoning. That is, the training may have forced children to
focus on the composition of the samples and methods for
accessing and using evidence. Though there is little doubt
the training influenced children’s inductive judgments,
important questions remain concerning why the training had
these effects.
Another finding in this study is that children in the
Control group consistently answered better than chance on
the sample-to-population items. These results go along with
previous studies that found that young infants anticipate a
sample will have a similar distribution as the population
(Denison et al., 2011; Teglas et al., 2007). The novel finding
here is that the ability to detect the sample most likely to be
drawn from a population appears to be an important insight
for drawing inductive decisions. However, it is important to
note that while children consistently used the sample-topopulation rule in the Control condition, they only did so
after the training in the other group. Thus, more work is
needed to understand the extent to which children rely on
the match between sample and populations as a basis for
inductive generalization.
Indeed, rather than contesting the view that young
learners are intuitive statisticians (e.g., Teglas et al., 2007;
Xu & Garcia, 2008) the present study challenges the
meaningfulness of such a designation. On the one hand the
intuitive statistics perspective has been criticized on the
basis that the methods used to measure infants’ recognition
of some inductive principles (e.g., matching samples to
populations) actually assess perceptual skills (Lawson &
Rakison, 2013). Moreover, because preschoolers in the
present study failed to respond in-line with any of the
statistical principles during pretest it remains to be seen just
how well they are able to incorporate statistical properties of
evidence into their inductive decisions. Certainly the
inability to incorporate statistical properties into their
inferences does not mean children are unable to recognize
these features in the evidence. Instead, the point is that there
is a considerable gap in the literature on statistical reasoning
in young children, such that the characterization of infants
as gifted statisticians (e.g., Xu & Garcia, 2008) needs to be
reconciled with other work showing the limitations in the
statistical reasoning of young children (e.g., Gutheil &
Gelman, 1997) and adults (Kahneman et al., 1982;
Sedlmeier & Gigernezr, 1997).
The present study might also have practical implications
for education. National standards dictate that students
receive direct instruction about statistics starting by grade
six (National Governors Association Center for Best
Practices, 2010). One explanation for why this training
comes so late is that statistical principles are beyond the
grasp of younger children. However, such a conclusion

1525

seems unwarranted. In fact, one interpretation of the present
results is that young children can benefit from early
statistics instruction. One question for future research is to
examine the overall effects of such early instruction. For
example, does instruction about statistical properties of
evidence have an influence on performance on mathematics
or an overall impact on critical thinking skills? And does
this training have lasting effects that extend beyond the few
days as was observed in the present studies? Many topics in
the mathematics curriculum are necessary for mastery;
however they are not applicable to most people’s daily lives.
Probability and statistics are constantly being used every
day. Statistics deals with the risks, rewards, and randomness
of situations that people may encounter. Teaching children
about probability and statistics should be at the forefront of
the mathematics curriculum since it is something they can
apply to their day-to-day lives.

Acknowledgments
This study would not be possible without the cooperation of
the teachers, parents, and children of the Ebenezer Child
Care centers in Wisconsin. Thanks also to Chelsea Kieler
and Lily Cabrera for assistance with data collection.

References
Denison, S., Reed, C., & Xu, F. (2011). The emergence of
probabilistic reasoning in very young infants. In L.
Carlson, C. Holscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society. doi:
10.1037/a0028278.
Fong, G. T., Krantz, D. H., & Nisbett, R. E. (1986). The
effects of statistical training on thinking about everyday
problems. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 253 – 292.
Fong, G. T., Nisbett, R. E. (1991). Immediate and delayed
transfer of training effects in statistical reasoning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 3445.
Gutheil, G. & Gelman, S. A. (1997). Children’s use of
sample size and diversity information within basic-level
categories. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
64, 159 – 174.
Gweon, H. & Schulz, L. (2011). 16-month-olds rationally
infer causes of failed actions. Science, 332, 1524. doi:
10.1126/science.1204493
Jacobs, J. E. & Narloch, R. H. (2001). Children’s use of
sample size and variability to make social inferences.
Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 311 – 331.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective
probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 430 – 454. doi:10.1016/00100285(72)90016-3
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment
under uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge
University Press.
Kosonen, P. & Winne, P.H. (1995). Effects of teaching
statistical laws on reasoning about everyday problems.

Journal of Education Psychology, 87, 33 – 46. doi:
10.1037/0022-0663.87.1.33
Lawson, C.A. (2014). Three-year-olds obey the sample size
principle of induction: The influence of evidence
presentation and sample size disparity on young
children’s generalizations. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology.
Lawson, C. A. & Fisher, A. V. (2011). It’s in the sample:
The effects of sample size and sample diversity on the
breadth of inductive generalization. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 110, 499 – 519.
Lawson, C.A., & Rakison, D.H. (2013). Expectations about
single event probabilities in the first year of life: The
influence of perceptual and statistical information.
Infancy, 18, 961–982. doi: 10.1111/infa.12014
Li, F., Cao, B., Li, Y., Li, H., & Deák, G. (2009). The law
of large numbers in children’s diversity-based reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 15, 388–404.
Lopez, A., Gelman, S.A., Gutheil, G., & Smith, E.E. (1992).
The development of category-based induction. Child
Development, 63, 1070 – 1090. doi: 10.1111/j.14678624.1992.tb01681.x
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices,
Council of Chief State School Officers. (2010).
Common Core State Standards. Washington D.C.
Nisbett, R. E., Fong, G. T., Lehman, D. R., Cheng, P. W.
(1987). Teaching reasoning. Science, 238, 625 – 631.
doi: 10.3758/BF03204711
Nisbett, R. E., Krantz, D. H., Jepson, C., & Kunda, Z.
(1983). The use of statistical heuristics in everyday
inductive reasoning. Psychological Review, 90, 339 –
363.
Osherson, D.N., Smith, E.E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir,
E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Sedlmeier, P. & Gigerenzer, G. (1997). Intuitions about
sample size: The empirical law of large numbers.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10, 33-51.
Teglas, E., Girotto, V., Gonzalez, M., & Bonatti, L. (2007).
Intuitions of probabilities shape expectations the future
at 12 months and beyond. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
104, 19156-19159. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700271104
Xu, F., & Kushnir, T. (2013). Infants are rational
constructive
learners.
Current
Directions
in
Psychological Science, 22, 28-32.
Xu, F. & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 50125015. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0704450105
Xu, F. and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007), Sensitivity to sampling
in Bayesian word learning. Developmental Science,
10, 288–297. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00590.x

1526

