UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The influence of structural salience and verbalisation on finding the return path

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/37g938x4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hinterecker, Thomas
Strickrodt, Marianne
Roser, Florian
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The influence of structural salience and verbalisation
on finding the return path
Thomas Hinterecker (thomas.hinterecker@psychol.uni-giessen.de )
Marianne Strickrodt (marianne.strickrodt@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Florian Röser (florian.roeser@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Kai Hamburger (kai.hamburger@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University Giessen, Department of Psychology,
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science
Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10 F
35394 Giessen, Germany
Abstract

gation (e.g., buildings) which stick out of their environment
(e.g., Lynch, 1960; Presson & Montello, 1988; Caduff &
Timpf, 2008; Hamburger & Knauff, 2011). Now let us assume that with the help of such a verbal route description
we successfully reached our goal (here, point of interest). In
many cases, like in our hotel scenario, we want to get back
to where we came from. This confronts us with a new problem: We have to find our way back. To manage this task the
probably easiest way would be to retrace the initial path and
therefore use the same landmarks provided in the initial
route description. One question of interest is now: Are certain landmarks and landmark positions more suitable than
others for finding the return path?
Several theories of landmark suitability have been suggested (e.g., Klippel & Winter, 2005; Caduff & Timpf,
2008; Röser, Krumnack, Hamburger, & Knauff, 2012). One
important term in this context is landmark salience, which is
often described as a pop-out effect or how much an object
stands out from its immediate surroundings. Klippel and
Winter (2005) differentiate between three forms of landmark salience based on the assumptions by Sorrows and
Hirtle (1999). These are visual (how much an object stands
out from its surroundings, referring to colour, size, shape,
etc.; Caduff & Timpf, 2008; Hamburger & Knauff, 2011),
semantic or cognitive (knowledge-related features of a
landmark like its meaning, function and name; Caduff &
Timpf, 2008; Hamburger & Knauff, 2011), and structural
salience (e.g., the location of a landmark at an intersection;
Klippel & Winter, 2005). As we assumed in our previous
work, the structural salience might be the most important of
these three kinds of saliencies for finding the return path
(Hamburger et al., 2013). Therefore, in the current study we
try to control for the visual and semantic saliences.
At a prototypical cross intersection four landmark positions –the four corners of the intersection– are possible
(Röser, Krumnack, & Hamburger, 2013). Since the direction
of turn seems to play a critical role for choosing landmarks
(e.g., Röser, Hamburger, Krumnack, & Knauff, 2012), positions may be defined in dependence of the direction of turn:
behind the intersection opposite to the direction of turn (A),
behind the intersection in direction of turn (B), before the
intersection opposite to the direction of turn (C), and before
the intersection in direction of turn (D) (Hamburger et al.,

Are some landmark positions at intersections better for finding a return path than others? This study investigated whether
there is a variation in the influence of a landmark on performance and decision times when finding a return path depending on its position at an intersection. A variation of this influence is expected depending on the type of verbalisation of
spatial directions used. First, participants learned a path either
with direction specific (turn left at or turn right at) or direction unspecific material (turn into direction of or turn in the
opposite direction of). In this path the positions of the landmarks were varied systematically. Secondly, participants had
to find the return path of the learned route and their third task
was to write down verbal route descriptions. An effect of the
landmark position on finding the return path can be suggested, although it was barely insignificant, for direction specific
and direction unspecific material. A significant influence on
the accuracy of the information in the route descriptions depending on the position of a landmark and on the specificity
of the spatial directions could be shown. The results are discussed in the context of current wayfinding and landmark research.
Keywords: return path; structural salience; landmarks; verbalisation; mental transformation; route descriptions

Introduction
In a previous work we introduced some theoretical assumptions concerning the return path (CogSci 2013; Hamburger,
Dienelt, Strickrodt, & Röser, 2013) which shall be experimentally addressed in the following study. Before going
into detail, let us start with an initial example taken from the
just mentioned work: “Imagine that you are on a vacation in
an unknown foreign city. After your arrival at the hotel you
want to explore the surroundings and maybe visit a place of
interest or a touristic feature (e.g., a famous building such as
the Eiffel Tower in Paris). You may base your search on
different means for successfully reaching your goal” (Hamburger et al., 2013, p. 537). Let us assume that we are not in
possession of any of these means (e.g., a city map or a smart
phone with a GPS tracking function). Besides of just walking around, including the risk of getting lost, we could ask a
pedestrian or the receptionist at the hotel desk for verbal
route directions. It has been shown that the use of so-called
landmarks in route descriptions plays an important role in
finding ones way successfully (e.g., Denis, 1997). Landmarks are commonly described as reference points for navi-

613

2013). To keep it simple, the defined position labels for the
return path remain in the perspective of the initial path.
As pointed out by Hamburger et al. (2013) the optimal
landmark positions for the return path might differ from the
ones of the initial path (see figure 1). For the latter, the ideal
positions for an egocentric perspective seem to be the positions B and D (Röser, Hamburger, et al., 2012). For the
return path, however, it might be important that a landmark
is located either at position A or D. This might be because
of the invariance of these positions, i.e. they remain unchanged for the return path and may lead to an advantage in
a wayfinding task. This does not apply for the landmark
positions B and C. These positions are variant and have to
be mentally/verbally transformed on the return path (see
Hamburger et al., 2013 for further details).
One important restriction concerning the advantages of
variant positions is that it only holds for the use of unspecific spatial information. Compared to direction specific information, where left has to be transformed into right on the
return path, direction unspecific information used with the
invariant positions (e.g., “turn into direction of” or “turn in
the opposite direction of”) remains unchanged. This could
lead to less cognitive load since no verbal and mental transformation and therefore one processing step less would be
required. Note that for the variant positions mental and
verbal transformations have to be conducted independent of
the type of verbalisation on the return path (Hamburger et
al., 2013).
When spatial directions are verbalised in a specific way,
different positions might be optimal for the return path (see
figure 1 right). Based on the findings of Röser, Hamburger,
et al. (2012) it seems to be important that in such a case the
landmark is located somewhere in the direction of turn. This
is the case for landmarks on position D in both travel perspectives (overlapping feature). Therefore, we conclude,
that with direction specific route information position D is
the optimal position.

marks located before the intersection comes into play (figure 2). If the facades of such a landmark differ in a way that
makes them unrecognizable as belonging to the same landmark (not visually similar), it (the landmark) becomes useless for the return path (for direction specific and unspecific
route directions).

Figure 2. Visibility for the forward run (left) and the return
path (right). “X” indicates the position of an individual,
““ the walking direction. If, for example, the brown facade of D or the blue of B is initially used as a landmark this
becomes critical on the return path because both memorized
facades are not visible anymore (before a decision has to be
made).
The landmark’s visibility can have further implications.
As can be seen in figure 2, the facades of position A are
visible from both travel perspectives. One could argue that
due to this position A might be optimal for finding the return path. Nevertheless, whether landmark visibility has
such an impact or not is beyond the scope of this work. Here
we try to control for the described potential issues of visibility by using landmarks which can be easily recognized again
on the return path (identical facades).
According to the above logic the hypotheses are: in an
experiment where participants first have to learn an initial
path and find the return path afterwards , the optimal landmark positions differ with respect to the provided route
information: either direction specific or unspecific. For the
latter, positions A and D might be the most suitable (due to
their invariant location). With direction specific material
position D could be optimal (because it is in direction of
turn on the initial and return path).

Method
Participants
A total of 34 students from the University of Giessen participated in this experiment (21 females). They had a mean age
of 25.15 years (SD=4.16). All participants provided informed written consent and some received course credits for
participation. They were naïve with respect to this study and
had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity, as well as
normal colour vision. Epileptics were excluded in order to
prevent health risks caused by photosensitive epilepsy.

Figure 1. Possible optimal landmark positions (grey) for the
initial and the return path. For the return path, optimal pos itions differ with respect to the specificity of the used route
information (direction specific or unspecific). Please see
text for further details.

Material
For this experiment we used the virtual environment
SQUARELAND (Hamburger & Knauff, 2011). It was designed using the freeware Google Sketchup 6.0© and con-

According to the concept of “visibility” (Winter, 2003;
Röser, Krumnack, et al., 2012) another premise for land-

614

sists of a maze made of 10x10 cuboids, representing regular
orthogonal intersections. This environment has repeatedly
been used successfully for this kind of research (e.g., Hamburger & Röser, 2011; Röser, Hamburger, & Knauff, 2011;
Röser, Hamburger, et al., 2012; Röser, Krumnack, et al.,
2012; Bucher, Röser, Nejasmic, & Hamburger, 2014). We
created 34 routes in an egocentric perspective. The directions left and right were used. At each intersection one cuboid stood out from the background representing a landmark. Therefore, the cuboid was coloured (figure 3) with
one of the following colours or luminances: red, green, blue,
yellow, purple, brown, black, and white1 . Within each route,
every colour was used only once resulting in eight distinct
intersections within the route. The sequence of the colours
was pseudo-randomized, considering every sequence had to
be used only once. In order to prevent the participants from
seeing the whole maze, a virtual haze (light grey) was used.
To indicate the turning direction at a decision point for the
initial path an instruction (white letters on black background; floating at the same position in midair) was presented at each intersection. In half of the 34 routes direction
specific route directions were presented, in the other half
direction unspecific route directions, respectively. In the
direction specific cases sentences like “Red facade turn left”
(originally in German: “Rote Fassade links abbiegen”) were
presented. In the direction unspecific trials, messages like
“Turn in direction of the red facade” or “Turn in the opposite direction of the red facade” (original: “Richtung roter
Fassade abbiegen” or “Entgegen roter Fassade abbiegen”)
were shown. For the return path, the perspectives at the
intersections were adjusted and the route directions were
removed.

moving direction) were balanced for single routes (withinsubject factor).
The routes were presented by a custom 19” monitor
(DELL©) attached to a Personal Computer (DELL© Optiplex 745). For presentation and data recording the software
SuperLab 4.5 (Cedrus Corporation ©) was used.

Procedure
Each participant was pseudo-randomly assigned to either a
route with direction specific or unspecific route directions
(between-subject factor). The participants were instructed to
memorize a path for the purpose to eventually find the return path. After a pause of five seconds the assigned route
consisting of eight intersections was presented successively
via screenshots. The picture presentation duration time was
self-paced. When pressing the space bar the next intersection was presented. Between the pictures a fixation cross
was shown for a period of one second. After this learning
phase the participants had to find the return path for the
given route. Hence, the intersections were presented in reverse travel direction. At each intersection it was the task to
decide whether the correct travel direction is left or right,
using the arrow keys of the keyboard. No feedback about
the accuracy of decisions was given. After the return path
test phase two randomly chosen intersections in perspective
of the return path were shown (in order to control for sequence effects). Again, the participants had to indicate the
memorized travel direction. After completing this wayfinding phase, the next task was to write down a verbal route
description for the return path of the presented route. Therefore, pen and paper were provided. Eventually, the participants had to answer exploratory questions (demographic
data, learning strategies, etc.).

Results
Prior to descriptive or inferential statistics, three participants
(two from the group with specific route directions) were
excluded from the analysis due to rapid progress from one
intersection to the next (quicker than 500ms) in the learning
phase. It can be doubted that the participant was able to
memorize the route appropriately in such a short amount of
time.
The results for mean correct decisions at an intersection
depending on learning condition and landmark position are
visualized in figure 4. It shows the highest amount of correct
decisions if a landmark was located on positions B and D on
the initial path with respect to direction specific route information. With direction unspecific information landmark
position A and D obtained the highest percentage values.
Analyses of variance with repeated measures were performed for each of the dependent variables correct decisions
and response times. The learning conditions (direction specific or direction unspecific route information) represented
the between-subject factor. The within-subject factor consisted of the four possible positions of a landmark at a decision point (A, B, C, or D). For the amount of correct decisions no main effects for the factors learning condition

Figure 3. Screenshot of an intersection in the virtual environment (decision point) including the route direction
(“Turn in direction of the red facade”). The red cuboid represents the landmark.
To control for direction or landmark effects, the number
of right/left turns and the position of the landmark at an
intersection (before or after the intersection, in or against the

1

Colours were chosen with the help of the webpage
http://www.colorschemedesigner.com. The whole spectrum was
used periodically to create differentiable colours.

615

(F(1,29)=.149;
p=.702)
and
landmark
position
(F(3,87)=.914; p=.438) could be found. Further, the interaction of learning condition and landmark position was barely
insignificant F(3,87)=2.659; p=.053. Concerning the response times no main effect for the factors landmark pos ition (F(3,87)=.855; p=.468) and learning condition (F(1,
29)=.341; p=.564), as well as no interaction between these
factors could be found (F(3,87)=.680; p=.567).

if a landmark was located at positions B and D. Landmark
position A and D obtained the highest percentage values
with respect to direction unspecific route information.

Figure 5. Mean correct directions (in %) provided in the
written route descriptions with respect to the specificity of
the provided spatial information and landmark position.
Analyses of variance with repeated measures were performed for the dependent variable correct directions provided in the written route description. The learning conditions
(direction specific or direction unspecific route information)
represented the between-subject factor. The within-subject
factor consisted of the four possible positions of a landmark
at a decision point (A, B, C or D). A significant main effect
for the factor landmark position (F(3, 57)=3.191; p=.030)
but not for learning condition, (F(3,19)=.243; p=.628) could
be found. According to these results, post-hoc tests were
performed, showing a significant difference between pos ition C and D (t(20) = -2.911; p = .009) independent of the
learning condition. Further, the analysis of variance revealed
an interaction between the factors landmark position and
learning conditions (F(3,57)=4.647; p=.006). Subsequent
post-hoc tests showed a trend to a difference of the mean
values of the two learning conditions for position A (t(19) =
-2.592; p = .018).

Figure 4. Mean correct turning decisions (in %) for the
wayfinding task with respect to the specificity of the provided spatial information and the landmark position.
Unilateral one sample t-tests were performed in order to
establish if choices were significantly higher than 50%
(chance level). For direction specific information this was
the case for positions B and D, but not for A and C (A: t(14)
= 1.468; p = .164; B: t(14) = 2.779; p = .015; C: t(14) =
.619; p = .546; D: t(14) = 1.784; p = .096). With direction
unspecific the positions A and D were significantly higher
than 50%, while position C and B were not (A: t(15) =
4.392; p = .001; B: t(15) = -.620; p = .544; C: t(15) = .764; p
= .456; D: t(15) = 1.861; p = .083).
The used landmark colours did not lead to significant differences in performance (correct decisions: χ²(7,
N=31)=1.453; p=.984; response times: F(7,210)=.344;
p=.933).
Mean correct decisions for the additionally shown cros sings were 43% for direction specific and 69% for direction
unspecific route information. Tests did not reveal significant
differences between the learning conditions with respect to
correct decisions (t(29)=-1.726; p=.095) and response times
(t(29)=-.194; p=.847).
In the condition with direction unspecific spatial information, six (38%) of the participants used unspecific spatial
directions for describing a return path. In the condition with
direction specific material, one participant (7%) wrote a
direction unspecific route direction.
Results for mean correct directions provided within the
written route descriptions (evaluated in segments) are shown
in figure 5. Those route descriptions that did not refer to
landmarks were excluded from the analysis (62% or 21
route descriptions remaining). For direction specific route
information highest mean correct directions were provided

Discussion
In this experiment direction specific and unspecific spatial
information was presented on a forward run of a route. Participants had to reproduce the return path in two different
ways: in a wayfinding task and in a verbalisation task (route
descriptions). We expected that the variation in the specificity of the spatial information leads to different optimal
landmark positions for reproducing the return path (position
D for direction specific, positions A and D for direction
unspecific material).
Concerning the results of the wayfinding task an interaction trend between the landmark position and the specificity
of the provided route directions could be revealed. As the
descriptive statistics suggest, there might be an advantage
for positions A and D in finding the return path if the route
directions were verbalised in an unspecific way (see figure

616

4). As already mentioned this might be because it is not
necessary to conduct mental or verbal transformations for
these two positions (Hamburger et al., 2013). With specific
route directions positions B and D seem to have an advantage. This differs from the assumption of position D
being the only optimal position for finding the return path in
such a case. An explanation for these findings could be the
following: the words left and right in the provided route
directions on the initial path may cause attentional shifts in
the indicated direction, as shown, for example, by Hommel,
Pratt, Colzato, and Godijn (2001). This could lead to a better
memorability for landmarks at positions in the direction of
turn, resulting in a better recall on the return path. With
direction unspecific spatial information this change in visual
attention might be missing as such kind of information is
relatively uncommon and new. Nevertheless, the findings
are in line with the assumptions made by Klippel and Winter (2005), where the best location for a landmark is in front
of an intersection (on the return path this is the case for
landmarks on position B and D).
However, the mentioned interaction trend may be seen as
somehow unsatisfying. Besides the possibility that a larger
sample size might remedy this, further reasons for the absence of clearer results can be found if we compare this
study to two experiments conducted by Hamburger et al.
(2013). In their first experiment, no landmark position effect
could be revealed (only in the group of low performers an
impact of structural salience was indicated). In the second
experiment, however, the landmark position led to significant differences in the wayfinding performance. Better decisions were made if landmarks were located at the assumed
optimal positions (before the intersection in the direction of
turn and behind the intersection opposite the direction of
turn, respectively). The authors suggested that the absence
of position effects in the first experiment was due to the
rather unrealistic setup that was used (sequence of screenshots) and, therefore, suppressed the originally pursued
route learning strategies. A serial learning strategy (e.g.,
Buchner & Jansen-Osmann, 2008) of combining different
items in a sequence (e.g., red, left; blue, right) is not quite
comparable to learning a route. The second experiment used
a more realistic setup (videos) and could be seen as closer to
a wayfinding task in the real world (Hamburger et al.,
2013). Since in this study we used sequences of screenshots
rather than videos the same explanation for the absence of
clear significant results could be taken into account.
When it comes to the additionally shown crossings , direction unspecific route information seems to lead to higher
mean correct decisions than direction specific material. This
allows the suggestion that a deeper processing of the route
knowledge is obtained when learning a route according to
spatial information like “in direction of” and “opposite to”.
Landmarks and directions can be remembered more easily
leading to an advantage for direction unspecific verbalis ation.
Regarding the results for the written route descriptions,
the factor landmark position led to significant differences in

correct direction information. Moreover, these differences
varied as a function of the specificity of the presented sp atial information. As further tests revealed position D led to
significantly more correct directions than position C independent of the spatial directions, while position A led to a
better performance if direction unspecific route information
was presented on the initial path. These findings are in line
with the assumptions.
As figure 5 shows positions A and D seem to be the optimal ones if a return path has to be verbalised for a route
direction in the condition with direction unspecific spatial
information. For direction specific information this seems to
account for positions B and D. Although writing a verbal
route direction is not perfectly comparable with a wayfinding task the data imply that structural salience has an effect
on finding ones way and that this effect varies according to
whether an initial path was learned with direction specific or
unspecific spatial directions. Interestingly the results (optimal positions) for the route descriptions are in line with the
results of the wayfinding task.
Further, it can be seen that with specific route directions
only 32% correct direction information was provided in the
written route descriptions for landmarks on position A (see
figure 4). However, in the same learning condition the results concerning the wayfinding task revealed a relatively
good outcome for position A (63%, see figure 5), what
might be due to its good visibility (see figure 3). Such a
discrepancy, however, can not be reported for the remaining
landmark positions, but could be expected between a cued
(wayfinding) and a free recall task (creating a verbal route
direction). Since these findings are somehow ambiguous,
future systematic investigations should be considered.
Concerning direction unspecific spatial information, one
important question is whether people are able to encode
route and/or spatial information in such a way or not (Hamburger et al., 2013). This study’s results suggest that the
given route information indeed effects the retrieval. So it
seems that wayfinders are able to encode unspecific route
information and therefore they can make use of the advantage of the invariance of a landmark’s location on pos ition A or D. However, it seems that even if this is the case,
people prefer to provide direction specific information in
route descriptions. Only six (38%) out of 16 participants
learning the route with unspecific instructions used this type
of verbalisation in their own route description. This could be
because under everyday conditions wayfinders are used to
verbalise spatial directions in the more common specific
way (probably due to socialization).
In summary, this study presented further empirical data
on the influence of structural salience on finding the return
path and first evidence that the type of verbalisation interacts with the landmark position, leading to different optimal
landmark positions for the return path. However, the found
optimal positions differed from the expected ones if direction specific route information was shown originally. According to this, a new model of the possible optimal land-

617

mark position for finding the return path (figure 6) could be
established, but further research is needed for validation.

Hamburger, K., Dienelt, L. E., Strickrodt, M., & Röser, F.
(2013). Spatial cognition: the return path. In M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 537-542). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Hommel, B., Pratt, J., Colzato, L., & Godijn, R. (2001).
Symbolic control of visual attention. Psychological Science, 12, 360–365.
Kato, Y., & Takeuchi, Y. (2003). Individual differences in
wayfinding strategies. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 23(2), 171-188.
Klippel, A., & Winter, S. (2005). Structural salience of
landmarks for route discrimination. In A. G. Cohn & D.
Mark (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory. International
Conference COSIT (pp. 347-362). Berlin: Springer.
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pazzaglia, F., & Moè, A. (2013). Cognitive styles and mental rotation ability in map learning. Cognitive Processing,
14, 391-399.
Presson, C. C., & Montello, D. R. (1988). Points of reference in spatial cognition: Stalking the elusive landmark.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6(4), 378381.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M. (2011). The Giessen virtual environment laboratory: Human wayfinding
and landmark salience. Cognitive Processing, 12, 209214.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., Krumnack, A., & Knauff, M.
(2012). The structural salience of landmarks: Results from
an on-line study and a virtual environment experiment.
Journal of Spatial Science, 57(1), 37-50.
Röser, F., Krumnack, A., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M.
(2012). A four factor model of landmark salience – A new
approach. In N. Rußwinkel, U. Drewitz & H van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 11 th International Conference
on Cognitive Modeling (ICCM) (pp. 82-87). Berlin.
Röser, F., Krumnack, A., Hamburger, K. (2013). The influence of perceptual and structural salience. In M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 3315-3320). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The nature of landmarks for real and electronic spaces. In C. Freksa & D.
M. Mark (Eds.). Spatial Information Theory: Cognitive
and Computational Foundations of Geographic Information Science, International Conference COSIT 1999
(pp. 37-50). Stade: Springer.
Winter, S. (2003). Route adaptive selection of salient features. In W. Kuhn, M.F. Worboys & S. Timpf (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory: Cognitive and Computational
Foundations of Geographic Information Science, International Conference COSIT (pp. 37-50). Berlin: Springer.

Figure 6. Possible optimal landmark positions (grey) for the
return path with respect to the specificity of the used route
information (direction specific or unspecific) based on the
findings of this study. Please see text for further details.
Open questions concerning the differences between males
and females, as well as people with poor or good spatial
abilities and learning strategies (wayfinding performance vs.
sense-of-direction; e.g. Kato & Takeuchi, 2003; cognitive
styles and mental imagery; e.g., Pazzaglia & Moè, 2013)
still remain. A systematic investigation of whether videos
rather than a sequence of screenshots result in clearer position effects and whether the visibility affects the structural
salience of a landmark is yet to be implemented.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sarah J. Abbott and Carolina A. Bosch for proofreading the manuscript. Further, we thank the anonymous
reviewers for their critical comments on the manuscript.

References
Bucher, L., Röser, F., Nejasmic, J., & Hamburger, K.
(2014). Belief revision and way-finding. Cognitive Processing, 15, 99-106.
Buchner, A., & Jansen-Osmann, P. (2008). Is route learning
more than serial learning? Spatial Cognition & Computation, 8, 289-305.
Caduff, D., & Timpf, S. (2008). On the assessment of landmark salience for human wayfinding. Cognitive Processing, 9(4), 249-267.
Denis, M. (1997). The description of routes: A cognitive
approach to the production of spatial discourse. Cahiers
Psychologie Cognitive, 16(4), 40-458.
Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M. (2011). SQUARELAND: A
virtual environment for investigating cognitive processes
in human wayfinding. PsychNology Journal, 9(2), 137163.
Hamburger, K., & Röser, F. (2011). The meaning of Gestalt
for human wayfinding – How much does it cost to switch
modalities? Gestalt Theory, 33(3/4), 363-382.

618

