UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Gesture in Analogical Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61d500bg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Cooperrider, Kensy
Goldin-Meadow, Susan

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Gesture in Analogical Problem Solving
Kensy Cooperrider (kensy@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Ave., Chicago, IL 60637

Susan Goldin-Meadow (sgm@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Ave., Chicago, IL 60637
Abstract
We hypothesized that gestures, which are often schematic in
form, might play a role in making ideas more schematic and
thus more transferable to new contexts. Adapting Gick &
Holyoak’s (1983) analogical reasoning paradigm, we had
participants read and retell two stories, one after the other,
and then try to describe their similarities. The stories share a
helpful strategy for solving a problem that participants would
encounter later. Contrary to predictions, participants who
spontaneously gestured about the helpful strategy during the
retelling phase did not solve the problem as frequently as
those who kept their hands still. But participants who
spontaneously gestured about the strategy when comparing
the stories during the similarities phase were not hindered in
the same way. Our results suggest that gesture may have
contrasting effects at different stages of analogical reasoning,
perhaps through a common mechanism of maintaining and
entrenching representations.
Keywords:
solving

analogy;

gesture;

schematization;

problem

Introduction
When faced with a novel problem, a fruitful strategy is to
mine one’s past experience for similar problems and then
arrive at a solution to the new problem by analogy with an
old one. Helpful analogies may be easy to spot from afar or
after the fact, but in the rush of real-world problem solving
they often elude us. What leads people to find helpful
analogies in some cases but fail to do so in others? Previous
work has demonstrated that one important predictor of
whether an idea will be transferred to a new context is the
nature of the idea (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). Ideas that are
grounded in the concrete particulars of specific cases are
unlikely to transfer, whereas ideas that abstract away from
those particulars— that is, schematic ideas— are good
candidates for transfer. This finding led Gick & Holyoak
(1983) to predict that “any manipulation that can facilitate
schema formation will boost analogical transfer” (pg. 25). A
key question then becomes: are there ways to foster the
schematization of ideas and, in turn, foster analogical
reasoning?
Here we explore the possibility that a ubiquitous
behavior— the gestures we cannot help but produce as we
talk— might foster this kind of schematization. No matter
the context or content domain, people will gesture
spontaneously when they are wrestling with and describing

ideas. Could this hand-waving matter? Recent work
suggests that the answer is yes. Gesturing leads learners to
express ideas they would not have otherwise expressed
(Broaders et al., 2007); it can make learning last longer
(Cook et al., 2010); and it can provide a vehicle for learning
entirely new ideas (Goldin-Meadow et al., 2009). One clue
to how gestures may exert these powerful effects on thought
may be found in the forms they take. Gestures are often
highly schematic, only exhibiting the barest essence of
whatever idea or image they help express. For example, in
describing a complex visual scene, a speaker may produce
gestures that depict basic spatial forms and relationships
within the scene. Arnheim (1969) suggested that this
schematic nature of gesture is central to its usefulness. He
writes: “The portrayal of an object by a gesture rarely
involves more than one isolated quality or dimension... [I]t
is useful not in spite of its spareness but because of it... The
gesture limits itself intelligently to what matters” (pg. 117).
If Arnheim is correct that gesture “limits itself intelligently
to what matters,” gesturing might play a role in making
ideas more schematic and thus more transferable across
contexts.
To investigate this possibility, we introduced gesture into
a paradigm developed by Gick & Holyoak (1983). In
addition to being a well-studied model system for
understanding analogical problem solving, Gick &
Holyoak’s paradigm features a fundamentally spatial
analogy, which should lend itself to expression in gesture
(Alibali, 2005). In our version of the paradigm (adapted
from experiment 4 of Gick & Holyoak [1983]), participants
first complete a “story phase” in which they read and retell
two stories, one about a military strike and another about
dousing a fire that is raging out of control. Next, in the
“similarities phase,” participants describe any similarities
they noticed between the stories. In addition to a number of
superficial similarities, the stories share at their core an
abstract solution to a problem: they both involve the
redistribution of a force around a central target and the
subsequent deployment of the force from all angles. Finally,
under the guise of a separate study, participants attempt
Duncker’s (1945) “radiation problem,” which can be solved
by applying the redistribution strategy1 suggested by the
1

Previous reports have emphasized “convergence” as the central
feature shared by both of the stories and the analogous solution to
the radiation problem. However, we have found that mentions of

2068

stories. The paradigm allows us to ask how gestures
produced at two distinct time-points— first, when
consolidating a helpful idea in the “story phase” and,
second, when attempting to articulate that helpful idea in
more abstract form in the “similarities phase”— might lead
to analogical transfer. We predicted that, at both phases,
producing gestures representing the redistribution strategy
would lead people to later propose an analogous solution to
the radiation problem. We also predicted that qualitative
features of the gestures produced might matter. For
example, if participants produce similar redistribution
gestures across both stories, this might lead them to
recognize the schematic core that the stories share and as a
result be more likely to transfer this idea to the radiation
problem.

Methods
Participants
94 adults from the University of Chicago community
participated in exchange for payment or course credit. 7
participants were excluded because of prior knowledge of
the radiation problem, 4 were excluded because they had
technical knowledge of radiation techniques used in medical
treatment, and 5 were excluded because of experimenter
error. Data from the 78 remaining participants (49 women,
29 men; mean age of 21.7 years old) were analyzed.

Materials
All materials for were taken from Gick & Holyoak (1983).
These materials included the two stories, ‘The General’ and
‘The Fire Chief,’ used in the story phase as well as the text
describing Duncker’s radiation problem.

Procedure

take a moment to consider any similarities between the two
stories and then to describe them. Both the story and
similarities phase were video-recorded for later analysis of
participants’ speech and gesture.
After the similarities phase was complete, the confederate
was dismissed and participants were told that they were next
going to participate in a study on problem solving. They
were presented with Duncker’s radiation problem and were
given eight minutes to both read the problem and write
down plausible solutions to it. When the allotted time was
up, participants completed several questionnaires and,
finally, were asked about any prior knowledge they may
have had of the radiation problem.

Analysis
We analyzed participants’ speech and gesture in both the
story and similarities phases using ELAN annotation
software. Participants’ retellings in the story phase were
annotated for whether or not they mentioned the
redistribution strategy. At a critical point in both stories, a
force (troops in the case of the General story, water in the
case Fire Chief story) is re-organized so that it surrounds a
central target (the fortress, the fire). Whenever they
occurred in the participants’ retellings, mentions of this
critical change in strategy were classified as present in
speech only, speech and gesture, or gesture only.
Redistribution was considered present in gesture if the
gesture iconically represented the redistribution of force—
for example, by representing the division of the army into
small groups in the case of the General story or the decision
to surround the fire in the case of the Fire Chief story (see
Figure 1). Such gestures were also annotated for the overall
shape that they represented, such as whether the circle was
represented as a continuous arc or a series of discrete
positions.

After consenting to participate, participants were told they
were first going to participate in a study about how people
remember and retell stories. They were then given one of
the two stories (‘The General’ or ‘The Fire Chief,’ order
counterbalanced across subjects) and asked to read it
carefully so that they would be able to retell it later on.
After three minutes, the story was taken away and a
confederate, posing as another participant, was brought in.
The participant was asked to retell the story they read to the
confederate. No mention of gesture was made. When they
were done, the confederate left the room and the participant
was handed the second story. After three minutes, the
confederate was brought in again and the participant retold
the second story. These two retellings together constitute the
“story phase” of the procedure.
Immediately after the second retelling was complete, with
the confederate still present, the participant was asked to
the convergence of forces may be less important for predicting
solution success than mentions of the initial insight to create a new
spatial distribution of the force. Our discussion throughout thus
focuses on the moment of initial redistribution.

2069

Figure 1: Examples of redistribution gestures produced by
two participants over the course of the procedure. In the
Fire Chief story, gestures produced along with mentions of
redistribution often represented a circle surrounding the
fire (A and B). In the General story, gestures produced
along with mentions of redistribution often represented the
divided army (A) or traced the army’s new formation
around the fortress (B). In the similarities phase, generic
redistribution gestures often echoed these concepts of
division (A) or surrounding (B).
.

Table 1: Solution success on the radiation problem as a function of mentions of redistribution
in speech and/ or gesture in the story phase.
Speech in both
stories

Gesture

Speech in one
story

Gesture in both

.38 (15/39)

Gesture in one

.50 (7/14)

.30 (3/10)

No gesture in either

.89 (8/9)
.48 (30/62)

Total

--

Participants’ descriptions in the similarities phase were
annotated in a similar fashion for whether or not they
mentioned redistribution. Mentions of redistribution in the
similarities phase came in two forms. Of particular interest
were generic mentions, in which the participant explicitly
mentioned redistribution as a feature common to both
stories. Generic mentions of redistribution in speech might
include statements that both stories involved “splitting up,”
“dividing,” or “spreading things out.” Occasionally,
participants used phrasing that was not inherently spatial—
e.g. “both stories involved organization”— while producing
an iconic spatial gesture clearly depicting redistribution.
These were considered gesture-only mentions of
redistribution. Participants also produced story-specific
mentions of redistribution, in which the participant merely
mentioned that redistribution occurred in one story, without
explicitly noting that this was in fact a feature common to
both stories. For example, in order to support the statement
that “both stories involved a strong leader,” a participant
might describe how the general ordered his troops to break
up into small groups. Gestures in the similarities phase were
coded in the same way as gestures in the story phase, and in
the same way regardless of whether they occurred in the
context of generic or story-specific mentions of
redistribution.
Finally, each participant’s proposed solutions to the
radiation problem were analyzed for the presence of the
desired analogous solution. In order to be scored as having
the solution present, participants had to propose a radiation
treatment in which, instead of deploying the radiation from
one direction, multiple low-intensity rays were arranged so
as to converge on the tumor from different angles.

Results

Speech in neither
story

Total

--

.38 (15/39)

--

.42 (10/24)

.67 (2/3)

.00 (0/3)

.67 (10/15)

.38 (5/13)

.00 (0/3)

& Holyoak (1983). An unanticipated finding from our study
was that solution success was related to the order in which
participants received the stories: only 12/38 (.32) of
participants who started with the Fire Chief story solved the
radiation problem, compared to 23/40 (.58) who started with
the General story (χ2= 4.3, 1 df, n= 78, p= .04, Cramer’s V=
.26).

Story Phase
We next analyzed whether participants’ spoken mentions of
redistribution in the story phase predicted whether they
would go on to solve the problem (see Table 1). 62
participants mentioned redistribution in speech both in their
retelling of the Fire Chief story and in their retelling of the
General story (30/62 [.48] succeeded on the radiation
problem); 13 participants mentioned redistribution in their
retelling of only one of the stories (5/13 [.38] succeeded on
the radiation problem); and 3 participants did not mention
redistribution in their retelling of either story (0/3 [.00]
succeeded on the radiation problem). This pattern, while
perhaps suggestive, did not reach significance.
A more interesting pattern emerges when these spoken
mentions are broken down into those that also involved
gesture and those that did not2. Considering first the 62
participants who mentioned redistribution in both stories: 39
accompanied their spoken mentions with gesture in both
cases and 15/39 (.38) went on to solve the problem; 14
accompanied their spoken mentions with gesture for one
story but not for the other and 7/14 (.50) went on to solve
the problem; 9 only mentioned redistribution in speech,
never accompanying their mentions with a gesture, and 8/9
(.89) went on to solve the problem. For these 62
participants, presence of gesture when mentioning

Overall solution success
Out of the 78 participants, 35 (.45) successfully produced
the analogous solution to the radiation problem. This
solution rate is close to the proportion of .52 reported for the
most comparable condition of experiment 4 reported in Gick

2

Gesture-only mentions of redistribution were rare in the story
phase and are not included in the analysis. They were more
common in the similarities phase and are therefore included in our
analysis of it.

2070

Table 2: Solution success on the radiation problem as a
function of mentions of redistribution in
the similarities phase.
Generic mention
(all but 2 involved gesture)

.68 (15/22)

Story-specific mention only
(all but 1 involved gesture)

.36 (8/22)

No mention

.35 (12/34)

Total

.45 (35/78)

redistribution was thus not independent of solution success
(two-tailed Fisher’s exact, p= .02). Considering next the 13
participants who mentioned redistribution in only one of
their retellings: 10 accompanied their spoken mentions with
gesture and 3/10 (.30) would go on to solve the problem; 3
mentioned it only in speech and 2/3 (.67) went on to solve
the problem. These proportions, while not statistically
different from each other, echo the pattern found for
participants mentioning redistribution in both stories.
We next examined the form that these redistribution
gestures took. Gestures about redistribution in the Fire Chief
story invariably involved tracing or modeling a circle with
one or both hands (see Figure 1). Gestures about
redistribution in the General Story either represented the
division of the army into multiple units, or else showed the
reorganization armies into a circular formation surrounding
the fortress. Some participants thus produced gestures that
shared the same gestalt— by representing a circular
formation in the General story and a circular formation in
the Fire Chief story— while other participants produced
gestures with contrasting gestalts— by representing a
divided formation in the General story and a circular
formation in the Fire Chief story. This serendipitous
variation allowed us to explore whether producing two
gestures representing the same spatial gestalt might make
people more likely to discover the idea of redistribution at
their core and then use this idea to solve the radiation
problem. Of the 39 participants who produced redistribution
gestures in both of the stories, 9 people produced gestures in
the stories that both represented the same spatial gestalt and
2 (.22) went on to solve the problem; 30 produced gestures
representing different spatial gestalts and 13 (.43) went on to
solve the problem. These proportions are not statistically
different from each other but run counter to the predicted
direction.

Similarities Phase
Next we analyzed whether what people mentioned in the
similarities phase predicted whether they would go on to
solve the problem (see Table 2). Many participants noted
superficial similarities between the stories, such as that both

involved a strong protagonist, a problem that a group of
people faced, or a change of strategy. But the focus of our
analysis was whether participants mentioned redistribution
and, further, whether these mentions were generic or storyspecific. 22/78 (.28) people produced a generic mention of
redistribution in one modality or another: 2 did so only in
speech, 6 did so only in gesture, and 14 did so in speechgesture combinations. Of these 22, 15 (.68) went on to solve
the radiation problem, compared to 20 of the 56 people (.36)
who did not produce a generic mention of redistribution
(χ2= 5.48, 1 df, n= 78, p= .02, Cramer’s V= .29). This
pattern replicates Gick & Holyoak’s (1983) finding that
solution success on the radiation problem is predicted by
whether participants identify solution-relevant similarities
between the stories. Note that because 20/22 (.91) generic
mentions of redistribution involved gesture, it is not
possible to meaningfully compare those mentions that
involved gesture with those that did not.
Finally, we examined whether story-specific mentions of
redistribution during the similarities phase predicted success
in the same way that generic mentions did. Of those 56
participants who did not make a generic mention of
redistribution, 22 produced one or more story-specific
mentions of redistribution and 8 (.36) went on to solve the
problem. By comparison, of the 34 participants who never
mentioned redistribution, either generically or storyspecifically, 12 (.35) went on to solve the problem. Storyspecific mentions of redistribution thus do not appear to
predict solution success, while generic mentions do. Note
also that, like the generic mentions, story-specific mentions
were almost always accompanied by gesture (21/22),
making it impossible to meaningfully compare those that
involved gesture to those that did not.

Discussion
We predicted that gesturing about the redistribution
strategy, whether during the story or similarities phase,
would lead to success on the radiation problem. What we
found instead was a more nuanced relationship between
gesture and solution success. Redistribution gestures
produced in the story phase, while initially retelling the
General and Fire Chief story, were predictive of a failure to
solve the radiation problem. Even when participants
produced the same helpful redistribution gesture, first in one
story and then immediately after in the next story, they were
no better off. In the similarities phase, gestures produced
when mentioning redistribution as a generic feature of both
stories were inextricably co-produced with speech. But they
apparently did not get in the way of success on the radiation
problem and may have even helped. These results suggest,
not only that gesture may play an important predictive role
in analogical problem solving, but also that it may have
distinct effects at different stages of the process.
Consistent with previous observations about gesture form,
the gestures produced in both phases of our study were
highly schematic, representing the pared-down essences of
spatial concepts such as division (e.g. two fists pulled apart)

2071

or surrounding (e.g. an index finger tracing a circle). In the
story phase, participants in some cases produced
qualitatively similar, highly schematic redistribution
gestures in both the General and Fire Chief stories. The key
to solving the radiation problem was thus not only right
under our participants’ noses but actually in their hands.
And yet these helpful concepts proved elusive only minutes
later. How could this be? The answer we suggest is that
gesture form can be deceiving. A participant who produces
a gesture in the story phase that appears to be highly
schematic may actually have in mind concrete and detailed
imagery tied to the particular story being described.
Producing a gesture in this case may serve to maintain or
even further entrench such imagery in all its richness (Wesp
et al., 2001). On this account, the schematic form that a
gesture takes may be due more to motor constraints than to
the schematic nature of the mental imagery that underlies it.
The gestures produced in the similarities phase were also
highly schematic. In fact, examining a redistribution gesture
produced in the stories phase alongside a redistribution
gesture produced in the similarities phase, it is very
difficult, if not impossible, to tell them apart (see Figure 1).
In the same way, within the similarities phase it is very
difficult to identify differences between a gesture produced
in the context of a generic mention of redistribution and one
produced in the context of a story-specific mention. And yet
these gestures appear to play very different roles depending
on the context in which they are produced. Thus one
possible moral for future research is that you cannot judge a
gesture by its form alone. Gestures associated with generic
mentions of redistribution in the similarities phase are likely
motivated by imagery that is no longer tied to a particular
story but highly schematic. Producing a gesture in this case
may also serve to maintain or further entrench the imagery
underlying it but at this stage this is no longer hurtful: once
a spatial abstraction such as the redistribution strategy has
taken shape in the mind, gesturing about it may only serve
to make it all the more robust. Of course, whether gesture
actually helps make such abstractions more robust— or
merely does no harm— is an important question that our
study leaves open.
On a cautionary note, because the results of this first
study are correlational, it is difficult to tell whether gesture
is an active ingredient in analogical problem solving or a
correlate of other active ingredients. One alternative
explanation for the correlation we observed is that gestures
may be more likely to be produced when imagery is
particularly vivid (Hostetter & Alibali, 2008). If this is the
case, then the strength of the imagery underlying that
gesture— rather than gesture per se— might be what
hinders transfer in the story phase. And since the imagery
underlying generic redistribution gestures produced in the
similarities phase is likely more schematic, the fact that it is
strong may no longer hinder transfer. Another alternative
explanation is that, given recent findings that gesture is
more likely to be produced by individuals with poor spatial
reasoning ability (Chu et al., 2013), one could predict that

those who gesture might be just the individuals who would
have difficulty with the radiation problem, which involves a
spatial insight. Further studies manipulating gesture directly
will be required to clarify why gesture plays the predictive
role that it does in this paradigm.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
Grant R01-HD047450 and National Science Foundation
Grant B6S-0925595 to S. Goldin-Meadow and by National
Science Foundation Grant SBE-0541957 (Spatial
Intelligence and Learning Center; S. Goldin-Meadow is a
co-principal investigator).

References
Alibali, M. W. (2005). Gesture in spatial cognition:
Expressing, communicating, and thinking about spatial
information. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 5(4),
307–331.
Arnheim, R. (1969). Visual thinking. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Broaders, S. C., Cook, S. W., Mitchell, Z., & GoldinMeadow, S. (2007). Making children gesture brings out
implicit knowledge and leads to learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136(4), 539–50.
Chu, M., Meyer, A., Foulkes, L., & Kita, S. (2013).
Individual differences in frequency and saliency
of
speech-accompanying gestures: The role of cognitive
abilities and empathy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology General.
Cook, S. W., Mitchell, Z., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008).
Gesturing makes learning last. Cognition, 106(2), 10471058.
Duncker, K. (1945). Duncker, K. (1945). On problem
solving. Psychological Monographs, 58(5, whole no.
270).
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1–38.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Cook, S. W., & Mitchell, Z. A. (2009).
Gesturing gives children new ideas about math.
Psychological Science, 20(3), 267–72.
Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible
embodiment: Gestures as simulated action. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 15(3), 495–514.
Wesp, R., Hesse, J., Keutmann, D., & Wheaton, K.
(2001).Gestures maintain spatial imagery. American
Journal of Psychology, 114(4), 591–600.

2072

