UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The unbearable burden of executive load on cognitive reflection: A validation of dual
process theory
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01x9w1hw
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)
Authors
Johnson, Eric D.
Tubau, Elisabet
De Neys, Wim
Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed
  eScholarship.org                                Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                  The unbearable burden of executive load on cognitive reflection:
                                          A validation of dual process theory
                                             Eric D. Johnson (eric.johnson@ub.edu)
                       Department of Basic Psychology and IR3C, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
                                                  Elisabet Tubau (etubau@ub.edu)
                       Department of Basic Psychology and IR3C, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
                                        Wim De Neys (wim.de-neys@parisdescartes.fr)
                           CNRS, LaPsyDE (CNRS Unit 8042), Paris Descartes University, Paris, France
                              Abstract                                   respond with this intuitive—but incorrect—answer (e.g.
The Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) is increasingly employed to
                                                                         Bourgeois-Gironde & Vanderhenst, 2009; Frederick, 2005).
measure the tendency of an individual to override a prepotent but        If the bat costs $1 more than a 10-cent ball, the bat itself
incorrect response and to subsequently engage in further reflection.     must cost $1.10. Summing up, a $1.10 bat + a $0.10 ball
This interplay between fast intuitive responding and resource            would equal $1.20, not $1.10 as stated in the problem. Does
demanding reflection has been offered as a paradigmatic example          this imply that highly educated young adults think that ‘110
of dual process theories of thinking. Despite its growing popularity     + 10’ = ‘110’? Of course not. Rather, it suggests that even
both for dual process theories and as an easily deployed measure of      educated reasoners often do not invest the necessary effort
intelligence, the basic assumption that the CRT relies on executive      to correct their initial intuition, and instead settle for a
resources remains generally circumstantial. The present study            quickly derived response.
directly tested these dual process assumptions by presenting the
standard bat-and-ball problem and a no-conflict control version
                                                                            The above bat-and-ball problem1 is extremely popular
while manipulating executive resources with a secondary load task.       amongst researchers, and extremely difficult for
With the no-conflict control problems, accuracy was uniformly at         participants. This popularity and difficulty are highly
ceiling in no load, low load, and high load conditions. In sharp         intertwined. First, high correlations are often observed
contrast, in the standard conflict problems accuracy clearly             between performance on this problem and other measures of
declined with increasingly load. These findings validate dual            intelligence or cognitive capacity, making it a tempting
process assumptions by providing direct causal evidence that             short alternative to more cumbersome measures such as
correctly resolving the bat-and-ball problem draws on executive          standard IQ or working memory tests (Toplak, West,
resources.                                                               Stanovich, 2011). Second, like many traditional judgment
 Keywords: Cognitive reflection; bat-and-ball problem; Dual              and reasoning tasks arising out the heuristics-and-biases era,
 process; Executive resources; Reasoning; Decision making; Bias          the above bat-and-ball problem is a paradigmatic example
                                                                         of a situation whose initially primed response is incorrect
                                                                         and which therefore must be overridden in order to correctly
                          Introduction                                   solve the task.
   In the face of difficulty, human reasoners often appear to               This latter point has made the bat-and-ball problem
forego the effortful processing that may be required and opt             particularly attractive for dual process theories of thinking
instead for less demanding intuitive responses (Kahneman,                and reasoning (Kahneman, 2011; Kahneman & Frederick,
2011). While many fast and frugal heuristics are no doubt                2002; Thompson, 2009). According to dual processes
adaptive in complex and reoccurring environments                         theories, human reasoning is characterized by two systems,
(Gigerenzer, 2007), thinking fast can also lead to quite                 or processing types, which respond to encountered
embarrassingly erroneous responses in less routine settings.             information in different ways. A first intuitive type thinking
Quickly consider the following example:                                  (System 1) automatically triggers responses based on prior
                                                                         knowledge/beliefs or via a number of simplifying heuristics,
  A bat and a ball together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1 more            whereas a second more deliberate type (System 2) demands
  than the ball. How much does the ball cost?                            the more controlled utilization of limited executive
                                                                         resources.
   Intuitively, the answer “10 cents” quickly springs to mind.
                                                                            1
In fact, typically around 80% of university students,                         The bat-and-ball problem, together with two other items, forms
including those from elite schools such as MIT and Harvard,              part of the Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT; Frederick, 2005). For
                                                                         a recently extended test, see Toplak, West & Stanovich (2013).
                                                                     2441

   The bat-and-ball problem has captured the attention of         standard conflict problems which draws on cognitive
researchers working within dual process frameworks                resources, then no performance decline should be observed
precisely because such a strongly compelling but wrong            under cognitive load on the control problems.
answer jumps to mind so quickly. In order to correctly
solve the problem, one must first detect that something is
amiss with the rapid, compelling response provided by
System 1. In principle, this takes little more than a simple                                Experiment
check: “Wait a minute, if the ball costs 10 cents, then the
bat costs $1.10… that can’t be right!”. Once the conflict is      Method & Material
detected, this erroneous intuition can then be overridden
                                                                  Participants. A total of 190 undergraduate students from
with the more effortful engagement of System 2.
                                                                  the University of Barcelona were recruited for this task in
   Although it is widely assumed that correctly solving the
                                                                  exchange for course credit. Seven of these students reported
bat-and-ball problem draws on the limited executive
                                                                  being familiar with the bat-and-ball problem, and therefore
resources of System 2, no direct evidence has been
                                                                  only data from the remaining 183 participants (mean age =
presented to validate this claim. So far, this idea is based
                                                                  20.46, SE=.23) was analyzed and reported here.
primarily on correlational data demonstrating the above
mentioned relationships between CRT performance and
                                                                  Reasoning Task. The reasoning tasks included both a
other measures of cognitive capacity (e.g. Aguilar, Johnson
                                                                  standard conflict and a no-conflict control version of the
& Tubau, 2014; Cokely & Kelley, 2009; Lesage, Navarrete,
                                                                  bat-and-ball problem introduced above. As in previous
& De Neys, 2012; Liberali et al, 2011). This is particularly
                                                                  work (De Neys et al, 2013), different contextual and
troublesome, especially given the variety of criticism aimed
                                                                  numerical contents were used (see Appendix). One problem
at dual process frameworks (see e.g. De Neys, 2006a;
                                                                  presented a bat and ball, the other presented a magazine and
2006b; Evans & Stanovich, 2013; Gigerenzer & Regier,
                                                                  banana. In one problem the total cost was $1.10 with one
1996; Keren & Schul, 2009).
                                                                  item costing $1 more than the other; in the other problem
   In the present study we tested this central dual process
                                                                  the total cost was $2.90 with one item costing $2 more than
claim by experimentally limiting executive resources with a
                                                                  the other. Item contents and values for the conflict and
dual-task paradigm. Dual process theorists claim that
                                                                  control versions were fully counterbalanced across
cognitive load should place differential burdens on effortful
                                                                  participants, which helps to ensure that any observed effects
and intuitive processing (Evans, 2008; Evans & Stanovich,
                                                                  are general and not driven by the specific material used (e.g.
2013; Sloman, 1996; Stanovich & West, 2000). If the bat-
                                                                  the ease of partitioning 1.10 and 10, or background beliefs
and-ball problem does indeed inextricably depend on the
                                                                  about the price of specific items)2. A blank box with the
availability of executive resources, then performance on this
                                                                  label “cents” appeared on screen following the problem.
task should decrease under cognitive load (for further
                                                                  Participants therefore typed only their numerical response
discussion see De Neys, 2006a, 2006b).
                                                                  into the box.
   As a crucial counterpoint, we also presented the following
no-conflict control version of the bat-and-ball problem:
                                                                  Load Task: Dot Memory. In the load conditions, participants
    A magazine and a banana together cost $2.90. The              were presented a secondary visuospatial storage task (De
    magazine costs $2. How much does the banana cost?             Neys, 2006a; Franssens & De Neys, 2009). Prior to the
                                                                  reasoning task, a pattern of dots was briefly presented
   On this control version the rapidly cued intuitive response    (900ms) in a 3 x 3 grid for participants to memorize and
(“90 cents”) does not conflict with other normative               keep in mind while reasoning. After the reasoning task,
considerations, and therefore no inhibition of an erroneous       participants were subsequently presented a blank grid into
prepotent response is required. De Neys, Rossi, and Houdé         which they clicked with the mouse to reproduce the
(2013) demonstrated very high accuracy on this control            remembered pattern (an indicated dot could be removed by
problem when presented as a simple reasoning task without         clicking again). Two load conditions were used in the
additional load manipulations. Crucial for the automaticity       present study. In the high load (HL) condition, four dots
assumption in dual process theories, accuracy should not          were presented in a complex interspersed pattern, which has
decline on these no-conflict problems in the presence of the      been established to interfere specifically with effort-
additional cognitive burden. Accordingly, this problem            demanding executive resources (Miyake et al, 2001). In the
helps to restrain interpretations of any observed decline in      low load (LL) condition, three dots were presented in a
accuracy under load in the standard bat-and-ball problem.         single column, which should place only a minimal burden
For example, if burdening cognitive capacity simply reduces       on executive resources (De Neys, 2006a; De Neys &
general resources which may be required for reading,              Verschueren, 2006; see examples in Figure 1).
comprehending, and responding in an experimental setting,
then a corresponding decline in performance should also be
observed on the control problem. If, however, it is the need
to overcome the rapidly available intuitive response on the          2
                                                                       None of these factors had any impact on performance.
                                                              2442

                                                                    load (100%, SE=0.0%), and high load (100%, SE=0.0%)
                                                                    conditions.        A logistic regression confirmed that
                                                                    performance was clearly not affected by executive load on
                                                                    these no-conflict problems (χ²(1)<1, p>.95). This establishes
                                                                    that the intuitive, and correct, response in the control version
                                                                    was automatically triggered with minimal involvement of
                                                                    executive resources.
                                                                       In sharp contrast, on the standard conflict versions a clear
                                                                    decline in correct responses was observed with increasing
                                                                    load, from 23% (SE=8.4%) with no load, to 16% (SE=6.1%)
Figure 1. Example dots patterns presented as a dual-load task in    with low load, to 3% (SE=3.3%) under high load (Figure 2).
the (A) Low Load condition, and (B) High Load condition.            Logistic regression revealed that this effect of load on
                                                                    accuracy was significant (χ² (1)=4.25, p=.039, eβ=.41, 95%
                                                                    C.I.=.18 – .96). This finding provides direct causal evidence
Procedure. All tasks were adapted for computer-based                for the typically assumed claim the CRT bat-and-ball
testing. Participants were tested in small groups (up to four       problem draws on executive resources.
at a time) at individual computer terminals. All participants
were randomized to receive the standard conflict (n=93) or
the no-conflict control (n=90) problem in one of the three
load conditions (HL, LL, NL).               Appropriate task
instructions were provided, along with a brief practice series
to familiarize them with the testing environment, explained
as follows.
   In the (high and low) load conditions, participants first
saw a simple and unrelated math story problem where they
were to provide a single numerical response and press the
Enter key. This was followed by a new screen with
instructions explaining that they would also have to
memorize a dot pattern to subsequently reproduce after the
reasoning task. Participants then practiced the entire series:
A pattern was briefly flashed for 900ms, followed by the            Figure 2. Response accuracy on the Conflict and Control problems
same simple practice problem, and finally a blank grid              under no load (NL), low load (LL), and high load (HL). Error bars
appeared for participants to reproduce the previously seen          are standard errors.
dot pattern. As part of another study, prior to the appearance
of the blank grid participants were also asked to provide a            The response accuracy on the standard conflict problems
confidence judgment regarding the correctness of their              in the no load condition (23%) is in line with previous
response. The procedure was the same in the no load group,          studies (e.g. De Neys et al, 2013), demonstrating that
but without any mention or practice of the dot pattern task.        performance was not generally influenced by the computer-
Following the practice series the actual experiment began.          based testing environment. Further analysis of erroneous
                                                                    responses showed that 95% (19/20) of biased reasoners
                                                                    provided the intuitive “10 cents” response in the absence of
Results & Discussion                                                load. Importantly, this same high proportion of intuitively
                                                                    cued incorrect responses was observed under low (97%;
   Load Task. On average, in the 3-dot low load condition
                                                                    30/31) and high (93%; 27/29) loads, confirming that the
participants correctly indicated 98% (2.95, SD=0.38) of the
                                                                    presence of a demanding executive task does not simply
dot locations on the conflict problems and 100% (3.00,
                                                                    lead to increased guessing or otherwise random responding3.
SD=0.00) of the dots on the control versions. In the 4-dot
                                                                       It might be argued that the decrease in accuracy under
high load condition, 86% (3.42, SD=0.94) of the dot
                                                                    load results not from increased demands on reasoning
locations on the conflict problems and 85% (3.38, SD=0.79)
                                                                    processes per se, but rather from the effect of load on
of the dots on the control versions were correctly indicated.
                                                                    reading or comprehension process, which are also known to
This shows that the secondary task was performed properly.
                                                                    draw on executive resources (Just, Carpenter, & Keller,
There was no correlation between participants scores on the
                                                                    1996). This interpretation is ruled out, however, by the
dot recall and reasoning task in the low load (r=.053, p=.68)
                                                                    uniformly high accuracy on the no-conflict problems
or high load (r=.058, p=.65) conditions, which indicates that
there was no performance trade-off between these tasks.
                                                                       3
                                                                          To be clear, the overall number of erroneous responses
   Accuracy. As expected, response accuracy was very high           increased under load. The point here is simply that in all
on the control problems in the no load (97%, SE=3.2%), low          conditions the erroneous responses are not random but specifically
                                                                    entail the postulated intuitively cued “10 cents” response.
                                                                2443

regardless of executive burden. This establishes that the         warranted. In brief, the present study validates a key
observed effect of load on the standard bat-and-ball problem      assumption of dual process theories, however, it clearly
resulted specifically from the deployment of executive            does not by itself argue against alternative frameworks.
resources required to overcome the strongly compelling               Our findings validate the involvement of executive
intuition.                                                        resources on the bat-and-ball problem, but they also raise
                                                                  additional questions regarding the nature of this
                                                                  involvement on these conflict problems. That is, it is not
                   General Discussion                             clear which component(s) of the bat-and-ball problem-
                                                                  solving process demand executive resources (see De Neys
                                                                  & Bonnefon, 2013). Recent work by De Neys, Rossi, and
   The bat-and-ball problem has become a centerpiece for
                                                                  Houdé (2013) established that, in the absence of a secondary
dual process theories of thinking (Bourgeois-Gironde &
                                                                  load, even incorrect reasoners were not completely
Vanderhenst, 2009; Kahneman, 2011; Thompson, 2009).
                                                                  oblivious to their erroneous response. In that study,
The principle assumption is that an intuitive but incorrect
                                                                  reasoners who went with their intuition on the bat-and-ball
answer (10 cents) is delivered via System 1 processing, with
                                                                  problem expressed less confidence in their invalid response
the intervention of System 2 required to override the
                                                                  relative to confidence expressed on the no-conflict control
erroneous intuition with correct reasoning. According to
                                                                  version.      The fact that even incorrect responders
dual process theory, the quintessential difference between
                                                                  demonstrated some awareness that their response was not
these two types of processing is the differential involvement
                                                                  fully warranted suggests that conflict detection is not the
of executive working memory (Evans, 2008; Evans &
                                                                  primary difficulty of the problem. Other dual-task studies
Stanovich, 2013; Stanovich, 2000). It is therefore essential
                                                                  have indeed shown that conflict detection can operate
for this theory to demonstrate that correctly solving the bat-
                                                                  independently of executive resources on a variety of
and-ball problem does indeed draw on this limited executive
                                                                  judgment and reasoning tasks (e.g. De Neys, 2006;
resource pool.
                                                                  Franssens & De Neys, 2009). Nevertheless, this does not in
   Results of the reported experiment validate this dual-
                                                                  and of itself establish that executive resources are not
process assumption by experimentally manipulating the
                                                                  implicated in the detection of conflict on the bat-and-ball
availability of executive resources while participants solved
                                                                  problem.
the bat-and-ball problem. When the intuitive response
                                                                     Of course even if reasoners detect the conflict in the
corresponded to the correct response in the control problem,
                                                                  problem and are in principle aware that the intuitive
accuracy was nearly perfect. Importantly, performance
                                                                  response must be inhibited/overridden, this does not imply
remained at ceiling under both low and high load
                                                                  that they still have the relevant knowledge or capacity to
conditions, confirming the basic assumption that the fast-
                                                                  derive the correct response. While it is probably safe to
acting System 1 intuition is triggered independently of
                                                                  assume that all university students can easily add 110 + 10,
executive involvement. In sharp contrast, a clear decline in
                                                                  that does not entail that they can all set up the appropriate
accuracy was observed with increasing load on the standard
                                                                  algebraic representation (x + (x + 1) = 1.10) from a reading
problem which required the override of the erroneously
                                                                  of the bat-and-ball problem. Even if this knowledge is
cued response. This is all the more remarkable given that
                                                                  generally present in a student population, the additional
performance in the absence of load is already so low. When
                                                                  cognitive load may impinge on the accessibility of this
executive resources were burdened with the secondary task
                                                                  knowledge. An alternative strategy for solving this problem
of maintaining and recalling a complex dot pattern, only a
                                                                  may be trial-and-error, adjusting the intuitive response (10
single person out of 30 was able to correctly solve the bat-
                                                                  cents) little by little until an acceptable answer is found.
and-ball problem. This pattern of results empirically
                                                                  This method of adjusting and checking also likely draws on
confirms the direct involvement of executive working
                                                                  executive resources and could account for the reduced
memory in the bat-and-ball problem, a suggestion supported
                                                                  performance observed under high load.
previously by correlational evidence only.
                                                                     In short, the load effect observed in the present study
   Although dual process theories continue to gain in
                                                                  could result from an additional burden on the retrieval of
popularity across the social and psychological sciences, they
                                                                  relevant knowledge, the conflict detection process, or the
have also received their fair share of criticism (see Evans &
                                                                  ability to inhibit/override the intuitive response and supplant
Stanovich, 2013). Many of these views offer unimodal or
                                                                  it with a correct one. While this refinement remains for
alternative approaches that may be more appealing for a
                                                                  future research, the present study establishes that at
variety of reasons. To be clear, the demonstrated load effect
                                                                  whatever stage the trouble lies, successfully overcoming this
on the bat-and-ball problem does not in and of itself imply
                                                                  difficulty depends on executive working memory resources.
that dual process theories are indeed correct. Unimodal or
                                                                  This executive involvement in the face of conflict, along
other pluralistic models might also entail that the CRT
                                                                  with the automaticity of the intuitive control response,
draws on executive resources, however, the specific
                                                                  validates a key assumption of the dual process framework.
involvement of executive resources on conflict problems is
a clear, a priori assumption of the general dual process
model. Our results directly show that this assumption is
                                                              2444

                   Acknowledgements                             Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York:
                                                                  Farrar, Strauss, Giroux.
This research was supported by grants from the Generalitat      Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness
de Catalunya (FI-DGR 2011), the Spanish Ministry of               revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. In
Economics and Competitiveness (PSI2012-35703), and the            T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.),
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-JSH2-0007-01).              Heuristics & biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment
                                                                  (pp. 49–81). New York: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                Keren, G. & Schul, Y. (2009). Two Is Not Always Better
                                                                  Than One. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4(6),
                        References                                533-550.
                                                                Lesage, E., Navarrete, G., & De Neys, W. (2013).
Aguilar, D., Johnson, E.D. & Tubau, E. (2014). Reflection
                                                                  Evolutionary modules and Bayesian facilitation: The role
  on explanation but not on practice facilitates overcoming
                                                                  of general cognitive resources. Thinking and Reasoning,
  erroneous probabilistic intuitions. Manuscript submitted
                                                                  19(1), 27–53.
  for publication.
                                                                Liberali, J.M., Reyna, V.F., Furlan, S., Stein, L.M. & Pardo,
Bourgeois-Gironde, S., & Vanderhenst, J. B. (2009). How
                                                                  S.T. (2011). Individual Differences in Numeracy and
  to open the door to System 2: Debiasing the Bat and Ball
                                                                  Cognitive Reflection, with Implications for Biases and
  problem. In S. Watanabe, A.P Bloisdell, L. Huber, A.
                                                                  Fallacies in Probability Judgment. Journal of Behavioral
  Young (Eds.), Rational animals, irrational humans (pp.
                                                                  Decision Making. DOI: 10.1002/bdm.752
  235-252). Tokyo, Japan: Keio University Press.
                                                                Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Rettinger, D. A., Shah, P., &
Cokely, E.T. & Kelley, C.M. (2009). Cognitive abilities and
                                                                  Hegarty, M. (2001). How are visuospatial working
  superior decision making under risk: A protocol analysis
                                                                  memory, executive functioning, and spatial abilities
  and process model evaluation. Judgment and Decision
                                                                  related? A latent-variable analysis. Journal of
  Making, 4(1), 20–33.
                                                                  Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 621–640.
De Neys, W. (2006a). Dual processing in reasoning: Two
                                                                Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
  systems but one reasoner. Psychological Science, 17,
                                                                  reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3–22.
  428–433.
                                                                Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
De Neys, W. (2006b). Automatic-heuristic and executive-
                                                                  differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
  analytic processing in reasoning: Chronometric and dual
                                                                  debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–726.
  task considerations. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
                                                                Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The
  Psychology, 59, 1070–1100.
                                                                  cognitive reflection test as a predictor of performance on
De Neys, W., & Bonnefon, J. F. (2013). The whys and
                                                                  heuristics-and biases tasks. Memory and Cognition, 39,
  whens of individual differences in thinking biases. Trends
                                                                  1275-1289.
  in Cognitive Sciences, 17, 172-178.
                                                                Toplak, M.E., West, R. F. & Stanovich, K. E. (2013).
De Neys, W., Rossi, S. & Houdé, O. (2013). Bats, balls, and
                                                                  Assessing miserly information processing: An expansion
  substitution sensitivity: Cognitive misers are no happy
                                                                  of the Cognitive Reflection Test. Thinking & Reasoning,
  fools. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20, 269-273.
                                                                  DOI: 10.1080/13546783.2013.844729.
De Neys, W. & Verschueren, N. (2006). Working memory
                                                                Thompson, V. A. (2009). Dual process theories: A
  capacity and a notorious brain teaser: The case of the
                                                                  metacognitive perspective. In J. Evans & K. Frankish
  Monty Hall Dilemma. Experimental Psychology, 53, 123-
                                                                  (Eds.), In Two Minds: Dual Processes and Beyond.
  131
                                                                  Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of
  reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annual Review
  of Psychology, 59, 255–278.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Stanovich, K. (2013). Dual process
                                                                                         Appendix
  theories of higher cognition: Advancing the debate.
  Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 223–241.            Standard versions
Franssens, S., & De Neys, W. (2009). The effortless nature
  of conflict detection during thinking. Thinking &             A bat and a ball together cost $1.10 . The bat costs $1 more
  Reasoning, 15, 105–128.                                       than the ball. How much does the ball cost? ___ cents
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision           [correct = .05 cents; intuitive = .10 cents]
  making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
Gigerenzer, G. (2007). Gut Feelings: The Intelligence of the    A bat and a ball together cost $2.90. The bat costs $2 more
  Unconscious. New York: Viking.                                than the ball. How much does the ball cost? ___ cents
Gigerenzer, G., & Regier, T. (1996). How do we tell an            [correct = .45 cents; intuitive = .90 cents]
  association from a rule? Comment on Sloman (1996).
  Psychological Bulletin, 119, 23-26.
                                                            2445

A magazine and a banana together cost $1.10. The magazine
costs $1 more than the ball. How much does the banana
cost? ___ cents
  [correct = .05 cents; intuitive = .10 cents]
A magazine and a banana together cost $2.90. The magazine
costs $2 more than the ball. How much does the banana
cost? ___ cents
  [correct = .45 cents; intuitive = .90 cents]
Control versions
A magazine and a banana together cost $2.90. The magazine
costs $2. How much does the banana cost?
  [correct & intuitive = .90 cents]
A magazine and a banana together cost $1.10. The magazine
costs $1. How much does the banana cost?
  [correct & intuitive = .10 cents]
A bat and a ball together cost $2.90. The bat costs $2. How
much does the ball cost?
  [correct & intuitive = .90 cents]
A bat and a ball together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1. How
much does the ball cost?
  [correct & intuitive = .10 cents]
                                                            2446

