UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The strategic use of noise in pragmatic reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7zz5j5qx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bergen, Leon
Goodman, Noah

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The strategic use of noise in pragmatic reasoning
Leon Bergen (bergen@mit.edu)1 , Noah D. Goodman (ngoodman@stanford.edu)2
1 Department

of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge MA 02139
of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305

2 Department

Abstract

Here we ask whether novel pragmatic inferences can be
driven by the physical properties of the communication channel. Consider that agents in a conversation are typically mutually aware of the physical limitations of their communication system, e.g. that their utterances may be corrupted by
noise. These agents can therefore take actions that exploit
these limitations, and their conversational partners’ knowledge of these limitations. Although noise is typically viewed
as a problem for communication, we will argue that the possibility of noise is in many circumstances a resource, without
which certain types of communication would not be possible.
Using this perspective, we will explore two sets of phenomena that on the surface look only loosely related (see
Benz (2012) for the application of similar ideas to a different
set of pragmatic phenomena). The first of these phenomena
is the effective use sentence fragments to communicate full
propositions (Merchant, 2004). Consider, for example, the
typical manner in which wh-questions are answered:

We combine two recent probabilistic approaches to natural language understanding, exploring the formal pragmatics of communication on a noisy channel. We show that nominal amounts
of actual noise can be leveraged for communicative purposes.
Common knowledge of a noisy channel leads to the use and
correct understanding of sentence fragments. Prosodic emphasis, interpreted as an intentional action to reduce noise on a
word, results in strengthened meanings.
Keywords: Pragmatics; Communication; Bayesian modeling

Recent work in cognitive science has investigated the inferential aspects of human communication: how people use
general-purpose reasoning to go beyond the literal content
of their language input. This work has generally taken one
of two perspectives. Researchers have used noisy channel
models (Levy, Bicknell, Slattery, & Rayner, 2009; Gibson,
Bergen, & Piantadosi, 2013) to investigate how people infer
meanings from language input that may have been corrupted
by noise. Work on probabilistic pragmatics models (Frank &
Goodman, 2012; Franke, 2009) has looked at how people use
strategic reasoning to enrich the meanings that they communicate with their conversational partners. The current work
will combine these perspectives, providing a unified explanation of two distinct phenomena: the use of sentence fragments
to communicate full propositions, and the use of prosody to
shift pragmatic interpretations.
People’s communication channels are limited in various
ways, and successful communication often requires complex
inferences in order to overcome these limitations. When a
speaker in a conversation tries to communicate something to
the listener, their intended signal may be corrupted by speech
errors (e.g., if they are excited or intoxicated), environmental
noise (if they are in a loud setting, e.g. at a cocktail party), or
perceptual noise (if the listener is not paying attention). For
the listener to successfully understand the speaker’s intended
meaning, they must take into account these possible sources
of noise, and infer whether they heard what the speaker actually intended. A growing body of experimental evidence
suggests that people account for the possibility of noise when
interpreting language; this has been successfully modeled as
probabilistic inference of the original message given the received message. A different body of computational research
has emphasized the implications for communication of probabilistic models of social inference. This work views the
agents in a conversation as rational and cooperative, and as
having mutual knowledge of these properties. These agents
are able to draw sophisticated inferences about each others’
intentions by using this knowledge, explaining pragmatic enrichment of sentence meanings.

(1)

A: Who went to the movies?
B: Bob

The utterance Bob is used to express the proposition that Bob
went to the movies. This proposition could have been expressed with the full sentence Bob went to the movies, but this
would be redundant given the context; it is common knowledge between the two speakers that the response will describe
who went to the movies. Thus, given an appropriate context, the use of sentence fragments allows people to remove
extraneous words from their utterances. However, fragmentary sentences present a difficulty for probabilistic pragmatics
models, which generally require a complete truth-functional
literal meaning to initiate pragmatic reasoning.
The second phenomenon is the use of prosodic stress—a
change in how a sentence is pronounced—to change the interpretation of the sentence. In particular, speakers can use
prosody to place focus on particular parts of an utterance.
Consider the following example:
(2)

A: Who went to the movies?
B: BOB went to the movies.

Here capital letters are used to indicate that the speaker
has placed prosodic stress on the word “Bob.” A stressed
utterance will be interpreted exhaustively (Groenendijk &
Stokhof, 1984; Von Stechow, 1991): the speaker intends to
communicate that Bob was the only person who went the
movies. Without stress, this utterance is compatible with
other people having gone to the movies in addition to Bob.
One explanation of this relationship between prosody and

182

meaning is that prosody simply carries conventional meaning which composes with lexical meaning. An alternative,
which we will explore here, is that the meaning of prosodic
emphasis comes as a pragmatic enrichment given the effect
that prosody has on the physical acoustic channel of speech.
We will demonstrate how both of these phenomena emerge
from pragmatic reasoning given the possibility of noise. Our
results will be theoretical, showing that the machinery of
noisy-channel and probabilistic pragmatics models can be
combined and exploring the predictions of this combination.1
Introspective data from examples will be strong enough to
motivate our explorations, but our theoretical results also suggest experimental questions for future research.

particular utterance. Rather, they interpret an utterance according to its literal meaning by Bayesian inference:

P(m)
if m ∈ JuK
L0 (m|u) ∝
(2)
0
otherwise.
The term P(m) is the prior distribution on meanings that the
speaker may want to communicate.
The speaker Sn chooses utterances by considering which
would most effectively communicate their intended meaning
to the listener Ln−1 . They want to minimize the information that the listener would still lack to recover meaning m
after perceiving utterance u p . This can be formalized as the
surprisal: − log Ln−1 (m|u p ) (Cover & Thomas, 1991). The
speaker wants to minimize surprisal, thus has utility function:

Background

U(u|m) = log Ln−1 (m|u p ) − c(u),

Noisy-channel models provide an account how people understand language despite the possibility of noise corrupting their language inputs. Under noisy-channel accounts, the
comprehender has a model of the noise process that generated
their observed utterance, and they determine the speaker’s
intended utterance by integrating this knowledge with their
prior expectations about what the speaker is likely to say.
This is formalized as a Bayesian decoding procedure. The
listener has a prior distribution over utterances P(ui ), which
gives the probability that the speaker intends to use utterance
ui . The listener’s model of the noise process is represented by
the distribution PN (u p |ui ), which gives the probability that the
listener will perceive utterance u p given that the speaker intended ui . The posterior probability that the speaker intended
ui given that the listener perceived u p is given by:
L(ui |u p ) ∝ P(ui )PN (u p |ui )

(3)

where c(u) is the cost of utterance u. The distribution over
utterances for the speaker Sn is defined using the Luce-choice
rule, which describes the choice behavior of approximately
rational agents (Sutton & Barto, 1998):
Sn (u|m) ∝ eλUn (u|m)

(4)

The term λ > 0 controls the speaker’s degree of rationality.
Finally, listener Ln (n ≥ 1) interprets an utterance u by considering which meanings would make the speaker Sn likely to
choose u. This reasoning is captured with Bayes’ rule:
Ln (m|u) ∝ P(m)Sn (u|m)

(5)

These models are each intended to capture distinct phenomena, and as currently presented the models are not compatible with each other. The probabilistic pragmatics models
assume that there is no noise in the transmission of the utterance from the speaker to the listener; if the speaker intends
for the listener to receive utterance u, then this is what the
listener will receive. On the other hand, the noisy-channel
models do not say anything about how a comprehender can
extract non-literal meanings from a speaker’s utterance; from
the perspective of these models, the speaker is a black box,
not a rational agent with sophisticated intentions.
Neither type of model can, on its own, explain the phenomena illustrated above. The pragmatics models only deal
with grammatical utterances whose literal meanings are specified in advance, ruling out the use of non-grammatical sentence fragments within these models (unless a semantics for
these utterances is given as an input). In addition, without
stipulating that prosody shifts the literal meaning of an utterance, these models cannot explain why prosody influences
pragmatic interpretation (see Bergen, Goodman, and Levy
(2012) for a discussion of related issues). Noisy-channel
accounts, which do not provide an endogenous model of
how the speaker chooses utterances, do not explain why the
speaker would choose ungrammatical sentence fragments as
utterances, or place prosodic stress on their utterances.

(1)

Probabilistic pragmatics models give an account of a different aspect of people’s linguistic knowledge: how the participants in a conversation draw inferences that go beyond
the literal meanings of the utterances that they hear. In several contemporary models (Frank & Goodman, 2012; Franke,
2009; Jager, 2010; Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2013), this is
formalized with a hierarchy of agents of increasing strategic
sophistication. Here we will present a slightly modified version of the Rational Speech Acts model of (Frank & Goodman, 2012). The speaker has a meaning m ∈ M that they want
to communicate to the listener, where M is the set of possible
meanings, or worlds. The set of utterances U specifies the
grammatical utterances available to the speaker. The literal
meaning JuK of an utterance u is the set of possible worlds in
which the utterance is true: m ∈ JuK if and only if the utterance is true of the meaning.
The least sophisticated agent in the model, the listener L0 ,
does not reason about why the speaker would have chosen a
1 All

of the models discussed in the paper were implemented in
the probabilistic programming language Church (Goodman, Mansinghka, Roy, Bonawitz, & Tenenbaum, 2008). The code is available
at http://probmods.org/prosody.html.

183

Ellipsis

2. Because noise will sometimes corrupt the speaker’s utterances, the listener L0 needs to infer which utterance the
speaker intended before assigning it a literal interpretation.
The distribution PN (u p |ui ) defines the noise process: the
probability that the listener will perceive utterance u p given
that the speaker intends to use utterance ui . The literal listener assigns a probability to meaning m by integrating the
prior probability of m with the probability that m is literally
consistent with the speaker’s intended utterance:

As example 1 illustrates, people can use sentence fragments
to communicate full propositions; indeed, this is often the
most natural way to communicate. A basic question, then,
is what linguistic knowledge allows for the successful interpretation of sentence fragments. One possibility is that this
knowledge is conventionalized as part of a language’s grammar or semantics, i.e., the language provides a procedure for
interpreting fragments that are used in response to questions,
or in other contexts. The language might contain a rule stipulating that the name of an agent is a grammatical response to
a “who”-question, and that the answer to such a question can
be obtained by substituting this name into the question.
It is unlikely, however, that such a grammatical rule would
account for the productivity of sentence fragment usage.
Consider the following examples (see Stainton (1998) for related cases):
(3)

A: I think I’ve discovered the culprit.
B: The butler!

(4)

A: I got laughed out of the seminar again today.
B: Your pragmatic theories.
A: Yeah, everyone thinks they’re crazy.

L0 (m|u p ) ∝ P(m)

∑

P(ui )PN (u p |ui ).

(6)

ui :m∈Jui K

The speaker Sn (for n ≥ 1) chooses utterances by maximizing the probability that the listener Ln−1 will recover their intended meaning, while minimizing effort. The speaker needs
to consider that their utterance may be corrupted by noise;
whether the listener successfully recovers the speaker’s intended meaning will depend on what utterance the listener
perceives. Thus, the speaker’s utility function Un generalizes
the one defined in Equation 3, and now takes the expectation
over the surprisal of their intended meaning:
Un (ui |m) = ∑ PN (u p |ui ) log (Ln−1 (m|u p )) − c(ui ).

(7)

up

In neither case is there an apparent grammatical marker which
licenses the fragment’s use as an utterance. Rather, in both
examples, the first speaker’s utterance raises a topic for discussion, and the second speaker offers a fragment that can be
understood given this topic. These examples suggest that the
interpretation of sentence fragments is not fixed by the grammar, but rather is driven by general inferential mechanisms.
We will be pursuing the hypothesis that people interpret
sentence fragments through pragmatic inference, not grammatical rules. The speaker can successfully communicate using an ungrammatical, fragmentary utterance by exploiting
the possibility—known to the listener—that noise may have
corrupted the utterance. When a strategically naive listener
hears a sentence fragment, they will believe that noise corrupted it, because sentence fragments are not grammatical
parts of the language. They will therefore infer what sentence
the speaker actually intended to use. A strategically sophisticated speaker, reasoning about the naive listener, will therefore choose a sentence fragment to express their intended
meaning if it is parsimonious and likely to be interpreted correctly by the listener. A more sophisticated listener will expect such fragments, and so on. Neither speaker nor listener
assign a literal meaning to the sentence fragment itself.

The speaker’s distribution over utterances is defined using the
Luce-choice rule, as in Equation 4.
The listener Ln (for n ≥ 1) has a model of the speaker Sn ,
and, to a first approximation, interprets an utterance by reasoning about what intended meanings would have made this
speaker likely to use the utterance. However, the listener accounts for the possibility that noise corrupted the utterance
she received; combining Equations 5 and 1:
Ln (m|u p ) ∝ P(m) ∑ Sn (ui |m)PN (u p |ui ).

(8)

ui

Results
We will use example 1 to illustrate how the model assigns
interpretations to sentence fragments. Suppose that it is common knowledge, following the question, that if anyone went
to the movies, then it was either Alice or Bob who went. Thus
the speaker either wants to communicate that Alice went to
the movies, that Bob went, or that nobody went. For simplicity, we will assume that the utterances available to the speaker
are of the form “X went to the movies,” where X is “Alice,”
“Bob,” or “Nobody”; it is straightforward to generalize the
reasoning here to larger sets of alternative utterances. Finally, we will suppose that the noise process consists of three
types of noise (Levy, 2008; Gibson et al., 2013): insertions
of words into the sentence, deletions of words, and replacements of words, which are assumed to occur independently.
Only deletions will be relevant for the current example.
Figure 1 shows model results: robust interpretation of
“Bob” as meaning that Bob went to the movies, almost independent of the actual amount of noise. This can be explained as follows. The naive listener L0 will interpret the

Model
This reasoning can be formalized by combining the Rational Speech Acts model of (Frank & Goodman, 2012) with a
simple Bayesian model for interpreting noisy language input
(Levy, 2008; Gibson et al., 2013). The model starts with the
literal listener L0 who interprets utterances according to their
literal meanings. There is an important difference between
the definition of this literal listener and the one in Equation

184

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
10-5

10-4

10-3

Noise

10-2

10-1

Probability of using sentence fragment

Probability of correct interpretation

Interpretation of Sentence Fragments

ings that their utterances communicate. We now consider
the possibilities for communication that are opened when the
speaker can affect the noise rate of their utterances.
As example 2 illustrates, the interpreted meaning of an utterance is changed by prosodic stress. In that example, the
speaker uses stress to signal that they have exhaustive knowledge about the question under discussion, namely who went
to the mall. Several related uses of prosodic stress have been
noted in the literature. Consider the following example:

Use of Sentence Fragments
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
10-5

10-4

10-3

Noise

10-2

10-1

(5)

Figure 1: The left panel shows the probability the listener will
assign the correct meaning to the sentence fragment “Bob.”
The right panel shows the probability the speaker will use a
sentence fragment, as a function of the true noise rate.

A: Who did John introduce at the party?
B: John introduced MARY to Bill.

By placing stress on “Mary,” the speaker is able to indicate
that Mary was the only person that John introduced to Bill;
this leaves open the possibility that Mary was introduced to
other people by John. This contrasts with the meaning that
results from placing stress on “Bill”:

two grammatical utterances according to their literal meanings. If the listener hears the sentence fragments “Alice” or
“Bob,” then they will believe that this was not the speaker’s
intent, but rather that noise corrupted the intended utterance.
After hearing “Bob,” the most probable inference is that the
speaker intended to say “Bob went to the movies”: this requires positing the smallest number of string edits, i.e. the
deletion of the last four words. If the first word of the utterance is deleted, so that the listener hears “went to the movies”
(or any subset of these words), then the speaker’s intent will
be completely lost, because either grammatical utterance will
have been equally likely to produce the perceived utterance.
The speaker S1 reasons about the listener L0 , and knows
that this listener will usually interpret the utterance “Bob” as
meaning that Bob went to the movies, and similarly for “Alice.” If this speaker wants to communicate that Bob went to
the movies, then choosing the fragment “Bob” is a reasonable
strategy: it will usually be intepreted correctly, and requires
less effort than “Bob went to the movies.” This explains why
sentence fragments will be pragmatically licensed in many
contexts to communicate propositional meanings.
It is important to note that this reasoning will work even if
the noise rate is arbitrarily close to 0, so long as it is positive.
This is illustrated in Figure 1. When the listener L0 hears an
ungrammatical sentence fragment, they know that they perceived something that the speaker did not intend. Conditional
on having heard this ungrammatical utterance, they know that
noise must have corrupted the speaker’s intended utterance,
however a priori unlikely that is. As a result, the speaker
S1 may utter sentence fragments much more frequently than
would be expected under the noise model. The frequency
with which the speaker S1 chooses a sentence fragment is determined by how successfully it communicates their intended
meaning, and its cost relative to a grammatical sentence.

(6)

B: John introduced Mary to BILL.

In this case, the speaker intends to communicate that Bill was
the only person that Mary was introduced to; it is still possible, however, that other people were introduced to Bill. Thus,
prosodic stress in these cases is used to indicate the dimension
along which the speaker has exhaustive knowledge.
Prosody can also be used to shift the interpretation of scalar
items. Consider the following contrast:
(7)

I passed the test.

(8)

I PASSED the test.

The first example generates a weak scalar implicature: the
speaker at least passed the test, and they do not know if they
aced it. In contrast, the second example generates a strong implicature: the stress on the scalar item “passed” indicates that
the speaker knows that they did not ace the test. More generally, prosodic stress communicates that the speaker knows
that the stronger scalar alternatives to their utterance are false.
Why does prosodic stress have these effects on the pragmatic interpretation of utterances? We propose that these effects result from the acoustic signature of prosody. There are
two main acoustic changes associated with prosodic stress:
increased loudness and duration (Breen, Fedorenko, Wagner,
& Gibson, 2010). For our purposes, the significance of these
acoustic changes is that they will increase the robustness of
the utterance to noise. An utterance that is louder and longer
is less likely to get swamped by sounds in the environment,
and more likely to be the focus of the listener’s attention.
Thus, by placing stress on part of an utterance, the speaker
is choosing to decrease the noise rate for that part of the utterance. The speaker’s choice to reduce the noise rate for a
particular part of the utterance is an intentional action, and as
a result can receive a pragmatic interpretation by the listener.

Prosody

Model

In the previous section, we showed how participants in a conversation can use the possibility of noise to enrich the mean-

As with the previous model, this version begins with a listener L0 who interprets utterances literally. Before defining

185

this listener, we will consider several changes to the speaker
model. Previously, we assumed that the speaker was fully
knowledgeable, so that the speaker’s intended meaning could
be modeled by a point distribution on meanings. The current model will relax this assumption, so that the speaker’s
knowledge state is modeled by a non-trivial distribution over
meanings (Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2013); the listener will
try to infer this knowledge state. In particular, assume that the
speaker made an observation o, resulting in a posterior distribution over meanings: P(m|o) ∝ P(o|m)P(m), where P(o|m)
is the probability that the speaker made observation o given
that the true world state is m.
The noise rate of the speaker’s communication channel is
a function of the prosody that the speaker chooses. This is
captured by the term PN (·|ui , s), which is the distribution over
utterances that will be perceived by the listener, given that the
speaker intends utterance ui and uses prosody s. The probability that the listener accurately perceives ui will be higher if
the speaker chooses to apply prosodic stress to the utterance.
The speaker Sn wants to choose an utterance and prosody
that will communicate their knowledge state most effectively,
while simultaneously minimizing their effort. Because the
speaker’s knowledge state is no longer represented by a single
meaning, but rather by a distribution over meanings, the informativeness of the speaker’s utterance is no longer measured
by surprisal, as it was in Equation 7. Instead, we will use KLdivergence to measure the distance between the speaker’s belief distribution P(·|o) and the listener’s posterior distribution
after hearing the speaker’s chosen utterance and prosody:

Use of Prosody

Prosody

1.0

Prosodic Stress

Probability of prosodic stress

Probability of exhaustive interpretation

Interpretation of Prosody
1.0

No Prosodic Stress

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Knowledge
Knowledgeable

0.8

Ignorant

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
2

4

6

Depth

8

10

2

4

6

Depth

8

10

Figure 2: The left panel shows the probability that the listener will assign an exhaustive reading to “BOB went to the
movies,” as a function of recursion depth. The right panel
shows the probability that the speaker will use prosodic stress
when they have full or partial knowledge about the situation.

prosodic strategies: they can either use no prosodic stress, or
place prosodic stress on the names of the agents in the sentence. The base rate of noise is assumed to be 1% and the use
of prosodic stress is assumed to decrease the noise rate by a
factor of 2 (though the model’s predictions are invariant to a
range of base noise rates and noise reduction factors).
Figure 2 shows that at higher recursion depths—i.e., for
more sophisticated speakers and listeners—the model interprets prosodic stress on “Bob” as indicating that the speaker
knows that Alice did not go to the movies. This can be exUn (ui , s|o) = − ∑ PN (u p |ui , s)KL(P(·|o)||Ln−1 (·, o|u p , s)) − c(ui ) plained as follows. The listener L0 is strategically unsophisup
ticated, and interprets utterances literally. This listener will
not gain information from prosodic stress, as prosodic stress
The speaker’s distribution Sn (ui , s|o) over utterances is again
is semantically inconsequential under the current account.
defined using the Luce-choice rule (Equation 4).
The pragmatic effects of prosody first emerge with the
The literal listener L0 interprets an utterance u p with
speaker
S1 . If this speaker knows that only Bob went to the
prosodic stress s in a manner that generalizes Equation 6:
movies, then they have a very strong preference for the listener to hear “Bob went to the movies”: if the listener acciL0 (m, o|u p , s) ∝ P(m)P(o|m) ∑ P(ui )PN (u p |ui , s) (9)
dentally hears “Alice went to the movies” she will infer that
ui :m∈Jui K
Alice went to the movies, when in fact the speaker knows that
Similarly, after perceiving utterance u p and prosody s, the listhis is false. This speaker will therefore be relatively likely to
tener Ln infers the world state and speaker’s observations by:
place prosodic stress on the word “Bob,” in order to decrease
the noise rate and ensure that the listener perceives this accuLn (m, o|u p , s) ∝ P(m)P(o|m) ∑ Sn (ui , s|o)PN (u p |ui , s) (10)
rately. In contrast, if the speaker knows that Bob went to the
ui
movies, but is uncertain about whether Alice also went, then
Results
they will be less likely to place stress on the word “Bob.” If
the listener accidentally hears “Alice went to the movies” in
We will first consider how the model derives the interpretathis case, it is still a problem for the speaker, as it will imply
tion of sentences like example 2. Assume that following the
something that the speaker does not know. However, in conquestion in that example, there are three possible meanings
trast to the previous case, Alice going to the movies is at least
that the speaker may want to communicate: Alice went to the
compatible with this speaker’s knowledge. Prosody is thus
movies alone, Bob went alone, or Alice and Bob both went.
marginally less valuable for the ignorant speaker; this effect
Assume for simplicity that at least one of them went. The
is amplified by further levels of pragmatic recursion.
speaker may, however, be ignorant about whether both Alice
Next consider the interpretation of prosody in example 5,
and Bob went. The utterances available to the speaker will be
where selective prosody exhaustifies only part of the interof the form “X went to the movies,” where X can be “Alice,”
pretation. The modeling assumptions for this case straight“Bob,” or “Alice and Bob.” The speaker can adopt one of two

186

utterance. If the listener accidentally hears “aced” instead of
“passed,” then they will believe something that the speaker
knows is false. This speaker will therefore be relatively likely
to stress “pass.” In contrast, if the speaker knows that they at
least passed, but does not know if they aced the test, then it
is not as important for the listener to correctly perceive their
utterance. As a result, the speaker with partial knowledge
will be less likely to place prosody on the scalar term. Figure
4 shows how prosody affects the interpretation and usage of
scalar items.

Probability of exhaustive interpretation of "Mary"

Interpretation of Complex Prosody
1.0

0.8

0.6

Prosody

0.4

Prosodic Stress on "Mary"
Prosodic Stress on "Bill"
0.2

No Prosodic Stress

Conclusion
0.0
2

4

Depth

6

8

We have provided a unified pragmatic account of two distinct
linguistic phenomena: the use of sentence fragments to communicate full propositions, and the use of prosody to shift the
interpretation of utterances. We have argued that both of these
phenomena result from the strategic exploitation of the possibility of noise, which emerges naturally when noisy channel
and probabilistic pragmatics models are integrated.

10

Figure 3: The probability that “John introduced Mary to Bill”
will communicate that the speaker knows that only Mary was
introduced to Bill, given different prosodic actions.

1.0

Knowledge

Prosodic Stress

Benz, A. (2012). Errors in pragmatics. Journal of Logic, Language
and Information, 21(1), 97–116.
Bergen, L., Goodman, N. D., & Levy, R. (2012). Thats what she
(could have) said: How alternative utterances affect language use.
In Proceedings of the thirty-fourth annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Breen, M., Fedorenko, E., Wagner, M., & Gibson, E. (2010). Acoustic correlates of information structure. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 25(7-9), 1044–1098.
Cover, T. M., & Thomas, J. A. (1991). Elements of information
theory. John Wiley & Sons.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic
reasoning in language games. Science, 336(6084), 998–998.
Franke, M. (2009). Signal to act: Game theory in pragmatics.
Gibson, E., Bergen, L., & Piantadosi, S. T. (2013). Rational integration of noisy evidence and prior semantic expectations in sentence
interpretation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
110(20), 8051–8056.
Goodman, N. D., Mansinghka, V. K., Roy, D. M., Bonawitz, K.,
& Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). Church: a language for generative
models. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Goodman, N. D., & Stuhlmüller, A. (2013). Knowledge and implicature: Modeling language understanding as social cognition.
Topics in cognitive science, 5(1), 173–184.
Groenendijk, J., & Stokhof, M. (1984). Studies in the semantics of
questions and the pragmatics of answers (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of Amsterdam.
Jager, G. (2010). Game-theoretical pragmatics. Handbook of logic
and language, 467.
Levy, R. (2008). A noisy-channel model of rational human sentence
comprehension under uncertain input. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp.
234–243).
Levy, R., Bicknell, K., Slattery, T., & Rayner, K. (2009). Eye movement evidence that readers maintain and act on uncertainty about
past linguistic input. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 106(50), 21086–21090.
Merchant, J. (2004). Fragments and ellipsis. Linguistics and Philosophy, 27(6), 661–738.
Stainton, R. J. (1998). Quantifier phrases, meaningfulness “in isolation”, and ellipsis. Linguistics and Philosophy, 21(3), 311–340.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An
introduction (Vol. 1) (No. 1). Cambridge Univ Press.
Von Stechow, A. (1991). Focusing and backgrounding operators.
Discourse Particles: Pragmatics & Beyond, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 37–84.

Knowledgeable

No Prosodic Stress

0.8

References

Use of Prosody for Scalar Items

Prosody

Probability of prosodic stress

Probability of exhaustive interpretation

Interpretation of Prosody
1.0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Ignorant

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
2

4

6

Depth

8

10

2

4

6

Depth

8

10

Figure 4: The left panel shows the probability that the listener will assign a strong (knowledgeability) implicature to “I
PASSED the test,” as a function of recursion depth. The right
panel shows the probability that the speaker will use prosodic
stress when they have full or partial knowledge.
forwardly extend those for the previous case. The pragmatic
effects of prosody again arise at the level of the speaker S1 .
If the speaker S1 knows that Mary was the only person who
was introduced to Bill, but is uncertain about whether Mary
was introduced to anyone else, then they will be more likely
to place prosodic stress on “Mary” than “Bill.” Conversely if
the speaker has complete knowledge of who was introduced
to Bill. As a consequence, the speaker’s choice of where
to place prosody is informative about the dimension along
which they have exhaustive knowledge, as shown in Figure 3.
Finally, we consider the model’s derivation of strong implicatures from prosodic stress, as in example 8. Suppose
that the two scalar alternatives available to the speaker are
“passed” and “aced” (where “aced” entails “passed”). If the
speaker S1 knows that they passed the test, but did not ace
it, then it is important for the listener to correctly hear their

187

