UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Interactions of Category Structure and Supervision in Category Learning: a comparative
approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1058s0j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Yim, Hyungwook
Castro, Leyre
Wasserman, Edward
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Interactions of Category Structure and Supervision in Category Learning
: a comparative approach
Hyungwook Yim (yim.31@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Leyre Castro (leyre-castroruiz@uiowa.edu)
Edward A. Wasserman (ed-wasserman@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, The University of Iowa
E11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
The current study investigated the interactions among category structure, supervision, and the ability to selectively attend
during category learning. Specifically, we compared pigeons’
with human adults’ category learning using artificial categories
to examine the role of selective attention in category learning.
Results showed that pigeons benefit more from supervision,
and unlike human adults, the benefit is stronger for sparse categories. Moreover, whereas supervision did not affect human
adults’ generalization performance, low-supervision resulted
in lower generalization for pigeons. The results were discussed
in terms of the difference in utilizing the supervisory signal,
and the ability to selectively attend to category relevant information.
Keywords: category learning; selective attention; supervision;
category structure; comparative study.

Introduction
Selective attention is one of the crucial components in category learning (Shepard, Hovland, & Jenkins, 1961). Importantly, selective attention supports efficient category learning
and generalization since it enables one to focus on categoryrelevant information while ignoring category-irrelevant information (Mackintosh, 1965). For example, when learning how
to distinguish halibuts from flounders, the shape of the tail
is a relevant dimension. Once one learns to focus on the
shape of the tail and ignore other parts of the fish, distinguishing the two fishes becomes efficient when encountering
new instances. Moreover, since selective attention undergoes
marked development due to the maturation of the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) (Diamond, 2002; Hanania & Smith, 2010), selective attention has been considered to be one of the main
factors in explaining the development of category learning
(Sloutsky, 2010).
Along with selective attention, the structure of the category is another important factor that shapes the process of
category learning. Among many, one way to view category
structure is by its density (Gentner, 1981; Kloos & Sloutsky,
2008). Specifically, Kloos & Sloutsky (2008) proposed a formal measurement for category density using entropy values.
Category density was defined by ”the ratio of variance relevant for category membership to the total variance across

members and nonmembers of the category”. Therefore, dense
categories have low within variability and high between variability, whereas sparse categories have low between variability and high within variability. For example, dogs and cats
are dense categories since they have many overlapping features within their category, but are also distinguishable from
other categories. Due to the redundancy of the category relevant information it is known that even infants are able to learn
dense categories (e.g., Quinn, Eimas, & Rosenkrantz, 1993).
On the other hand, chest x-rays of different kinds of diseases
could be considered as sparse categories. For example, it is
hard to distinguish patient who have pneumonia from those
who do not or even from patients who have other diseases.
This is due to the fact that while many x-rays look alike, only
a few features are relevant in diagnosing a certain disease.
Also, having only little category relevant information makes
category learning hard, and requires extensive training (e.g.,
Palmeri, Wong, & Gauthier, 2004).
Naturally, learning sparse categories requires selective attention, whereas dense categories could be learnable without selective attention. From this point of view, evidence
has shown that 3- to 4-month-olds do not selectively attend
to category relevant dimensions when learning dense categories (Best, Yim, & Sloutsky, 2013), and adults could learn
dense categories using distributed attention (Best, Robinson,
& Sloutsky, 2014).
Finally, supervision also interacts with the above two components during category learning, where supervision aids selective attention to find the category-relevant information.
The distinction between unsupervised and supervised learning in category learning is well recognized (Love, 2002), and
different underlying mechanisms have been also proposed
(Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004). On the other hand, the
interaction among the amount of supervision, category structure, and the ability to selectively attend is not extensively
studied. Some evidence has shown that sparse categories benefit from supervision more than dense categories (Kloos &
Sloutsky, 2008). It was argued that the use of supervisory sig-

1814

Learning
CatA

…

…

CatB

Generalization

…

…

(b)

Low
Supervision

(c)

High
Supervision

Low
Supervision

High
Supervision

Try again!

CatA

correct

…

…

CatB

SPARSE

DENSE

(a)

…

…

incorrect

correct

incorrect

incorrect

correct
Good
Job!

incorrect

correct

‘Good Job!
You are correct.’

food

food

Figure 1: Stimuli structure and experimental design used in Experiment 1 and 2. (a) Dense and sparse stimuli structure used
in the learning phase and generalization phase. (note that the red circle depicted in the sparse categories was invisible to the
subjects). (b) Experimental design in Experiment 1. (c) Experimental design in Experiment 2.

nals were mediated by selective attention and the related brain
areas such as the PFC. Therefore, sparse categories, which require selective attention, would benefit more than dense categories.
In the current study, we further investigated this view by
manipulating (1) different kinds of category structure, (2) different amount of supervision, and (3) different ability in managing selective attention during category learning, which was
achieved by cross-species comparisons. Since selective attention is closely linked to the PFC, we selected pigeons species that are known to not have a comparable PFC to humans. Therefore, the cross-species comparison will show us
the difference in the category learning due to the functionality
of the PFC (or the ability to selectively attend).

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined the benefit of supervision during category learning in human adults. The effect of category density was manipulated by stimuli (i.e., Dense/Sparse), whereas
the amount of supervision was manipulated through the learning procedure (i.e., High-supervised/Low-supervised).

Methods
Subjects Ninety six undergraduate students at The Ohio
State University participated for course credit (56 females,
M = 19.63 years, SD = 2.00). Each participant was randomly
assigned to one of the four conditions, resulting in 24 subjects for each condition. Two additional participants from the
Low-supervised Dense condition was excluded due to not understanding the instructions correctly.
Materials Flower-like artificial categories were used in the
experiment (see Figure 1a). For the learning phase, there
were two sets of categories (i.e., Category A, and Category
B) for each density condition (i.e., Dense, and Sparse). Each
exemplar had a gray hexagon in the middle with six colored
shapes on every side. For Dense categories three out of six
changed their color and shape, whereas three were constant in
their shape, color, and location, which served as category rel-

evant dimensions. For example, Category A in the Dense condition had three pink triangles that where constant throughout the exemplars, whereas Category B had three blue semicircles in the same location. For Sparse categories, five out of
six dimensions changed their color and shape, whereas one
was constant. For example, one category in the Sparse condition (i.e., Category A) had a pink triangle whereas another
category (i.e., Category B) had a blue semi-circle. Stimuli for
the generalization phase were identical to that of the learning
phase. However, irrelevant dimensions changed their shape
and color from the learning phase. Each category set in the
learning and generalization phase had 18 unique exemplars.
Procedure The subjects were told that they are going to
play a game where a star is hidden under the tree or the rocks.
They were also told that the location of the star will depend
on the artificial flower that will be presented in the middle of
the screen, and that they should look at the flower carefully
to find the star. There were 12 blocks, where each block contained 12 learning trials. Among the 12 trials, half contained
exemplars from Category A, and the other 6 trials contained
exemplars from Category B. The exemplars were presented
in a random order.
On each trial, an exemplar was presented on the top center
of the computer screen, and a picture of a tree and a rock
was each presented on the bottom left and right side of the
screen, which was randomized by subject (see Figure 2b).
On every trial, subjects used the mouse to click on the picture
of a tree or rock to indicate their decision about where the
star is hidden. In the Low-supervised condition, when the
subject made a decision, the star appeared on the correct side,
which was counterbalanced for Category A and B for each
subject, for 2000 msec regardless of their response accuracy.
Also a ”Good Job!” phrase was simultaneously presented on
the bottom of the screen. In the High-supervised condition,
the star was only presented when the subject made a correct
response. If the subject made an incorrect response, a ”Try
again!” phrase was presented on the center of the screen for
2000 msec, and the subjects saw the same exemplar again.

1815

Dense

Sparse

Trials to Criterion (TTC)

.75
.5
.25
0

HighSuper
LowSuper

Dense

Sparse

Figure 2: Results from Experiment 1 with humans. (a) Trialsto-criterion, and (b) generalization accuracy. (error bars represent +/- 1 SEM)

We first classified learners and non-learners by setting a criterion of .85 accuracy in a block. Within 12 blocks, subjects
who reached .85 accuracy and showed an asymptotic performance after reaching the criterion were considered as learners. Overall, there were more learners in the Dense conditions, and in the High-supervised conditions (see Table 1).
A binary logistic regression with Supervision and Density as
covariates show that there was a statistically significant effect
for Supervision (Wald = 7.76, p < .005), and Density (Wald
= 5.77, p < .05). The non-learners were excluded from all
following analysis.
Table 1: Proportion of learners in Experiment 1.
High-Supervised
Low-Supervised

30
0

Results

Dense Category
1.0
.87

60

(b) 1.0

HighSuper
LowSuper

Generalization Accuracy

(a) 90

When a subject had more than 10 trials correct in a block
(i.e., 83% accuracy), a generalization phase with 6 trials was
introduced before proceeding to the next block. The generalization trials were identical to the learning trials except:
(1) stimuli from the generalization set were used, and (2)
a blank screen was presented for 2000 msec after the subject’s responses, which prevented subjects from getting any
direct feedback. The experiment was terminated for each subject either when the subject responded to all 12 blocks, or
when the subject’s responses were perfect for 2 consecutive
blocks. The experiments were written in MatLab, using Psychophysics Toolbox extensions (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997).

Sparse Category
.83
.67

Trials-to-criterion (TTC) was calculated by counting the
number of trials to reach the criterion (.85) for each subject. The High-supervised Dense condition showed the fastest
learning (M = 22.50, SD = .99), followed by the Lowsupervised Dense condition (M = 34.80, SD = 2.49), Highsupervised Sparse condition (M = 47.43, SD = 1.94), and
the Low-supervised Sparse condition (M = 75.43, SD = 2.70)
(see Figure 2a). The TTC data was submitted to a 2 × 2
(Supervision × Density) between-subjects ANOVA. Results
showed a statistically significant main effect of Supervision
(F = 12.94, p < .001), and Density (F = 34.24, p < .001), but
no interaction (F = 1.96, p = .17). By comparing the ratio
of the High-supervised condition to the Low-supervised condition, the benefit of supervision could be calculated for the
Dense and Sparse conditions. The calculations showed that
the Sparse condition benefited slightly more (1.59 = 75.43 trials / 47.43 trials) than the Dense condition (1.54 = 34.8 trials
/ 22.5 trials).
Finally, generalization trials were analyzed. The average
of the first 2 generalization trials after each subject reached
the criterion (.85) was used in the analysis. The two Dense
conditions showed similar accuracy on the generalization trials with both conditions having an average of .97 (High-

supervised, SD = .12; Low-supervised, SD = .07). The Highsupervised Sparse condition (M = .81, SD = .18) was slightly
less accurate than the Low-supervised Sparse condition (M =
.89, SD = .18). Conducting a 2 × 2 (Supervision × Density)
between-subject ANOVA showed that there was a statistically
significant main effect for Density (F = 12.86, p < .001), but
not for Supervision (F = 1.46, p = .23) or interaction (F =
1.63, p = .21).
In sum, results from the number of learners, and TTC
showed that Dense conditions are overall easier than Sparse
conditions, and that supervision aided learning in both conditions. However, there was no significant interaction between
category structure and the amount of supervision. That is, the
benefit of supervision did not significantly differ across different densities. Moreover, generalization was only affected
by density and not by the amount of supervision.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, pigeons were introduced to compare the effect of the ability to selectively attend during category learning. The manipulation of the two other factors (i.e., category
density, and amount of supervision) was similar to Experiment 1.

Subjects
The subjects were 16 feral pigeons maintained at 85% of their
free-feeding weights by controlled daily feedings. The pigeons were randomly assigned into one of the conditions,
resulting in 4 pigeons for each condition. The pigeons had
served in unrelated studies prior to the present project.

Materials
The experiment used four 36 × 36 × 41 cm operant conditioning chambers detailed by Gibson et al. (2004). The
chambers were located in a dark room with continuous white
noise. Each chamber was equipped with a 15-in LCD monitor located behind an AccuTouch resistive touchscreen (Elo
TouchSystems, Fremont, CA). The portion of the screen that
was viewable by the pigeons was 28.5 cm × 17 cm. Pecks to
the touchscreen were processed by a serial controller board

1816

Trials to Criterion (TTC)

7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

(b) 1.0

HighSuper
LowSuper

Dense

Generalization Accuracy

(a)8000

outside the box. A rotary dispenser delivered 45-mg pigeon
pellets through a vinyl tube into a food cup located in the
center of the rear wall opposite the touchscreen. Illumination
during the experimental sessions was provided by a houselight mounted on the upper rear wall of the chamber. The
pellet dispenser and houselight were controlled by a digital
I/O interface board. Each chamber was controlled by a personal computer, and the experiments were developed in MatLab. The category exemplars used in the experiment were
identical to those used in Experiment 1.

Sparse

.75
.5
.25
0

HighSuper
LowSuper

Dense

Sparse

Figure 3: Results from Experiment 2 with pigeons. (a) Trialsto-criterion, and (b) generalization accuracy. (error bars represent +/- 1 SEM)

Procedure
The learning phase consisted of 144 trials each day. Among
the 144 trials half contained exemplars from Category A, and
the other half contained exemplars from Category B. On each
trial, two identical exemplars were presented on the right and
left side of the computer screen (see Figure 2c). In the Lowsupervised condition, after five responses to either of these
two images, a target stimulus (i.e., black concentric rings on
a white background) was presented on the correct side of the
screen, where the correct side for Category A and Category B
was counterbalanced among subjects. After one response to
this target stimulus, food reward was delivered. Completing
the sequence of category exemplars-target stimulus always
ended with food reinforcement, regardless of the specific side
that the pigeons chose when the exemplars were presented.
Inter-trial intervals were 5000 msec in duration. The Highsupervised condition was very similar to the unsupervised
procedure. However, the five responses to the category exemplars must be on the correct side for the target stimulus
to be presented. If the last peck was on the wrong side, the
screen would go black for 1000 msec and the category exemplars were presented again. The pigeons had to complete
the 5-pecks response requirement again until the correct response was made. Responses from the correction trials were
not analyzed. When a bird reached a learning criterion of .85,
generalization phase was introduced the next day for 4 days.
The generalization phase consisted of 162 trials a day
which included 144 training trials and 18 testing trials randomly intermixed. The trials presented the generalization
stimuli; on these trials, no correction procedure was given (to
avoid teaching the birds the correct response) so that pigeons’
choices were always reinforced, regardless of the pigeons being in the Low- or High-supervised conditions.

2992.32) (see Figure 3). The TTC data was submitted to a 2 ×
2 (Supervision × Density) between-subject ANOVA. Results
showed a statistically significant main effect of Supervision
(F = 15.46, p < .005), Density (F = 6.16, p < .05), and a
marginal interaction (F = 4.36, p = .061). The benefit of supervision was also calculated as in Experiment 1. The benefit
in the Dense condition was 6.38 (= 1836 trials / 288 trials),
and 9.25 (= 5664 trials / 612 trials) in the Sparse condition,
which indicated a greater benefit in the Sparse condition.
In the generalization trials, the High-supervised Dense
condition showed the highest accuracy (M = .94, SD = .03)
followed by the Low-supervised Dense condition (M = .88,
SD = .17), High-supervised Sparse condition (M = .85, SD =
.09), and the Low-supervised Sparse condition (M = .67, SD
= .13). A 2 × 2 (Supervision × Density) between-subjects
ANOVA showed a statistically significant main effect of Density (F = 14.03, p < .005) and Supervision (F = 9.14, p <
.01), but no interaction (F = 2.19, p = .17). Interestingly, the
Low-supervised Sparse condition did not show above chance
performance (t = 2.54, p = .13).
Based on the TTC results, pigeons showed a greater benefit from supervision in learning the categories than adults.
Moreover, pigeons benefited more in the Sparse condition
than the adults. Interestingly, supervision also interacted in
the generalization phase unlike human adults - lower supervision was accompanied by worse generalization. This generalization difference between humans and pigeons is further
investigated in the next section using a simulation approach.

ALCOVE simulation

Results
One bird in the Low-supervised sparse condition was excluded from all analysis due to not reaching the learning criterion after 76 days (10944 trials). Trials-to-criterion (TTC)
was calculated by counting the number of trials to reach the
criterion (.85) for each subject. Overall, birds in the Dense
conditions learned the categories faster (M = 1062.00, SD =
1378.92) than those in the Sparse conditions (M = 2777.14,
SD = 3262.29), and birds in the High-supervised conditions
learned the categories faster (M = 450.00, SD = 179.48) than
those in the Low-supervised conditions (M = 3476.57, SD =

In this section we further investigate the mechanism underlying the generalization difference between the two species.
When comparing the two species regarding generalization,
pigeons needed more learning trials to reach the criterion (i.e.,
.85) while showing less accuracy in generalization. This is
particularly noticeable in the Low-supervised Sparse condition where pigeons showed chance level generalization. The
results could be explained by the difference in the ability to
selectively attend between pigeons and humans. If humans
have a better ability to selectively attend to category relevant

1817

General Discussion
The current study investigated the interactions among category density, supervision, and the ability to selectively attend
during category learning. Especially, we compared pigeons
with human adults to examine the effect of the ability to selectively attend to relevant dimensions during category learning. Overall, results showed that learning was faster in the

λα = 1

λα = 1e-2

λα = 1e-4

λα = 1e-5

Generalization
Accuracy

TTC

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1
.75
.5
.25
0
1
.75
.5
.25
0 1 2 3 4 5 6

Attention
activation

information, it would take less time to learn the category, and
would be easier to apply it to new instances since one would
only need to pin point the relevant information while ignoring
irrelevant information. On the other hand, if selective attention is less functional, category learning would have to rely on
rote memory. Therefore when encountering new instances,
generalization would rely on the overall similarity between
the learned (or memorized) exemplars and the new instances.
We could easily simulate this account by utilizing computational models in category learning. Here we used ALCOVE
(Kruschke, 1992) to identify the contribution of selective attention, and memory to category learning.
ALCOVE is an exemplar based network model that represents the exemplars on a multidimensional space, and incorporates attentional learning. Compared to other exemplar
based category learning models, it is able to simulate learning trajectories (c.f., Nosofsky, 1986), and simple in that it
only deals with supervised learning (c.f., Love, Medin, &
Gureckis, 2004), which is suitable to our data. However, any
exemplar based category learning model that incorporates selective attention would be able to simulate the same results.
We took a simulation approach where we changed λα (attention weight learning rate) systematically while fixing all
other parameters. The λα controls how well the model is able
to shift attention throughout learning, and has been an useful parameter to explaining various category learning studies
(e.g., Nosofsky & Kruschke, 2002). The simulation used the
sparse categories used in the study, and the λα was decreased
from 1 to 1e-5 while other free parameters were fixed (i.e., λw
= .01, c = .5, φ = 4.5). The model learned the exemplars until
it reached the learning criterion (.85), and was tested on the
generalization stimuli without learning.
Results are shown in Figure 4. The first row shows trials
to criterion (TTC) as λα decreases. As attentional flexibility decreased learning slowed down. The second row shows
generalization accuracy as λα decreased. It shows that even
though more learning was required under low λα , generalization accuracy decreased. The third row shows how attention
was deployed in the model, where dimension 1 is the relevant
dimension in the sparse category (note that there was only
one relevant dimension in the sparse category). It shows that
the model learned to attend to the relevant dimension when
λα was high, whereas attention was diffused across all dimensions when λα was low. In sum, simulation results using
ALCOVE were consistent with our argument where the difference in the ability to selectively attend affected both TTC
and generalization accuracy.

Dimension

1 2 3 4 5 6

Dimension

1 2 3 4 5 6

Dimension

1 2 3 4 5 6

Dimension

Figure 4: ALCOVE simulation results. The first column (λα
= 1) resembles the performance of human adults whereas the
fourth column (λα = 1e-5) resembles the performance of pigeons. All parameters where fixed where only the λα parameter (attention weight learning rate) was systematically
changed (see text for details). The top row in each subplot
represents TTC where the criterion was .85, the middle row
represents accuracy in the generalization trials, and the bottom row represents attention weights where the first value on
the x-axis represents the attention weight for the relevant dimension.

Dense condition than in the Sparse condition, and pigeons
required more trials to learn the categories than adults. Interesting findings were that only density but not supervision affected generalization for human adults, whereas both factors
affected generalization for pigeons. Moreover, adults did not
have any difference in the benefit of supervision between the
Dense and Sparse conditions, whereas pigeons had a greater
benefit in the Sparse condition.
First, pigeons’ greater benefit in the Sparse condition is
worth noting. We had hypothesized that since pigeons do not
have a PFC as humans do, pigeons’ ability to focus on the
relevant dimension (i.e., selective attention) would not benefit from the supervisory signal. There could be two possible explanations of the results. One is that pigeons do
have a brain structure subserving selective attention (Shimizu,
2009). Therefore, the supervisory signal may aid the pigeons
with focusing on the relevant dimension during learning. Another possibility is that the supervisory signal helps pigeons to
learn the contingency between the studied exemplars and the
response action (i.e., the location of pecking). In this case, pigeons would benefit from supervision during category learning without any involvement of selective attention. The two
explanations are both possible, and further research would be
required. Especially, the later possibility could be tested by

1818

conducting a latent learning paradigm (e.g., Tolman, 1948),
where pure category learning could be decomposed from contingency learning.
Second, it was interesting that pigeons needed more learning trials to reach the learning criterion (i.e., .85) while showing less accuracy in generalization. We used ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992) to argue that this could be due to the difference
in the ability to selectively attend to category relevant information. The simulation results are also consistent with previous eye-tracking studies where infants learned categories
with diffused attention whereas adults showed evidence of
selective attention (Best, Yim, & Sloutsky, 2013). The two
studies together imply that with higher functionality of the
PFC, selective attention becomes more flexible during category learning. Moreover, with flexible selective attention category learning becomes easier, and more generalizable. This
fact is particularly interesting regarding the development of
category learning, since the ability to control selective attention (or the maturation of PFC) could explain the development of the speed and flexibility of category learning.
Finally, the amount of supervision between the two groups
should be further investigated. Regarding the TTC results,
human adults had less benefit than the pigeons. Though
the results could directly indicate performance difference between the two species, it is possible that the amount of supervision between the Low-supervised and High-supervised
conditions were different between the two groups. For example, it is possible that for human adults, the Low-supervised
condition provided enough supervision, whereas for pigeons
the amount of supervision in the High-supervised condition
was tantamount to that. Future research would be required
to investigate the comparable amount of supervision between
adults and pigeons.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a National Science Foundation (NSF) grant (BCS-0720135) to Vladimir Sloutsky. We
would like to thank John Opfer, and Keith Apfelbaum for
their helpful comments.

References
Best, C. A., Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2014). Attention optimization in the course of category learning.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Best, C. A., Yim, H., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2013). The cost of
selective attention in category learning: Developmental
differences between adults and infants. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 116(2), 105–119.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10(4), 433–436.
Diamond, A. (2002). Normal development of prefrontal cortex from birth to young adulthood: Cognitive functions,
anatomy, and biochemistry. In D. Stuss, & R. Knight
(Eds.) Principles of frontal lobe function, (pp. 466–503).
London, UK: Oxford University Press.

Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
verbs and nouns. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161–
178.
Gibson, B. M., Wasserman, E. A., Frei, L., & Miller, K.
(2004). Recent advances in operant conditioning technology: a versatile and affordable computerized touchscreen system. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36(2), 355–62.
Hanania, R., & Smith, L. B. (2010). Selective attention and
attention switching: towards a unified developmental approach. Developmental Science, 13(4), 622–635.
Kloos, H., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2008). What’s Behind Different Kinds of Kinds: Effects of Statistical Density on
Learning and Representation of Categories. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 137(1), 52–72.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An Exemplar-Based Connectionist Model of Category Learning. Psychological
Review, 99(1), 22–44.
Love, B. C. (2002). Comparing supervised and unsupervised
category learning. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 9(4),
829–835.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004). SUSTAIN: a network model of category learning. Psychological review, 111(2), 309–32.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1965). Selective Attention in Animal
Discrimination Learning. Psychological Bulletin, 64(2),
124–150.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, Similarity, and the
Identification-Categorization Relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115(1), 39–57.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Kruschke, J. K. (2002). Single-system
models and interference in category learning: Commentary on Waldron and Ashby (2001). Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(1), 169–174.
Palmeri, T. J., Wong, A. C.-N., & Gauthier, I. (2004). Computational approaches to the development of perceptual
expertise. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(8), 378–86.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: transforming numbers into movies. Spatial Vision, 10(4), 437–442.
Quinn, P. C., Eimas, P. D., & Rosenkrantz, S. L. (1993). Evidence for representations of perceptually similar natural
categories by 3-month-old and 4-month-old infants. Perception, 22(4), 463–75.
Shepard, R. N., Hovland, C. I., & Jenkins, H. M. (1961).
Learning and memorization of classifications. Psychological Monographs, 75(13), 1–41.
Shimizu, T. (2009). Why can birds be so smart? Background,
significance, and implications of the revised view of the
avian brain. Comparative Cognition & Behavior Reviews, 4, 103–115.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2010). From perceptual categories to concepts: What develops? Cognitive Science, 34, 1244–86.
Tolman, E. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychological Review, 55, 189–208.

1819

