UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Immediate Accuracy Feedback in a Multiple-Target Visual Search Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6348d3gg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Attar, Nada
Wu, Chia-Chien
Pomplun, Marc

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Immediate Accuracy Feedback in a Multiple-Target Visual Search
Task
Nada Attar (nattar@cs.umb.edu)
Chia-Chien Wu (chiachie@cs.umb.edu)
Marc Pomplun (marc@cs.umb.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts at Boston
100 Morrissey Boulevard, Boston, MA 02125-3393, USA

Abstract
Visual search is one of the most common behaviors in daily life.
Studies of visual search, however, have mainly focused on how
visual properties of stimuli affect search efficiency. The current
study examined the effects of immediate auditory feedback for
each selection during a multiple-target visual search task. In a
feedback condition, one of two different sounds was played,
indicating whether the subject had reported a correct detection, i.e.,
was fixating a target. In the neutral sound condition, subjects
always received the same sound, regardless of whether they had
visually selected a target or a distractor. We analyzed overall
performance measures such as trial duration and the proportion of
correct target detections and correctly completed trials.
Furthermore, we analyzed pupil size as a measure of cognitive
effort. The results show that pupil dilation was greater and search
accuracy was better when subjects were given feedback than when
they only received a neutral sound. In summary, the present study
demonstrates that immediate feedback may increase cognitive
effort, leading to more accurate task performance, with
enhancement of specific components of search behavior.
Keywords: Attention; visual search; eye movements; pupil
dilation; auditory feedback.

Introduction
Visual search is arguably the most common task in our daily
life. It has therefore received substantial research interest,
with a focus on the factors that may affect the search
performance. In a typical visual search task, participants are
asked to report if a visually distinctive target is present
among a set of distractors in a given scene. The gauge for
the task difficulty is the accuracy and the “search slope”,
i.e., the slope of the response time (RT) that typically
increases linearly with greater search set size. Wolfe (1998)
used the term “search efficiency” as a term describing how
search for a target can be influenced by distractors being
added to the visual search display. Most studies of visual
search have varied either the visual features of the stimuli or
the prior experience participants bring to the task. For
example, Duncan and Humphreys (1989) manipulated the
similarity between targets and distractors in their study, and
Cohen and Ivry (1991) used the density of objects to vary
the search difficulty instead. Variation in previous
knowledge included experiments in which the features (i.e.,
color or shape) of the target and distractors were maintained
from trial to trial and then were reversed unpredictably
(Bravo & Nakayama, 1992).

Another way of influencing visual search performance is
the presentation of feedback to the subject. Feedback was
used in many previous studies after each trial only to
indicate if the trial has been passed or failed (see Bravo &
Nakayama, 1992; Donnelly et al., 2007; Giesbrecht, Sy, &
Guerin, 2013). Such “between trials reinforcement” rarely
occurs in the real world. That is, during natural viewing,
observers typically bring their line of sight to the location of
an expected search target. If the fixated object is consistent
with their initial expectation, observers will keep the same
viewing strategy. Otherwise, the search strategy has to be
modified. These confirming and modifying processes based
on the instant feedback seem to be commonly used in our
search performance. The role of feedback on this sequential
search behavior, however, is not well understood.
Some prior studies have found that receiving feedback
can facilitate search performance. Chun and Wolfe (1996)
suggested that viewers use feedback to set their decision
criterion in visual search tasks. This feedback can either be
implicit (the viewers already know they were correct
because they were able to identify the target) or explicit (the
viewers are told whether they were correct or incorrect).
Wolfe et al. (2007) showed that explicit feedback can have
an impact on tasks with low target prevalence, i.e., tasks in
which targets appear infrequently and typically yield high
proportions of missed targets. Schwark, Sandry,
MacDonald, and Dolgov (2012) examined the effect of false
feedback on finding targets in a visual search task. They
controlled participants' perceived number of misses through
explicitly misleading feedback. In the false-feedback
condition, participants were falsely informed that they had
missed a target even though they had indicated “target
absent” correctly. Their result indicated that participants
committed a higher number of false alarms due to a shifted
criterion but they were able to find low prevalence targets
more successfully. Though these studies have shown that
feedback can change searchers’ decision criterion and
thereby affect search performance, they only used feedback
after each trial. As noted above, however, in natural viewing
we rarely receive feedback after search performance is
terminated. In fact, we normally receive visual feedback on
each fixation. This within-trial based feedback has been
neglected in most studies.
Finally, it is also important to note that sound can affect
search performance. Only very few studies investigated the
effect of the sound presented during visual search.

1868

Iordanescu and Grabwecky (2008) demonstrated that
characteristic sounds facilitated visual localization of
objects. For example, their experiment showed that finding
an animal’s picture was easier when the sound of the animal
was played during scene presentation. In addition, sound did
not help find the animal’s written name. Other studies
showed that search performance was improved when a
sound was presented at the location of a visual target in a
simultaneous manner (e.g., Bolognini, Frassinetti, Serino, &
Làdavas, 2005; Frassinetti et al., 2002; Stein, Meredith,
Huneycutt, & McDade, 1989). These studies examined the
auditory-visual interactions during visual search but did not
answer the question on how online auditory feedback during
visual selection can help ongoing visual search. Auditory
presentation of such feedback would be most appropriate as
it does not directly interfere with the visual task.
Our study used auditory feedback during visual search
and examined its effect on overall search accuracy. To
investigate how the instant feedback may affect the
sequential search performance, subjects were asked to
search for multiple targets among a set of distractors and
make a response by key press whenever they found a target.
Different types of auditory feedback were given after the
response to indicate whether they made a correct detection.
To balance any prolonged time or any difference in
oculomotor response due to the key press, a control
condition was run in which only a neutral sound was given
regardless of whether subjects made a correct response or
not. By using the auditory signal as an online feedback
during the sequential search, we may be able to dissociate
the dual visual processes (i.e., confirming the currently
fixated object and planning where to go next) within a
single fixation. If online feedback does play a role in
determining sequential search performance, we should see
the difference in either search efficiency or any eye
movement variables. After each trial in either condition,
participants notified with a feedback sound if the trial has
been passed or failed. This between trials feedback was
given to avoid the uncertainty in the blocks with the neutral
feedback vs. the blocks with the auditory feedback.
In visual search tasks, attention has been known to
contribute to performance (Helmholtz, 1968). Moreover,
Palmer, Ames, and Lindsey (1993) measured the effect of
attention on simple visual search by testing experimental
models using different set sizes. They found that attention
affects the decision process but not the perceptual process.
A useful tool to measure the attentional and most
behavioral activities during visual search is pupillometry.
Using this measurement technique allows the study of
moment-to-moment deployment strategies during visual
search and monitor cognitive load during the course of a
search process even when feedback is involved. For
example, Hess and Polt (1964) studied the pupillary
response of people engaged in performing mental arithmetic
problems of increasing complexity. They found that the
level of presentation of the problem correlated positively
with pupil diameter (see also Ahern & Beatty, 1979).

Pupillary dilation appears to be a function of the cognitive
effort and attention required when individuals perform a
visual task (see Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007) and it
specifically reflects the cognitive effort required to perform
in complex visual tasks (Verney, Granholm, & Marshall,
2004). By testing any difference of timing and pupil size
across the two feedback conditions, we hope to clarify the
role of online feedback in our daily visual performance.

Method
Subjects
Eleven subjects, aged between 19-32 years old, were tested.
All had normal or corrected to normal vision and were naïve
as to the purpose of the study. Each subject received a $10
honorarium.

Apparatus
Eye movements were tracked and recorded using an SR
Research EyeLink-2k system. Its sampling frequency was
set to 1000 Hz. Stimuli were presented on a 22-inch
ViewSonic LCD monitor. Its refresh rate was set to 75 Hz
and its resolution was set to 1024 x 768 pixels. Participant
responses were entered using a keyboard.

Stimulus display
A total of 120 displays (1024 x 768 pixels) were generated
by a MATLAB script. Each display was composed of 32
Gabor patches (27 distractors and 5 targets) pasted on a gray
background, each with a radius of 1 degree. The distractors
were oriented randomly other than vertically or horizontally
and the targets were oriented vertically or horizontally. The
orientations of targets in the same trial were identical. To
make sure that the objects did not overlap, we set a
minimum distance of approximately 3 degrees between the
centers of any two Gabor patches. A sample stimulus is
shown in Figure 1.
The target orientation (horizontal or vertical) was
randomly selected for each trial. To investigate the effect of
instant auditory feedback on search performance, two
feedback conditions were tested: One was an auditory
feedback condition in which two types of sounds were used
to indicate whether the response subjects made (about
finding an individual target) was correct or not. The other
was a control condition in which subjects always received
an identical sound whenever they made a response. Subjects
performed 10 trials per block and 6 blocks in each condition
(1 for practice and 5 for the real test), and both conditions
were presented in an alternating order.

1869

Experimental Results and Discussion
Search Performance
Reaction time. We analyzed the reaction times (RTs) that
were measured from the onset of the image display to the
space bar response that participants used to indicate task
completion, i.e., having found all five targets. The average
RT in the auditory feedback condition was 13.05 s, which
was slightly, but significantly longer than in the neutral
sound condition (12.53 s), t(10) = 2.37, p = 0.039.
Overall Accuracy. Search accuracy was measured by the
proportion of correct trials, in which all five targets were
found. Overall search accuracy for participants in the
auditory feedback condition was 79.5%, while they only
achieved 67.7% in the neutral sound condition, t(10) = 3.52,
p < .05.

Figure 1. Sample trial and target items for a search task that
produces sound as a feedback signal for each target
selection during the search.

Eye Movements

Procedure
An instruction screen was shown before each block to
inform participants about the type of the feedback condition.
Each image display was only presented once to each
subject, either in the auditory feedback condition or in the
neutral sound condition.
Before the actual experiment, subjects had one block of
practice in each condition. During each trial, subjects were
instructed to search for the five targets and press the ‘x’ key
on the keyboard when they fixated on the target. After they
heard a sound (either feedback or neutral sound), they were
to continue searching for the next target in the display. The
next trial would begin once subjects pressed the space bar to
indicate that they found all targets or the stimulus had been
shown for 15 seconds (timeout).

The most essential question in the current study is whether
and how the online instant feedback can affect search
performance. In order to examine how auditory feedback
can help visual search, we compared the time interval
between two consecutive correct responses in both
conditions, that is, how long it took to find the next target
once a correct response was made. The probability of two
consecutive target responses with each correctly reporting a
target was above 90% for both conditions. Figure 2 shows
that the average search duration between two hits (correct
detection) was 250 ms faster in the auditory feedback (2.02
sec) than in the neutral sound condition (2.27 sec) across all
participants, t(10) = 3.46; p < .05.

Data Analysis
Our analysis only included the correct trials in which
participants found the five targets. This was decided because
trials with responses within less than five targets might add
noise to the analysis.
The responses were identified as either a hit or a miss
based on the eye fixation made during the button press.
Participants were trained to look at the item that they
identified as a target while they pressed the key on the
keyboard. Some fixations landed on the blank area rather
than on any search item. When this happened, we assumed
this fixation to be aimed at the nearest item, i.e., the one
whose center had the shortest Euclidean distance to the
current fixation location. If the Euclidean distance was
greater than a threshold which was set to 3.8 degrees, the
fixation was not assigned to any of the items. In addition, a
target response was considered a hit if subjects fixated on
the target while making a response on the keyboard. A miss
was counted if a selected item had already been previously
selected during the same trial (a revisit), or the fixation
during the response was on a distractor.

Figure 2. Search duration between two correct target
responses. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean.
This result suggests that auditory feedback facilitates
search performance and helps subjects find the next target
faster. Note that the time we measured here was between
two correct detections as reported by key press and did not
consider the duration for each fixation on the target. Thus,
it is likely that the greater search efficiency in the feedback
condition we found (see Fig. 2) was not due to the longer
pause duration before key press. To examine this possible

1870

confound, we compared the gaze duration on a target when
subjects made a response between both conditions. The
results show that the average gaze duration when fixating on
a target while making a response was similar between the
two conditions. The average gaze duration for all
participants was 700 ms for auditory feedback and 680 ms
for the neutral sound, which was not a statistically
significant difference, t(10) = 1.02, p > 0.1. This implies
that the better search efficiency we found (see Fig. 2) was
not due to the longer planning time but some other cognitive
factors.
Since the better performance evidently did not result from
the longer fixation duration on target items, it is possible
that subjects may have devoted more attentional resources
to the search process when they received positive feedback
during the search. To test this hypothesis, we compared the
pupil size to investigate whether different cognitive effort
was devoted depending on the feedback condition during
the continuous visual search. For this purpose, the mean
pupil size (in pixels in the camera image) was computed
during each trial.
Figure 3 shows that pupil dilation was greater in the
feedback condition than in the control condition, t(10) =
6.59, p < .05. This finding suggests that subjects did spend
more effort on search when they received feedback than
when they received neutral sound.

Figure 4. Mean pupil dilation per each correct response
interval during the search task. Error bars indicate standard
error of the mean.
Paired-sample t-tests were conducted to analyze the
difference in mean pupil size for each individual search
interval. This difference in pupil size between the two
conditions was significant starting at the search for the third
target until the fifth target, all ts(10) = 2.77, ps < .05. It thus
seems that the effect of the auditory feedback was not
present before detecting the first target, i.e., before receiving
the first feedback signal. Due to the delay of the cognitive
pupil response, only after detecting the second target,
subjects showed a significant pupillary response to the
auditory feedback, having a significantly greater pupil size
in the auditory feedback condition.

Conclusions

Figure 3. Mean pupil dilation for each of the experimental
conditions. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean.
In order to further investigate how the cognitive resources
were distributed throughout the search process, we
examined the participants’ pupil size when they performed
the search task during their search for each individual target.
For example, we measured the mean pupil size from the
start of the trial to the first target detection response. Then,
we measured the mean pupil size from the search that began
after the first hit to the next hit (for the second target), and
so on, until the fifth target. The average pupil size was
taken, and its mean across subjects is shown in Figure 4.

The goal of the present study was to investigate how instant
feedback during a sequential search task could affect search
performance by using moment-to-moment auditory
feedback during the search rather than only providing the
feedback after each trial. The link between cognitive load
and search efficiency had been the subject of several
previous studies (e.g., Schwark, Sandry, MacDonald, &
Dolgov, 2012). Our study yielded novel insight by using
immediate, auditory feedback. Similar to the prior studies,
we also used pupil size as the main measure to test how
cognitive load may vary during search.
Our results show that providing online instant feedback
during the sequential search task improved the search
performance and helped subjects find the next target faster.
Interestingly, this increase in search efficiency was not due
to the longer pause duration associated with target responses
as suggested by other studies on visual selection, in which
the longer planning time could result in a better target
selection (Cohen et al., 2007; Wu & Kowler, 2013). Instead,
the better performance was likely due to the greater
cognitive effort. That is, when the feedback was provided,
the pupillary dilation increased, indicating that more
attentional resources may have been devoted than when
only neutral sound was provided in the control condition.
In addition, when the pupil size data were categorized for
each individual target search interval (Fig. 4), the difference

1871

between the two conditions became even more prominent.
In the early stage of search, both conditions may have
involved similar amounts of attentional resources so that
there was no difference in the pupil size while searching for
the first two targets found. However, after the second target
was found, more attentional resources seemed to be used in
the feedback condition than in the control condition.
Moreover, the amount of attentional resources devoted on
each target was not uniform. The increase in pupil size in
the feedback condition can also imply the more pronounced
use of working memory in the planning of the sequential
search task.
It is possible that in the feedback condition, subjects tried
to focus more strongly and spent more time correcting their
mistake whenever a false alarm occurred, and this may
require slightly more time to complete the trial. Note that we
do not claim that once more cognitive effort was devoted,
the search process would be facilitated by improving the
selection for the next saccade. That is, it is unlikely that the
sensitivity of subjects’ peripheral vision could be enhanced
by the correct feedback to help localize the target, since the
Gabor patches used in the current study were too small to be
distinguished without directly fixating it. Nevertheless, the
feedback may enhance other visual processes. To
understand which factors contribute to this improvement of
search efficiency, further studies are needed.
In summary, the present study demonstrates that
immediate auditory feedback leads to more accurate but
overall slightly slower search, with enhancement of specific
components of search behavior. The increased effort
observed in the feedback condition might have mediated the
accuracy effect, but further work is required to make this
causal connection.
Our technique was able to improve the cognitive
engagement as suggested by the greater effort being devoted
to the search task, even though the fixation time on the
items in both conditions was similar.

Acknowledgments
Part of the study was supported by Grant R01 EY021802
from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to Marc
Pomplun. We would like to thank the Saudi Arabian
Cultural Mission - Ministry of Higher Education for
supporting the first author with a Ph.D. scholarship awarded
to her.

References
Ahern, S., & Beatty, J. (1979). Pupillary responses during
information processing vary with scholastic aptitude test
scores. Science, 205, 1289–1292.
Bolognini, N., Frassinetti, F., Serino, A., & Làdavas, E.
(2005) .Acoustical vision” of below threshold stimuli:
Interaction among spatially converging audiovisual
inputs. Experimental Brain Research. 160:273–282.
Bravo, M., & Nakayama, K. (1992). The role of attention in
different visual search tasks. Perception and
Psychophysics, 51, 465-472.

Chun, M. M. & Wolfe, J. M. (1996). Just say no: How are
visual searches terminated when there is no target
present? Cognitive Psychology, 30, 39-78.
Cohen, A., & Ivry, R. B. (1991). Density effects in
conjunction search: Evidence for coarse location
mechanism of feature integration. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 17, 891-901.
Cohen, E. H., Schnitzer, B. S., Gersch, T.M., Singh, M., &
Kowler, E. (2007). The relationship between spatial
pooling and attention in saccadic and perceptual tasks.
Vision Research, 47(14), 1907–1923.
Donnelly, N., Cave, K., Greenway, R., Hadwin, J. A.,
Stevenson, J., & SonugaBarke, E. (2007). Visual search
in children and adults: top-down and bottom-up
mechanisms. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60, (1), 120-136.
Duncan, J., & Humphreys, G. W. (1989). Visual search and
stimulus similarity. Psychological Review, 96, 433-458.
Frassinetti, F., Bolognini, N., & Làdavas, E. (2002)
Enhancement of visual perception by crossmodal visuoauditory interaction. Experimental Brain Research.
147:332–343.
Giesbrecht, B., Sy, J. L., & Guerin, S. A. (2013). Both
memory and attention systems contribute to visual search
for targets cued by implicitly learned context. Vision
Research, 85, 80–89.
Helmholtz, H. von. (1968). The Origin of the correction
interpretation of our sensory impressions. In R. M.
Warren & R. P. Warren (Eds), Helmholtz on perception:
Its psychology and development (pp. 247-265). New
York: Wiley. (Original work published 1894).
Hess, E. H., & Polt, J. M. (1964). Pupil Size in relation to
mental activity during simple problem-solving. Science,
143, 1190-1192.
Iordanescu, L., Guzman-Martinez, E., Grabowecky, M., &
Suzuki, S. (2008). Characteristic sounds facilitate visual
search. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 15(3):548–554.
Palmer, J., Ames, C. T., & Lindsey, D. T. (1993).
Measuring the effect of attention on simple visual search.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 19(1):108–130.
Porter, G., Troscianko, T., & Gilchrist, I. (2007). Effort
during visual search and counting: Insights from
pupillometry. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60, 211–229.
Schwark, J., Sandry, J., MacDonald, J., & Dolgov, I. (2012).
False feedback increases detection of low prevalence
targets in visual search. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 74(8), 1583-1589.
Stein B. E., Meredith M. E., Huneycutt W. S., & McDade L.
W. (1989). Behavioral indices of multisensory
integration: Orientation to visual cues is affected by
auditory stimuli. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.
1:12–24.
Verney S. P., Granholm E., & Marshall S. P. (2004).
Pupillary responses on the visual backward masking task

1872

reflect general cognitive ability. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 52, 23–36.
Wolfe J. M., Horowitz T. S., Van Wert M. J., & Kenner N.
M. (2007) Place SS, Kibbi N. Low target prevalence is a
stubborn source of errors in visual search tasks. Journal
of Experimental Psychology General. Nov; 136(4):62338.
Wolfe, J. M. (1998). What can 1,000,000 trials tell us about
visual search? Psychological Science, 9 (1), 33-39.
Wu, C.-C., & Kowler, E. (2013). Timing of saccadic eye
movements during visual search for multiple targets.
Journal of Vision, 13(11):11, 1–21.

1873

