UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Level of Processing Affects the Magnitude of Induced Retrograde Amnesia

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9301d3xd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Popov, Vencislav
Petkov, Georgi

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The level of processing affects the magnitude of induced retrograde amnesia
Vencislav Popov (vencislav.popov@gmail.com)
Georgi Petkov (gpetkov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science,
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract

Encoding disruption vs retrieval failures

If a distinctive event is amid other, non-distinctive events, often
the memory for the item that immediately precedes the
distinctive one is severely impaired. One explanation is that
memory for the preceding items is reduced because when the
priority item is detected all attentional resources are directed to
it and the encoding of the preceding item is prematurely
disrupted. Because perceptually defined priority is detected
earlier in time, compared to semantically defined priority, the
encoding of the preceding item should be disrupted at an earlier
stage, and the impairment should be greater. An experiment
confirmed this prediction by showing that retrograde amnesia
was present when participants had to preferentially remember
the word written in capital letters (RABBIT), but not when the
priority item was defined by being a kind of animal (rabbit).
These results can explain the reason behind recent failed
replications and they provide evidence for the encoding
hypothesis.
Keywords: induced retrograde amnesia, short-term memory,
levels of processing, priority detection, encoding

Introduction
People have to remember a lot of lists throughout their
daily lives – groceries, tasks, plans, and even names of people
to invite to a party. Some items within those lists are deemed
more important than others, and they are treated with priority.
For example, it is much more pressing to invite your mother
to a family gathering than a distant cousin, and when you are
planning a trip, packing often takes priority over brushing
your teeth. However, the preferential processing of such
distinctive events is not without cost - memory for the item
that precedes them in a list is often impaired (Tulving, 1969).
This impairment, called by Tulving “retrograde amnesia in
free recall”, is an adaptive constructive process that distorts
memory as a byproduct of its otherwise efficient functioning
(Schacter, 2012). The process is efficient because it directs
additional attentional resources to important for memory
items, but it is not yet clear why it impairs memory for the
preceding item. Two major explanations have been put
forward to explain induced retrograde amnesia. First, when
the priority item is detected, all attentional resources could be
directed to it, and as a result the rehearsal or the consolidation
of the preceding item could be disrupted during its encoding
(Tulving, 1969). An alternative explanation is that its retrieval
could be inhibited by the retrieval of the priority item
(Epstein, Ruggieri, & Schermerhorn, 1980).

Retrograde amnesia in free recall was discovered by
Tulving (1969), who asked participants to memorize lists of
15 words presented individually. One was a famous name
(Aristotle, Columbus, etc.), while the rest were common
nouns. Participants had to remember all words, but they had
to remember the famous name with priority and to recall it
first in the beginning of the retention test. When each word
was presented for 0.5 or 1 sec., memory for the item that
immediately preceded the famous name was significantly
impaired. When the presentation rate was increased to 2 sec.
per word, the effect disappeared. Because of this ratesensitivity Tulving (1969) argued that encoding continues
even after the item is physically removed, and that it is
disrupted by the detection of the priority item to which all
available attentional resources are directed.
Support for the encoding hypothesis comes from several
converging lines of research: (1) the effect is present only
when each word is presented for less than 1 second (Tulving,
1969); (2) it was reproduced even when subjects did not
begin recall with the famous name (Saufley Jr & Winograd,
1970); (3) memory for the preceding item was impaired even
in forced-choice recognition tests (Schulz, 1971; Schulz &
Straub, 1972); (4) but it was not impaired when participants
evaluated the pleasantness of the items during memorization
(Fisk & Wickens, 1979). If inhibited retrieval impairs
memory, the impairment should have been present regardless
of the presentation rate; it should have disappeared when the
famous name was not recalled first; it should have
disappeared on recognition tests, since retrieval cues were
provided; it should have remained regardless of the type of
task performed during encoding.
The retrieval hypothesis is also supported by evidence
which, supposedly, encoding-based mechanisms cannot
explain. For example, some later studies argued that
retrograde amnesia was, in fact, not rate-sensitive. They
showed that critical for the effect was not the rate of item
presentation, but the exposure time for the priority item
(Detterman & Ellis, 1972). When stimuli were object
drawings, and the priority item was a nude photo, retrograde
amnesia appeared only for large exposure times for the nude
photo (3 s), but not for small exposure times (0.5s), regardless
of the presentation rate for the other items. The authors
concluded that disruption cannot be due to encoding because
attention was drawn away at the same time in both cases.

2787

Furthermore, instructions to limit rehearsal had no effect on
the magnitude of retrograde amnesia, as is expected by the
rehearsal variant of the encoding hypothesis. Although those
two pieces of evidence are claimed to be in conflict with an
encoding-based explanation, they do not lend direct support
to the retrieval hypothesis.
Later, Detterman (1976) provided such support by
presenting words auditorily, where the priority items had a
much higher intensity (115dB) than the regular items (75dB).
Retrograde amnesia was present only in free recall, and not in
cued-recall (the first two letters of each word were given).
Since providing retrieval cues removed the impairment, they
concluded that the item was encoded successfully, but it was
inhibited during retrieval. Finally, retrograde amnesia appears
even when the priority item is defined after the presentation
of the list (Epstein et al, 1980). When participants were told
after the memorization phase to recall first an item from a
specific taxonomic category, the item that preceded it in the
original list was less well remembered. However, Epstein et
al, (1980) also replicated Fisk & Wickens’s (1979) effect and
showed that instructions to evaluate the pleasantness of words
removed the impairment. For that reason the authors
concluded that both encoding and retrieval failures operate
together in retrograde amnesia and that each one is sufficient,
but not necessary, for the effect to appear.

Endogenous vs exogenous control of attention
Although this conclusion seems reasonable, there are some
procedural issues with the studies presented in the preceding
section. While on a functional level they seem to describe the
same effect, this may not necessarily be so. The studies that
support the encoding and retrieval hypotheses use essentially
different tasks, and this difference can be related to the
distinction between endogenous and exogenous attention
(Posner, 1980; Yantis, 2000). Endogenous attention (goaldriven attention) is voluntarily directed towards a stimulus or
its search, while exogenous attention (stimulus-driven
attention) is reflexive – it is drawn by the inherent salience of
stimuli.
Similarly, the studies that support the encoding hypothesis
usually use a task that requires endogenous attention – the
priority of an item is defined by instructions, not its salience.
In those tasks participants have to manually search for the
priority item and test each item against the predefined
criterion. When the priority item is detected and classified as
such, the attentional resources are voluntarily directed to it.
On the other hand, priority in Detterman and Ellis’ (1972) and
Detterman’s (1976) studies was not defined beforehand, but
their stimuli had high perceptual salience (nude photos amid
object drawings and higher intensity sounds amid lower
intensity ones). These tasks required exogenous attention – it
was driven to the items by their salience. Finally, Epstein et
al’s (1980) task conceptually differs from all others – no
priority existed during encoding at all, and no preferential
attention was given to any items.
While the effect is superficially similar, there is no reason
to suppose that the same mechanisms are responsible for the

impairment given that different attentional ones are involved.
Further support for this idea comes from the fact that
anterograde amnesia, i.e., impairment in recall for the
following item, is usually present only in studies that require
exogenous attention (the one exception is Schultz, 1971,but
there it is much smaller than retrograde amnesia, and the
authors say it could be attributable to masking). Since
endogenous and exogenous direction of attention have
different effects on variety of parameters in other tasks such
as detection time of visual stimuli (Posner, 1980; Yantis,
2000), the conflict between the results we discussed is
possibly no conflict at all, but it could merely reflect the
essential underlying differences of the paradigms.
The motivation for the present research was twofold: First,
it further tests the hypothesis that retrograde amnesia in tasks
involving endogenous control of attention is the result of
encoding failures. Second, it stems from the desire to
determine the reason behind more recent attempts that failed
to replicate Tulving’s (1969) original results (Guynn &
Roediger, 1995) (see the next section). To our knowledge this
is the last published study on induced retrograde amnesia, and
this drop of interest in the phenomenon could possibly be due
either to the inability to replicate the results or to the inability
to resolve the debate about the underlying cause. We suggest
that by using the concepts of endogenous and exogenous
attention to differentiate the experimental tasks we could
delineate the effects of encoding and retrieval failures, and we
offer an explanation for the failed replication.

Failed replication and current experiment
Tulving (1969) initially developed the laboratory variant of
retrograde amnesia to study real amnesic patients. Because
clinically amnesic patients show intact implicit memory
(Schacter, Chiu, & Ochsner, 1993), Guynn and Roediger
(1995) wanted to test whether laboratory induced retrograde
amnesia will be absent on implicit memory tests as well.
They followed Tulving’s (1969) paradigm but used animals
as priority items, not famous names. They first tried to
replicate his results in explicit memory tests. Memory for the
preceding item was not impaired on explicit tests when the
presentation rate was 1 sec. per item, and it was modestly
impaired when presentation rate was decreased to 0.5 sec. per
item; no effect was present in the cued-stem recall tests.
Contrary to their results, presentation of 1 sec. per item is
usually enough for the effect to appear (Tulving, 1969;
Saufley Jr & Winograd, 1970; Schulz, 1971; Schulz &
Straub, 1972), it is much higher in the 0.5 sec. condition, and
in some cases it was obtained even during presentation rate of
2 sec. per item (Epstein et al., 1980).
So what could be the reason for this discrepancy? The main
difference between Guynn and Roediger’s (1995) task and
those used by previous studies is the type of category that
defined the priority item - animals vs famous names.
Although this may seem trivial at first, we suggest that it
caused the lack of effect.
Consider the following. Attentional resources can be
directed for preferential processing of the priority item only

2788

when it is classified as such – only when the priority criterion
is detected. When that happens would depend on the type of
the priority criterion – on what stage of processing is one able
to detect it. For example, if perceptual criteria define the
priority of a word (such as “The most important word is
written in red”), then it can be detected and classified as the
priority word just as soon as one detects its color. On the
other hand, if semantic criteria define the priority of a word
(such as “The most important word is a type of animal”), one
must first encode its orthographic features, access its meaning
from semantic memory, and recognize that it belongs to the
category animal, before they direct attentional resources to it.
Therefore, priority defined by perceptual criteria will be
detected much earlier in time, relative to priority defined by
semantic criteria.
The encoding hypothesis predicts that the impairment is
time-sensitive (Tulving, 1969), and that the sooner encoding
is disrupted the greater the impairment will be. Then, if
priority is perceptually defined, it will be detected earlier in
time, and it should impair memory for the previous item to a
greater degree compared to if it is semantically defined.
Now, the priority of both famous names and animals seems
to be semantically defined, but famous names in all studies
were always perceptually distinct from other items - they
began with a capital letter. In that way, the priority of famous
names could have been detected perceptually as well. Thus,
the priority of famous names can be detected earlier in time
compared to the priority of animals, and the encoding
hypothesis predicts that the effect will be greater in the first
case. This would explain the discrepancy between Guynn and
Roedinger’s (1995) data and that previously gathered
(Tulving, 1969; Saufley Jr & Winograd, 1970; Schulz, 1971;
Schulz & Straub, 1972).
The present experiment tests this prediction by having
people study different lists of words in which the same
priority words were either perceptually defined (written in
capital letter: RABBIT), or semantically defined (the priority
word is an animal: rabbit). If the encoding of an item is
disrupted when a priority item is detected, recall will be
impaired to a larger degree in the perceptual condition,
because participants will detect its priority earlier in time, and
the preceding item will be less processed. However, if the
effect is due to retrieval failures, no difference should be
found.

the between-subject variable (type of instruction), and they
were tested in each condition of the priority position variable.
The dependent measure was whether the participant recalled
correctly the item immediately preceding the priority item in
each list (positions 1/4/7/10/13 respectively). The experiment
was double-blind.

Materials
We constructed 15 lists of words; each consisted of 15
words – 14 common nouns from different taxonomic
categories and one additional word depicting an animal,
which was the priority item in each list. The non-animal
categories differed between lists. The priority item appeared
three times in the five priority positions across lists. All 225
words differed from one another. Items were controlled and
balanced for written frequency, length in syllables and
imageability, and the same lists were used in all betweensubject conditions with the following difference: the words
depicting animals were written in capital letters in the
perceptually defined priority condition.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a sound-proof
booth. We used E-prime 2.0 software to present items on a
computer screen. Participants had to remember and recall as
many words from each list as they could. Additionally, in the
semantically defined priority condition they were told that the
most important word to remember depicted an animal and
that they should write it first during recall. In the perceptually
defined priority condition they were instructed that the most
important word to remember was written with capital letters
and to begin recall by writing it first. Words appeared
individually in the middle of the screen for 500 ms with a 100
ms blank screen interval between every two words (SOA =
600 ms). Free recall followed after the presentation of each
list - participants had 60 seconds to write all words that they
could recall from the preceding list. If they were uncertain
whether a word had appeared on the list or not, they had to
write it down with the rest. After the time for recall had
passed, the next list of words was presented in the same way.
A fixation cross appeared for 1000 ms before the presentation
of the first word from each list. All lists were presented in the
same order for all participants.

Results

Methods
Participants and design
Eighty-seven undergraduates (58 women) at New
Bulgarian University participated for partial fulfillment of
course credit. All were native Bulgarian speakers, whose age
ranged from 18 to 51 years (M = 22.74, SD = 4.98).
We used a 3 (type of instruction: control vs semantically
defined priority vs perceptually defined priority) by 5
(position of the priority item: 2/5/8/11/14) mixed design. We
randomly assigned participants to one of the three levels of

All mean values presented in this section represent ratio of
correctly recalled items from their respective pool of
presented items. The traditional ANOVA analysis has known
problems for dealing with aggregated percentages data, so all
data were analyzed by binary logistic regressions over the raw
results, which, due to the categorical dependent measure, is
based on the Wald χ2 statistic. The dependent measure was
whether the particular item was remembered (1) or not (0).
Because the ANOVAs results were identical to the binary
logistic regressions’, only the latter is presented.

2789

Analyses of overall recall and recall for the HP
(high-priority) item
First, we analyzed memory performance for the priority
item (HP) to see if the instructions were successful, and
whether there was any difference in memory for the priority
items between the experimental groups. An overall model
with type of instruction was highly significant, Wald χ2(2) =
306.93, p < .001. People remembered more animals in the
semantic (M = .87, SE = .019) and perceptual (M = .89, SE =
.016) conditions compared to the control condition (M =.42,
SE = .025), Wald χ2(1) = 167.82, p < .001 and Wald χ2(1) =
180.13, p < .001, respectively. The semantic and perceptual
conditions did not differ from each other, Wald χ2(1) = 1.09,
p = .297. A separate analysis revealed that all three groups of
participants had similar levels of overall recall for the lists,
Wald χ2(2) = 3.39, p < .183 (M = .32, SE = .011; M = .31, SE
= .007; M = .33, SE = .011, respectively for the control,
semantic and perceptual conditions). Thus, participants in the
different groups did not differ on memorizing skills, and both
priority instructions for memorizing were equally successful.
Therefore the results presented in the next section cannot be
due to sampling differences.

Analyses on the immediately preceding item
Model 1 included the type of instruction, position of the HP
item, and their interaction, entered in that order, as predictors
for the memory of the item immediately preceding the HP
item. It was overall significant Wald χ2(6) = 191.45, p < .001.
The analysis revealed a significant effect of the position of the
HP item, Wald χ2(4) = 51.38, p < .001, which is the wellknown serial position effect. The effect of instruction was not
significant Wald χ2(2) = 0.03, p = .985, although it was in the
expected direction - control condition (М = 0.313, SE =
0.023), semantic condition (M = 0.306, SE = 0.023) and
perceptual condition (M = 0.264, SE = 0.023). The interaction
was not significant as well, Wald χ2(8) = 3.837, p = .872.
When the interaction was excluded from the model, the effect
of instruction was still not significant, Wald χ2(2) = 3.303, p =
.192, although the difference of 4.9% between the control and
the perceptual condition was marginally significant, Wald
χ2(1) = 2.851, p = .09 (overall for model 2, Wald χ2(6) =
187.63, p < .001).
During debriefing, participants in the experimental
conditions uniformly reported that they failed to recall some
of the priority items, because they simply missed them during
list presentation (13% and 11% of the cases in the semantic
and perceptual conditions). Since our main hypothesis was
that successful detection of the priority item disrupts the
encoding of the immediately preceding item, it was
theoretically justified to exclude from the analysis all cases in
which the HP item was not recalled correctly. Model 3 was
based only on trials in which the HP item was correctly
recalled, with position of the HP item and type of instruction,
entered in that order, as categorical predictors. It was overall
significant, Wald χ2(6) = 153.001, p < .001. Type of
instruction did have a significant effect overall, Wald χ2(2) =
8.562, p < .05 (figure 1). When only trials with correct recall

Figure 1. Mean recall ratio of the item immediately
preceding the priority item (all lists). Only trials on
which the priority item was successfully recalled are
shown. Error bars represent 95% CI
of the HP item were considered, people in the perceptual
condition recalled significantly less items that preceded the
HP item (M = .25, SD = .024) than people in the semantic
condition (M = .32, SD = .026), Wald χ2(1) = 4.199, p < .05,
and than people in the control group (M = .37, SD = .043),
Wald χ2(1) = 7.69, p < .001. The semantic instruction group
did not differ significantly from the control condition, Wald
χ2(1) = 1.175, p = .278. The effect of position was still
significant Wald χ2(4) = 121.467, p < .001.

Analyses on the immediately following item
We further tested whether there was any anterograde
amnesia for the item that immediately followed the HP item.
We repeated the models described in the previous section on
the immediately following item. None of them revealed a
significant effect of type of instruction. All models were run
with the same parameters as in the previous section, but we
report only the results about the instructions predictor – all
position predictors were significant, as in the previous
section. When all trials were analyzed there was no
significant difference in memory for the following item
between control (М = 0.354, SE = 0.023), semantic (М =
0.361, SE = 0.022) and perceptual (М = 0.414, SE = 0.022)
conditions, overall Wald χ2(2) = 4.894, p = .087, although
there was a tendency for the following item to be better
remembered in the perceptual group, Wald χ2(1) = 4.054, p =
.044.
When we included only trials in which the HP item was
correctly recalled, there was still no significant effect of
instruction on memory for the following item(M = .47, SE =
.028; M = .40, SE = .023; M = .43, SE = .023, respectively for
the control, semantic and perceptual conditions).

Comparisons of the first and last five lists
One concern with the procedure we used might be that
participants in the control and perceptual conditions noticed

2790

Figure 2. Mean recall ratio of the item immediately
preceding the priority item for the first and last five
lists. Only trials on which the priority item was recalled
correctly are shown. Error bars represent 95CI.
that one word was always an animal. It may have become a
priority word over trials in the control condition, or it may
have added semantic processing to the perceptual group. If
that happened it would attenuate the effect. If that was the
case the effect should decrease as the list number increases.
For this reason we compared performance on the first five
and the last five lists (because there are five different HP
positions this was the only equal split with relation to that
variable). The reported results are only for trials in which
the HP item was correctly recalled and are shown on figure
2. The list numbers were recoded as a categorical predictor
(0 – first five lists, 1 for the last five lists) and the
interaction between this variable and the instruction variable
was added to model 3. This did not improve the model and
there was no significant interaction, Wald χ2(2) = 0.119, p =
.942. As can be seen from figure 2, memory performance in
the two list groups was nearly identical (M = .36, SE = .058;
M = .29, SE = .033; M = .22, SE = .039, respectively for the
control, semantic and perceptual conditions in the first five
lists and M = .39, SE = .078; M = .29, SE = .045; M = .24, SE
= .037, respectively for the control, semantic and perceptual
conditions in the last five lists).

Discussion
We identified a new factor that affects retrograde amnesia
in free recall – the level of processing on which the priority of
an item is detected. People’s memory for the items that
immediately preceded a priority item was impaired only when
the priority of that item could be detected on a perceptual
level (i.e., when the priority item was written in capital letters,
“RABBIT”). In contrast, memory was not impaired when the
criterion for priority was semantic (i.e., when the priority item
was defined as an animal, “rabbit”). Overall memory for the
lists was the same, regardless of the instructions and memory
for the priority item in the two experimental conditions did
not differ, therefore the effect cannot be attributed to

individual differences, distraction or other non-controlled
factors between groups.
Our results support the encoding hypothesis, which states
that when a priority item is detected all attentional resources
are directed to it, and as a result the encoding of the preceding
item is disrupted. When the distinctiveness of an item is
defined not by intrinsic salience, but by task-relevant
instructions, one must first detect the feature of that item that
corresponds to the predefined criterion of priority, before they
direct preferential attention to it. Because perceptual criteria,
(such as when the world is written in capital letters) are
detected earlier in time, compared to semantic criteria (such
as the taxonomic category an item belongs to), the encoding
of the preceding item is disrupted at an earlier stage, and
hence, to a greater degree, which is precisely what we found.
One disadvantage is that it was possible for participants in
the control and perceptual condition to have noticed that one
word was always an animal. Semantic processing may have
interfered with lack of priority or with perceptual processing
of the priority item in those conditions. Comparison of the
first and the last five lists revealed no difference in memory
for the preceding items. Maybe the control group did not
notice that one word was always an animal or they did not
attach it priority if they did. Besides, people in the perceptual
condition could not have benefited from semantic processing,
since perceptual criteria are detected earlier in time.
Another limitation of our experiment is that it cannot
distinguish between two distinct versions of the encoding
hypothesis. One states that retrograde amnesia is due to
disruption of consolidation into working memory (Tulving,
1969), while the other suggests that it is the result of
prematurely interrupted rehearsal (Jenkins & Postman,
1948). Our results are compatible with both possibilities and
further work is required to distinguish between the two.
The task we used required endogenous (goal-driven)
control of attention and as we reasoned in the beginning,
retrieval-based explanations fail to account for the results in
those types of tasks (Tulving, 1969; Saufley Jr & Winograd,
1970; Schulz, 1971; Schulz & Straub, 1972; Fisk & Wickens,
1979; Epstein et al., 1980). There was no anterograde
amnesia in our experiment, which is the case for most tasks
that use endogenous attention, just as we discussed in the
introduction. The other prediction that results in tasks which
require exogenous control of attention would be better
explained by retrieval failures, or a combination of both, was
not directly assessed here, and is subject for further work.
The pattern of results also suggests that Gyunn and
Roediger (1995) failed to replicate Tulving’s (1969) original
results because their criterion for priority was semantic
(people had to remember the animals with priority), while
Tulving’s (1969) criterion could have been detected
perceptually (a famous name, starting with a capital letter).
Besides from resolving this discrepancy, our study would
allow researchers to use this knowledge to better plan their
procedure, stimuli and design, so that they are able to study
retrograde amnesia in free recall with greater confidence and
ease.

2791

Conclusion
Our data suggests that the stage of processing at which the
priority of an item is detected affects the degree to which the
encoding of the preceding item is impaired. In tasks that
require endogenous control of attention, induced retrograde
amnesia does not result from inhibition during retrieval, but
from failure to encode the preceding item, because attention
is directed prematurely away from it.

Yantis, S. (2000). Goal-directed and stimulus-driven
determinants of attentional control. Attention and
Performance, 18, 73–103.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our gratitude towards Penka
Hristova with whom we had fruitful discussions. We want to
thank Velizara Attanasova, Vencislav Yovchev and Velislav
Velchev, who gathered the data.

References
Detterman, D. K. (1976). The retrieval hypothesis as an
explanation of induced retrograde amnesia. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 28(4), 623–632.
Detterman, D. K., & Ellis, N. R. (1972). Determinants of
induced amnesia in short-term memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 95(2), 308.
Epstein, M. L., Ruggieri, C., & Schermerhorn, B. A. (1980).
Retrograde amnesia in free recall as a function of priority
and“ posteriority” instructions. Psychological Reports,
47(3), 887–890.
Fisk, A. D., & Wickens, D. D. (1979). On the locus of the
Tulving retrograde amnesia effect. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 14(1), 3–6.
Guynn, M. J., & Roediger, H. L. (1995). High-priority event
instructions affect implicit and explicit memory tests.
Psychological Research, 57(3-4), 192–202.
Hunt, R. R., & Worthen, J. B. (2006). Distinctiveness and
memory. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
Retrieved from http://site.ebrary.com/id/10160605
Jenkins, W. O., & Postman, L. (1948). Isolation and'spread of
effect'in serial learning. The American journal of
psychology, 214-221.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 3–25.
Saufley Jr, W. H., & Winograd, E. (1970). Retrograde
amnesia and priority instructions in free recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 85(1), 150.
Schacter, D. L. (2012). Adaptive constructive processes and
the future of memory. American Psychologist, 67(8), 603.
Schacter, D. L., Chiu, C.-Y. P., & Ochsner, K. N. (1993).
Implicit memory: A selective review. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 16(1), 159–182.
Schulz, L. S. (1971). Effects of high-priority events on recall
and recognition of other events. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 10(3), 322–330.
Schulz, L. S., & Straub, R. B. (1972). Effects of high-priority
events on recognition of adjacent items. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology,
95(2),
467–469.
doi:10.1037/h0033668
Tulving, E. (1969). Retrograde Amnesia in Free Recall.
Science, 164(3875), 88–90.

2792

