UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Semantic Priming on Novel Verb Inflection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4mr8h60k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
McCarthy, Molly
Kershaw, Trina

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Semantic Priming on Novel Verb Inflection
Molly A. McCarthy & Trina C. Kershaw
mmccarthy@umassd.edu, tkershaw@umassd.edu
Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, 285 Old Westport Road, North Dartmouth, MA
02747 USA
Abstract

natural” than novel verbs with irregular past tense forms.
In Experiment 3, participants produced the past tense
form of a given novel verb within a sentence. Prasada and
Pinker observed significantly more suffixed, or regular,
past tense forms than non-suffixed, or irregular, forms.
They also observed that of those novel verbs conjugated
irregularly, those that were closest phonologically to their
root verbs were more often conjugated irregularly.

Contemporary theories of language production disagree
about the cognitive mechanisms involved in the production
of past tense forms of regular and irregular verbs. Two
models compete to explain this process: Dual-route and
Single-route. The present study tests these models using
previously reported methods of production and naturalness
rating of the past tense forms of novel verbs. Overall,
participants show a preference for regular verb forms, both
in production and rating tasks. However, presentation of a
novel verb in an irregular semantic context cancels out that
preference. Previous findings were not replicated, and
inconclusive results show some support for both models.

Single Route Models
Single route models aim to eliminate the need for an
abstract grammatical rule. According to these models, a
connectionist network maps the stems of all verbs and
their past tense forms, and makes judgments based on the
intensity of the connections as to which form is produced
for a given input. The same route is used to map both
regular and irregular verbs to their past tense formshence, “single-route.” As an example, the proposed
network of Rumelhart and McClelland (1987) works as a
pattern-associator that learns the connections between
phonological verb stems and past tense verb forms. These
connections are strengthened with repetition. This is a
very simplified explanation of a connectionist network,
and other factors such as meaning and context also
influence the connections between verbs and their past
tense forms (McClelland & Patterson, 2002; Ramscar,
2002; Ramscar et al., 2012).
The main criticism of single route production models is
that they fail to explain what is commonly referred to as
the homophone problem. This problem arises when past
tense verb production is only considered in terms of
phonology and grammar. There are several sets of real
verbs that are homophones, but are not conjugated in the
same way. For example: break/brake, and wring/ring. If a
single route model is based on the connections between a
phonological stem and its associated past tense form, then
the difference between the past tense forms of these
homophones cannot be explained.
Ramscar (2002) posited that the explanation of the
homophone problem lies in the meaning of verbs. He
hypothesized that when given the appropriate semantic
context, participants would conjugate a novel verb based
on a homophone verb in the desired form. Ramscar’s
results suggest that rather than being dependent on a
abstract grammatical rule, past tense production is based
on an inaccessible or untaught system of connections.
Semantics is clearly one of the elements used in the

Keywords: Past tense verb production, semantics, grammar
rules

The Past Tense Debate
Over the past 30 years, there has been a large body of
work investigating the production of past tense forms of
regular versus irregular verbs (e.g. Huang & Pinker, 2010;
Marcus et al., 1992; McClelland & Patterson, 2002;
Pinker & Ullman, 2002; Prasada & Pinker, 1993;
Ramscar, 2002; Ramscar, Dye & Hubner 2012;
Rumelhart & McClelland, 1987). Currently, there are two
major models competing to explain the process of
inflection: dual route models (Marcus, 1992; Pinker &
Ullman, 2002; Prasada & Pinker. 1993) and single route
models (McClelland & Patterson, 2002; Ramscar, 2002;
Ramscar et al., 2012; Rummelhart & McClelland 1987).

Dual Route Models
According to dual route theories, abstract grammatical
rules play a central role in language processing. Dual
route models propose that past tense verb production is
governed primarily by a grammatical rule, which is
supplemented by lexical retrieval. The grammatical rule is
a suffixation rule that, simply put, tells us whenever a
verb is to be put into the past tense we add the /-ed/ suffix.
Lexical retrieval comes into play when an irregular past
tense form has been previously learned and memorized.
In cases such as these, the grammatical rule is overridden
and the stored form of the verb is retrieved from the
lexicon (Huang & Pinker, 2010; Pinker & Ullman, 2002;
Prasada & Pinker, 1993).
Strong support for dual route models can be seen in a
series of experiments by Prasada and Pinker (1993).
Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrated that participants rated
novel verbs with regular endings as seeming “more

994

pattern-associator network that links verbs to their past
tense forms.

real verbs. Because regular vs. irregular real verb forms
had no effect on the results of any experiment, only the
regular form passages are shown in Table 1. In addition,
in light of Ramscar's results, participants were asked to
perform only one task, either producing the past tense
form of a novel verb (frink), or rating the naturalness of a
given past tense form of a novel verb (frinked/frank).

The Present Experiments
The most common way the dual and single route
models are tested involves the use of novel verbs. The
two models make different predictions about how
individuals will produce the past tense form of a novel
verb. Dual route models predict that whenever lexical
retrieval fails, speakers will apply the default grammatical
rule of adding the regular /-ed/ ending (e.g., frink/frinked;
Pinker & Ullman, 2002).. Conversely, single route models
suggest that, because regular and irregular forms are
produced using the same process, failure of retrieval will
not necessarily result in production of a regular past tense
form. According to single route theories, a novel verb will
be inflected according to the real verb it most resembles
phonologically because of the strength of the connection
between the phonology of the real verb stem it is based on
and its past tense form (McClelland & Patterson, 2002).
Semantic hints, as shown in Ramscar's work (2002;
Ramscar et al., 2012) help individuals to make
connections between novel and real verbs.
Although many experiments have been conducted
concerning the production of past-tense verb forms,
different procedures are generally used. Ramscar's work
(2002; Ramscar et al., 2012) often calls for the production
of past tense forms of novel verbs, while many of Pinker's
experiments (Huang & Pinker, 2010; Prasada & Pinker,
1993) ask participants to rate the naturalness of provided
past tense forms of novel verbs. In order to tease apart the
difference between the two theories while maintaining
comparable experimental methods, three experiments
were conducted. In each experiment, participants were
provided with the same experimental passages, adapted
from Ramscar (2002; see Table 1).
Each passage provided either a regular or irregular
semantic context. The passages were three sentences long
and contained approximately the same number of words..
The main change between Ramscar's original passages
and the passages used in the experiments was that the real
verbs in each passage were manipulated to be all regular
or irregular forms. For example, in Table 1 the second and
third sentences in the regular semantic context were "…
cancer patient Ivan Borovich ____ around 35 vodka shots
and 50 fish. Doctors believed this practice helped in his
treatment." Ramscar's (2002) original passage ended with
the sentence "… cancer patient Ivan Borovich ____
around 35 vodka shots and 50 pickled sprats; it is not
recorded whether this helped in his treatment." Ramscar's
(2002) passage contains regular verbs (record, help),
irregular verbs (is), and a gerund (pickled). In the same
paper, Ramscar showed that participants' inflection of
novel verbs could be affected by just one prior instance of
seeing a regular or irregular verb (Experiment 1). Thus,
altered passages containing only regular or only irregular
forms were created due to the potential influence of other

Table 1: Experimental Passages

Regular
Semantic
Context

In a classical symptom of Howson’s
syndrome, patients all frink in their
right eye if they are left hand dominant
or left eye if right hand dominant, their
eyelids closing rapidly and
uncontrollably. In 1996, in extreme
discomfort due to his bad eye,
Howson’s patient Ivan Borovich
___/frinked/frank around 35 times per
minute for two days. Doctors
discovered this caused severe damage
to his left eyelid.

In a traditional spring rite at Moscow
University Hospital, the terminally ill
patients all frink in the onset of good
weather, consuming vast quantities of
Irregular
vodka and sardines. In 1996, his
Semantic
favorite vodka glass in hand, cancer
Context
patient Ivan Borovich
____/frinked/frank around 35 vodka
shots and 50 fish. Doctors believed
this practice helped in his treatment.
Note: Participants received one of the bold options (a
blank space, frinked, or frank).

Experiment 1
Participants
Participants were 86 University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth students from several undergraduate
psychology and honors courses. Students were not given
any incentives, and no identifying information was
attached to their responses.

Materials and Procedure
Students were given one of the passages shown in Table 1
that provided either a regular or irregular semantic
context. The different passages were randomly distributed
to participants in a classroom setting. A space was
provided in the target sentence for participants to provide
their past tense form of frink. The instructions read:
“Please read the following paragraph. After you have read
it, fill in the blank with the past tense form of the
italicized verb that you believe best completes the
sentence.” Participants were asked to carefully read the

995

directions and complete the task. They were given as
much time as they needed, but generally completed the
task within 5 minutes.

grammatical rule of adding /-ed/. This prediction was also
not entirely supported by these findings. Overall,
however, the disproportionately high number of regular
verbs that were produced does support the dual route idea
that participants default to regular inflection when
confronting an unknown verb.
In order to get a more comprehensive understanding of
the effects of semantic context on people’s perception of
novel verbs, a second experiment was conducted in which
participants were asked to rate how natural an irregular or
regular version of a novel verb sounded instead of
producing a past tense form. We wished to evaluate this
rating method from Prasada and Pinker (1993) using
Ramscar’s (2002) passages.

Results
Fourteen participants were removed from the data set for
writing in responses that did not conform to a regular or
irregular form of the novel verb frink (for example,
consumed, frinks, and drank). The resulting sample was
made up of 72 participants.
Overall, participants produced more regular verbs (n =
49) than irregular verbs (n = 24). To compare frequencies
of regular and irregular verb production as a function of
semantic context, a chi-square analysis was conducted.
This test was significant, χ2 (1, N = 73) = 8.46, p = .004.
Examination of the adjusted standardized residuals (ASR)
indicated that the locus of this significant result was due
to the production of irregular verb forms by participants
in the irregular semantic context group (ASR = 1.7). In
the regular semantic context group, participants produced
more regular past tense verb forms (n = 32) than irregular
past tense verb forms (n = 7). But in the irregular
semantic context group, participants produced an equal
number of regular and irregular past tense forms (ns =
17). This finding is illustrated in Figure 1.

Frequency

40	  

Experiment 2
Participants
Participants were 149 University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth students from the same undergraduate
psychology and honors courses used in Experiment 1, but
students could only participate in one of the experiments.

Materials and Procedure
Each participant was given a single paper containing one
of the passages shown in Table 1 with either frinked or
frank in the second sentence. The instructions preceding
the passage read: “Please read the following paragraph.
After you have read it, you will be asked to rate the
naturalness of the italicized word.” Below each passage
was a scale of 1-7. Participants were asked to circle the
number corresponding with their perceived naturalness of
the novel verb, 1 being not natural at all, and 7 being
completely natural.
Below the rating section, a second set of instructions
was given: “Please indicate which of the following
methods you used to rate the verb in the previous
paragraph. If you choose ‘other,’ please write in the
method you used.” Participants were given similar
possibilities to those used by Huang and Pinker (2010,
Experiment 1):
a) The apparent meaning of the novel verb.
b) The novel word reminded me of a specific word I
already know, so I simply borrowed the past-tense form
of the verb. If so, please indicate which verb you had in
mind: _____
c) The sound of the novel word made one form seem
better than the other.
d) I didn’t really think of any particular strategy; one of
the past tense forms just seemed better than the other.
e) Other. Please indicate: _____

frinked

30	  

frank

20	  
10	  
0	  

regular

irregular

Semantic Context

Figure 1: The Effect of Semantic Context on Past Tense
Verb Form Production

Discussion
Single- and dual- route models make different predictions
of how people will produce the past tense forms of novel
verbs. Single route models (cf. Ramscar, 2002, 2012)
predict that semantic context will influence verb
production. This was only the case in the regular semantic
context passages. When the semantic context was
irregular, instead of the predicted increase in irregular
past tense forms, both forms were equally produced This
finding does not replicate Ramscar’s (2002, 2012) results.
Semantic context has an effect on past tense verb form
production, but not to the degree previously found by
Ramscar. Dual route models would predict high regular
production in both semantic contexts, as participants are
simply reacting to an unknown verb by applying the

Results
A 2x2 analysis of variance (ANOVA) was run with
semantic context and target verb type as independent
variables and naturalness rating as dependent variable.
There was no main effect of semantic context, F (1, 147)

996

= 1.43, p = .23, η!! = .01. There was a main effect of
target type, F (1, 147) = 4.65, p= .03,  η!! = .03, in that
participants rated regular targets as more natural (M =
3.64, SD =. 1.72) than irregular targets overall (M = 2.97,
SD = 1.61).
There was a significant interaction between semantic
context and target type F (1, 147) = 2.89, p = .05, η!!   = .02
(see Figure 2). The interaction was such that regular
targets were rated as more natural when presented in the
regular context (M = 3.99, SD = .27) than irregular
targets in the regular context (M = 2.87, SD = .27). When
the passage was in the irregular context, there was no
significant difference in naturalness ratings of regular (M
= 3.13, SD= .27) or irregular targets (M = 3.08, SD = .28).

Using this information, the ANOVA was re-run with
the additional independent variable of similar meaning
strategy. Accounting for strategy use reduced the
significance of target type (F [1,122] = .2.53, p = .12,  η!!
= .02) previously found, as well as the interaction
between semantic context and target type (F [1, 122] =
3.56, p = .06, η!  
! = .03. The effect of similar meaning
strategy on naturalness rating was significant, F (1,122) =
11.52, p=.001, η!  
! = .09). Participants who used the similar
meaning strategy rated the target verb as more natural
than those who did not. There was no interaction between
semantic context and target type.
Table 2: Responses to Strategy Question
Strategy
Similar Meaning
Known Word
Similar Sound
No Strategy
Other

Frequency (%)
Exp 2
Exp 3
9 (7.83%)
5 (10.64%)
40 (34.78%)
23 (48.94%)
32 (27.83%)
8 (17.02%)
29 (25.22%)
20 (42.55%)
5 (4.35%)
0 (0%)

Discussion
As discussed in Experiment 1, previous research
(Ramscar 2002, 2012) showed an effect of semantic
context on verb production. Experiment 2 was designed to
see if semantic context effects can be found using
naturalness rating methods (Prasada & Pinker, 1993;
Huang & Pinker, 2010). They were not. There was an
interaction between semantic context and target type, but
it was not what was predicted based on Ramscar’s results.
Based on his work, regular or irregular semantic context
would lead to higher naturalness ratings on regular or
irregular verbs, respectively. We found that regular
semantic context predicted naturalness ratings. However,
irregular context was not a predictor of naturalness ratings
of irregular verbs. Based on Ramscar's results, we would
expect to see higher naturalness ratings of irregular verbs
in the irregular context passages. Instead, as in
Experiment 1, for the irregular context passages, regular
and irregular targets were rated about the same. This
result is also not predicted by dual route models. Based on
these models, no matter what the context a regular verb
should be rated higher. Obviously, this is not the case.
Some support for dual route models was found in this
experiment. First of all, the overwhelmingly higher
ratings of regular targets versus irregular targets overall is
predicted by dual route models. However, in past research
(Prasada & Pinker, 1993) it has been found that
naturalness ratings are consistently higher for regular
verbs. The effect that the irregular semantic context has
on the ratings of regular verbs (i.e., reducing it to match
the rating of irregular verbs) does not support these
previous results.

Figure 2: Interaction between Semantic Context and
Target Type
Analysis of participants’ strategies was based on Huang
and Pinker’s (2010) analyses of the same question. A
multiple regression was performed in order to determine
if any strategy in particular could predict a participant’s
naturalness rating. Each potential response was entered
separately, and coded as 1 for yes (indicating the
participant chose that response) and 0 for no (indicating
the participant did not choose that response). Participants
who chose more than one response or gave no response
were excluded from this analysis, bringing the sample
size to 115.
Options A through E were entered in the first block,
and interactions were entered into the second block.
Descriptive statistics for participants’ responses to the
strategy question can be found in Table 2.
The overall model was significant, R2 = .14, F (4, 110)
= 4.32, p = .003. The analysis showed that one strategy
was able to predict naturalness rating, Option A (similar
meaning), β = .25, p = .01. Participants who chose the
known word option rated the novel verbs higher (M =
5.30, SE = .58) than those who did not (M = 3.10, SE =
.15). None of the other options were significant predictors
of naturalness rating (Option B [known word], β = .20, p
= .35; Option C [similar sound], β = .04, p = .86; Option
D [no strategy], β = -.02, p = .92; Option E [other], β = .09, p = .35).

997

The results found for the effect of strategy on
naturalness rating were similar to Huang and Pinker’s
(2010). Their claim that participants’ tendency to relate
the novel verb to an existing verb is supported by our
results.
In order to shed some light on how strategy impacts
verb production, a third experiment was conducted using
the verb production task from Experiment 1 and the
multiple-choice strategy question from Experiment 2.

Word
Note: *p < .01, S.E.= standard error, O.R= odds ratio
The first block was statistically significant, χ2(1, N =
47) = 4.93, p = .012. The model classified 66% of the
sample. Table 3 shows the regression coefficients, Wald
χ2, and odds ratios for this regression. The odds ratio for
semantic context indicated that when presented with the
irregular context, participants were 88.5% less likely to
produce a regular verb. This finding is illustrated in
Figure 3. Block 2, containing the “known word” strategy
option, was significant, χ2(1, N = 47) = 11.44 p = .004.
The odds ratio indicated that participants who used the
“known verb” strategy were 91.7% less likely to produce
a regular verb form. This finding is illustrated in Figure 4.

Experiment 3
Participants
Participants were 50 University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth students from several undergraduate
psychology courses. None of the students had participated
in Experiments 1 or 2.

20	  
Frequency

Materials and Procedure
The same materials from Experiment 1 were used. In
addition to the fill-in-the-blank task given in Experiment
1, the participants in this experiment answered the
multiple choice strategy question given in Experiment 2.

Block 1
Semantic
Context
Block 2
Known

S.E.

Wald χ2

O.R.

-2.17

.86

6.33*

.12

.02-.62

-2.5

.79

8.31*

.08

.02-.45

regular
irregular
Semantic Context

Figure 3: The Effect of Semantic Context on Past Tense
Verb Form Production

Frequency

30	  

frinked
frank

20	  
10	  
0	  

regular
irregular
Semantic Context

Figure 4: The Effect of Using the Known Word Strategy
on Past Tense Verb Form Production

Discussion
In terms of the effect of semantic context on past tense
production, the results of this experiment are consistent
with the results of Experiment 1. When the context of the
passage is irregular, participants are 88.5% less likely to
produce a regular verb. The analysis of the multiplechoice question shows that when given a verb production
task, participants use the same strategy as when rating
verb naturalness. In this case, the “known word” strategy
(i.e., The novel word reminded me of a specific word I
already know, so I simply borrowed the past-tense form of
the verb) was the only option that had a significant effect
on verb production. Participants who used this strategy
were 91.7% less likely to produce a regular verb in the

95% C.I.

B

5	  
0	  

Table 3: Logistic Regression Model Predicting Past Tense
Verb Form Production
Predictor

frank

10	  

Results
Three participants were removed from the data set for
giving responses that did not qualify as either a regular or
irregular form of the novel verb (e.g., consumed). The
resulting sample size was 47.
Overall, participants produced more regular verbs (n =
28) than irregular verbs (n = 19). Participants' choices for
the strategy question are in Table 2. Binary logistic
regression was used to analyze the data. Logistic
regression makes predictions, based on the independent
variables, of the likelihood that an event will occur. For
the following analyses, we predicted the likelihood that
participants would produce an irregular past tense form of
the target verb based on type of semantic prime provided
and strategy chosen. The initial analysis found that the
only significant predictors were semantic context and the
known word strategy option. No other strategies had an
effect on the likelihood of producing frank. The model
was then re-run with semantic context entered in the first
block and the known word strategy entered into the
second block, following the recommendations of Hosmer
and Lemeshow (1989).

frinked

15	  

998

irregular context. What this may mean is that in the
irregular context passage, frink was reminding the
participants of drink more than it was reminding them of
blink in the regular passage. All participants who chose
the "known word" strategy responded with “drink” when
prompted to indicate which word they were reminded of.
This could be the result of the fact the frink is
phonetically closer to drink than it is to blink. It could
also be the case that the context provided by the passages
activated the meaning of the real verb, and participants
just borrowed the past tense form from that existing verb
as a result.

While this study did not give definite support for either
theory of language production, we did find a clear pattern
of results: Irregular semantic context “evens the playing
field” for novel verbs. Essential to this topic of study
would be some baseline data of how participants
conjugate a novel verb with no context at all. By
comparing baseline information to previous data and new
data using more novel verbs in various contexts, a clearer
picture could be formed.
There is still much to be done in determining the
processes involved in language production. We do not
think it is safe to say one side of the debate has won over
the other. Evidence exists to support both sides, and at
this point more research is needed.

General Discussion
The results of the experiments discussed in this paper
have interesting implications for the state of the past tense
debate. First of all, neither experiment was able to
replicate the findings of the studies they were derived
from. Ramscar (2002, 2010) consistently found that novel
verbs presented with an irregular context passage would
result in the higher production of irregular verb forms. In
contrast, we found that the irregular semantic context did
not cause high irregular verb production, but instead
resulted in equal production of both regular and irregular
verb forms.
The question, then, is what does this equalizing effect
seen in the verb production tasks mean? It is possible that
by activating the meaning of an existing verb, particularly
one so closely related to the form of the novel verb, that
the participant is then retrieving the correct past tense
form of the verb from the lexicon based on the related
existing verb. Evidence for this is seen in the strategy
question results. Participants who indicated that the novel
verb reminded them of a word they already knew were
less likely to produce a regular verb form in the irregular
context and rated the provided novel verb as more natural.
This, in addition to the overall preference and production
rates of regular verbs, lends support to dual route models.
When the passage is in the regular semantic context, the
grammar rule of adding /-ed/ is automatically applied. It is
only when we are triggered to recall an existing irregular
verb form similar to the novel verb in meaning and
structure that the initial rule is overridden. What is not
explained by this are those cases in which participants
produced or preferred irregular verbs in the regular
context passages.
Another curious finding was the inability to replicate
Prasada and Pinker's (1993) and Huang and Pinker’s
(2010) findings that participants will produce regular
verbs no matter the semantic context of the passage, and
that they will also consistently rate regular verbs more
naturally despite the context. This difference might be
explained by our method of only obtaining one response
from each participant, suggested by Ramscar (2002).
Until now, there have been no studies on naturalness
rating of novel verbs using only one response per
participant.

Acknowledgements
Experiments 1 and 2 were conducted as part of the
requirements for Molly McCarthy's undergraduate honors
thesis project. We thank Judith Sims-Knight and Keota
Fields for serving as honors thesis committee members.

References
Hosmer, D., & Lemeshow, S. (1989). Applied logistic
regression. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Huang, Y.T., & Pinker, S. (2010). Lexical semantics and
irregular inflection. Language and Cognitive Processes,
25, 1-51.
Marcus, G., Pinker, S., Ullman, M., Hollander, M.,
Rosen, J.T., Xu, F., & Clahsen, H. (1992).
Overregularization
in
language
acquisition.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 21, 1-178.
McClelland, J.L., & Patterson, K. (2002). 'Words or rules'
cannot exploit the regularity in exceptions. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 6, 464-465.
McClelland, J.L., & Patterson, K. (2002). Rules or
connections in past-tense inflections: What does the
evidence rule out? Trends in Cognitive Science, 6, 465472.
Pinker, S., & Ullman, M.T. (2002). The past and future of
the past tense. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6, 456-463.
Prasada, S., & Pinker, S. (1993). Generalization of regular
and irregular morphological patterns. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 8, 1-56.
Ramscar, M. (2002). The role of meaning in inflection:
Why the past tense does not require a rule. Cognitive
Psychology, 45, 45-94.
Ramscar, M., Dye, M., & Hubner, M. (2012). When the
fly flied and the fly flew: How semantics affect the
processing of inflected verbs. Language and Cognitive
Processes, Volume, 1-30.
Rumelhart, D.E., & McClelland, J.L. (1987). Learning the
past tenses of English verbs: Implicit rules or parallel
distributed processing? In B. MacWhinney (Ed.),
Mechanisms of language acquisition (pp. 194-248).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

999

