UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of syntax-semantics mismatch on referent predictability: Evidence from Chinese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38h2b5bc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Cheng, Wei
Yuan, Man
Ferreira, Fernanda
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Syntax-Semantics Mismatch on Referent Predictability:
Evidence from Chinese
Wei Cheng (cheng22@email.sc.edu)
Linguistics Program, University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29208 USA

Man Yuan (77673817@qq.com)
Yinxing College of Hospitality Management, Chengdu University of Information Technology
Chengdu, 611743 China

Fernanda Ferreira (fernanda@sc.edu)
Psychology Department & Linguistics Program, University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29208 USA

Amit Almor (almor@sc.edu)
Psychology Department & Linguistics Program, University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29208 USA

predictability. For example, in an Explanation coherence
relation as indicated by the connective because, stimulusexperiencer (SE) verbs such as scare in (1) produce a
continuation bias towards Mary.

Abstract
Previous studies on reference tracking have established the
importance of semantic factors in affecting the likelihood of
re-mentioning a referent. This paper extends this line of
research by investigating the interaction between syntax and
semantics in this process. We conducted a Chinese sentencecompletion experiment and found that the degree of syntaxsemantics mismatch affects a referent’s likelihood of remention. The results thus support a theory relating a referent’s
salience in discourse to its likelihood of re-mention.

(1) Mary scared Sara because …

Keywords: Referent re-mention; accessibility; thematic roles;
psychological verbs; Chinese ba

Introduction
Recent studies (e.g., Levy, 2008) show that language
processing is constrained by linguistic constituents’
predictability, i.e., the likelihood of being mentioned
subsequently. In the field of reference processing, studies
(e.g., Kehler et al., 2008) have established the importance of
semantic factors in determining a referent’s predictability.
However, there are some controversies about the role of
syntactic factors in this process (Fukumura & van Gompel,
2010; Kaiser et al., 2011a, b). In this paper, we report a
reference production experiment investigating the possible
interaction between syntactic and semantic factors that may
affect a discourse entity’s predictability.
Kehler and Rhode (2013) suggested a division of labor
between semantics and syntax in reference tracking. On the
one hand, semantic factors such as verb meaning determine
the coherence relation between sentences, which affects
comprehenders’ predictions about the likelihood of
mentioning referents. On the other hand, syntactic factors
such as grammatical roles mainly affect the form of
reference and have little influence on referent predictability.
Kehler et al. (2008) discussed several types of coherence
relations which exert different influence on referent

Such preference reflects the verb’s implicit causality which
biases reference towards the cause of an event (namely, the
stimulus thematic role) under an Explanation coherence
relation. Replacing the connective because in (1) with so
would change the discourse relation from Explanation to
Result, therefore changing the referential bias towards the
experiencer of the event, i.e., Sara in (1).
Although the semantic factors mentioned above present
comprehenders a strong cue about the upcoming referent,
structural factors are argued to have a small effect on
likelihood of mention. For example, Fukumura and van
Gompel (2010) found no syntactic effect on a referent’s
likelihood of re-mention. Instead, they confirmed that remention bias is mainly due to semantic factors such as verb
meaning and discourse coherence relation. Based on the
results, they argued that syntactic factors influence an
entity’s accessibility in the mental discourse model but
semantic factors do not. In other words, they suggested a
dissociation
between
referent
accessibility
and
predictability.
However, research by Kaiser and colleagues (2011a, b)
shows that syntax matters in referent predictability. In an
aural story-continuation study with agent-patient verbs, they
found that in active sentences such as (2a), participants were
more likely to continue the sentence with reference to the
patient thematic role (i.e., Lisa) than agent (i.e., Mary).
However, when (2a) is passivized as in (2b), the patient
preference observed in (2a) disappeared, with the agent and
the patient almost equally predictable from the context.

2026

(2) a. Mary slapped Lisa at the zoo. As a result …
b. Lisa was slapped by Mary at the zoo. As a result …

(Kaiser et al., 2011a)
Kaiser et al. (2011a, b) attributed their findings to a
mismatch between syntactic semantic roles. The agent
thematic role is more prominent than the patient thematic
role. Therefore, in the passive structure, when the agent
Mary is demoted to the object position of the by-phrase, a
syntactically less prominent position, a syntax-semantics
mismatch happens. According to them, such mismatch
would draw comprehenders’ attention to the otherwise-lessprobable referent (namely, the agent Mary) and hence
increase its possibility of re-mention. In active sentences
like (2a), by contrast, syntactic functions align with thematic
roles in terms of prominence. The agent is projected in the
subject position, a syntactically prominent position,
therefore no mismatch. As a result, referent predictability
was not affected.
Since (2a) and (2b) had the same coherence relation, the
findings of Kaiser et al. (2011a, b) run against the
coherence-based account for referent re-mention as
proposed by Kehler and colleagues (2008, 2013). However,
they are compatible with Arnold’s (2001) Expectancy
Hypothesis which argues that accessible entities have a high
level of predictability. Antecedent accessibility can be
further interpreted as activation in the mental discourse
model, the strength of which is modulated by various
discourse contexts including syntactic and semantic factors
(Arnold, 2010). Under this account, the syntax-semantics
mismatch in (2b) makes the agent Mary more activated and
hence more accessible in comprehenders’ discourse model,
increasing its probability of re-mention.
This activation-expectancy account (Arnold, 2001, 2010)
raises the question of whether the degree of syntaxsemantics mismatch plays a role in determining referent
predictability. According to Arnold (2010), activation is a
graded notion. Meanwhile, syntax-semantics mismatch can
also be interpreted as a gradient phenomenon, i.e., a
continuum from no mismatch to a high degree of mismatch.
If a sentence has no mismatch, the referents’ activation will
not be affected. However, any increase on the mismatch
continuum may boost a referent’s activation, leading to
higher predictability. Crucially, this predication is different
from that of Fukumura and van Gompel (2010) who
assumed a separation between accessibility and
predictability such that any change in referent accessibility
will not affect the referent's likelihood of re-mention.
Another unsolved question in previous literature is
whether such syntax-semantics mismatch effect in referent
predictability works with other types of verbs, such as SE
verbs. Kaiser et al. (2011a) included SE verbs in their study
but did not find any effect of mismatch. This is expected
because they used items such as (3).

in the passive structure (3b), no mismatch occurs in that the
experiencer Lisa is located in the subject position, a
syntactically prominent position. By contrast, there is
syntax-semantics mismatch in (3a), as the experiencer is
demoted into the object position. Such mismatch did not
affect story continuation because the discourse coherence in
this sentence also produces a referential bias towards the
experiencer. Therefore, the absence of mismatch effect may
be due to a ceiling effect of the experiencer bias.
In a written story-continuation task, Rhode and Kehler
(2013) used stimuli like (3) but without connectives. They
found an effect of mismatch: there were more continuations
with the stimulus (i.e., Mary) in the passive than in the
active (76% vs. 59%). In other words, there was a boost
towards reference to the experiencer Lisa in the active
mismatch condition. However, one potential problem with
their study is that they didn't specify the coherence relation
between the prompt sentence and the continuation sentence.
Therefore, their results were confounded by the different
possible coherence relations participants could engage in.
In this paper, we addressed these questions in a sentencecompletion experiment by using Chinese SE verbs. A
special property of Chinese sentence structure makes it
possible to manipulate the degree of syntax-semantics
mismatch. Many Chinese active sentences can be expressed
in two ways, as shown in (4). In a canonical active structure
such as (4a), the experiencer Fupeng is projected after the
main verb. By contrast, with the use of a dummy word ba as
in (4b), the experiencer comes before the main verb.
(4) a. Active canonical
Dengxiang jinu-le
Fupeng.
Dengxiang anger-ASP Fupeng
‘Dengxiang angered Fupeng.’
b. Active ba
Dengxiang ba Fupeng jinu-le.
Dengxiang ba Fupeng anger-ASP
Following previous proposals (e.g., Li, 2006), we assume
that the post-ba NP is generated in the postverbal object
position and then moves up to its surface position.
Psycholinguistic studies (e.g., Bever & McElree, 1988) have
found that syntactically moved element is more prominent
for comprehenders. Therefore, we can assume that the
object NP is syntactically more prominent following ba than
the main verb. Given this, although in both (4a) and (4b) the
experiencer Fupeng (object NP) is in a less prominent
position than the stimulus Dengxiang (subject NP), resulting
in a syntax-semantics mismatch, the ba structure would
involve a lower level of mismatch than the canonical
structure. Such difference enables us to directly examine the
effect of degree of syntax-semantics mismatch on referent
predictability.

(3) a. Mary annoyed Lisa at the zoo. As a result …
b. Lisa was annoyed by Mary at the zoo. As a result …
(Kaiser et al., 2011a)

Experiment

According to Kaiser et al., the experiencer thematic role is
more prominent than the stimulus thematic role. Therefore,

2027

The experiment focused on SE verbs in Chinese. 1 We
manipulated syntax-semantics mismatch through three kinds
of structures: active canonical structure, active ba structure
and passive structure. In the actives such as those in (4)
above, the stimulus thematic role is the subject, while the
experiencer thematic role is the object. There is a syntaxsemantics mismatch in actives, as the experiencer that is
more prominent than the stimulus in the thematic hierarchy
occupies the object position, a syntactically less prominent
position than the subject position (Gordon & Hendrick,
1998). Moreover, as discussed above, the extent to which
syntax and semantics are mismatched is different between
these two types of active sentences, with the mismatch less
serious in the ba structure than the canonical structure.
However, when the sentence is passivized as in (5), the
mismatch disappears as the experiencer is located in a more
prominent subject position. Therefore, the three types of
structures enabled us to manipulate (the degree of) syntaxsemantics mismatch.

Fifty-one students in a university in China took part in the
study for extra credit. All of them were native speakers of
Mandarin Chinese.
Materials and Design
There were 18 test items in the experiment. All of them
were sentence fragments containing an SE verb with two
human characters of the same gender followed by a
connective yinwei ‘because’. In other words, we used a free
prompt (i.e., no pronoun) to elicit participants’ continuation.
The items were counterbalanced in terms of gender such
that half items had both female entities and half had both
male entities. All items appeared in three types of structures
(i.e., active canonical, active ba, and passive), making a
total of 54 experimental stimuli. Sample stimuli are given
below. We also constructed 18 filler items which contained
other types of verbs (e.g., xihuan ‘like’, piping ‘criticize’)
and connectives (e.g., ranhou ‘then’, danshi ‘but’).
(6) a. Active canonical
Dengxiang jinu-le
Fupeng, yinwei …
Dengxiang anger-ASP Fupeng because
“Dengxiang angered Fupeng because …”
b. Active ba
Dengxiang ba Fupeng jinu-le,
yinwei …
Dengxiang ba Fupeng anger-ASP because
“Dengxiang angered Fupeng because …”
c. Passive
Fupeng bei Dengxiang jinu-le,
yinwei …
Fupeng by Dengxiang anger-ASP because
‘Fupeng was angered by Dengxiang because …’

(5) Fupeng bei Dengxiang jinu-le.
Fupeng by Dengxiang anger-ASP
‘Fupeng was angered by Dengxiang.’
We used the connective yinwei ‘because’ to control the
coherence relation of discourse. When followed by because,
SE verbs produce a strong reference bias towards the
stimulus rather than the experiencer (Stevenson et al.,
1994).
If the likelihood of re-mention is determined by discourse
coherence relation (Kehler et al., 2008; Kehler & Rhode,
2013), we would not expect to see a re-mention difference
among the three structures because all of them had the same
coherence relation pointing to the stimulus as the potential
referent.
By contrast, if predictability is determined by accessibility
or activation (Arnold, 2001, 2010), we would expect to
observe a re-mention difference among the three structures
due to different degrees of syntax-semantics mismatch.
Specifically, since there is no mismatch in the passive, we
would expect to see in this structure a strong preference for
the discourse-biased entity (namely, the stimulus). On the
contrary, in actives where there is mismatch, the preference
for the stimulus may be compromised with a boost of
reference to the experiencer which is more activated due to
mismatch. Moreover, since mismatch is less serious in the
ba structure than the canonical structure as argued above,
there would be more instances of reference to the stimulus
in the ba structure than the canonical structure.

Method
Participants

1
Unlike English, Chinese has a limited set of SE verbs (Wen,
2006). Those which can occur with ba are usually a resultative
compound composed of a morpheme denoting an action and
another morpheme denoting the result of this action.

We used a Latin-Square design to divide the 54 test
stimuli into three lists such that every item only appeared in
one condition per list. The test stimuli and fillers were
pseudo-randomized with one filler between experimental
stimuli. To counterbalance the effect of trial order, three
reverse lists were also constructed. The 51 participants were
randomly assigned to each list, with three lists having eight
participants and three lists having nine participants.

Procedure
The experiment was administered in a class by the second
author. Participants were given a booklet and asked to
produce a meaningful and natural continuation to the
sentence fragment.

Coding and Analysis
The second author who is a native speaker of Chinese coded
the data first. Afterwards, another trained coder who was a
native Chinese speaker and naive to the purpose of this
study coded the data independently. The coders noted
whether the continuation started with reference to the first or
the second NP. The responses which had ambiguous
reference or reference to other entities than the two
characters in the main clause were coded as unclear.
Overall, the two coders achieved a coding agreement rate of
97%. The inconsistently coded responses (N = 28) were

2028

excluded from analysis. Thirty-four additional responses,
which were coded as unclear, were also excluded. Such data
trimming made one participant’s valid response rate very
low (28%), and this participant was thus eliminated, leaving
us the data of 50 participants. Overall, 7.4% of all responses
(N = 909)2 were eliminated.
As mentioned above, there is a strong re-mention bias
towards the stimulus when a sentence containing SE verbs
is followed by because (e.g., Stevenson et al., 1994). Since
our major concern was whether syntax-semantics mismatch
would affect this re-mention bias, we scored participants’
reference to either the stimulus or the experiencer .3 Because
the choice between the stimulus and the experiencer is
binary, we used mix-effects logit models to analyze our
data. These models are suitable for analyzing nominal data
(Jaeger, 2008).

both the passive and active ba structures demonstrate a
stronger stimulus bias than the active canonical structure.
Alternatively, this pattern can be interpreted from the
perspective of the experiencer thematic role. That is,
compared with the passive and ba structures, there was a
boost of reference to the experiencer in the active canonical
structure (see Figure 1).

Results
We first analyzed whether the list had an effect on the
results. We fitted a mixed logit model with structure (active
canonical, active ba, and passive) and list as fixed effects,
and subject and item as random effects with structure and
order as random slopes respectively. This model showed no
effect of list and no interaction between structure and list
(p’s > .1).
Since the list did not have an effect on our data, we
collapsed the data across the six lists and analyzed the data
with a focus on the effect of structure. As Figure 1 shows,
participants started the continuation with a strong preference
for the stimulus thematic role in all three types of structures
(>80%). In other words, the stimulus had a high
predictability. However, it can also been seen from Figure 1
that there was a difference among the proportions of
reference to the stimulus among the three structures. The
passive structure had the highest likelihood of re-mention
for the stimulus, the active canonical structure had the
lowest likelihood, and the active ba structure fell in
between.
A mixed logit model with structure as a fixed effect, and
subject and item as random effects with no slope, showed a
main effect of structure. Specifically, the stimulus was more
likely to be referred to in the active ba structure (87%) than
the active canonical structure (81.2%) (β = -0.54, SE = 0.27,
p < .05). However, no significant difference was found
between the active ba structure (87%) and the passive
structure (89.5%) (β = 0.25, SE = 0.30, p = .41), although
there was a trend for passives to have a stronger preference
for the stimulus compared with active ba structures. Thus,
2
The number of responses did not match the number of total
trials (18×51=918) because nine trials were not answered by
participants.
3
When coding the data, the coders coded whether participants
referred to NP1 or NP2. Note that the surface position of an entity
does not align up with its thematic role across conditions. In active
canonical and ba structures, NP1 is the stimulus and NP2 is the
experiencer. In the passive structure, NP1 is the experiencer and
NP2 is the stimulus.

Figure 1: Proportion of continuation reference

Discussion
In this paper, we investigated whether the interaction
between syntax and semantics, particularly the mapping
between syntactic prominence and thematic prominence,
affects the likelihood that a referent will be re-mentioned in
subsequent discourse. Moreover, we were interested in
whether such effect is modulated by the degree of
mismapping between syntax and semantics. By focusing on
Chinese SE verbs, we found that although the passive and
the active ba structure did not differ significantly in terms of
the likelihood of re-mentioning the stimulus, both of them
had a stronger preference for the stimulus than active
canonical structures. Overall, this means that the degree of
syntax-semantics mismatch has an effect on referent
predictability.
One may wonder whether the discrepancy between
passive and active sentences was due to the factor of
recency. In passives, the stimulus (the discourse-biased
entity) was more recent to the connective because in its
surface position than the experiencer. Thus, the factors of
discourse bias and recency coincided in passives. By
contrast, in actives the experiencer was more recent than the
stimulus. Although intuitively appealing, this explanation
cannot fully account for our results. In our items, the
experiencer was more recent than the stimulus in both the
active canonical and ba structures, and yet we observed a
higher probability of reference to stimulus in the ba
structure than in the canonical structure. Therefore, we
suggest that recency is not a crucial reason for our results.

2029

Rather, we take the results as a reflection of the effect of
syntax-semantics interaction on referent predictability. In
the active sentences in our study, syntactic prominence does
not match semantic prominence, as the experiencer which is
semantically more prominent than the stimulus (Grimshaw,
1990) is located in the object position. In passives, on the
contrary, there is no mismatch. Accordingly, our results
showed that sentences in passive voice had a stronger remention bias towards the stimulus (i.e., the discourse-biased
entity) than active sentences with a canonical order. Thus, in
the latter structure, there was a boost of reference to the
experiencer, an entity that was syntactically demoted but
semantically prominent. Such syntax-semantics interaction
effect was also noted by Ferreira (1994) who found that
when presented with SE English verbs, participants were
more likely to produce passives such that semantic
prominence aligned with syntactic prominence.
Therefore, our results extend Kaiser et al.’s (2011a, b)
findings on agent-patient verbs to SE verbs and lend support
to their argument that syntax-semantics mismatch affects a
referent’s re-mention probability.
In addition, a more important finding of our study is that
the degree of syntax-semantics mismatch affects an entity’s
likelihood of re-mention. We manipulated the degree of
mismatch by alternating active items between canonical and
ba constructions. Although in both structures the
experiencer is in a syntactically less prominent object
position, resulting in syntax-semantics mismatch, the degree
of such mismatch varies between the two structures. As
argued in Introduction, the syntactic prominence of the
experiencer is higher in the ba construction than in the
canonical construction, which leads to a lower degree of
mismatch in the former. Our results showed that there was a
significant difference in a referent’s re-mention probability
between ba and canonical structures. Specifically, we found
that compared with ba structures, there was a boost of
reference to the experiencer in canonical structures. This
indicates that the degree of mismatch influences
participants’ expectations about upcoming entity: the higher
level of mismatch, the more references to the otherwiseless-probable entity.
Overall, our results cast doubt on the coherence-driven
theory of referent predictability (Kehler et al., 2008; Kehler
& Rhode, 2013). According to this theory, whether a
referent will be mentioned again in subsequent discourse is
determined by the coherence relation of current discourse.
Since all the three structures in our materials had the same
SE verb and subordinate connective (because), they should
have the same coherence relation, namely, the Explanation
relation in Kehler et al.’s theory. Under this account,
therefore, no difference in continuation bias is expected
among the three types of sentences. However, as our results
showed, there was a significant re-mention difference
between the active canonical structure and the two other
structures. This discrepancy indicates that discourse
coherence relation is not the only factor behind
comprehenders’ calculation of potential referent.

However, we do not imply that Kehler and colleagues’
(2008; 2013) reference processing theory is wrong. In their
theory, coherence is involved in the process of predicting
upcoming referent, while structural factors are involved in
the process of integration. Our results only suggest that the
top-down process of prediction involves not only coherence
relations as claimed in their original proposal but also some
other factors such as syntax-semantics mismatch.
As mentioned in Introduction, the effect of degrees of
syntax-semantics mismatch on referent predictability is
compatible with Arnold’s (2001, 2010) proposal but not
with Fukumura and van Gompel’s (2010) account. Arnold
argued that a referent’s predictability is determined by its
accessibility or activation in the mental discourse model.
Syntax-semantics mismatch is a gradient phenomenon,
ranging from no mismatch to a high degree of mismatch.
The different degrees of mismatch may make certain entities
more or less accessible, resulting in different possibilities of
re-mention. By contrast, Fukumura and van Gompel
suggested that accessibility and predictability are
dissociated, with the former being affected by syntactic
factors and the latter by semantic factors. Thus, their theory
predicts that the degree of syntax-semantics mismatch has
little effect on the referent’s likelihood of re-mention.
Our findings confirmed the predictions of Arnold’s (2001,
2010) theory but ran against those of Fukumura and van
Gomel (2010). In our data, the active canonical structure
had the highest level of mismatch, leading to a big increase
in referent activation. By contrast, the ba structure had a
lower level of mismatch, thereby a moderate activation.
Accordingly, compared with the ba structure, we saw a
boost of reference to the experiencer thematic role in the
canonical structure. In other words, the experiencer became
more predictable in the canonical structure because it was
more activated due to a higher level of mismatch in this
structure than in the ba structure.
One of the results which appeared to be different from the
predications of the activation-expectancy account is that the
experiencer was not more predictable in the ba structure
than the passive structure. Given that there was a mismatch
in the ba construction but no mismatch in the passive, a
difference in referent activation and hence predictability was
expected. However, the data did not show any significant
difference. In the following, we suggest a possible reason
for this discrepancy.
On the one hand, due to mismatch, the experiencer was
more activated in the ba structure than in the passive. On the
other hand, entities in the subject position are more
accessible than those in lower positions in the syntactic tree
(Gordon & Hendrick, 1998). Since the experiencer was in
the subject position in the canonical structure but in the
post-ba position in the ba structure (see (7) below), it was
more activated in the former than the latter. Therefore, the
activation difference between the two structures was
cancelled out, making the experiencer equally predictable in
both structures. Such activation difference also existed
between the canonical structure and the passive. However, it

2030

was not cancelled out because the mismatch in the canonical
structure was so big that it greatly boosted the activation of
the experiencer in this structure, leading to a higher remention bias.
(7) a. Active ba
Dengxiang ba Fupeng jinu-le.
Dengxiang ba Fupeng anger-ASP
‘Dengxiang angered Fupeng.’
b. Passive
Fupeng bei Dengxiang jinu-le.
Fupeng by Dengxiang anger-ASP
‘Fupeng was angered by Dengxiang.’
One remaining question is why syntax-semantics
mismatch affects the experiencer but not the stimulus. After
all, the mismatch not only happens to the experiencer but
also the stimulus. In the active sentences, the stimulus
which is a thematically less prominent entity is located in
the subject position, a syntactically prominent position.
Thus, if mismatch has any effect, the stimulus should also
be affected. That is, like the experiencer, its mental
representation should also be more activated, resulting in
higher predictability. However, our results did not show any
increase in the predictability of the stimulus proportional to
the increase in degree of mismatch. Rather, in the active
canonical structure which had the highest level of syntaxsemantics mismatch, we saw the lowest chance of reference
to the stimulus.
We suggest two possible reasons. First, it could be due to
the inherent difference between the two thematic roles. That
is, the effect of mismatch only applies to a thematically
more prominent entity, i.e., the experiencer in our case.
Alternatively, it could be that there is no essential
difference between these two thematic roles with regard to
whether they will be affected by mismatch. It may be that
their asymmetry in our data was due to more general
cognitive factors. For example, there may be a threshold for
activation such that once an entity is activated to a certain
level its representation will not be further boosted. In our
materials, the stimulus was the default candidate for remention due to discourse bias, and hence might already be
activated above the threshold. Therefore, although its
syntactic function did not match its thematic role, such
mismatch would not lead to a stronger activation. This may
explain why the reference to the stimulus did not increase in
the active sentences compared with the passives.
Summing up, by looking at Chinese SE verbs we
confirmed previous findings on the interaction between
syntax and semantics and its effects on referent
predictability. Moreover, we found that the degree of
mismatch between syntactic and thematic prominence
affects the likelihood of re-mention. Such mismatch affects
predictability because it modulates a referent’s levels of
accessibility and activation. Our data highlight the need to
look at referent representation and processing from both a
linguistic perspective and a more general cognitive
perspective.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Weiyi Zhao for helping us code the data.

References
Arnold, J. E. (2001). The effect of thematic roles on
pronoun use and frequency of reference continuation.
Discourse Processes, 31, 137–162.
Arnold, J. E. (2010). How speakers refer: the role of
accessibility. Language and Linguistic Compass, 4, 187203.
Bever, T., & McElree, B. (1988). Empty categories access
their antecedents during comprehension. Linguistic
Inquiry, 19, 35-43.
Ferreira, F. (1994). Choice of passive voice is affected by
verb type and animacy. Journal of Memory and
Language, 33, 715-736.
Fukumura, K., & van Gompel, R. P. G. (2010). Choosing
anaphoric expressions: Do people take into account
likelihood of reference? Journal of Memory and
Language, 62, 52–66.
Gordon, P. C., & Hendrick, R. (1998). The representation
and processing of coreference in discourse. Cognitive
Science, 22, 389-424.
Jaeger, F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434–46.
Kaiser, E., Holsinger, E., & Li, D. C.-H. (2011a). Who
next? Consequences of syntax-semantics mismatches for
likelihood of mention. Poster presented at CUNY,
Stanford, CA.
Kaiser, E., Li, D. C.-H., & Holsinger, E. (2011b). Exploring
the lexical and acoustic consequences of referential
predictability. In I. Hendrickx, A. Branco, S. Lalitha
Devi, & R. Mitkov (Eds.), Anaphora Processing and
Applications (pp. 171-183). Heidelberg: Springer.
Kehler, A., Kertz, L., Rohde, H., & Elman, J. L. (2008).
Coherence and coreference revisited. Journal of
Semantics, 25, 1–44.
Kehler, A., & Rohde, H. (2013). A probabilistic
reconciliation of coherence-driven and centering-driven
theories of pronoun interpretation. Theoretical
Linguistics, 39, 1-37.
Levy,
R.
(2008). Expectation-based
syntactic
comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126-1177.
Li, Y.-H. A. (2006). Chinese ba. In M. Everaert & H. C. van
Riemsdijk (Ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Syntax
(Vol. 1). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Rohde, H., & Kehler, A. (2013). Grammatical and
information-structural influences on pronoun production.
Language and Cognitive Processes. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1080/01690965.2013.854918.
Stevenson, R. J., Crawley, R. A., & Kleinman, D. (1994).
Thematic roles, focus and the representation of events.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 519–548.
Wen, Y. (2006). A Study on Modern Chinese Psychological
Verbs. Doctoral dissertation, Beijing Language
University, Beijing.

2031

