UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
They know the words but not the music: Deficits in perceiving prosodic cues to emotion by
individuals with psychopathic characteristics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2sh1w1s1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Mackenzie, Angel
Logan, John

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

They know the words but not the music: Deficits in perceiving prosodic cues to emotion by
individuals with psychopathic characteristics

!

Angel Mackenzie (angelmackenzie@cmail.carleton.ca)
John Logan (john.logan@carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada

Abstract

!

Psychopathy is a personality disorder characterized by
callousness and shallow affect. It not only manifests
itself as a clinical condition but also exists as a
continuous personality trait in the general population.
Psychopathic individuals possess a deficit in emotionprocessing that interferes with their ability to perceive
emotional expression in others. Participants varying in
“subclinical psychopathy” (i.e., psychopathic
characteristics below the cutoff for psychopathy)
categorized the emotional prosody in semantically
neutral words and sentences representing five emotion
categories (happy, sad, angry, fear, and disgust). Wordlength stimuli were predicted to be perceived with
greater ambiguity than the sentence-length stimuli due
to the duration difference between the two kinds of
stimuli, with the difference between the stimuli
predicted to be larger for participants with more
psychopathic characteristics. Participants with more
psychopathic characteristics and participants with
fewer psychopathic characteristics were equally good
at identifying the emotion in sentence-length stimuli.
However, the participants with more psychopathic
characteristics were less accurate at identifying
emotion in word-length stimuli than participants with
fewer psychopathic characteristics. This indicates that
even individuals varying in levels of subclinical
psychopathy can differ in emotion perception,
particularly as the ambiguity of the stimuli increases.

individuals with sub-clinical levels of psychopathy (i.e,
relatively moderate levels of psychopathy), and 2) if so, the
nature of the deficit and how it compared with those with
higher levels of psychopathic characteristics.

!

Psychopathy
Psychopathy is a disorder of personality characterized
by both emotional and behavioural features (Blair,
Mitchell, & Blair, 2005). Emotionally, psychopathic
individuals are callous and manipulative with shallow
affect. Behaviourally, these individuals are impulsive and
goal-directed, often leading them to engage in antisocial
behaviour. They show a lack of concern for consequences
of their actions or the welfare of others. Approximately 1%
of the population can be categorized as psychopathic
(Forth, Brown, Hart, & Hare, 1996). In addition to being
viewed dichotomously as a personality disorder (either
present or absent), psychopathy can also be considered as a
trait that varies in the general population. Thus, individuals
may score highly on a measure of psychopathy without
meeting the criteria for true “clinical” psychopathy. Much
of the literature on psychopathy has focused on
psychopathy as a disorder, particularly studying
incarcerated populations, in part because psychopaths are
overrepresented in the correctional system compared to
their prevalence in the population (Coid, Yang, Ullrich,
Roberts, & Hare, 2009).
Studying the presence of psychopathic characteristics in
the general population (“subclinical” psychopathy) is
important because it emphasizes continuity between a
clinical disorder generally associated with extreme
behaviour (e.g., homicide) to less extreme but still negative
behaviours (e.g., cheating) that likely are to be much more
prevalent in the population. For example, research by
Paulhus and associates indicates that individuals with
moderate levels of psychopathic characteristics are more
prone to engage in cheating on tests than individuals with
low levels of psychopathic characteristics (Williams,
Nathanson, & Paulhus, 2010). From a theoretical
perspective, this suggests that psychopathy is not an “all or
none” disorder, but rather, a personality characteristic that
exists on a continuum, with individuals differing in terms
of exhibiting more or less of the features, or more or less
intense features, associated with the disorder. Extending
the logic of this type of research to the present study, it is
therefore important to determine if having features of
moderate psychopathy also affect aspects of cognition,
such as the perception of emotion.
Psychopathy offers an intriguing testbed for evaluating
the theoretical relationship between cognition and emotion.
Several models of psychopathy (e.g., Blair et al., 2005;

!

Keywords: psychopathy, emotion, speech perception

Introduction
Emotion is a key indicator of the status of others.
Information about the emotional status of others is
available in various forms, including facial expressions
(e.g., Darwin, 1872) and vocal affect (i.e., speech) (e.g.,
Scherer, 1986). The focus of the present work is the
perception of emotion information that is conveyed by the
prosodic cues in spoken language, and how personality
characteristics can influence the accuracy of listeners’
perception of this information. The specific personality
characteristic investigated in the present study is
psychopathy, in part because previous research has shown
that psychopathic individuals have a deficit in processing
emotion information in faces and spoken language.
However, almost all of this research has been done with
incarcerated individuals with clinical levels of
psychopathy. The goals of the present study were 1) to
determine if deficits in emotion perception were present in

881

Newman, 1987; Newman & Kosson, 1986) make strong
claims about how psychopathy affects cognitive
mechanisms such as attention and perception.

meaning) and varying emotional prosody (suprasegmental
variations in frequency and amplitude) representing five
emotions (happy, sad, angry, fear, and disgust). The task
requirement was to accurately categorize the emotion
represented in the prosody of each word. Psychopaths
demonstrated a higher error rate for categorization of
fearful prosody than nonpsychopaths, but no group
differences were observed for the other emotion categories.
This suggests that psychopathic individuals have a
decreased ability to identify fear in others compared to
normal individuals, a finding that is consistent with the
amygdala dysfunction and dysfunctional fear hypotheses.
Several other studies have measured the response of
psychopathic participants to auditory emotional stimuli and
have found evidence for deficits in processing of emotional
speech (Blair, Budhani, & Colledge, 2005; Bagley,
Abramowitz, & Kosson, 2009). It is difficult to cohesively
summarize the findings of these various studies, however,
because the methodologies vary and the emotions included
in each task are often different. Moreover, at the present
time, minimal research has examined perception of
auditory (spoken) stimuli in the context of subclinical
psychopathy.
If the expression, “they know the words but not the
music” holds true, it should be more difficult for
psychopathic individuals to perceive emotional information
conveyed by prosody in speech than for them to perceive
emotion via word meaning and syntax and semantics.
Emotion speech perception also has a practical application
as it replicates the context of interpersonal discourse.
Therefore, if psychopathic individuals struggle to
accurately interpret emotion expressed by others, assessing
the former’s ability to perceive emotional speech should
capture this impairment in a socially relevant way.
If psychopathic individuals are able to learn how to
produce appropriate responses to emotion-relevant
situations despite having a diminished capacity to perceive
emotion, would increasing the ambiguity of the stimuli
more effectively demonstrate this impoverished ability to
perceive emotion? If the appropriate responses
psychopathic individuals demonstrate are learned responses
that are achieved through social feedback, this feedback
must occur in a context with multiple social cues. The
presence of multiple social cues may contribute to the
acquisition of this learned response. Therefore, exposing
individuals who score highly on psychopathy to somewhat
ambiguous emotional stimuli would make any deficits in
emotion-processing they may possess more evident.
Prosody is typically thought of in the context of sentencelength stimuli: changes in prosody are likely to be more
accurately perceived when they occur over the length of a
sentence, where variations in pitch and tempo have a
greater temporal duration. Individual words, on the other
hand, provide such brief opportunities for the reliable
perception of prosodic cues that it is likely more difficult to
effectively convey emotion in word-length than sentencelength stimuli. For this reason it is relevant to note that
Blair et al. (2002) successfully used isolated spoken words
in their task requiring identification of prosody; however,
the use of incarcerated individuals with very high levels of

!

Psychopathy and the Perception of Emotion Stimuli
Psychopaths show deficits in processing for various
types of emotional stimuli, including faces (Pham &
Philippot, 2010), visually-presented words (Blair et al.,
2006), and imagery (Sutton, Vitale, & Newman, 2002).
Results are mixed, but studies often show a deficit in
processing fearful stimuli (Blair et al., 2005; Marsh et al.,
2011). One explanation for this is that psychopathy is
associated with impaired processing in the amygdala,
which is responsible for the automatic response to fear
(Kiehl, 2006; Blair & Mitchell, 2009). Studies have found
psychopathic individuals display reduced physiological
reactivity to unpleasant imagery (Patrick, Cuthbert, &
Lang, 1994) and are not as responsive to fear conditioning
as nonpsychopaths (Hare, Frazelle, & Cox, 1978), which
would be consistent with this explanation. Several theories
have been developed which account for a deficit in
emotion-processing, especially the impoverished response
to fearful stimuli. These accounts include the dysfunctional
fear hypothesis (Newman & Kosson, 1986; Birbaumer et
al., 2005; Blair et al., 2005), the amygdala dysfunction
hypothesis (Blair et al., 2005; Mitchell et al., 2006) and the
violence inhibition mechanism (Blair, 1995). These
accounts can be grouped into a single category of theories
describing deficits in perception and experience of fear that
will henceforth be referred to as the dysfunctional fear
hypotheses.
(The other major competing explanation for
psychopathic behaviours is based on the existence of an
attentional deficit. Newman’s response modulation theory
(e.g., Newman,1987) proposes that psychopathic
individuals are unable to suspend a dominant response to a
stimulus in the face of relevant feedback from the
environment. However, it is not clear how it would account
for the deficits in emotion perception that are the focus of
the present study.)
One explanation for psychopathic individuals’ ability to
appear to function successfully in society (without outward
indication of any psychopathology) is that they are able to
learn the appropriate emotional response to social
situations despite their failure to truly experience it. Johns
and Quay (as cited in Blair et al., 2006) coined the term,
“they know the words but not the music” to describe this
paradox. That is, psychopathic individuals can learn,
through social feedback, how they should respond in a
situation that would evoke a normal emotional reaction in a
nonpsychopathic individual. Thus, they can often respond
accordingly and mask any deficit in emotional
understanding they might possess.
Despite considerable research that has identified
impairments in processing of emotional stimuli in
psychopaths, few studies have explored this emotion
processing deficit using auditory emotional stimuli
(emotional speech). Blair et al. (2002) conducted a study
with psychopathic inmates wherein participants listened to
spoken words with neutral semantic content (word

882

psychopathy may have provided sufficient differences in
level of psychopathy to accentuate the group differences in
identification of emotional prosody.

subclinical population were not included in the study. The
SRP-III short version is comprised of 29 questions (e.g., “I
like to watch fist fights”) that are scored on a 5-point Likert
scale from Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (5). It is
scored on the four dimensions of Interpersonal
Manipulation and Callous Affect (combined to form Factor
1), and Erratic Lifestyle and Criminal Tendencies
(combined to form Factor 2), with individual factor scores
given in addition to a total SRP score.

!

Present Study
The current study measured the ability of individuals
scored on a measure of subclinical psychopathy to correctly
identify the emotional prosody present in words and in
sentences. We predicted that individuals who scored higher
on a measure of subclinical psychopathy would be more
likely to accurately identify the emotion conveyed by
prosodic information in sentences than in words. In
contrast, we predicted that low scoring individuals will
show equivalent levels of emotion identification
performance for the two types of stimuli.

!

Procedure
Data were collected online using Qualtrics software
(Qualtrics, 2013). Participants were provided a link to the
online study which brought them to the consent form,
followed by instructions for the task. A stimulus (word or
sentence) was presented and participants were required to
categorize the emotional prosody of the stimulus as one of
five emotion categories: happy, sad, angry, fear, or disgust.
These five options were displayed on the screen during the
task as a set of multiple choice items and participants were
instructed to click on the appropriate emotion category
using the cursor. As soon as the selection was made, the
next stimulus was immediately presented (approximately 1
second later). Stimuli were blocked separately by stimulus
type (word vs. sentence) and also separately by speaker
within stimulus type. Stimuli were randomized within
blocks and presentation of stimulus type was
counterbalanced. Participants were presented five practice
words at the beginning of the set of word trials and five
sentences for the set of sentence trials. Prior to the task,
participants completed several personality questionnaires
including the SRP-III.

!

Method
Participants
Participants consisted of 159 undergraduate students
enrolled in a first or second year psychology class.
Participants received course credit in return for
participation. The recruitment notice stipulated that
participants have normal hearing. Participants were scored
on the SRP-III with scores ranging from 29 to 88 (median
value of 49.5). A quartile split on the SRP-III was used to
distinguish between high and low scoring individuals with
the high scoring group representing the top 25% of SRP-III
scorers and the low scoring group representing the bottom
25% of SRP-III scores. This resulted in inclusion of 81
participants in the final analysis (40 = low scoring, 41 =
high scoring).

!

!

Materials
Speech Stimuli. The stimuli used in the present study
were based on words used by Blair et al. (2002). Seven
bisyllabic nouns with neutral semantic content (e.g., carpet,
daughter) were spoken with varying emotional prosody
representing one of five emotions: happy, sad, angry, fear
and disgust. All stimuli were approximately 500-600 ms in
length. All words were produced for each emotion category
by two different speakers (one male, one female). Since the
original study by Blair et al. used British English speakers
as the study was conducted in the United Kingdom, it was
deemed appropriate to create a new set of stimuli spoken
using “Canadian” English for the Canadian listeners
participating in the study.
The same two speakers also produced the set of
sentence-length stimuli. Five sentences with neutral
semantic content (e.g., “My coffee table is brown”) (the
sentences were originally developed by David Kosson)
were reproduced with the same five emotions (happy, sad,
angry, fearful, and neutral) that were used to produce the
word stimuli. Fewer sentences were included in order to
make the two experiment conditions (words and sentences)
more comparable in duration.
Individual Differences Measure. The SRP-III (SelfReport Psychopathy scale) (Paulhus, Neumann, & Hare, in
press) was administered to participants prior to the
experimental task. Individuals who scored higher on
psychopathic characteristics than would be found in the

Results
A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted for
stimulus type (word vs. sentence) × SRP group (high/low)
× emotion × speaker on both accuracy and response times.
Sphericity was observed for all effects discussed.
Although response times were recorded and analyzed,
these results will not be discussed here as there were no
significant results for response times. This is not surprising
as this can be attributed to the method in which data were
collected (using the cursor method rather than a keystroke
response option). The prolonged time required for
participants to move the cursor to the appropriate selection
made the RTs too long to be practically useful.
A main effect of stimulus type (word vs. sentence) on
accuracy was observed (F(1,79) = 80.14, MSE = 4.63, p < .
001), with sentence-length stimuli producing higher
accuracy than word-length stimuli. There was a significant
interaction between stimulus type and SRP Group (F(1,79)
= 5.49, MSE = .32, p < .05) (see Figure 1), with
comparable accuracy for identification of sentence-length
prosody between high and low scoring individuals but
poorer accuracy for identification of word-length prosody
by high scoring than low scoring individuals. There was a
main effect of emotion identification accuracy (F(4,316) =
80.14, MSE = 2.887, p < .001), with happy stimuli proving
the most easy to identify and disgust stimuli the least.
There was a significant effect of SRP group (F(1,79) =
7.41, MSE = 1.51, p < .01), with high scoring individuals

883

displaying lower overall accuracy rates across all emotion
categories. There was no significant interaction between
SRP group and emotion, indicating that although high
scoring individuals show discrepancies in their ability to
perceive emotional prosody in general, and for word-length
prosody in particular, compared to low scoring individuals,
there were no differences between high and low scorers
related to specific emotion categories. There was a
significant interaction between stimulus type and emotion
(F(4,79) = 20.82, MSE = .75, p < .001) (see Figure 2), with
higher accuracy rates for sentence-length stimuli in all
emotion categories except, surprisingly, for fear. This is
counter to what was predicted as it was expected that there
would be a particularly noticeable difference between high
and low scoring individuals in their ability to perceive
fearful stimuli given the results of Blair et al. (2002). There
was no significant effect of speaker, suggesting that
idiosyncratic qualities of the speakers’ voices were not
responsible for the observed effects.

Conclusion
As predicted, individuals who scored higher on the
SRP-III showed greater deficits in their ability to categorize
emotional prosody in words than sentences when compared
with low scoring individuals. For categorization of
emotional prosody in sentences, high scoring participants
showed accuracy rates comparable to low scoring
participants. For categorization of emotional prosody in
words, however, high scoring participants were less
accurate than low scoring participants. Due to the brief
presentation of prosody information in word-length
compared with sentence-length stimuli, words can be
thought of as more ambiguous representations of emotional
prosody. When presented with stimuli that provide a strong
representation of emotional prosody in the form of
sentences, high scoring individuals are able to perceive the
prosody conveyed in the sentence as effectively as low
scorers.
This pattern of results is consistent with the proposed
theory that individuals high in psychopathic characteristics
have a deficit in emotion-processing, an impairment that
becomes evident with increasingly ambiguous emotional
stimuli. While highly psychopathic individuals may be able
to replicate accurate reactions to emotional stimuli and
apply these appropriately in social interactions, these
responses do not necessarily reflect the same extent of
emotional understanding as the average person would
experience. The results of the present study demonstrate
that individuals vary in their ability to effectively perceive
emotion information conveyed by prosodic cues in speech,
and that differences in the duration of the prosodic cues
appears to be the major underlying this difference.
However, between the extremes of isolated words and
sentence-length stimuli, it remains unclear what would
constitute a sufficiently long stimulus that would provide
enough unambiguous prosodic information for individuals
with moderately high levels of psychopathy to accurately
perceive the intended emotion. It may be challenging to
devise stimuli that permit a systematic examination of this
issue due to the interplay between how prosody is used in
linguistic units that span the difference between isolated
words and sentences.
A noteworthy finding was that higher levels of
psychopathy were not associated with a problem perceiving
fear, a finding not consistent with the fear dysfunction
hypotheses. Rather than displaying a deficit in emotionprocessing specific to fearful stimuli as identified by Blair
et al. (2002) in psychopathic inmates, high scoring
individuals in the present study showed poorer ability to
accurately identify emotional prosody consistently across
all emotion categories. This suggests that perhaps the
deficit in emotion-processing experienced by individuals
with subclinical psychopathy does not directly map onto
the impairment as seen in individuals who meet the criteria
for true psychopathy.
Further exploration of the emotional deficiency in
individuals with subclinical psychopathy and how it relates
to emotional impairment in those with clinical psychopathy
is needed. Future analyses also will need to examine
differences related to individual SRP factor scores rather

!

Figure 1. Accuracy for identification of emotional prosody
in word-length vs. sentence-length stimuli by SRP-III
Group (High/Low). Error bars indicate standard error of the
mean.

	  Propor&on	  Accuracy

1
0.75
0.5
Word-­‐length
Sentence-­‐length

0.25
0
Low-­‐scoring

"

High-­‐scoring

SRP-­‐III	  Group

!

Figure 2. Accuracy for identification of emotional prosody
by emotion category. Error bars indicate standard error of
the mean.

Propor&on	  Accuracy

1
0.75
0.5

Word-­‐length
Sentence-­‐length

0.25
0
Angry Disgust

Fear

Happy	  

Sad

Emo&on	  Category
"

!
884

than overall SRP score to determine whether these
differences in perceiving emotional prosody are more
heavily reliant on the callous/unemotional component than
the impulsivity/behavioural component of psychopathic
traits. On the other hand, if the impulsivity component of
psychopathy is implicated in the attenuated ability of those
with high levels of psychopathy, then it may permit
accounts of psychopathy based on an attention deficit (i.e.,
Newman’s (1986) response modulation theory) to compete
with the fear dysfunction hypothesis as a viable theory of
emotion processing in this personality disorder.

Marsh, A., Finger, E., Schechter, J., Jurkowitz, I., Reid, M.,
& Blair, R.J. (2011). Adolescents with psychopathic
traits report reductions in physiological responses to fear.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 28(2),
834-841.
Mitchell, D.G.V., Fine, C., Richell, R.A., Newman, C.,
Lumsden, J., Blair, K.S., & Blair, R.J.R. (2006).
Instrumental learning and relearning in individuals with
psychopathy and in patients with lesions involving the
amygdala or orbitofrontal cortex. Neuropsychology,
20(3), 280-289.
Newman, J.P. (1987). Reaction to punishment in extraverts
and psychopaths: Implications for the impulsive behavior
of disinhibited individuals. Journal of Research in
Personality, 21, 464-485.
Newman, J.P., & Kosson, D.S. (1986). Passive avoidance
learning in psychopathic and nonpsychopathic offenders.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95(3), 252-256.
Patrick, C.J., Cuthbert, B.N., & Lang, P.J. (1994). Emotion
in the criminal psychopath: Fear image processing.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103(1), 523-534.
Pham, T.H., & Philippot, P. (2010). Decoding of facial
expression of emotion in criminal psychopaths. Journal
of Psychiatric Disorders, 24(4), 445-459.
Paulhus, D. L., Neumann, C., & Hare, R. D. (in press).
Manual for the self-report psychopathy scale. Toronto:
Multi-Health Systems.
Qualtrics (Version 38,972) [Software]. (2013). Provo, UT:
Qualtrics Research Suite.
Scherer (1986). Vocal affect expression: A review and
model for future research. Psychological Bulletin, 99(2),
143-165.
Sutton, S.K., Vitale, J.E., & Newman, J.P. (2002). Emotion
among women with psychopathy during picture
perception. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111(4),
610-619.
Williams, K. M., Nathanson, C., & Paulhus, D. L. (2010).
Identifying and profiling scholastic cheaters: Their
personality, cognitive ability, and motivation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 16, 293.

!

References
Bagley, A.D., Abramowitz, C.S., & Kosson, D.S. (2009).
Vocal affect recognition and psychopathy: Converging
findings across cluster analytic approaches to assessing
the construct. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118(2),
388-398.
Birbaumer, N., Veit, R., Lotze, M., Erb, M., Hermann, C.,
et al. (2005). Deficient fear conditioning in psychopathy:
A functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 62(7), 799-805.
Blair, R.J.R. (1995). A cognitive developmental approach
to morality: Investigating the psychopath. Cognition, 57,
1-29.
Blair, R.J.R, Budhani, S., & Colledge, E. (2005). Deafness
to fear in boys with psychopathic tendencies. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(3), 327-336.
Blair, R., Mitchell, D., & Blair, K. (2005). The psychopath:
Emotion and the brain. Blackwell Publishing: MA, USA.
Blair, R.J.R., & Mitchell, D.G.V. (2009). Psychopathy,
attention and emotion. Psychological Medicine, 39,
543-555.
Blair, R.J.R., Mitchell, D.G.V., Richell, R.A., Kelly, S.,
Leonard, A., Newman, C., & Scott, S. (2002). Turning a
deaf ear to fear: Impaired recognition of vocal affect in
psychopathic individuals. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 111(4), 682-686.
Blair, K.S., Richell, R.A, Mitchell, D.G.V., Leonard, A., &
Morton, J. (2006). They know the words but not the
music: Affective and semantic priming in individuals
with psychopathy. Biological Psychology, 73(2),
114-123.
Coid, M., Yang, M., Ullrich, S., Roberts, A., & Hare, R.D.
(2009). Prevalence and correlates of psychopathic traits
in the household population of Great Britain.
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 32(2),
65-73.
Forth, A.E., Brown, S.L., Hart, S.D., & Hare, R.D. (1996).
The assessment of psychopathy in male and female
noncriminals: Reliability and validity. Personality and
Individual Differences, 20(5), 531-543.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man
and animals. London: John Murray,
Hare, R.D., Frazelle, J., & Cox, D.N. (1978) Psychopathy
and physiological responses to threat of an aversive
stimulus. Psychophysiology, 15(2), 165-172.
Kiehl, K.A. (2006). A cognitive neuroscience perspective
on psychopathy: Evidence for paralimbic system
dysfunction. Psychiatry Research, 142(2-3), 107-128.

!

885

