UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Transferring Primitive Elements of Skill Within and Between Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/88f575v9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gittelson, Logan
Taatgen, Niels

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Transferring Primitive Elements of Skill Within and Between Tasks
Logan J. Gittelson (gittel@rpi.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, 110 8th Street
Troy, NY 12180 USA

Niels A. Taatgen (n.a.taatgen@rug.nl)
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Nijenborgh 9
Groningen 9747 AG Netherlands
Abstract

We chose these two tasks because they both produce
distinct behaviors depending on the developmental stage of
the subject. Specifically, the way in which multiple
dimensions are handled changes depending on which stage
the subject is currently in.
If task-specific skills are guided by task-general strategies
we should see some of the general strategies being acquired
in one task transfer to another. We explore this hypothesis
by training on either the BBT and TTB task to see whether
prior training on one seemingly unrelated task improves
performance on the other. We can analyze both the transfer
between tasks, but also the transfer between stages within a
task.
At present, our work is free of empirical data and based
solely on the concepts and parameters of ACTransfer.
Hence, what we present here are theory-based predictions
free of parameter tuning to empirical data.

The primitive elements of skill theory proposes a set of
approximately 2000 primitive information processing
elements (PRIMs) (Taatgen, 2013) that compose all cognitive
acts by combining and recombining to produce learning and
transfer. By this theory, learning is transfer and transfer
results from learning as the primitive elements combine to
form new elements based on task demands and these more
complex elements are reused later in learning (thereby
producing increase in skill) and repurposed by different tasks
(thereby producing transfer). We illustrate PRIMs in this
paper by producing two models of the Balance Beam Task
(BBT) and of the Take the Best heuristic (TTB). Although
BBT and TTB do not, on the surface, possess much in
common, when run in a transfer paradigm (TTB-to-BBT or
BBT-to-TTB) each model harvests PRIMs created by its
predecessor, thereby demonstrating positive transfer.
Keywords: Balance Beam; Take the Best; ACTransfer;
primitive information processing elements (PRIMs)

Balance Beam Task
The balance beam task has been a focus of study for many
years. This task was originally developed by Piaget (1958)
and extensively studied by Siegler (1976, 1981), among
many others. The task involves a subject (typically a child
around age 11) being shown a balance beam with a certain
number of equally massive weights on each side at certain
specific distances from the fulcrum, with the beam being
held from tipping in either direction. The subject is then
asked which direction the balance beam will fall (or if it will
stay balanced) upon release. After the subject submits their
answer the beam is then allowed to tilt, showing the correct
answer.
The methods used by children performing this task were
said by Inhelder and Piaget to reflect developmental stages,
and not experience-based changes in strategies. However,
our immediate interest in this task is not with its history in
developmental psychology but as a demonstration of
general transfer with the ACTransfer theory. The 4 stages
are:

Introduction
For decades cognitive scientists have been studying the
amazing phenomenon of learning. Many researchers have
developed theories and models of skill acquisition, but none
have fully captured the mechanism behind learning. This
illusive concept not only covers the development and
refinement of a single isolated skill, but also the influence of
previous experience and its influence on future learning.
Ever since Thorndike and Woodworth's (1901) formal
introduction of the concept, transfer has been a topic
touched on by numerous researchers. Some work in the field
includes Singley (1989) and, most recently, Taatgen (2013).
Besides transfer scientists have also been interested in
peoples' capacity to learn and reason at different ages.
Inhelder and Piaget (1958) proposed a multi-stage model
which has been supported by the results of many decision
making tasks (Siegler 1976, 1981). We decided to use these
stages in modeling Goldstein and Gigerenzer's (1996) Take
the Best heuristic in the form of a decision making task.
Both Piaget's Balance Beam Task (BBT) and Gigerenzer's
Take The Best heuristic (TTB) have been a focus of
cognitive modeling (Van Rijn 2003, Nellen 2003). By using
Taatgen's ACTransfer modeling framework (Taatgen, 2013)
we can create models for both BBT and TTB and then
analyze the transfer between them.

Stage 1 Subject only considers a single dimension (in this
case usually the number of weights on each side),
the subject then makes a decision based on only
that factor.

529

Stage 2 Subject considers various factors until one is found
to support an individual side or all known factors
are considered and therefore must balance.

Best is used in artificial intelligence for decision making in
limited information, time-pressured environments.

Stage 3 Subject considers all factors and chooses the side
with the most number of supporting factors
(guesses if it's a tie).

ACTransfer (Taatgen, 2013) is a cognitive modeling
framework built on top of ACT-R, a widely used framework
in the field of computational cognitive modeling (Anderson,
2007). The purpose of ACTransfer is to model and measure
transfer between tasks. For example, the classically used
cognitive experiment which tested typists learning to use
different text editors, and assessed how learning one task
influences how quickly one learns another, can be modeled
very well in this framework. ACTransfer is able to model
this phenomenon by breaking up traditional production rules
in to more basic generalized elements called Primitive
Information Processing Elements (PRIMs). PRIMs come in
three different varieties, which all act upon slots in ACT-R's
buffers. One kind copies information between slots, another
kind compares two slots for equality, and the third writes to
the slots from declarative memory (Taatgen, 2013).
As each combination of PRIMs is used those connections
become stronger and faster, thus improving performance on
other tasks that share the same combination of PRIMs. Not
always do tasks that share PRIMs have surface similarities.
ACTransfer has shown unexpected connections between
several tasks (Taatgen, 2013). However, it is fair to say that
the exploration of transfer between the TTB and BBT tasks
represents a minor milestone in the application of the theory
to predict general transfer.
ACTransfer models can be run to show the estimated time
to complete certain tasks. These estimations can then be
used to calculate the transfer between tasks with the
equation developed by Katona (1940). In basic terms, the
percent transfer is the improvement on the task by trial n
after training on a different task, divided by the
improvement on the task by trial n after training on the same
task. If Pl(1) is performance on that task on trial 1, and Pl(n)
is performance on trial n after performing that task on trials
1 through (n-1), and Pt(n) is performance on that task on
trial n after performing a different task on trials 1 through
(n-1): %Transfer = ( ( Pl(1) – Pt(n) ) / ( Pl(1) – Pl(n) ) ) *
100.
Transfer should be expected between any models that
share similar production rules. The tasks analyzed here
mostly share actions such as memory retrieval (translating
data from the world into something usable by the model),
buffer comparison (deciding if two values are equal), and
response (an active response given by the model to choose
an option). These rules become more complex as in later
stages as illustrated by Figure 1 below.
Some similarities were unavoidable between the tasks, but
others were focused on by the modeler with the logic that a
single human would perform all of these tasks in a relatively
similar way. Nonetheless, the transfer between models
should be most representative of the similarities between the
tasks.

ACTransfer

Stage 4 The value of each factor is added up (or multiplied
if they have been taught the torque rule), this is the
final stage. Multiplication is usually not
considered, unless explicitly taught, because
addition so often yields the correct answer. This
stage is not in the model.

Take The Best
Take the Best tasks (Gigerenzer, et al . 1996, 1999) involve
a subject being given two options along with facts about
each, and then choosing the best option. An example of this
is determining which city is larger, given a list of facts about
each. Take the Best can be used as a time-pressured
algorithm that looks at the most important factors first. In
time-pressured situations it is important to make a decision
as quickly as possible, but there may not necessarily have a
hard time limit. To make this model comparable to the
balance beam task no time-pressure is considered. The
stages in this task are similar to that in the balance beam
task, except that in this task any number of dimensions can
be considered (in this model we restrict it to three) as
opposed to the balance beam's built-in limit of two. As well
as the difference in the number of possible dimensions,
Take the Best only has three stages (opposed to balance
beam's four stages), these stages are:
Stage 1 Subject only considers first dimension and answers
based on that.
Stage 2 Subject considers a sequence of new dimensions
until a fact which supports a single option is found.
If this evidence is not found and the list of known
dimensions is exhausted than the subject will
answer that all options are equal.
Stage 3 Subject considers all known dimensions and adds
together how many dimensions support each
option. Once all dimensions are analyzed the
number of facts supporting each side are compared,
if equal it is answered that all options are equal.

Previous Models
Models have been made for both the Balance Beam Task
and Take the Best, each emphasizing their own features.
The closest models to this one are Van Rijn's (2003)
Balance Beam ACT-R model and Nellen's (2003) Take the
Best ACT-R model (because ACTransfer is built on top of
ACT-R). The Balance Beam Task has been focused on by
mostly psychology and cognitive science while Take the

530

Figure 1: A graph of the various PRIMs (small circles) connecting the various models (large
circles). (BB means Balance Beam Task)

Balance Beam Task Implementation

The Model

The balance beam task is implemented with three distinct
stages. The first stage, which models the first psychological
stage mentioned earlier, interacts with the simulated
environment to observe the first property (semantically this
is weight, but the model has no concept of that). The model
then uses its declarative memory to retrieve the fact relevant
to that observation, which it answers upon. Every time any
of the models observes the environment they also perform
this fact retrieval, the logic behind it being that an
observation by itself is not usable knowledge until parsed.
The second stage of the balance beam model starts the
same as the first, except it does not always answer
immediately. If the first property does not explicitly support
the left or right side falling (that the beam will balance) then
the environment is queried again for a fact. When this
second fact is retrieved (it is recognized as the second by
virtue of its working memory being full) it is used to give
the answer (because the first fact must necessarily have
been 'balance').

The model created for this paper examines stages 1 through
3 of the Balance Beam Task and stages 1 through 3 of the
Take the Best task using the ACTransfer framework. While
stage 3 of both tasks are theoretically the same, they are
modeled differently. Because the balance beam task is only
comparing two dimensions, no sense of counting or number
comparison is used, only congruency between the last
remembered dimension and the current dimension. The
Balance Beam models also do not contain an internal list of
properties (unlike the Take the Best models) because they
only look at two dimensions. It is plausible that the Balance
Beam models in general do not need any sort of list. A list
may be unnecessary because all that's needed for their
heuristics is just a memory of whether they retrieved a
property yet. This model does not aim to include any of the
nuanced between stage properties like no-feedback
transitions, rather it only looks at transfer. What we hope to
see is transfer between the models, showing that learning
one of the previous stages helps in learning the next stage
and/or the other task.

531

Table 2: Results of training and testing the model within and between tasks.
The third stage of the balance beam model works the same
way as the second stage, except that it always observes both
dimensions and does not immediately answer based on the
second observation. Instead the third stage uses the
conditions of its production rules to determine if the two
dimensions of evidence are congruous (in which case it
answers the side they suggest), if one dimension suggests
'balance' (in which case it chooses the other dimension), or
if the evidence is incongruous (in which case it guesses the
answer).

number of dimensions, unlike stages 2 and 3 of the Balance
Beam model.
The third stage of the Take the Best model is more
involved than any of the other stages. Like stage 3 of the
Balance Beam model it considers all known dimensions
before deciding, but instead of being able to just store a
single dimension in working memory it must count how
many pieces of evidence it observes in support for each
option. After the list of dimensions is exhausted it compares
the two numbers in working memory to determine which
side has more evidence. In this model it can only count up
to three, but with more facts in working memory it could
work on any number of dimensions.

Take The Best Implementation
For Take the Best, the first stage is similar to the first stage
of the Balance Beam model. The largest difference, for both
this stage and the rest of the Take the Best stages, being that
the model observes a specific, predetermined, property in
the environment. This is different than the balance beam in
that the model actually specifies which fact it is observing
(rather than just “the next fact”), after the first stage the
model must use declarative and working memory to
determine the next dimension.
The second stage acts with the same basic principle as the
balance beam's second stage, except instead of considering
only two dimensions it continuously observes new
dimensions until either evidence is found to support one
choice over the other or its list of known dimensions is
exhausted. This stage could hypothetically consider any

Results
Using Katona's transfer equation stated earlier with an n of
101 we found the results shown in Table 2.
The leftmost column denotes which task the model was
trained on for the first 100 trials. The topmost row denotes
which task the model was tested on for the 101 st trial, except
for the “no training” row in which the task was tested
without any prior training (for the purpose of getting a
baseline). The “Difference” rows show the difference in
time between the model attempting the task with no prior
training (the first row) and its attempt at the task after 100
trials of training (the task trained on is specified in the leftmost column). The “Transfer” rows show the percent
transfer derived from Katona's equation. For the stages

532

testing is done on that stage only (e.g. Stage 3 Balance
Beam Task training is independent of training any other
stages, it simply means a completely fresh model was run
on stage 3 for 100 trials before a 101 st testing trial on
whatever condition was specified)

frequently than others, so the training on these rarer types of
trials would be much less developed.

Conclusion
These models show how important intermediate
developmental stages are to the development of decision
making. Expecting a child to jump from stage 1 to stage 3,
skipping stage 2, in any of these tasks would be
unreasonable given the increased ease of going through the
intermediate stage. Transfer between the tasks showed that
going from a more complicated task to a less complicated
one had the highest transferability, but initially learning the
less complex task would help a child learn the more
complicated one, especially at earlier developmental stages.
ACTransfer has proven itself to be a powerful tool in
exploring learning and transfer that can lead to some
surprising results. This framework could be used to support
ideas such as Bavelier's (2003) notion of video games
improving certain cognitive functions. It would be no
surprise to see a task as complex as a video game to activate
a plethora of PRIMs which are also used in a number of
other tasks.
This framework could also push forward educational
entertainment. Perhaps instead of directly teaching children
the contents of traditional lesson plans we could use tasks
similar to activities they willingly partake in during their
free time. Having them learn these skills, with low-level
connections to the desired skill that is trying to be taught,
we could hide away rigorous practice in tasks that students
enjoy, possibly even without their knowledge.
We see ACTransfer as ushering in a new age of modeling
which could lead the way forward to discovering a whole
array of connections between tasks that we never knew
existed. Once these connections are discovered there lies
endless possibilities for skill training and learning in
general.

Analysis
In the Balance Beam Task, the 70% transfer between stage
1 and stage 2 indicates that learning stage 1 does indeed
help in learning stage 2, similar results are seen between
stage 2 and 3 with a 70% transfer. The transfer between
stages 1 and 3 is only 49% though, showing that the
intermediate stage 2 clearly assists the transition.
Take the Best shows similar results, although not as
strongly. 36% transfer between stage 1 and 2 show that they
are related, but not as closely as the balance beam stages.
30% transfer between stage 2 and 3 show similar existent,
yet weak results. The mere 7% transfer between stages 1
and 3 indicate that virtually no transfer occurs between the
two, showing again that stage 2 is very important to
transition to the final stage.
Horizontal transfer between tasks is not symmetrical,
showing that going from Take the Best to Balance Beam
carries, in general, higher transfer. This suggests that take
Take the Best is a more complex task, which was expected
given the increased number of dimensions. Looking at each
stage individually, stage 1 carries the highest transfer with
43% going from the Balance Beam Task (BBT) to Take the
Best (TTB) and 50% going from BBT to TTB, again this is
reasonable given the simplicity and shared heuristics of the
two stages. Stage 2 is the second most closely associated,
with 30% transfer in either direction. Stage 3 shows the
largest discrepancy in directionality with 15% going from
BBT to TTB and 27% going from TTB to BBT. These
values for stage 3 could be explained by the addition of
counting and comparing values in the Take the Best model.
An interesting result of this model is that there is more
transfer between Take the Best and Balance Beam at
equivalent stages than there is between Take the Best at any
particular stage and the next stage up. Notably, this same
effect does not appear going from the Balance Beam Task to
Take the Best. This conclusion seems to support the idea of
a unified stage of development in one sense. This
conclusion can also be explained as Take the Best being a
task that has stages which are particularly difficult to
advance through and the Balance Beam Task being
generally easier.
One of the biggest problems with this paper's model is
that some stages go through radically different paths of
production rules depending on what kind of trial they are
dealing with. For example, stage 2 in both the tasks can
either be very quick, requiring a look at only the first
dimension, or take a longer time, requiring looking at
multiple dimensions if the first dimension does not indicate
a specific option to choose. Because of this discrepancy the
model will encounter certain levels of difficulty much less

Acknowledgments
A special thank you to Prof. Niels Taatgen and the whole
Cognitive Modeling lab at Groningen for a wonderful and
productive semester. Thank you to Prof. Wayne Gray for
supporting my research and assistance editing.

References
ACT-R v6.0. Retrieved March 15, 2013, from “ACT-R 6.0”
Web site: http://act-r.psy.cmu.edu/actr6/.
ACTransfer v0.45. Retrieved March 15, 2013, from
“Transfer:
ACTransfer”
Web
site:
http://www.ai.rug.nl/~niels/ACTransfer.html.
Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2003). Action video game
modifies visual selective attention. Nature, 423(6939),
534-537.
Inhelder, B., and Piaget, J. (1958). The Growth of Logical
Thinking : From Childhood to Adolescence. Basic Books,
Inc.

533

Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). "Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality".
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Czerlinski, J., Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999).
"How good are simple heuristics?" In Gigerenzer, G.,
Todd, P. M. & the ABC Group, Simple Heuristics That
Make Us Smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Katona, G. (1940). Organizing and memorizing: studies in
the psychology of learning and teaching.
Nellen, S. (2003). The use of the “take-the-best” heuristic
under different conditions, modeled with ACT-R. In
Proceedings of the fifth international conference on
cognitive modeling (pp. 171-176).
Rijn, H. v., Someren, M. v., & Maas, H. v.d. (2003).
Modeling developmental transitions on the balance scale
task. Cognitive Science, 27, 227-257.
Siegler, R. S. (1976). Three aspects of cognitive
development. Cognitive Psychology 8:481–520.
Siegler, R. S. (1981). Developmental sequences within and
between concepts. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development 46(2):1-74.
Singley, Mark K. (1989) The transfer of cognitive skill.
Harvard University Press, No. 9.
Taatgen, N.A. (2013). The nature and transfer of cognitive
skills. Psychological Review, 120(3), 439-471.
Taatgen, N.A. (2013). The gap between architecture and
model: strategies for executive control. AAAI Technical
Report FS-13-03 (pp. 95-101). Palo Alto, CA: AAAI
Press.
Taatgen, N.A. (2013). Diminishing return in transfer: A
PRIM model of the Frensch (1991) arithmetic
experiment. Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on cognitive modeling (pp. 29-34). Ottawa:
Cartelon University.
Thorndike, E. L. and Woodworth, R. S. (1901) "The
influence of improvement in one mental function upon the
efficiency of other functions", Psychological Review 8

534

