UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two Plus Three Is Five: Discovering Efficient Addition Strategies without Metacognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2gx1j1qq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hansen, Steven Stenberg
McKenzie, Cameron Ross Lloyd
McClelland, James L.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two Plus Three Is Five:
Discovering Efficient Addition Strategies without Metacognition
Steven S. Hansen (sshansen@stanford.edu)
Cameron McKenzie (crlmck@stanford.edu)
James L. McClelland (mcclelland@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Abstract

several early models did have this character (Neches, 1987).
However, the paucity of solution paths that involved faulty
strategies appear to rule out the „take a random step‟ style
exploration used by most reinforcement learning models
(Crawley, Shrager, & Siegler, 1997). Trial and error
accounts were thus rejected, and replaced by a theory that
posited a metacognitive mechanism with explicit, domainspecific content knowledge to filter out flawed strategy
proposals. This mechanism allows the discovery of new
strategies while producing only reasonable errors. However,
it remains unclear how children could acquire the complex
knowledge required to judge the appropriateness of their
own strategy proposals. The acquisition of the
metacognitive filter is neither explained nor explicitly
modeled.
The approach taken in this paper is to circumvent this
difficulty by proposing that a metacognitive filter may not
be necessary in the first place. We accomplish this by
modifying a standard trial and error, reinforcement-learningbased paradigm to be biased towards previously learnt
actions. We note that children learning the addition task
have already learnt to count out numbers of objects, count
on their fingers, and perform addition using a fingercounting strategy (Siegler & Jenkins, 1989). As we shall
demonstrate, instantiating a model with biases towards these
actions obviates the need for a metacognitive filter. We also
expand the notion of retrieval – a „strategy‟ that circumvents
the need to engage in a structured sequence of behaviors by
simply recalling the correct final answer to a problem – by
suggesting that retrieval might also occur for appropriate
subparts of a larger problem. Our model makes several
novel predictions about the discovery process and questions
the notion that selection and discovery processes necessarily
take place at the level of complete strategies.

When learning addition, children appear to perform a
remarkable feat: as they practice counting out sums on their
fingers, they discover more efficient strategies while avoiding
conceptually flawed procedures. Existing models that seek to
explain how children discover good strategies while avoiding
bad ones postulate metacognitive filters that reject faulty
strategies. However, this leaves unexplained how the domainspecific knowledge required to evaluate a strategy might be
acquired prior to addition being mastered. We introduce a
biased exploration model, which demonstrates that new
addition strategies can be discovered without invoking
metacognitive filtering. This model provides a fit to data
comparable to previous models, with the considerable
advantage of avoiding an appeal to knowledge whose source
is not itself explained. Specifically, we fit the pattern of
changes in strategy use over time as children learn addition,
as well as the overall error rate and error types reported
empirically. The model suggests that the critical element
allowing strategy discovery may be prior learning, rather than
metacognitive strategy evaluation. We close by offering
several empirical predictions and propose that what others
have called strategies might often be decomposable into
elements that can be assembled on the fly as problem solving
unfolds in real time.
Keywords: M athematical Cognition; Strategy Discovery;
Reinforcement Learning; M etacognition.

Introduction
Single-digit addition is one of the first hurdles children
master on their way to mathematical competence. Given the
importance of mathematics to educational attainment, it is
unsurprising that the process by which children learn
addition has received considerable attention (eg, Siegler &
Jenkins, 1989). A remarkable observation from these studies
is that, once they are equipped with the ability to count out
sums on their fingers, children spontaneously (without
instruction) exhibit faster strategies. Despite this willingness
to innovate, children rarely arrive at a strategy that, when
executed correctly, leads to the wrong answer. This poses a
real problem for trial and error theories of learning. As they
acquire new, faster strategies, how do children know which
strategies to avoid?
Several attempts have been made to model the evolution
of children‟s approaches to solving simple addition
problems. The apparent absence of explicit instruction in the
use of particular observed s trategies would normally make
reinforcement learning a candidate mechanism, and indeed

Background
The data our model attempts to account for comes from a
study examining 4 and 5 year olds‟ discoveries of new
finger addition strategies (Siegler & Jenkins, 1989).
Children are assumed to come to the task knowing a correct
but inefficient strategy, and are observed in a series of
sessions spread over approximately three months as they
solve simple addition problems . Over this time, children
gradually acquire strategies that lead to faster completion of
the task.

583

In our view, it is important to frame the dis covery process
against the backdrop of relevant previously learnt
procedures. The most important to our theory is what we
will call the count-list procedure whereby the child learns to
step through a stable ordering of the number words,
sometimes while counting out fingers or other physical
tokens. The count list is a prerequisite for learning addition
and is known by all children in the study.
We also assume (following Davidson, Eng & Barner,
2012) children can perform the how many task, in which the
child verbally goes through his count list in order,
simultaneously pointing to the next in a set of physical
tokens, then responding with the number reached when the
items in the set have been exhausted. It is generally accepted
that this behavior is well learnt by the time children are
taught their first addition procedure. Finally, we assume
children have mastered the give-a-number or give-n task,
which involves providing a supply of tokens and asking the
child to give the experimenter (or other target) a certain
number of them. Children who can perform this task for
numbers larger than 4 do so by stepping through the count
list as they remove them one by one from the supply,
stopping when they reach the reques ted number.
In the study we will be considering, children were
enrolled in a preschool/kindergarten that taught a standard
procedure, known as the „sum‟ strategy, for correctly adding
two numbers together. This procedure begins with the child
counting from one up to the value of one of the two
addends, while simultaneously putting up a finger or taking
a token from a pile on each count. The remaining addend is
counted out in the same manner. The child then proceeds to
count off each finger/token that she has previously
enumerated. For example, a protocol for the problem “2+3”
might read: “one, two (while raising two fingers), one, two,
three, (while raising three more fingers), one, two, three,
four, five (while counting the raised fingers). Five.” Crucial
to our later modeling, this protocol can be reframed in terms
of previously learnt procedures. The first step is a „give-anumber‟ task where the number to be given is one of the
addends. The second step is the same, but targeting the
second addend. Finally, to produce the answer, a „how
many‟ task is performed on the fingers/tokens produced by
the previous two tasks.

introduced (i.e. problem with one very large addend), which
caused children who had already discovered the min
strategy to expand its usage rapidly.
In the study, the majority of children discovered two new
strategies, and generally did so in the same order. The first
discovery was the shortcut-sum strategy, and this tended to
occur very early on in the study.1 This strategy involves
counting up from one to the sum of the two numbers ,
though the interpretation of this behavior is a key question
posed by our theory.
The second strategy, the min strategy, consists of counting
from the larger of the two addends up to the sum. For
example, for the problem “2+5”, a possible protocol would
be: “five, six, seven. The answer is seven.” This strategy
slowly gains dominance over both the shortcut-sum and sum
strategies. While these transitions are occurring, children
also gradually increase their reliance on the „retrieval
strategy‟, simply recalling the correct answer.
Given the categorical nature of their coding scheme, the
researchers focused their analysis on when new strategies
were discovered, how often they were used thereafter, and
whether or not any incorrect strategies were ever used. The
results of the study partially supported the idea that strategy
change occurred through an exploration-based, incremental
learning process. Children were not always able to describe
or explain their new strategies to the experimenter.
However, the authors also found no evidence that incorrect
strategies were ever used and they argued that exploration of
the space of possible strategies should lead to such errors.
Though children did sometimes answer problems
incorrectly, the authors argued that these errors did not
represent the sort of conceptual mistakes one would assume
children would make if they were randomly exploring the
space of possible strategies.

The SCADS Model (Shrager and Siegler, 1998)
In the years following this study, Siegler and colleagues
built several computational models to explain their data,
culminating in SCADS (Strategy Choice And Discovery
Simulation), which posits initial knowledge of the „sum‟
strategy, a retrieval system for recalling answers based on
associative learning, a module that proposes new strategies
and another module that filters out proposals that do not
meet criteria assuring their adequacy.
SCADS captures some aspects of the successive
emergence of strategies shown in the behavioral data.
However, the transitions in learning are far more rapid than
in the empirical data, and no account is given for how
children would acquire the posited metacognitive filtering
mechanism. It is this gap that we attempt to address.

After prescreening sessions where the children‟s
knowledge of the sum strategy was verified, the children
were asked to solve addition problems across several
sessions. The children predominantly used the „sum‟
strategy at first, but adapted their procedures over time,
generally moving to approaches that increased accuracy
while decreasing time taken. The experimenters coded the
children‟s behavior as falling into one of several discrete
„strategies‟ on a trial by trial basis. At no point was only a
single strategy chosen for all problems . Instead, there were
„overlapping-waves‟ of strategies. As shown in Figure 1b,
the distribution of strategies changed quite slowly, though in
the last block of trials “challenge” problems were

1

These transitions are quite gradual on the time scale of the Siegler
and Jenkins (1989) study, and some participants are already on
their way into adopting these strategies at the outset of the study,
but they are easily seen in aggregate data over longer time periods
(Svenson & Sjöberg, 1983).

584

B

A

C

Figure 1: A) The SCADS model B) Behavioral strategy usage data across four blocks of 35 problems, average over 8
subjects. 60 prescreening trials were also administered but not recorded here. The abrupt change from the third to final
block was due to a large intervention involving a spike in problem difficulty at the beginning of block 4. C) The biased
exploration model, with data averaged over 100 runs. The milder strategy transitions are due to the lack of intervention
(Shrager & Siegler, 1998; Neches, 1987). Which of these
two conceptualizations is the better account of human
behavior is an empirical question, and the two mechanisms
are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
The size of the second addend is positively correlated
with error rate when the shortcut-sum strategy is used, and
this has been seen as evidence that the strategy was
discovered to eliminate redundancy. It has been
hypothesized that the increased error rate comes from the
child having to hold two numbers in mind (one for the total
count, and another for the count within the second addend).
However, our recognition account is also compatible with
this increased error rate, as larger second addends allow
more chances to terminate the counting process, as well as
providing more time to forget the problem, thus lowering
the chance of recognizing the answer.
The second transition, from „shortcut sum‟ to „min‟
involves (a) skipping the counting out of the addend chosen
to be dealt with first and (b) choosing the larger of the
addends as the first one to deal with. Skipping the counting
of an addend can be seen as a sort of retrieval, wherein it is
the result of the subtask that is recalled rather than the
answer to the entire problem. This subtask structure is part
of the „sum‟ strategy, which contains two instances of the
preexisting „give-a-number‟ task, first learned prior to
encountering addition. Thus part (a) of the „min‟ strategy
comes about by starting with the „shortcut sum‟ strategy, but
instead of performing the full „give-a-number‟ task for the
first addend and then counting on, the child retrieves the end
state of this subtask and then counts on. Part (b), choosing
the larger of the two addends first, follows quickly from
random exploration due to the inclusion of time cost in the
reinforcement learning algorithm: The reward signal
associated with producing the answer comes sooner in this

The Biased Exploration Model
Our model approaches the problem of strategy evolution
through the use of a standard reinforcement learning system.
It attempts to do away with the domain specific strategy
proposal and filtering modules of SCADS. It avoids
incorrect strategies because action is biased towards related,
previously learned, procedures. The key insight arises by
breaking down the two main strategy discoveries („shortcut
sum‟ and „min‟) into the component steps needed to allow a
new policy to arise from a predecessor.
For the „shortcut sum‟ this means making two critical
exploratory steps away from the existing „sum‟ strategy
policy. The first is to continue going through the count list
after reaching the end of the first addend, rather than starting
the count over at one for the second addend. The seco nd is
to stop going through the count list once the correct numeral
is uttered. This second step can be seen as relying on
problem specific knowledge, but avoiding reliance on recall
by replacing it with an easier recognition problem whereby
the child merely has to stop counting when the value
reached feels like it is correct.
Exploration of this shortcut sum strategy can take place
without assuming there is uniform exploration across all
possible states and actions. We propose that the previously
learnt counting procedure gives children a tendency to
continue counting even when the first addend is reached .
Thus, whilst the majority of the time the model chooses the
sum strategy, occasionally a latent tendency to perform the
related counting task takes over and an „exploratory‟ step is
made. Critically, this exploratory step speeds up task
performance but does not lead to an error.
We should stress here that the discovery process proposed
above is very different from prior proposals, which focus on
realizing the redundancy in having to recount both addends

585

case, so the effective reward for dealing with the larger
addend first is greater.

known as the TD error, is used to update both the critic and
the actor.
All of the knowledge the model has about what actions to
execute is stored in 10 two-dimensional tables, one for the
state space of each of the 10 possible problems , as shown in
Figure 2b. Each table can be imagined as a 6x6 square,
where each cell represents a state of the world relevant to
solving the specific problem associated with the table. The
first dimension represents the number of fingers/tokens
currently raised, from 0 to 5 (we only consider addition
problems with sums up to 5, though nothing prevents the
extension to larger problems). The second dimension is an
echoic buffer that represents the last numeral uttered.
Each cell of the table contains 5 values, each representing
the propensity towards taking a specific action in that state.
There are 5 possible actions: perform a give-a-number
subtask on the first addend, perform a give-a-number
subtask on the second addend, perform a how-many subtask
on the fingers currently raised, raise one more finger and say
the next number in the count list, state that your previous
utterance is your final answer. The first three actions are
referred to as subtasks, since they involve a mediating
process before affecting the state. When called upon to
perform one of the subtask actions, either the end state is
retrieved, or failing that, the whole subtask is carried out
without interruption.
In addition to these actions, the agent tries to retrieve the
sum at the start of each problem, and the action selection
process described above only occurs when this initial
retrieval fails. The assumptions made for retrieving this sum
(as well as the subtask end states) are taken straight from
SCADS. This memory mechanism, the „distributions of
associations‟ model, learns by accumulating association
strengths between the task at hand and the various possible
end states, with the idea being that it will converge to the
correct answer as this is the most common end state for an
agent competent at the task. When called upon to make a
retrieval, a threshold is stochastically set and compared to
each association strength. If no associations are higher than
this threshold, then the retrieval fails to return an answer. If
multiple associations are above the threshold, the retrieved
association is randomly chosen from this set (Siegler &
Shrager, 1984).
We give the model the initial „sum strategy‟ policy by
looking at all of the states encountered when executing this
strategy, and setting the model‟s action preferences in these
states to be consistent with the actions taken by the strategy.
A weak preference for actions consistent with proceeding
through the count list while putting up fingers is also
encoded. As noted above, this is critical to the discovery of
the shortcut-sum strategy in the model.
The model was trained on problems randomly sampled
from cases where the sum was no greater than 5 and
averaged over 100 runs. Since a tabular version of the
Actor-Critic architecture was used, the top-level policy
information (which subtask or primitive action to select)
about each addition problem was learnt independently.

A

B

Figure 2: A) The actor-critic architecture as instantiated in
the biased exploration model. The discrepancy between
the critic‟s predicted cumulative value and reality is used
to update both the critic and the actor. B) The state space
of the biased exploration model for the problem „two plus
three‟, with arrows representing a sample trajectory for
the sum (red) and shortcut sum (green) strategies as well
as the count list procedure (blue). Each cell contains
propensities for executing each of the five possible
actions (see main text) at that state. The cell in the inset
shows the propensities when in the „two fingers up, just
said two‟ state.
Implementation We implemented the model within the
actor-critic reinforcement learning architecture. While this
architecture has traditionally been chosen for its relative
biological plausibility, here its utility comes from the fact
that an actor-critic model learns by modifying the current
policy. This feature limits how drastically a single learning
step can affect the behavior of the agent (Sutton & Barto,
1998). This is important in part because it prevents the large
number of errors typically associated with reinforcement
learning. Since the initial policy (the explicitly taught sum
strategy) is accurate, the model avoids a big change unless it
consistently outperforms this existing solution.
As shown in Figure 2a, the actor-critic model consists of
two main parts: the actor who selects actions to perform
based on the current state, and the critic who predicts the
expected cumulative reward of the actor at that state. At
each time step an action is selected by treating the actor‟s
action propensities as probabilities (via the softmax
function). The action is performed, which modifies the state
of the agent and produces some reward value. The critic is
then able to see whether or not its prediction was better or
worse than expected by comparing it against this actual
reward plus its expectation at the new state. This signal,

586

However, the give-a-number subtasks were shared across
problems (for example, there was a single give-3 subtask,
which could be carried out by iterating up to 3 or by
producing 3 fingers all at once). While strategy learning
may have a degree of problem specificity, as in the current
model, sharing across specific problems seems likely, and
some proposals on how to do so are put forward in the
discussion section.

then sum‟ strategy has not been reported in children to our
knowledge, instances might have been lumped together with
the sum strategy, based on their operational definition of the
sum strategy as putting up fingers for each addend (agnostic
as to whether they are simultaneously counted) and then
counting them together. On this basis, we lump our model‟s
data for the „retrieve larger, then sum‟ strategy together with
the prototypical sum strategy for comparison with the
microgenetic study data.

Results

Error Analysis Both the kind and quantity of the model‟s
errors fell within the bounds of a typical child in Siegler‟s
microgenetic study or a cross -sectional study covering
similar addition problems (Siegler & Jenkins 89, Svenson &
Sjöberg 83). The error rate averaged across 100 trials of
each problem type was 13.4%, compared to 15% in the
Siegler study. The problems Shrager and Siegler had
assumed went hand in hand with trial and error learning,
such as counting out a single addend twice, were also
absent. This was determined by examining each erroneous
trial and summing across those where the model made
identical steps. Categorizing each unique error would be
quite time prohibitive, but over 50% of errors occurred in a
small number of unique action sequences. Of this group, the
vast majority of the errors were in retrieval, with a failure to
inhibit counting beyond the correct answer being the only
other significant category of errors .
The retrieval errors have strong empirical support, and
occur in our model precisely because its retrieval system is
very closely based on the existing literature (Siegler &
Shrager, 1984; Siegler & Shipley, 1995). The failures to
inhibit counting, or „count on‟ errors, are a consequence of
our approach. Our theory relies on children taking steps in
line with procedures related to, but different from, the task
at hand, specifically the count-list procedure. Occasionally
the model fails to stop counting upon reaching the sum,
which is precisely what is happening in the count on errors.
Whilst the exact frequency is not reported, Siegler and
Jenkins (1989) themselves report that children occasionally
count past the correct answer. One strong empirical
prediction of our model is that thes e errors should
occasionally occur and be indicative of a child in the early
stage of learning, before the shortcut sum strategy is
consistently accurate.

The primary concern of this article was to demonstrate the
viability of an exploration-based model of strategy
discovery in addition. Following previous work (Shrager &
Siegler, 1998), we focus on the qualitative fit to the pattern
of strategy use as a function of problems encountered. A
principal claim of the model is that avoidance of implaus ible
errors can occur without metacognitive filters, so we also
examine the model‟s errors, including the overall rate and
types of errors. Whilst preferable, quantitative assessment of
model fit is not possible, as detailed raw data is not
available (Siegler, personal communication).
To ensure a valid comparison between our model and the
available data, our model was trained for the same number
of trials as the human participants (4 blocks of 35 trials). We
trained the model for 2 preliminary blocks (labeled blocks 1 and 0 in Figure 1c) prior to this to account for the
prescreening trials the participants received.
Strategy Distribution Dynamics Our model‟s strategy
choices over time are shown in Figure 1c, where the number
of correct trials is plotted for each strategy for each
successive block of 35 trials. Since strategies are not
explicitly represented anywhere in our model, the action
sequence for each trial was examined to specify the strategy.
We omit from figure 1 strategies which never achieved a
usage rate greater than 5%. Additionally, the min strategy is
discovered around the same time as in the study, which co occurs with dropping usage of the sum strategy. In the
study, there is an abrupt change from the third to final
block; this was due to the inclusion of challenge problems
(not yet addressed in our simulations) at the beginning of
block 4.
Some of the model‟s solutions did not fit into one of the
preexisting strategies, but played a significant role in the
usage dynamics of the model. Specifically, a strategy
emerged whereby the larger addend was retrieved (i.e. by
recalling the end state of its give-a-number subtask), but
then the rest of the solution followed the steps of the sum
strategy. This „retrieve larger, then sum‟ strategy (which
occurred on 13% of trials averaged across the six blocks)
played a crucial role in setting up the order dependence later
needed in the min strategy. Having order dependence
develop here solves the problem previous trial-and-error
accounts have had where min discovery relied on first
discovering the „count from first‟ strategy, which is rarely
used in children (Neches, 1987). While the „retrieve larger

Discussion
We set out to explore how the problem of strategy discovery
might be solved without a metacognitive filter, while
avoiding a high error rate and approximating the pattern of
change in strategy use observed in Siegler and Jenkins,
1989. The biased exploration model showed this to be
possible and additionally demonstrated that strategies can be
composed by assembling parts on the fly, rather than being
selected as units at the start of the problem. This allows fine
grained variations in strategies to be used, and predicts that
such variation, such as the „retrieve larger, then sum‟
strategy, will be seen in behavioral data.

587

Distinguishing our account from that of the
SCADS model and investigating the extent to which
metacognition plays a role in the discovery process will be
another focus of our future work. One area where the
models make distinct predictions is in the rationale behind
the use of the shortcut sum strategy. The SCADS model
claims that children track the total while also counting out
the second addend, while our account relies on habitually
counting on until the sum is recognized, avoiding the need
to keep track of the second addend. This may be amenable
to empirical exploration. Self-reports might also be used to
differentiate these accounts, but we stress that we do not
claim children do not eventually discover a rationale for
their actions. Our claim is only that they need not do so
before the actions themselves emerge.
Another area for future work will be to address the
problem-specific representations of our current model and to
explore the consequences of this for the model‟s predictions.
Sharing information between problems might simply
accelerate the learning process, but more fundamental
changes are also possible. For example, sharing could
increase certain errors due to confusion of one problem with
another, which would change the pressures that lead to
strategy discovery.
Another approach we are exploring is to let a
neural network control the policy across all of the problems
(in this case, the problem state would be represented as an
input feature vector), as this could allow a more nuanced
sharing of discovery information to emerge (it is possible to
see at least some versions of a table-driven model as an
alternative implementation of this neural-network based
approach).
Going forward, we plan to extend our model to
account for another stream of evidence that has previously
been used to support the notion of metacognition: the
recognition of never-before seen strategies. Children that
have been shown the min strategy before discovering it still
rate it as better than an incorrect strategy (Siegler &
Crawley, 1994). While this has previously been taken as
support for the proposed metacognitive filter, we suggest
that the biased exploration model can account for this data
as well by using the agent‟s value function to evaluate novel
strategies. Such an extension is indicative of our overall
goal with this model: to set up a new foundation for selfguided learning that will allow a rethinking of the role of
metacognition in strategy discovery.

metacognitive
and
associative
mechanisms.
Developmental Review, 17(4), 462-489.
Davidson, K., Eng, K., & Barner, D. (2012). Does learning
to count involve a semantic induction?. Cognition, 123(1),
162-173.
Neches, R. (1987). Learning through incremental refinement
of procedures. Production system models of learning and
development, 163-219.
Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1998). SCADS: A model of
children's strategy choices and strategy discoveries.
Psychological Science, 9(5), 405-410.
Siegler, R. S., & Shrager, J. (1984). A model of strategic
choice. Origins of Cognitive Skills. Hills dale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Siegler, R. S., & Jenkins, E. (1989). How children discover
new strategies. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Siegler, R. S., & Crawley, K. (1994). Constraints on
learning in nonprivileged domains. Cognitive Psychology,
27(2), 194-226.
Siegler, R. S., & Shipley, C. (1995). Variation, selection,
and cognitive change. Developing cognitive competence:
New approaches to process modeling, 31-76.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement
learning: An introduction (Vol. 1, No. 1). Cambridge:
MIT press.
Svenson, O., & Sjöberg, K. (1983). Evolution of cognitive
processes for solving simple additions during the first
three school years. Scandinavian journal of psychology,
24(1), 117-124.

Acknowledgments
Thanks go out to the whole Parallel Distributed Processing
Lab at Stanford, for their support throughout the research
process and to Robert Siegler and the reviewers for useful
comments.

References
Crawley, K., Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1997). Strategy
discovery as a competitive negotiation between

588

