UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Type of iconicity matters: Bias for action-based signs in sign language acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31p325jc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Ortega, Gerardo
Sumer, Beyza
Ozyurek, Asl

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Type of iconicity matters: Bias for action-based signs in sign language acquisition
Gerardo Ortega (gerardo.ortega@mpi.nl), Beyza Sümer (beyza.sumer@mpi.nl) and Aslı Özyürek
(asli.ozyurek@mpi.nl)
Centre for Language Studies, Radboud University and
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Wundtlaan 1, 6525XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

variants are possible: One depicting the action associated
with a referent (action signs) and the other depicting its
perceptual features (perceptual signs). By investigating the
use of different types of iconic signs between interlocutors
of different ages, it will be possible to understand whether
iconicity plays any role in sign language acquisition.
Research on this issue is timely given the growing interest
on how direct mappings between a linguistic label and a
referent may facilitate language development in the manual
(sign) and spoken (speech) modalities of language (Perniss
et al., 2010).

Abstract
Early studies investigating sign language acquisition claimed
that signs whose structures are motivated by the form of their
referent (iconic) are not favoured in language development.
However, recent work has shown that the first signs in deaf
children’s lexicon are iconic. In this paper we go a step
further and ask whether different types of iconicity modulate
learning sign-referent links. Results from a picture description
task indicate that children and adults used signs with two
possible variants differentially. While children signing to
adults favoured variants that map onto actions associated with
a referent (action signs), adults signing to another adult
produced variants that map onto objects’ perceptual features
(perceptual signs). Parents interacting with children used
more action variants than signers in adult-adult interactions.
These results are in line with claims that language
development is tightly linked to motor experience and that
iconicity can be a communicative strategy in parental input.

Iconicity in Spoken and Signed Languages

Keywords: sign language, acquisition, iconicity, action,
perception, sound-symbolism

Introduction
Manual languages stand out for their prevalence to include a
large number of linguistic labels whose forms are motivated
by the form of the concepts they represent (Klima &
Bellugi, 1979; Perniss, Thompson, & Vigliocco, 2010;
Taub, 2001). The overwhelming abundance of iconicity in
signed languages compared to spoken languages makes it a
viable route to investigate whether direct links between a
linguistic form and a referent have any role in language
acquisition. Early investigations on the role of iconicity
during sign language development concluded that nonarbitrary (i.e., motivated) links between a sign and the
concept it depicts did not facilitate learning (Conlin, Mirus,
Mauk, & Meier, 2000; Meier, Mauk, Cheek, & Moreland,
2008; Orlansky & Bonvillian, 1984). A recent study,
however, reports that iconic signs are the first to be
comprehended and produced by deaf children acquiring a
sign language natively (Thompson, Vinson, Woll, &
Vigliocco, 2012). An explanation behind these contradicting
findings may relate to iconicity being operationalised in a
broad sense when in fact a more granular differentiation
between different types of iconic depictions is required. The
present study furthers our understanding of this issue by
investigating patterns of usage of specific types of iconic
signs by deaf users of Turkish Sign Language (Turk Isaret
Dili, TİD) from different age groups. Specifically, we
investigate the use of iconic signs for which two lexical

Regardless of whether they are expressed in the oral-aural or
visual-manual channel, languages can “mimic” the acoustic
or visual properties of their referents and use them as basis
of their phonological structure. In spoken languages, words
can make non-arbitrary links with the sounds produced by
their referent and use them as linguistic labels. This is the
case of onomatopoeia (e.g., moo for ‘cow’) and ideophones
(gblogblogblo in Siwu for ‘bubbling’) (Assaneo, Nichols, &
Trevisan, 2011; Dingemanse, 2012). Words representing the
acoustic properties of their referents (sound-symbolism) are
present in many non-Western languages, like Japanese and
Siwu (Dingemanse, 2012; Perniss et al., 2010) but relative
to signed languages, their occurrence is infrequent. In
contrast, languages expressed in the manual-visual modality
stand out for their tendency to include in their lexicons a
large number of signs that incorporate features of their
referents.
Through iconic depictions, signs may represent
characteristics of an entity, motion patterns and spatial
relationships between objects (Taub, 2001). Iconic signs
may also represent whole entities, parts of an object or
simply point at objects present (Mandel, 1977). Iconicity is
also expressed at the sub-lexical level because the
phonological constituents of signs may also express features
of the concept they represent (Cuxac, 1999; Pietrandrea,
2002; van der Kooij, 2002).
Relevant to the present study is the occurrence of more
than one iconic lexical variant to represent a concept. In
many sign languages, lexical variants may represent
physical features of a referent (perceptual signs) or an action
associated with an object (action signs). In TİD, for

1114

example, two lexical variants TOOTHBRUSH1 can represent
its thin, elongated shape (Figure 1A) or how a toothbrush is
manipulated (Figure 1B). These are permissible lexicalised
variants that refer to the same concept.

Figure 1 Lexical variants for toothbrush in Turkish Sign
Language. TOOTHRBUSH (A) represents the perceptual (long,
thin) features of the referent (perceptual sign) while
TOOTHRBUSH (B) depicts how a toothbrush is manipulated
(action signs).
Iconic lexical variants are common in sign languages but
it is unclear what factors drive lexical choice during signing.
Researchers investigating this issue have observed patterns
of usage across different sign languages and thus propose
that sign languages can be clustered into typological groups
according to the referents they depict and the structural
devices which represent them (phonological constituents).
For instance, Nyst (2013) has argued that West African sign
languages like Adamorobe and Malian Sign Language
encode iconicity in signs through very similar mechanisms
but these differ significantly in how iconicity is depicted in
European sign languages. Padden et al. (submitted) coined
the term patterned iconicity to describe the phenomena by
which sign languages prefer one form of iconic depiction
over another (e.g., choosing action over perceptual signs).
In the present study rather than focusing on the typological
preferences of iconic depictions in TİD, we ask whether
different types of iconic representations have any
learnability advantage by children and if so, whether signers
modulate their signing accordingly.

Iconicity and Language Acquisition
Classic traditions in developmental psychology argued that
mastering arbitrary linguistic forms was possible only after
links between an iconic form and its referent had been
established (Piaget, 1962). According to this view, the
iconic links are readily accessible to children hence work as
scaffolding to establish links between less transparent wordreferents. This view lost momentum for several decades but
recent studies have gathered some evidence to support this
claim. Imai, Kita, Nagumo, and Okada (2008) found that
children as young as 25 months of age were sensitive to
sounds mimicking features of actions and that they took
advantage of these forms during the acquisition of action
1

By convention, sign glosses are written in block capitals.

verbs. Yoshida (2012) found that Japanese and American
children benefited from sound-meaning mappings when
acquiring action verbs. Importantly, this study shows that
parents deviated from conventional ‘adult speech’ when
talking about actions. Japanese parents, whose language has
a remarkably high incidence of sound-symbolic words, used
words with their children that mimicked properties of the
verb they referred to (mimetic words) more often than they
did in adult-adult interactions. English speakers, whose
language has few instances of sound-symbolism, produced a
range of idiosyncratic words that somewhat mimicked the
referent. These findings show that regardless of their native
language, children are sensitive to non-arbitrary sound-form
mappings and exploit them during acquisition. They also
show that caregivers adapt their speech to facilitate
language acquisition by favouring sound-symbolic (iconic)
words (Japanese parents) or by creating idiosyncratic labels
(American parents) that could facilitate language
acquisition.
This handful of studies would indicate that iconicity is an
important factor which boosts language acquisition.
However, the data are not conclusive and more empirical
studies are required to confirm the beneficial properties of
iconicity during language development. A high incidence of
sound-symbolic (iconic) words is rare in spoken languages
and as a consequence, it is difficult to make definite remarks
about the role of iconicity during language acquisition. Sign
languages, in contrast, exhibit iconicity in abundance and as
such offer a unique opportunity to investigate whether
children seize the opportunity to exploit iconic sign-referent
mappings when the opportunity is at hand (i.e., when a sign
depicting a referent is a permissible lexical variant). Sign
languages also offer the opportunity to investigate whether
caregivers adjust to children’s linguistic needs and modify
their (sign) language production accordingly. This has not
been investigated systematically in signs showing different
types of iconic depictions for the same referent.
The first studies investigating sign language acquisition
do not report a facilitating effect of iconicity. Orlansky and
Bonvillian (1984) followed the linguistic development of 13
deaf children acquiring American Sign Language (ASL)
from birth and found that they produced an equal proportion
of iconic and arbitrary signs. They conclude that structural
complexity of the sign rather than iconic sign-form
mappings drive sign language acquisition. Meier, Mauk,
Cheek and Moreland (2008) also investigated the role of
iconicity in the acquisition of ASL and did not find that
children learn iconic signs faster than arbitrary signs. The
negligible effect of iconicity during sign language
acquisition was attributed to children not having sufficient
world knowledge to make associations between a linguistic
symbol and its referent (Newport & Meier, 1985). The
argument is that iconicity is not accessible from the onset of
language learning but instead develops gradually overt time
(Namy, 2008).
The irrelevance of iconicity during sign language
acquisition has been challenged recently. After analysing
parental reports of 31 deaf children learning British Sign

1115

Language (BSL), it was found that iconic signs are the first
to be comprehended and produced by children (Thompson
et al., 2012). This finding holds after the phonological
complexity of signs has been taken into account. The
relevance of this study is that it suggests that iconicity, a
prevalent feature in all studied sign languages, plays a
significant role during acquisition. However, this study
alone does not answer how children access the iconic links
between a sign and its referent or whether certain iconic
depictions have a learnability advantage. In addition, it
remains unclear how these findings are compatible with
earlier studies claiming that iconicity is not an aid for
acquisition (Conlin et al., 2000; Meier et al., 2008). We
propose that these contradicting findings are the result of
defining iconicity in a broad sense when a more fine-grained
operationsalisation of iconicity could reveal a more
prominent role during acquisition.

describe from a picture the spatial relationship between two
objects. The objects selected were: toothbrush, cup, pen,
bathtub and bed. These items were selected because they
have two permissible lexical variants for the same referent
in TİD: One representing an action associated with the
object (action signs) and the other depicting its perceptual
features (perceptual signs). Action signs could represent an
action associated with the referent or the way it is
manipulated. Perceptual signs described the form of a
referent with different hand configurations or by tracing its
shape in space (see Figure 1). The visual prompts consisted
of 16 pictures in which the five objects were presented in
different spatial relation with another object (e.g., a picture
of a plane under a bed aimed to elicit the sign BED).
Descriptions consisted of pictures of toys and did not show
any entity performing an action on any object.

The Present Study

Participants were instructed to describe the spatial
relationship between two objects in a picture. These
instructions made participants unaware that their lexical
choice during the description would be analysed.
Participants were shown the visual stimuli on a laptop. The
computer screen was divided into four sections with each
quadrant displaying a picture of two objects placed in
different spatial arrangements. The four pictures included
the same two objects (e.g., a plane and a bed) but they had
different spatial relationships (e.g., the plane was on, under,
next to, or in front of the bed). In a self-paced task,
participants pressed a key to bring to the screen the four
pictures. After pressing the key a second time, one of the
four pictures was highlighted with a red frame (e.g., a plane
under the bed). The red frame was indicative of the picture
participants had to describe to a deaf interlocutor. Adults,
pre-school children, and school-age children described the
picture to a deaf research assistant. Parents of the pre-school
children and parents of the school-age children described
the pictures to their own children. Interlocutors had a
booklet with the four pictures for each description. After
participants had described the highlighted picture, the
interlocutor had to point at the correct picture on the
booklet.

Most studies investigating the role of iconicity in sign
language acquisition are based on parental reports which
may present large coding inconsistencies, and do not take
into account parents’ sign production. Also, studies do not
expand on whether the iconic link is made accessible to
children via parental input or whether the type of iconicity
(e.g., action vs. perceptual signs) may be an influencing
factor for learnability. The aim of the present study is to
address these issues by implementing a controlled picturedescription task to investigate the role of different types of
iconicity during the acquisition of TİD. We ask: 1) Do
signers of different age groups show a preference for one
type of lexical variant (action vs. perceptual) when two
variants are possible?; and 2) Do parents signing to their
children chose a particular lexical variant to facilitate signreferent mappings?

Methodology
Participants
A total of 48 deaf TİD signers living in Istanbul were
recruited for this study. These were grouped in five
categories according to their age: Pre-school children (N =
10, mean age: 5;02, range: 3;5 – 6;10); school-age children
(N = 10, mean age: 8;03, range: 7;02 – 9;10); parents of the
pre-school children (N = 9); parents of the school-age
children (N = 9); and a different group of adults not related
to the other groups (N = 10). All children were native
signers and all adults were native or early signers (age of
acquisition: 6 years or younger). All participants had lived
in Istanbul all their lives and were users of the same TİD
variant.

Materials
The present data comes from a larger dataset investigating
spatial descriptions by deaf signers (Sumer, Zwitserlood,
Perniss, & Ozyürek, 2012). Participants’ task was to

Procedure

Coding and data analysis
Signs referring to the target object were classified into
action and perceptual signs. With the help of a deaf research
assistant user of TİD, we verified that signs coded as action
and perceptual signs were lexical variants for the same
concept. For instance, we verified that the action and
perceptual signs for TOOTHBRUSH (Figure 1) were both
permissible forms for the concept toothbrush. We excluded
all classifier constructions (locative predicates) so only
lexicalised sign forms were included in the analysis. Figure
2 shows some of the renditions produced by participants
from the five age groups for a picture eliciting the sign BED.

1116

Figure 2. Examples of lexical variants for bed by participants in each age group. Adults predominantly produced perceptual
signs which represent the posts and board of a bed. Both groups of children produced predominantly action-based variants
which depict the action of lying on a pillow. Parents of pre-school children and parents of school-age children produced both
types of lexical variants comparatively.

Results
Target signs from all descriptions were categorised as either
action or perceptual signs. The overall proportion of action
signs per group was: adults mean = 0.25, SD = 0.14, preschool children mean = 0.81, SD = 0.21, school-age children
mean = 0.72, SD = 0.12, pre-school parents mean = 0.58,
SD = 0.28, and school-age parents mean = 0.56, SD = 0.19
(see Figure 3). A one-way ANOVA by participant (F1) and
by item (F2) showed there was a statistically significant
difference in the proportion of action signs produced in each
group [F1 = 11.163; p < 0.001, η2 = 0.509; F2 = 16.533, p <
0.001, η2 = 0.469]. Post hoc comparison after Bonferroni
corrections revealed that adults produced significantly less
action variants than pre-school children [t(9) = 6.543, p <
0.001], school-age children [t(9) = 7.663, p < 0.001], preschool parents [t(8) = 2.664, p = 0.029], and school-age
parents [t(8) = 3.296, p = 0.011]. There was no significant
difference in the proportion of action signs produced by
both groups of children [t(9) = 1.029, p = 0.330]. There was
no difference in the proportion of action signs produced by
pre-school children and pre-school parents [t(8) = 1.543, p =
0.161], or school-age parents [t(8) = 2.277, p = 0.052].
Similarly, school-age children did not differ from pre-school
parents [t(8) = 1.178, p = 0.273] or school-age parents [t(8)
= 1.606, p = 0.147]. Both groups of parents produced the
same proportion of action signs [t(8) = 0.095, p = 0.927].

* p < 0.001
** p < 0.05

Figure 4 shows the proportion of action-based variants per
item across groups. It is clear that, despite some variation,
the same pattern holds for all the items. Adults produced
few action signs when interacting with a deaf adult but both
groups of children prefer the action-based variants. Preschool parents and school-age parents do not display a clear
preference. This suggests that the effect is not driven by one
specific lexical item because all signs exhibit the same
trend.

Figure 4. Proportion of action variants per item for all age
groups.
In summary, these data show that action-based signs are
the preferred variant for children and parents interacting
with children even when the perceptual form is the
prototypical choice in adult signing.

Discussion

Figure 3. Proportion of action variants across age groups for
all description. Bars represent standard errors.

In the present study, we investigate the role of different
types of iconicity in sign language development and in the
input by parents. Adults interacting with another adult had a
clear tendency to produce perceptual sign variants. Children
from both age groups showed the opposite trend and were
significantly more inclined to produce action signs. Both
groups of parents produced the same proportion of action
and perceptual-based variants. Importantly, these tendencies
were observed across all signs in the study. We interpret
these results as meaning that children prefer action signs
because they can be easily mapped onto representations in
their motor schema. We also propose that when two lexical
variants are possible, parent signers favour action-based

1117

forms in child-directed signing to facilitate language
development.
The present data are in line with research in spoken
language development by showing that deaf as well as
hearing children are biased towards producing manual forms
depicting actions at the earliest stages of language
acquisition. It has been shown that hearing children learning
a spoken language are prone to produce iconic gestures
representing actions related to a referent. Pettenati, Sekine,
Congestrì, and Volterra (2012) asked Japanese and Italian
toddlers to produce a word for a set of pictures while their
responses and gestures were recorded. They found that
children in both groups produced the same proportion of
iconic gestures, which overwhelmingly depicted actions.
This tendency has also been observed in toddlers (17
months and older) acquiring Turkish where there is a bias
for learning action verbs early on due to typology (Furman,
Küntay, & Özyürek, 2014). Children’s preference for action
depictions has also been found in comprehension tasks.
Tolar, Lederberg, Gokhale and Tomasello (2008)
investigated whether hearing children of different ages (2;6–
5;0 years) were capable of matching a picture with iconic
ASL signs representing actions, shapes of objects or both
features together. They found that the ability to recognise
signs improved with age but importantly, that the first and
most accurately recognised signs were those depicting
actions. The preference towards action-based gestures has
been interpreted as motor representations boosting language
development because they replicate the motoric context in
which a word was learned (Pettenati et al., 2012). Action
gestures are easily mapped onto toddlers’ motor schema and
help them when the linguistic label is unavailable or
difficult to retrieve. Bias for action-based sign variants in
our study goes in line with claims that language
development is tightly linked to motor experience (Yu,
Smith, & Pereira, 2008; Yu & Smith, 2012).
Our data also suggest that parents use different types of
iconicity strategically to boost language development.
Caregivers modify the way they typically communicate to
facilitate a child’s language perception both in their speech
and by increasing the iconicity in their co-speech gestures
(Campisi & Özyürek, 2013). Deaf parents also display a
range of strategies to enhance children’s capacity to
perceive language, for example, modifying sign articulation
(Holzrichter & Meier, 2000). Children are sensitive to these
adaptations because they are more attentive and responsive
to child-directed signing than to signing addressed to adults
(Masataka, 2000). Our data suggests that in addition to
phonetic modifications in their signing, parents use different
types of iconic signs to facilitate sign language learning. It is
possible that parents favour signs that map onto motor
activities during child interactions because they are regarded
as easier to learn. That is, when two lexical variants are
available for a single concept, parents interacting with
children will favour variants that map onto children’s
motoric schemas.
Developmental studies on languages rich in soundsymbolism are rare and thus information about how

different iconic forms are exploited in mimetics in childdirected communication is limited. The available data
suggest, however, that caregivers prefer labels with nonarbitrary correspondences during interactions with children.
Nagumo, Imai, Kita, Haryu, and Kajikawa (2006) found that
Japanese parents speaking to their children tend to use verbs
that reflect iconic aspects of the action than words that do
not have such iconic links. The use of action words
(mimetic verbs), which are fully conventionalised words in
the language, diminishes substantially when parents interact
with other adults. It remains to be seen however whether
different types of iconicity in mimetic speech are also
favored during development and in the input.
The present data also suggest that in addition to
typological differences across languages (Nyst, 2013;
Padden et al., submitted), choice of certain iconic depictions
(action vs. perceptual signs) may be rooted in pragmatic
conventions of use (i.e., addressee design). These
preferences may be attributed to the iconic properties of
signs and their learnability.
It could be argued that parents’ bias towards action signs
may relate to their accommodating to their children’s
signing. That is, caregivers may be imitating the sign
variants they observe in their children rather than it being a
communicative strategy to facilitate language learning. We
deem this possibility unlikely given that children and
parents’ pattern of sign use do not overlap entirely (parents
produce action and perceptual signs in equal proportion).
Future research should look at the signs used by parents in
child and adult interactions in order to make definite claims
about how they modulate their lexical choice depending on
the interlocutor.
Our results support recent claims that iconicity may play a
role in sign language acquisition (Thompson et al., 2012)
and goes a step further by suggesting that type of iconicity
matters in sign language learning and in child-directed
signing. We conclude by arguing that regardless of
modality, words and signs with iconic links to a referent are
easily mapped to children’s sensory-motor experience and
that parents exploit these direct links as a strategy to boost
language development. These effects might be more visible
in sign language development than originally thought and
require further investigation.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a European Research Council
Starting Grant (ERC) awarded to the last author. We would
like to thank Şule Kibar and Sevinç Akın, the deaf research
assistants who helped with the coding and classification of
the lexical signs.

References
Assaneo, M. F., Nichols, J. I., & Trevisan, M. A. (2011).
The anatomy of onomatopoeia. PloS One, 6(12), 1–
27.
Campisi, E., & Özyürek, A. (2013). Iconicity as a
communicative strategy: Recipient design in

1118

multimodal demonstrations for adults and children.
Journal of Pragmatics, 47(1), 14–27.
doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2012.12.007
Conlin, K. E., Mirus, G. R., Mauk, C., & Meier, R. P.
(2000). The acquisition of first signs: Place,
handshape, and movement. In C. Chamberlain, J. P.
Morford, & R. I. Mayberry (Eds.), Language
Acquisition by Eye (pp. 51–70). Mahwah, N. J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cuxac, C. (1999). French sign language: proposition of a
structural explanation by iconicity. Gesture-Based
Communication in Human-Computer, 1739(1), 165–
184.
Dingemanse, M. (2012). Advances in the Cross-Linguistic
Study of Ideophones. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 6(10), 654–672. doi:10.1002/lnc3.361
Furman, R., Küntay, A. C., & Özyürek, A. (2014). Early
language-specificity of children’s event encoding in
speech and gesture: evidence from caused motion in
Turkish. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience,
29(5), 620–634. doi:10.1080/01690965.2013.824993
Holzrichter, A., & Meier, R. P. (2000). Child-directed
signing in American Sign Language. In Language
Acquisition by Eye (pp. 25–40). Mahwah, N. J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition,
109(1), 54–65.
Klima, E., & Bellugi, U. (1979). The signs of language.
Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Mandel, M. A. (1977). Iconic devices in American Sign
Language. In A. Friedman (Ed.), On the Other Hand:
New Pespectives on American Sign Language (pp.
57–107). New York: Academic Press.
Masataka, N. (2000). The role of modality input in the
earliest staes of language acquisition: Studies of
Japanese Sign Language. In C. Chamberlain, J. P.
Morford, & R. I. Mayberry (Eds.), Language
acquisition by eye (pp. 3–24). Mahwah, N. J.
Meier, R. P., Mauk, C. E., Cheek, A., & Moreland, C. J.
(2008). The form of children’s early signs: Iconic or
motoric determinants? Language Learning and
Development, 4(1), 63–98.
Nagumo, N., Imai, M., Kita, S., Haryu, E., & Kajikawa, S.
(2006). Sound iconicity bootstraps verb meaning
acquisition. Paper Presented at the XVth International
Conference of Infant Studies.
Namy, L. (2008). Recognition of iconicity doesn’t come for
free. Developmental Science, 11(6), 841–846.
Newport, E. L., & Meier, R. P. (1985). The acquisition of
American Sign Language. In D. Slobin (Ed.), The
cross-linguistic study of language acquisition, Volume
1 (pp. 881–938). Mahwah, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Nyst, V. (2013). Gesture as a blue print for sign language
structure. Paper Presented at the Minerva Symposium
on Emergent Languages and Cultural Evolution.

Orlansky, M. D., & Bonvillian, J. D. (1984). The role of
inconicity in early sign language acquisition. The
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 49(3),
287–92.
Padden, C., Meir, I., Hwang, S.-O., Lepic, R., Seegers, S., &
Sampson, T. (n.d.). Patterned iconicity in sign
language lexicons. Under Review.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R. L., & Vigliocco, G. (2010).
Iconicity as a general property of language: evidence
from spoken and signed languages. Frontiers in
Psychology, 1(227), 1664–1678.
Pettenati, P., Sekine, K., Congestrì, E., & Volterra, V.
(2012). A Comparative Study on Representational
Gestures in Italian and Japanese Children. Journal of
Nonverbal Behavior, 36(2), 149–164.
doi:10.1007/s10919-011-0127-0
Piaget, J. (1962). Play, Dreams, and Imitation in Childhood.
New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Pietrandrea, P. (2002). Iconicity and arbitrariness in Italian
Sign Language. Sign Language Studies, 2(3), 296–
321.
Sumer, B., Zwitserlood, I., Perniss, P., & Ozyürek, A.
(2012). Development of locative expressions by
Turkish deaf and hearing children: Are there modality
effects? In K. Biller, E. Chung, & A. E. Kimball
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual Boston
University on Language Development (BUCLD 36)
(pp. 568–580). Boston: Cascadilla Press.
Taub, S. (2001). Language from the body: Iconicity and
metaphor in American Sign Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Thompson, R. L., Vinson, D. P., Woll, B., & Vigliocco, G.
(2012). The Road to Language Learning Is Iconic:
Evidence From British Sign Language. Psychological
Science, (November).
doi:10.1177/0956797612459763
Tolar, T. D., Lederberg, A. R., Gokhale, S., & Tomasello,
M. (2008). The development of the ability to
recognize the meaning of iconic signs. Journal of
Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 13(2), 225–240.
Van der Kooij, E. (2002). Phonological Categories in Sign
Language of the Netherlands: The Role of Phonetic
Implementation and Iconicity. Utrecht: LOT.
Yoshida, H. (2012). A cross-linguistic study of soundsymbolism in children’s verb learning. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 13(2), 232–265.
doi:10.1080/15248372.2011.573515
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied attention and
word learning by toddlers. Cognition, 125(2), 244–62.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2012.06.016
Yu, C., Smith, L. B., & Pereira, A. (2008). Grounding word
learning in multimodal sensorimotor interaction. In B.
C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.),
Proceeding of the 30th Annual Conference if the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1017–1022). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1119

