UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Violations of the Local Independence Assumption in Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1jj364dr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Zee, Jesse
Storms, Gert
Verheyen, Steven

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Violations of the Local Independence Assumption in Categorization
Jesse Zee (jesse.zee@student.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (gert.storms@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Steven Verheyen (steven.verheyen@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Leuven
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
The Threshold Theory of categorization posits that prior to
making a categorization decision a respondent assesses the
similarity between item and category and compares it against
a personal threshold. Only if the item-category similarity
exceeds this threshold should the respondent endorse the item
as a category member. The Threshold Theory thus assumes
that a single latent variable, item-category similarity, suffices
to explain all categorization patterns. We put this assumption,
known as local independence, to test by providing
respondents with sets of four items to categorize. These items
are equated in terms of their similarity to the target category,
but are by design comprised of two pairs of similar items,
such as rollerskates-skateboard and horse-mule for the
category of VEHICLES. Contrary to the local independence
assumption, the items within the pairs are more likely to
receive the same categorization decision than the items across
pairs. We explain how these categorization patterns can be
accommodated within the Threshold Theory framework,
either by giving up the assumption that everyone assesses
item-category similarity in the same way for differently
weighted category information, or by explicitly incorporating
item-item similarity in addition to item-category similarity.
Keywords: categories; concepts; similarity;
Threshold Theory; vagueness.

typicality;

Introduction
Perceptions, thoughts, beliefs and other such mental
phenomena are the product of the constant interaction of the
embodied brain with the world. Indeed, the intentionality
and meaning of these mental phenomena are most
commonly about the outside world, as is the case with
perception (Koendrink, 1999). Analogously, mental
representations of categories and items are assumed to exist
in our minds, to such an extent that we cannot trace the
private meaning a person entails of any word. We can
merely derive the mathematical models that best describe
the patterns and behavior of such mental phenomena.
Furthermore, the private nature of language and differences
in brain and environment bring about the individually
differential responses observed in many psychological
studies and particularly in studies of vague concepts:
concepts that specify categories without clearly defined
boundaries.
To elucidate the categorization decisions of people when
confronted with categorization tasks involving such vague
concepts, most accounts ground their theory on the notion of
similarity. Categorization is assumed to occur when item
and category are sufficiently similar. Hampton (1998), for
instance, investigated the categorization of instances at the

border of vague categories. He found that for the majority of
borderline cases, the probability of being placed in the
category was directly predictable from how typical or
representative the items were of the category (a proxy of
item-category similarity).
The Threshold Theory of categorization (Hampton, 2007)
offers a process account of how item-category similarity is
used to arrive at categorization decisions. It posits that
individuals verify whether the similarity meets a personal
threshold in order to include the item in the category. Like
most accounts of categorization, the Threshold Theory
assumes local independence: the decisions pertaining to two
items are considered conditionally independent of each
other given their item-category similarity values. Any
relationship that might exist between the categorization
decisions should be explained by these similarity values. In
other words, the theory invokes a latent variable, itemcategory similarity, that is believed to be sufficient to
explain the entire range of categorization patterns one might
observe.
Verheyen and Storms (2011) used a formal procedure to
demonstrate violations of the local independence
assumption in semantic categorization. They applied a
formalization of the Threshold Theory to categorization data
from eight natural language categories and found
unexplained structure in the residuals. This result shows that
item-category similarity does not suffice to account for all
categorization patterns. Verheyen and Storms continued to
show that many of the dependencies between items that they
observed could be accounted for by item-item similarity. In
categorizing items as FURNITURE or not, participants might
consistently provide the same response to dishwasher as to
refrigerator because their similarity as electrical appliances
is recognized, Verheyen and Storms suggested. Similarly,
the answers towards the items psychology and sociology
with respect to SCIENCES might be dependent because both
are social sciences.
Several other researchers have argued that consecutive
categorization decisions are not made independently of one
another. In a series of studies by Brooks and colleagues
participants were provided with a cognitive rule, which they
had to use explicitly when categorizing. Rule-irrelevant
item-item similarities were found to contribute significantly
to consecutive categorization judgments (Brooks & Allen,
1991; Brooks & Regehr, 1993). Similarly, Brooks, Norman,
and Allen (1991) found that judgments of expert
dermatologists, who are assumed to have many complex
rules at their disposal for making a diagnosis, were also

1670

influenced by the similarity that existed between
successively presented cases. Jones and Sieck (2003) found
that commonalities between consecutive cues in a
probability learning paradigm constituted sequential
dependency learning, again indicating a relationship
between item-item similarity and response dependencies in
categorization.
The commonality between the aforementioned studies at
interest is that categorization responses are influenced by
similarities between the items. Indeed, intuitively one might
expect that whenever a certain item resembles another for
whatever reason, these items would evoke more similar
categorization responses than items that do not resemble
each other as much. If such a categorization pattern were to
occur for items that are matched in terms of item-category
similarity, this would constitute a violation of the local
independence assumption. Indeed, it would suggest that
item-category similarity is not the sole variable driving
categorization decisions, but that item-item similarity is also
of importance. Since so far only a formal argument has been
given for these kinds of violations (Verheyen & Storms,
2011), we dedicate the following study to an empirical
demonstration of violations of the local independence
assumption.

Rationale of Studies
For the design of our study we took inspiration from a study
by Hampton and Yeh (described in Hampton, 2006). For
several categories we constructed quadruples of candidate
exemplars. We matched the four items within a quadruple in
terms of item-category similarity. In addition, each
quadruple was designed to consist of two pairs of similar
items, such as rollerskates-skateboard and horse-mule for
the category of VEHICLES. By re-pairing the items in a
quadruple one can thus construct four pairs of dissimilar
items: rollerskates-horse, rollerskates-mule, skateboardhorse, and skateboard-mule.
For each of the six pairs of items within a quadruple one
can compute the degree of categorization agreement
between the items that make up a pair. If the assessment of
item-category similarity is all there is to categorization, the
measure of agreement for a similar pair should not differ
from the measure of agreement for a dissimilar pair. After

all, in constructing each quadruple it was ensured that the
items were matched in terms of item-category similarity.
Thus the six pairs that constitute a quadruple should not be
qualitatively different if the local independence assumption
holds.
This is exploited in a randomization test (Edgington &
Onghena, 2007). Each of our studies will be comprised of
10 quadruples. That is, in each study 10x4 items will be
presented for categorization. For each quadruple the average
measure of categorization agreement across the four
dissimilar pairs will be subtracted from the average measure
of agreement across the two similar pairs. A test statistic is
then constructed for the entire study by taking the average
of these differences across the 10 quadruples that make up
the study.
Figure 1 is meant to convey this procedure. The table on
the left has 10 rows (one for each quadruple in a study) and
6 columns (one for each pair in a quadruple). The entries in
the table are measures of categorization agreement for the
items that make up a pair. In Figure 1 the row (quadruple)
and column (pair) indices are substituted for the actual
measures to facilitate understanding of the randomization
test procedure. It is here assumed that columns 1 and 2
contain the agreement measures for the similar pairs within
the quadruple (gray entries). Columns 3-6 contain the
agreement measures for the dissimilar pairs within the
quadruple (white entries). Dotted ellipses represent the
average of the first two entries within a row. Solid ellipses
represent the average of the last four entries within a row.
The difference between the dotted and solid ellipses is
averaged across the 10 rows to yield the test statistic.
This test statistic is then situated within a distribution of
values that are arrived at by calculating the test statistic on a
large number of related 10 by 6 data tables. Each of these
data tables is arrived at by randomly permuting the entries
within a row. This permutation implements the hypothesis
that there is nothing special about the similar pairs vs.
dissimilar pairs distinction. The table on the right in Figure
1 represents one such (random) re-organization of the
original data. Comparing the values in the first two columns
of the table with those in the last four columns of the table
no longer entails a comparison of pairs comprised of similar
items and pairs comprised of dissimilar items (gray and

Figure 1: Rationale of the randomization test used to detect violations of local independence.

1671

white entries are dispersed over the columns). If the value of
the test statistic for the original data is located in the tail of
the resulting distribution, this is an indication that, contrary
to the local independence assumption, there is something
peculiar about the distinction.

Pilot
We started our project with an exploratory study, which was
intended to obtain typicality norms for 1276 items from 24
categories. For practical reasons we split up the materials in
two subsets. Set 1 comprised 616 items from 12 categories
(CLOTHING, DISEASES, ENERGY SOURCES, FISH, FRUITS, KITCHEN
UTENSILS,
MUSICAL
INSTRUMENTS,
NATURAL
EARTH
FORMATIONS, PROFESSIONS, SCIENCES, VEHICLES, WEAPONS ).
Set 2 comprised 660 items from 12 different categories
(ADDICTIONS, ANIMALS, BUILDINGS, CRIMES, FURNITURE,
INSECTS, MEDIA, SPORTS, TOOLS, TOYS, VEGETABLES, WEATHER
1
PHENOMENA) . We primarily focused on borderline items
such as rollerskates for VEHICLES or bullfighting for SPORTS:
items that are neither evident members, nor evident nonmembers of the target categories. However, several clear
members and non-members were included for each category
to make the task less transparent and more rewarding for the
participants.
We had 29 first year Bachelor of Psychology students
provide typicality judgments on a seven point Likert scale
ranging from very atypical to very typical. Fifteen students
provided judgments for Set 1. Fourteen students provided
judgments for Set 2. Every participant was presented with a
different order of categories and items within categories.
The reliability of the typicality judgments ranged from .87
for NATURAL EARTH FORMATIONS to .98 for ANIMALS with a
mean of .94.
We continued by selecting from the materials in the
exploratory study 20 quadruples, 10 belonging to Set 1 and
10 belonging to Set 2. The four items that were selected for
each quadruple were to adhere to the following criteria: (i)
The four items in a quadruple had to match in terms of mean
typicality. (ii) The items in a quadruple were to fall apart in
two pairs of semantically similar items. (iii) The items had
to be borderline items, meaning they displayed intermediate
typicality ratings.
Mean typicality is often used as a proxy for item-category
similarity (Hampton, 1998, 2007; Verheyen, Hampton, &
Storms, 2010). Criterion (i) thus ensures that the items
within a quadruple are matched in terms of item-category
similarity, the latent variable put forward to explain the
range of semantic categorization data.
Several studies have identified item-item similarity as a
factor affecting categorization (Brooks & Allen, 1991;
Brooks, Norman, & Allen, 1991; Brooks & Regehr, 1993;
Jones & Sieck, 2003; Verheyen & Storms, 2011). Criterion
(ii) was included to look for violations of local
independence due to item-item similarity. Such violations
occur when categorization agreement is found to be higher
1

Note that in all studies items and categories were presented in
Dutch. We provide their English translation for convenience.

between items in a semantically similar pair than between
items in a semantically dissimilar pair.
Categorization agreement between respondents is maximal
at the high and low ends of the typicality scale. Items of
intermediate typicality, on the other hand, elicit interindividual categorization differences (Hampton, 1998, 2007;
Verheyen, Hampton, & Storms, 2010). Criterion (iii) was
incorporated because we planned to look at categorization
agreement differences between similar and dissimilar pairs
to detect violations of local independence. This requires
investigating items for which categorization agreement
differences are likely to occur.
Criterion (iii) was met by the inclusion of items with a
mean typicality score of around 4 (i.e., the middle of the
seven point typicality scale we used; M=3.4, SD=1.3).
Criterion (ii) was met by verifying whether the participants
in the Pilot Study gave similar responses to the items within
a pair considered to be similar, and dissimilar responses to
the items within a pair considered to be dissimilar. This was
done by calculating across respondents the correlation
between the typicality judgments for the items in a
quadruple (see also Hampton & Yeh, described in Hampton,
2006). This results in 6 correlations for the 6 item pairs in a
quadruple. We required the correlations for the similar pairs
to exceed 0.3 (M=.76, SD=.36), and the correlations for the
dissimilar pairs to be lower than the lowest of the similar
pair correlations (M=.24, SD=.26).
To determine whether Criterion (i) was met, we conducted
a permutation test (Edgington & Onghena, 2007). For each
of the six pairs in a quadruple we compared the mean
difference in typicality rating across respondents with a
distribution of values that resulted from computing the same
difference under the assumption that there was no difference
between the ratings for the items comprising a pair. To this
end we randomly determined whether a participant's ratings
for the items comprising a pair were to be swopped or not.
If the items were truly matched in terms of typicality this
procedure shouldn't result in mean differences in typicality
across participants that are different from the one observed
for the empirical (unswopped) data. We concluded that a
pair of items was matched in terms of mean typicality if the
empirical mean typicality difference fell between the 2.5th
percentile and the 97.5th percentile of the distribution
comprising 10,000 reference values simulated under the
assumption of no difference. Both for the Set 1 quadruples
and for the Set 2 quadruples this was the case for 57 of the
10 x 6 pairs. The three violations in Set 1 were due to FRUIT
item pairs. The violations in Set 2 were due to the categories
2
ADDICTIONS (1 pair) and TOYS (2 pairs) .
Space restrictions do not allow us to provide all the details
about the selected materials. We can, however, provide an
example to illustrate the employed procedure. The pairs
rollerskates-skateboard and horse-mule were considered
candidates to form a quadruple for VEHICLES. The first two
2

These three quadruples were nevertheless presented to
participants in Studies 1 and 2. None of the results we present
depend on whether they are included in the analyses or not.

1672

items may make up a semantically related pair because both
are means of transportation that one could buy in a sports or
toy store. They can be contrasted with the two last items,
which are both animals that can be used for transportation.
With mean typicality scores of 4.50, 4.57, 4.21, and 4.71
they can be considered borderline items. The correlations
between the typicality ratings for the within-pair items are
.86 and .82. These are considerably higher than the values
for the across-pairs correlations (.54, .65, .66, .57) indicating
higher item-item similarity within pairs than across pairs.
The permutation test indicated that in all six pairs that can
be formed with the four items, the items were matched in
terms of mean typicality. Having met Criteria (i)-(iii), these
items were presented for categorization in Studies 1 and 2,
along with other items such as sink-toilet and umbrella
stand-coat rack for FURNITURE and plastic bag-pillow and
pest control-weed killer for WEAPONS.
Note that for some categories it was possible to determine
several such quadruples, but we chose to include only one
per category in our studies. This way we could be fairly
certain that any dependencies in categorization were to be
attributed to the particular higher-order similarity structure
of the quadruple, and were not due to relationships with
other items that were presented.

Study 1
In this study we presented the 10 quadruples that were
selected from Set 1 to a group of 120 first year Bachelor of
Psychology students. We presented the 10 quadruples that
were selected from Set 2 to a different group of 124 first
year Bachelor of Psychology students. None of the Study 1
participants had participated in the Pilot. For every
participant we randomized the order in which the 40 itemcategory combinations were presented. We asked each
participant to provide binary membership judgments.
Participants could indicate they felt an item was a member
of the target category by circling a 1, indicate they felt an
item was not a category member by circling a 0, or indicate
that they did not know the item and/or category.

To analyze the data we employed the permutation test that
was outlined in section Rationale of Studies. A separate
analysis was conducted for the quadruples from Set 1 and
those from Set 2. As a measure of categorization agreement
within a pair we computed Cohen's kappa coefficient
(Cohen, 1960) which yields a value between 0 and 1. A
value of 0 indicates that any agreement on behalf of the
participants concerning whether two items should be
considered category members or not is purely coincidental.
A value of 1 indicates that the participants are in perfect
agreement concerning category membership. One can think
of values between 0 and 1 as reflecting the “distance”
travelled from coincidental agreement to perfect agreement.
A data table like the one on the left in Figure 1 can be
constructed by computing the kappa coefficient for all 10x6
item pairs. The row for the category VEHICLES, for instance,
would have values .51 and .65 in columns 1 and 2 for the
within-pairs categorization agreement. It would have
values .31, .24, .31, .23 in columns 3-6 for the across-pairs
categorization agreement. Clearly, taking the difference
between the mean of the former two values and the mean of
the latter four values results in a positive value, suggesting
higher categorization agreement within pairs than across
pairs. That is, there was a tendency among participants
either to indicate that rollerskates and skateboards are
VEHICLES, but mules and horses are not, or to indicate that
mules and horses are VEHICLES, but rollerskates and
skateboards are not. This trend is apparent across all
quadruples from a set, as is evidenced by the positive value
for the empirical test statistic that is arrived at by computing
the average of the mean kappa differences across quadruples
(dashed vertical line in both panels of Figure 2).
The empirical test statistic was compared with 100,000
simulated test statistics, resulting from randomly permuting
the kappa values for a quadruple. (Permutation in one
quadruple was independent of the permutation in another
quadruple.) This procedure effectively implements the
hypothesis that there is nothing peculiar about the
distinction between similar pairs and dissimilar pairs. The

Figure 2: Mean difference between within pairs kappa and across pairs kappa for quadruples from Set 1 (left) and Set 2
(right) in Study 1. Observed (dashed vertical line) vs. simulated difference under local independence assumption (histogram).

1673

resulting distribution is depicted by the histograms in Figure
2. They reflect the range of categorization agreement
differences one would expect if local independence were to
hold. The empirical test statistic is clearly greater than what
one would expect under the local independence assumption.
It is located in the upper 5% of the distribution. The nature
of the quadruple manipulation suggests that item-item
similarity is likely to be responsible for the violations.

Study 2
The purpose of Study 2 was to replicate the results of Study
1 using a different categorization measure. We presented 51
students with the 20 quadruples we obtained from our pilot
study. None of the 51 participants had taken part in the
previous studies or were aware of them. This time the
participants were invited to respond to each of the 80 itemcategory combinations with a continuous membership
judgment using an 11 point Likert scale ranging from
clearly does not belong to the category to clearly belongs to
the category (following the instructions used in Estes,
2004). We presented the quadruples from Set 1 and Set 2 in
two distinct blocks separated by a short break and alternated
between participants which block was presented first.
Within each block we also randomized the presentation
order of the 40 item-category combinations. The
presentation of items and the acquisition of continuous
categorization responses were computerized. On each trial a
single item-category combination was displayed. After each
response the screen was cleared and a new item-category
combination was presented. We adopted this computerized
procedure to exclude the possibility that the
interdependency effect in Study 1 was due to participants
making their later responses consistent with previous ones,
by backtracking answers when they recognized some
relationship between two items. (Study 1 was a paper and
pencil task.)
To analyze the data we again employed the permutation
test that was outlined above. As was the case for Study 1 a
separate analysis was undertaken for the quadruples from

Set 1 and those from Set 2. As a measure of categorization
agreement for two items we computed the correlation
between the continuous categorization ratings given to each
of the items, across the different participants in the study.
For example, the correlation was calculated across
participants of the ratings given to each member of a pair of
similar items such as horse-mule (.64) and of the ratings
given to each member of a dissimilar pair such as
rollerskate-mule (.25). For the computation of the empirical
and simulated test statistics we applied the Fisher
transformation to these correlations. The number of
simulations and the criterion were again set to 100,000
and .05, respectively.
In Figure 3 the empirical test statistic is again depicted by
dashed vertical lines. Both for the Set 1 quadruples (left)
and the Set 2 quadruples (right), the categorization
judgments appear more in line for items that form similar
pairs than for items that form dissimilar pairs. As was the
case for Study 1, the empirical test statistic is located in the
upper 5% of the distribution of test statistics that was
arrived at by assuming local independence. Not only do
these results demonstrate violations of the independence
assumption; they suggest that these violations might be the
result of item-item similarity. The results from Study 2 add
to those from Study 1 in that they show the
interdependencies to hold, regardless of whether
categorization judgments are made in a binary or in a
continuous fashion.

Discussion
Like most accounts of semantic categorization the
Threshold Theory assumes that similarity drives
categorization decisions (Hampton, 1998, 2007). Verheyen,
Hampton, & Storms (2010) have provided a formalization
of the Threshold Theory that explains semantic
categorization in terms of a latent variable. They showed
that this latent variable was strongly related to mean
typicality, a measure that is considered to be a proxy of
item-category similarity. Local independence is one of the

Figure 3: Mean difference between within pairs correlation and across pairs correlation for quadruples from Set 1 (left) and
Set 2 (right) in Study 2. Observed (dashed line) vs. simulated difference under local independence assumption (histogram).

1674

underlying assumptions of latent variable models.
Categorization decisions towards different items should be
conditionally independent of each other given the items'
scores on the latent variable (i.e, their mean typicality or
item-category similarity). Verheyen and Storms (2011)
already demonstrated that the local independence
assumption was not tenable by establishing that the
application of the latent variable model to semantic
categorization data left some of the structure in the data
unexplained. In addition to this formal argument the current
studies offer an empirical demonstration of violations of the
local independence assumption.
The current results need not be taken to discard similaritybased theories of categorization in general or the Threshold
Theory in particular. To the contrary, the current results
clearly establish that participants' decisions are subject both
to item-category similarity and item-item similarity. The
former shows in the inter-individual categorization
differences for the items of intermediate typicality that
comprise our materials. The latter shows in that participants'
categorization decisions are in line with the 2 x 2 similarity
structure of the quadruple design. Similarity thus clearly
emerges as an important explanatory construct in
categorization research.
We see at least two manners in which categorization
theories can be extended to account for the current findings.
One is to recognize that individuals may weight category
information differently (because of previous experiences
and immediate situations; e.g., Smith & Samuelson, 1997),
resulting in different assessments of item-category
similarity. In fact, the typicality correlation procedure we
used to validate Criterion (ii) of our stimulus selection
procedure might indicate just that: some individuals might
attach weight to aspects of the VEHICLES category that make
rollerskates and skateboards more typical exemplars than
horses and mules, while others might attach weight to
aspects that make horses and mules more typical VEHICLES
than rollerskates and skateboards. In the words of Hampton
(2006, p. 99): “Having the same feature profile, similar
pairs would move up or down together as feature weights
change across individual raters, whereas dissimilar pairs
would not”. Verheyen and Storms (2013) have implemented
a mixture version of the latent variable Threshold model that
identifies latent subgroups of participants who weight
features of the category differently, resulting in a different
organization of the items along the latent variable.
Alternatively, one could explicitly acknowledge the
dependencies by incorporating them in the modeling
framework. This could amount to bringing additional
similarity information into the model (item-item similarity
in addition to the already present item-category similarity).
This possibility is considered by Verheyen and Storms
(2011).

Acknowledgments

Psychology at the University of Leuven. Steven Verheyen is
a postdoctoral fellow at the Research Foundation-Flanders.
We would like to thank James A. Hampton for his helpful
comments throughout various stages of the project.

References
Allen, S. W., & Brooks, L. R. (1991). Specializing the
operation of an explicit rule. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 120, 3-19.
Brooks, L. R., Norman, G. R., & Allen, S. W. (1991). Role
of specific similarity in a medical diagnostic test. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 278-287.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20,
37-46.
Edgington, E., & Onghena, P. (2007). Randomization tests.
Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Estes, Z. (2004). Confidence and gradedness in semantic
categorization: Definitely somewhat artifactual, maybe
absolutely natural. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11,
1041-1047.
Hampton, J. A. (1998). Similarity-based categorization and
fuzziness of natural categories. Cognition, 65, 137-165.
Hampton, J. A. (2006). Concepts as prototypes. The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in
Research and Theory, 46, 79-113.
Hampton, J. A. (2007). Typicality, graded membership, and
vagueness. Cognitive Science, 31, 355-384.
Jones, M., & Sieck, W. R. (2003). Learning myopia: An
adaptive recency effect in category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 626-640.
Koendrink, J. (1999). Guest editorial. Perception, 28,
1181- 1184.
Regehr, G., & Brooks, L. R. (1993). Perceptual
manifestations of an analytic structure: The priority of
holistic individuation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 122, 92-114.
Smith, L. B., & Samuelson, L. K. (1997). Perceiving and
remembering: Category stability, variability and
development. In K. Lamberts, & D. Shanks (Eds.),
Knowledge, concepts, and categories (pp. 161-195). East
Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Verheyen, S., Hampton, J. A., & Storms, G. (2010). A
probabilistic threshold model: Analyzing semantic
categorization data with the Rasch model. Acta
Psychologica, 135, 216-225.
Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (2011). Towards a
categorization-based model of similarity. In L. Carlson,
C. Hölscher, & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 614-619). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (2013). A mixture approach to
vagueness and ambiguity. PloS ONE, 8: e63507

Jesse Zee completed Studies 1 and 2 as part of a research
internship while pursuing the degree of Bachelor of

1675

