UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual bias of diagram in logical reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76p4s1m8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Sato, Yuri
Wajima, Yuichiro
Ueda, Kazuhiro

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual bias of diagram in logical reasoning
Yuri Sato, Yuichiro Wajima, and Kazuhiro Ueda
Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, The University of Tokyo, Japan
{sato,ywajima}@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp,ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
We analyze the information discrepancy between diagrammatic representations and logical reasoning, which we call visual biases in diagrammatic reasoning. Diagrammatic representations contain semantic information, which is based on the
topological configurations of objects, and visual information,
such as geometric location. In principle, visual information
is unnecessary to the validity of logical reasoning. However,
people are so sensitive to visual information such as size and
shape in diagrams that they occasionally do not ignore irrelevant information. This phenomenon leads to mistakes in logical reasoning. We addressed this issue in the present study.
In Experiment 1, we assessed whether and how a visual bias
of external diagrams affects reasoning performance. We asked
participants to directly manipulate size-fixed (Euler) diagrams
while solving syllogistic tasks. In Experiment 2, we tested
whether size-scalable diagrams were able to reduce a visual
bias of diagrams in logical reasoning.
Keywords: diagrammatic reasoning; external representation;
visual bias; diagram particularity; diagram layout; logical reasoning

Introduction
There is a strong belief that diagrammatic representations always facilitate logical reasoning such as syllogisms. However, diagrammatic representations sometimes impede logical
reasoning, even when they correctly express the information
contained in premisses. This is partly due to the information
discrepancy between diagrammatic representations and logical reasoning. We call this visual biases in diagrammatic
reasoning. Diagrammatic representations contain semantic
information that is based on the topological configurations
of objects, and visual information, such as geometric location. For example, consider a diagram like the symbol of the
Olympic Games. There is a common part between the blue
circle and yellow circle, and the blue circle is located to the
left of the yellow circle. On the other hand, the validity of a
logical inference can be determined only by semantic information of logical connectives (and, or) and quantifiers (all,
some), and not by words with particular contents (dog, frog).
It is possible to express the logical semantic relationships as
topological configurations of diagrammatic objects (cf. Allwein & Barwise, 1996). Consequently, in principle, the visual
information contained in a diagram, such as geometrical features, is not necessary to check the validity of a logical argument. However, people are so sensitive to visual information
such as size and shape in diagrams (cf. Treisman, 1988) that
they occasionally do not ignore irrelevant information. This
is a source of errors in logical reasoning.
In a notable study within the cognitive science literature,
Stenning and Oberlander (1995) proposed the concept of
specificity to analyze (in)effectiveness of diagrammatic representations in logical reasoning. In their theory, diagrams

can specify certain classes of information in that one diagram
corresponds to one model. In contrast, sentential representations do not have this property of specificity since one sentence can represent multiple models. This distinctive property of semantics in diagrammatic representations can affect
various processes of diagrammatic reasoning. For example,
it enables us to directly extract (interpret) semantic information from diagrams (Stenning & Lemon, 2001). On the other
hand, diagrams with the property of specificity can be ineffective in handling multiple possibilities by combining diagrams
(Shimojima & Katagiri, 2013). In such cases, more attention
must be paid to the semantic information than the visual information.
Our view regarding the visual biases of diagrams is consistent with that discussed in a recent Human-Computer Interaction study of diagram layout (cf. Purchase, 2012). In this
study, the researchers used semantically equivalent but visually different diagrams. Using such diagrams, the researchers
were able to study the way in which the visual layout of a diagram could impede the extraction (interpretation) of semantic information. Indeed, in an early study, Purchase (1997)
found that the number of edge crossings in a graph (nodelink diagram) had a negative effect on human graph reading.
More recently, Benoy and Rodgers (2007) found that jagged
shapes were detrimental to Euler diagram (set diagram) comprehension. Additionally, Blake, Stapleton, Rodgers, Cheek,
and Howse (2012) explored the role of diagram orientation by
comparing participant comprehension of the Euler diagrams
at several angles. The findings in the above studies were limited to the process of information extraction from diagrams.
In the present study, we aim to explore visual biases of diagrams in reasoning or inference, using semantically equivalent but visually different diagrams. We focus on visual layout, which can impede the process of information transformation (inference) process from given diagrams.
This approach enables us to go beyond visual biases of
diagrams. One traditional technique is described in a seminal study by Barwise and Etchemend (1994). Their “Hyperproof” system is a computer-assisted learning program of
logic that uses a hybrid interface of logical formulas and diagrams. In hyperproof, blocks are placed on a chess board.
The relationships between the blocks are expressed by propositions (formulas). By observing the block diagrams, the truth
of a proposition can be checked and logical relationships between propositions can be validated. In this set up, some
blocks (e.g., cylinders) do not have specific properties (shape,
size), and thus work as variables. As a result, at least their
system can be free from visual biases of diagrams technically.
However, it is important to note that diagrams do not indicate

2883

whether a visible property (e.g., size) of an object has a meaning in the hyperproof system. In contrast, we propose a way
to create diagrams such that they contain objects that work
as variables. Specifically, we introduce a method for creating size-scalable diagrams, in which object-sizes are scalable
from default, to avoid visual bias of diagrams in logical reasoning.
In Experiment 1, we used size-fixed diagrams, to address
the question of whether and how a visual bias of diagrams affects reasoning performance. In Experiment 2, we examined
whether size-scalable diagrams would be able to reduce visual bias in diagrams representing logical arguments. Before
we describe the methods of the two experiments, we will discuss size-fixed and size-scalable forms of Euler diagrams in
more detail.

Task analysis
The normal view of Euler diagrammatic representation is that
the spatial configuration, such as inclusion and exclusion between circles, represent the set relationships, such as subset and disjoint, which can be translated to categorical sentences, such as All A are B and No A are B (cf. Sato, Mineshima, & Takemura, 2010a; Mineshima, Sato, Takemura,
& Okada, 2014). Here, it is assumed that users deal with the
topological configurations of the size-scalable circles rather
than their geometric locations. In an empirical study by Sato
et al (2010a,b) that investigated the effectiveness of externally provided Euler diagrams in syllogistic reasoning, participants were instructed not to write anything on paper, and
were expected to internally (not directly) manipulate external diagrams. This was an attempt to focus reasoner attention
onto the semantic (topological) information contained in the
diagrams. In contrast, we wanted to block the mental conversion of external diagrams and focus reasoner attention not
only onto the topological features, but also onto the visual
(geometrical) features of Euler diagrams. Thus, we asked the
participants to directly manipulate the diagrams (having specific sizes) when solving reasoning tasks. We used the three
kinds of Euler diagrams: (1) size-fixed diagrams (type I), (2)
size-fixed diagrams (type II), and (3) size-scalable diagrams.

Reasoning with size-fixed diagrams: type I
We start with Euler diagrams that have specific circle-sizes.
For example, consider the EA3 syllogism, which has no valid
conclusion (NVC). The first premise No B are A is represented by D1 in Fig. 1, and the second premise All B are C is
represented by D2 . In these two diagrams, circle-sizes are not
scalable from the default size of the premise diagrams, such
as D1 and D2 ; only circle C is movable. Here the unification
of the premise diagrams does not uniquely determine the spatial relationship between circles C and A, i.e., there are three
possible configurations of circles C and A (C excludes A; C
includes A; C and A partially overlap). A possible strategy
for judging NVC is to start to enumerate multiple configurations of conclusion diagrams D3 , D4 , and D5 until it becomes
apparent that there is no relationship between C and A that


  
Bk k
A

D1

C
Bk

C
Bk k
A

C
Bk k
A

C
Bk k
A

D4

D5


  
D2

D3

Fig. 1: An example of reasoning with NVC using size-fixed
diagrams: type I
Bk k
A

C
Bn
k

D6

D7

C
Bn
A
kk

D8

C
Bk
A
nk

D9

Fig. 2: An example of syllogistic reasoning with NVC using
size-fixed diagrams: type II
holds in all the conclusion diagrams. An alternative strategy
is to place the circles C and A such that they partially overlap; i.e., D4 . When such a configuration of circles holds, both
No C are A and All C are A are invalid conclusions. Additionally, when (1) syllogisms consist of universally quantified
sentences or (2) the Euler diagrams do not hold the existential
assumption for minimal regions, one can determine whether
a syllogism is NVC using the partial-overlapping strategy.
When using size-fixed diagrams (type I), all three possible configurations of circles C and A can be exhaustive, and
thereby both the enumeration and partial-overlapping strategies are available. Such diagrams could work in a positive
way when solving reasoning tasks.

Reasoning with size-fixed diagrams: type II
Consider the other type of Euler diagrams, in which the circles have different sizes. In Fig. 2, the circle-size of C
in D7 (corresponding to the second premise All B are C) is
smaller than that of C in D2 of Fig.1. The unification process
almost automatically determines the exclusion configuration
between circles C and A, as shown in D8 . In addition, the unification process gives rise only to the partial-overlapping configuration as in D9 as far as the circle C is carefully placed on
the most right side. Here, the reasoner has the option to construct the overlap configuration, but this is a difficult task because the circle-size of C is so small. Given this small circlesize, the reasoner can not construct the circle configuration
of inclusion relation in conclusion diagram, corresponding to
D5 in Fig. 1.
In this case using size-fixed diagrams (type II), all three
possible configuration of circles C and A are not exhaustive.
This makes it difficult for reasoner to choose an enumeration
strategy. On the other hand, the circles C and A can be placed
in such a way that they partially overlap. Thus, one can determine whether a logical argument has NVC using the partialoverlapping strategy with the premise diagrams. However, it
is relatively difficult to use this partial-overlapping strategy.
This is due to a visual bias in diagrammatic reasoning: i.e.,
the possible area of intersection between C and A is very small
because the circle C (or A) is the smallest size available when
constructing the overlap configuration in the conclusion diagram. In such cases, these diagrams might work in a negative
way when solving reasoning tasks.

2884

Bk k
A

C
Bn
k

D10

D11

C
Bn
A
kk

D12


C
Bk k
A

D13


C
Bk k
A

No B are A.

All C are A.





D14

Bl l
A

Fig. 3: An example of syllogistic reasoning with NVC using
size-scalable diagrams

All B are C.

C

No C are A.


None of them.

Table 1: Syllogisms (first and second premises) used in the
experiment
Syllogisms having NVC
AE1 All B are A, No C are B.
AE3 All B are A, No B are C.
EA3 No B are A, All B are C.
EA4 No A are B, All B are C.

Fig. 4: A syllogistic task with size-fixed diagrams (type I) for
Experiment 1a; the correct answer is None of them.

Syllogisms having VC
AE2 All A are B, No C are B.
AE4 All A are B, No B are C.
EA1 No B are A, All C are B.
EA2 No A are B, All C are B.
AA1 All B are A, All C are B.

No B are A.

All B are C.
All C are A.

Bl l
A

Reasoning with size-scalable diagrams
Consider the size-scalable Euler diagrams used for solving
the EA3 syllogism that has NVC, as shown in Fig. 3. Each
default circle-size in the premise diagrams D10 and D11 is the
same as that in D6 and D7 from the size-fixed diagrams (type
II) in Fig. 2. In the size-scalable diagrams, the reasoner can
scale the size of circle C up and down (denoted by thin lines).
For the convention, the unification of premise diagrams can
give rise to all three possible configurations of circles C and
A: an exclusion relationship in D12 , a partial-overlapping relationship in D13 , and an inclusion relationship in D14 .
In this case using size-scalable diagrams, all three possible
configurations of circles C and A can be exhaustive. As a result, both the enumeration and partial-overlapping strategies
are available. Thus, such diagrams would resist the visual
bias found in size-fixed diagrams (type II) as stated in Fig. 2.

Syllogisms having universally quantified sentences
For simplicity, the premises and conclusions of the syllogisms
used in this experiment were universally quantified sentences
of the form either All A are B or No A are B. All the syllogisms used in this experiment are shown in Table 1. We gave
nine different types of syllogisms in total, out of which 4 syllogisms had no-valid conclusion (NVC) and 5 syllogisms had
a valid conclusion (as filler tasks). The NVC types that cannot fix the circle-sizes uniquely (AA2, AA3, EE1, EE2, EE3,
EE4) were not used. The valid conclusion of AE2, AE4, EA1,
and EA2 syllogisms is No C are A (VC-no), and that of AA1
is All C are A (VC-all).

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we examined whether and how human diagrammatic reasoning is affected by visual bias of diagrams.
We asked participants to directly manipulate size-fixed diagrams (type I for Experiment 1a; type II for Experiment
1b) when solving syllogistic tasks with universally quantified
sentences.


C

No C are A.


None of them.

Fig. 5: A syllogistic task with size-fixed diagrams (type II)
for Experiment 1b; the correct answer is None of them.

Method
Participants Forty-five undergraduate and graduate students from the University of Tokyo (mean age 20.11 ± 1.32
SD) were recruited by means of a poster placed on the campus. All participants gave informed consent and were paid for
their participation. All procedures in this experiment were approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Tokyo.
The participants were Japanese-speaking students, and the
sentences and instructions were provided in Japanese. The
participants were divided into two groups: Experiment 1a (24
participants) and Experiment 1b (21 participants). In Experiment 1a groups, two participants were excluded–one for a
computer malfunction, and one for response times more than
two SD from the mean. In Experiment 1b groups, we excluded data from one participant who did not use (move) diagrams.
Materials The participants in the both groups were given
syllogisms with (size-fixed) Euler diagrams in a PC monitor.
The participants were presented with two premises and were
asked to choose a sentence corresponding to the correct conclusion, from a list of three possibilities. The list consisted of
All C are A, No C are A, and None of them. When solving
such problems, the participants were also asked to use the diagrams appeared at the center of the monitor (the lower side
of the premise sentences), and to move circle C to the left
side diagram by drag operation using a mouse (the left side
diagram cannot be moved). In Experiment 1a, the size-fixed
diagrams (type I), shown in Fig. 4, were provided. In Experiment 1b, the size-fixed diagrams (type II), shown in Fig. 5,
were provided. Each syllogistic task of VC-all and VC-no in
Experiment 1a was also used in Experiment 1b.

2885

Table 2: The appearance frequencies of circle configurations
in syllogisms having NVC
1. inclusion
2. exclusion
3. overlap
4. inclusion & exclusion
5. inclusion & overlap
6. exclusion & overlap
7. inclusion & exclusion & overlap
The sum of 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7
The sum of 4 and 7
The sum of 5 and 6

Exp-1a
4.5
6.8
35.2
15.9
11.4
15.9
10.2
88.6
26.1
27.3

Exp-1b
0.0
32.5
28.8
0.0
0.0
38.8
0.0
67.5
0.0
38.8

Exp-2
0.0
13.6
28.4
3.4
2.3
44.3
8.0
86.4
11.4
46.6

Table 3: The accuracy rates for NVC tasks with diagrams in
Experiments 1a, 1b, and 2
Experiments
1a: size-fixed diagrams (type I)
1b: size-fixed diagrams (type II)
2: size-scalable diagrams (starting from 1b)

In Experiment 1a, especially, we recorded how the participants move the Euler diagrams in syllogistic reasoning. For
analysis, we defined a configuration that remained for more
than 0.3 seconds as a unit of circle-configuration in the conclusion diagram. The following cases were not considered to
be units of circle configuration: (1) the default configuration,
and (2) unintentional configurations produced by the mouse
operation which was too fast to correctly drag the pictures.
The task was firstly displayed such that the premise sentences and diagrams were surrounded by frames, as shown in
Figs. 4 and 5. These frames were removed after five seconds,
and at the same time the participants were instructed to start
changing the position of circle C and solve the syllogistic reasoning tasks. There was no time limit to solve the reasoning
tasks.
Procedure The experiment was conducted individually.
Firstly, the participants were provided with a one-page instruction on the meaning of Euler diagrams, elaborating on
diagrams’ syntax–semantics correspondence rather than diagrammatic picture–semantics correspondence. A pretest
whether they understood the instruction correctly was conducted; it consisted of the problems on the correspondence
between universally quantified (affirmative and negative) sentences and Euler diagrams. Before the reasoning tasks, the
participants were given oral instruction on the reasoning task
and familiarlized with the mouse operations required for circle manipulation. Note that the experimenter did not provide any specific instruction about how to manipulate circle
C. One task example (All A are B, All B are C; therefore All A
are C) was displayed on a PC monitor. A total of nine different types of reasoning tasks were presented in random order
(one of three patterns).

Result and discussion
In the pretest of Euler diagrams, all of the participants chose
the correct answers for each item. The appearance frequencies of (combinations of) configurations of circles C and A in
diagram manipulation for solving NVC tasks are showed in
Table 2. The bold numbers refer to the circle-configurations
which are consistent with our description in task analysis.
Regarding the NVC tasks in Experiment 1a, 88.6% of the participants chose the expected strategies: 35.2% of the partici-

Accuracy rates
92.0%
76.3%
92.0%

pants chose the partial-overlapping strategy, 26.1% of the participants chose the enumeration strategy (4 & 7), and 27.3%
of the participants chose a confounding strategy of the two
strategies (5 & 6). Furthermore, in VC-all tasks, 100.0%
of the participants constructed the circle configuration that
C is included in A. In VC-no tasks, 96.6% of the participants constructed the circle configuration that C is excluded
from A. As we described in the subsection of task analysis, the participants chose (i) the enumeration strategy with
multiple configurations of conclusion diagrams and (ii) the
partial-overlapping strategy of placing two circles (see also
Sato, Wajima, & Ueda, 2014). This suggests that all three
possible configuration of circles C and A are exhaustive by
the size-fixed diagrams used in Experiment 1a.
As shown in Table 3, the accuracy rate of NVC tasks
for Experiment 1b (76.3%) was significantly lower than that
for Experiment 1a (92.0%) (Mann-Whitney U = 143, P =
0.023). The accuracy rates of the other two types (VC-all
and VC-no) were also substantially high. Experiment 1a
showed 100% for VC-all, and 96.6% for VC-no; Experiment
1b showed 100% for VC-all, and 100% for VC-no. The significant difference between accuracy rates for NVC tasks in
Experiment 1a and those in Experiment 1b provides evidence
for the claim that size-fixed diagrams (type II) suffer from the
visual bias of diagrams in logical reasoning.
All of the incorrect answers of NVC tasks in Experiment
1b were No C are A. Accordingly, in Experiment 1b, the
circle-configuration of exclusion was constructed in 89.5%
of the items (incorrectly) selecting No C are A in NVC tasks.
As shown in Table 2, additionally, the rate of the participants
who constructed the exclusion configuration was 6.8% in the
Experiment 1a, but the rate became as high as 32.5% in Experiment 1b (U = 116, P = 0.004).

Experiment 2
If visual bias is actually present in diagrammatic representations, then we expected that performance on the task in Experiment 1b would be improved when participants used sizescalable diagrams instead of size-fixed diagrams (type II). We
designed Experiment 2 to confirm this.

Method
Participants Twenty-five undergraduate and graduate students (mean age 19.32 ± 1.35 SD) were recruited. Three
participants were excluded–two for a computer malfunction,
and one for response times more than two SD from the mean.
Materials The participants were given syllogisms with
(size-scalable) Euler diagrams, shown in Fig. 6. The par-

2886

No B are A.

(4 & 7), and 46.6% of the participants chose the confounding
strategy (5 & 6). This suggests that all three possible configuration are exhaustive by the size-scalable diagrams used in
Experiment 2.

All B are C.
All C are A.

Bl l
A


C

No C are A.



General discussion
None of them.

Fig. 6: A syllogistic task with size-scalable diagrams; the correct answer is None of them
ticipants were presented with two premises and were asked
to choose a sentence corresponding to the correct conclusion.
When solving syllogistic tasks, the participants were asked
to use the diagrams: move circle C to the left side diagram
by drag operation using a mouse. In addition, the participants were provided the instruction that the size of circle C
by scrolling the mouse wheel can be scaled up or down if it is
necessary. Each default size of C (illustrated by thin lines) is
the same as that of size-fixed diagrams (type II) in Experiment
1b. Each syllogistic task of VC-all and VC-no in Experiment
1 was also used in Experiment 2.
Procedure The experiment was conducted in the same
manner as in Experiment 1. The instructions of diagrams
were provided, pretests were conducted, and then the reasoning task with diagrams were imposed.

Result and discussion
In the pretest of Euler diagrams, all of the participants chose
the correct answers for each item. In the reasoning tasks,
nineteen participants scaled up and down the size of circle C
(three participants did not scale up and down the circle-size in
more than two items in NVC tasks). For example, the sixteen
participants scaled up the circle C in the task of Fig. 6.
The accuracy rate of NVC tasks for Experiment 2 was
92.0%, as shown in Table 3. The data were compared with
those of Experiment 1b. The accuracy rate of NVC tasks
for Experiment 2 (92.0%) was significantly higher than those
for Experiment 1b (76.3%) (Mann-Whitney U = 140.5, P =
0.019). The accuracy rates of the other two types (VC-all
and VC-no) were substantially high, showing 100% for VCall, and 98.9% for VC-no. The significant difference between
accuracy rate for NVC tasks in Experiment 2 and that in Experiment 1b provides evidence for the claim that size-scalable
diagrams reduce the visual bias in logical reasoning with sizefixed diagrams (type II).
The difference in accuracy rates reflected in the appearance
frequencies of circle configurations in Table 2. The number of
participants who constructed the exclusion configuration was
13.6% in the Experiment 2, which was lower than 32.5% in
Experiment 1b (U = 144, P = 0.039). Furthermore, in NVC
tasks, 86.4% of the participants chose the expected strategies:
28.4% of the participants chose the partial-overlapping strategy, 11.4% of the participants chose the enumeration strategy

In Experiment 1, we addressed the question of whether and
how a visual bias of diagrams affects human performance.
We asked participants to directly manipulate size-fixed diagrams when solving syllogistic tasks. In the size-fixed diagrams (type I) used in Experiment 1a, the circle-sizes were
sufficient to allow participants to construct configurations of
overlap and inclusion in the conclusion diagram. In the sizefixed diagrams (type II) used in Experiment 1b, the circle C
(or A) was set to be the smallest size possible, making it more
difficult for participants to construct the configuration of overlap in the conclusion diagram. The difference in accuracy
rate for NVC tasks between Experiment 1a and Experiment
1b provided evidence for the existence of a visual bias in diagrammatic reasoning. In Experiment 2, we addressed the
question of whether size-scalable diagrams were able to resist visual bias of diagrams. The difference in the accuracy
rate for NVC tasks between Experiment 2 and Experiment 1b
provided evidence for a reduction of visual bias in diagrammatic reasoning.
In this paper, we focused on visual biases in Euler diagrams
representing syllogistic arguments. However, such visual biases would occur in various kind of diagrammatic reasoning,
specifically in diagrams that is a linear variant of Euler diagrams (cf. Sato & Mineshima, 2012). In deductive reasoning, the size of each individual object in a diagrams can be
regarded as a piece of visual information, but these do not
necessarily contribute to the validity judgement of deductive
reasoning. However, what features of diagrams make the difference between semantic and visual information depends on
the type of reasoning. For example, consider inductive reasoning. The validity of an inductive argument can be determined by the probability of an event occurrence concerning
the truth of the statements. It is possible to express uncertainty relationships through the proportional relationships between diagrammatic objects. This technique is called “area
proportional Euler diagrams” (cf. for a survey of various
forms of Euler diagrams, see Rodgers, 2014). In this technique, (in contrast to that used in our study) the circle-sizes
play an important role in judging the validity of induction
(probability judgment). Thus, certain other features of diagrams (e.g., shape, orientation) can be regarded as irrelevant
(visual) information.
Concerning the distinction between visual and semantical information, a similar point has been made by the psycholinguistic studies of geometrical richness contained in languages. Most notably, Landau and Jackendoff (1993) analyzed the spatial language such as The cat is on the mat, and
examined that certain nouns (e.g., cat, mat) contain much detailed geometrical properties such as shape, comparing with

2887

certain prepositions (e.g., on). More relevant to our concern
is the study of spatial reasoning in Knauff and Johnson-Laird
(2002). In their experiments, the response time of inference
tasks with visual relations (that are easy to invoke visual representations but hard to invoke spatial representations, e.g.,
cleaner-dirtier) was longer than that with visuospatial relations (that are easy to invoke visual and spatial representations, e.g., above-below). These results suggest that irrelevant visual detail can impede inferential processes. The above
studies dealt with mental images elicited from sentential expression about what we saw. By contrast, this study applies
the geometrical richness in language components to that in
external diagrams, and further to visual biases of diagrams
for solving reasoning tasks.
The issue on visual biases of diagram in logical reasoning is an instance of diagram particularity (generality) problem, which is well known in the philosophy of mathematics
(Kulpa, 2009; Mumma, 2010; Shin, 2012). Indeed, Gottfried
Leibniz (1677) wrote:
we must recognize that these figures [the figures of geometry] must also be regarded as characters, for the circle described on paper is not a true circle and need not
be; it is enough that we take it for a circle (p.281).
The diagram written on paper (i.e., external diagram) is just
a particular object. In principle, a claim constructed from
the particular diagram can hold only in the particular case.
Thus, there is no guarantee of the correctness on claim in
other cases. In other words, they lack generality. Therefore,
we can not obtain general claim from the particular diagram.
This problem influenced early formal studies of diagrammatic
reasoning, where the formal definition of a diagram is abstract in that it is independent of any particular diagram (e.g.,
Shin, 1994). However, if formal studies can contribute the
mathematical underpinnings of actual diagrammatic reasoning, then it is important to associate particular diagrams and
general diagrams (Howse, Molina, Shin, & Taylor, 2002).
This view has especially manifested in the modern development of logic diagrams, such as spider diagrams (e.g., Howse,
Stapleton, & Taylor, 2005) and the modern formulation of
Euclid’s geometry (e.g., Avigad, Dean, & Mumma, 2009). In
these systems, primitive objects constituting a diagram such
as circles and rectangles are abstractly defined as formal units
with variables, and the particular diagrams are regarded just
as instances of diagrammatic objects that comply with the
abstract definition. In our empirical study, we suggested sizefixed diagrams as one form of particular diagrams. Our result
indicates that human suffer from the problem of visual bias
of diagrams (diagram particularity). This is the case not only
in special situations, such as mathematical generalization, but
also in the everyday use of diagrams. Furthermore, we introduced size-scalable diagrams as objects that play the role of
variables; thereby enabling diagrams with specific-size to be
recognized as instances of diagrammatic objects. We believe
that there is potential for designing pedagogical tools that reduce visual biases in diagrammatic reasoning and learning.

References
Allwein, G. & Barwise, J. (Eds.). (1996). Logical Reasoning with
Diagrams. New York: Oxford University Press.
Avigad, J., Dean, E., & Mumma, J. (2009). A formal system for
Euclid’s Elements. The Review of Symbolic Logic, 2, 700–768.
Barwise, J. & Etchemendy, J. (1994). Hyperproof, CSLI Lecture
Notes, No. 42. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Benoy, F. & Rodgers, P. (2007). Evaluating the comprehension of
Euler diagrams. In Proceedings of Information Visualization 2007
(pp. 771–778). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society.
Blake, A., Stapleton, G., Rodgers, P., Cheek, L., & Howse, J. (2012).
Does the orientation of an Euler diagram affect user comprehension? In Proceedings of DMS Visual Languages and Computing
2012 (pp. 185–190). Skokie, IL: Knowledge Systems Institute.
Howse, J., Molina, F., Shin, S.-J., & Taylor, J. (2002). On diagram
tokens and types. In Proceedings of Diagrams 2002, LNAI 2317
(pp. 146–160). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Howse, J., Stapleton, G., & Taylor, J. (2005). Spider diagrams. LMS
Journal of Computation and Mathematics, 8, 145–194.
Knauff, M. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). Visual imagery can impede reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 30, 363–371.
Kulpa, Z. (2009). Main problems of diagrammatic reasoning. Part I:
The generalization problem. Foundations of Science, 14, 75–96.
Landau, B. & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “What” and “where” in spatial
language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
16, 217–217.
Leibniz, G. (1677/1956). Philosophical Papers and Letters; Dialogue. L.E. Loemker (Trans. & Ed.). Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Mineshima, K., Sato, Y., Takemura, R., & Okada, M. (2014). Towards explaining the cognitive efficacy of Euler diagrams in syllogistic reasoning: A relational perspective. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 25, 156–169.
Mumma, J. (2010). Proofs, pictures, and Euclid. Synthese, 175, 255–
287.
Purchase, H.C. (1997). Which aesthetic has the greatest effect on
human understanding?. In Proceedings of Graph Drawing 1997,
LNCS 1353 (pp. 248–261). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Purchase, H.C. (2012). Experimental Human-Computer Interaction:
A Practical Guide with Visual Examples. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Rodgers, P. (2014). A survey of Euler diagrams. Journal of Visual
Languages and Computing, 25, 134–155.
Sato, Y. & Mineshima, K. (2012). The efficacy of diagrams in syllogistic reasoning: A case of linear diagrams. In Proceedings of
Diagrams 2012, LNAI 7352 (pp. 352–355). Heidelberg: Springer.
Sato, Y., Mineshima, K., & Takemura, R. (2010a). The efficacy of
Euler and Venn diagrams in deductive reasoning: Empirical findings. In Proceedings of Diagrams 2010, LNAI 6170 (pp. 6–22).
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Sato, Y., Mineshima, K., & Takemura, R. (2010b). Constructing internal diagrammatic proofs from external logic diagrams. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2668–2673). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Sato, Y., Wajima, Y., & Ueda, K. (2014). An empirical study of
diagrammatic inference process by recording the moving operation of diagrams. Accepted for publication in Proceedings of Diagrams 2014, LNAI. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Shimojima, A. & Katagiri, Y. (2013). An eye-tracking study of exploitations of spatial constraints in diagrammatic reasoning. Cognitive Science, 37, 211–254.
Shin, S.-J.(1994). The Logical Status of Diagrams. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shin, S.-J. (2012). The forgotten individual: diagrammatic reasoning in mathematics. Synthese, 186, 149–168.
Stenning, K. & Lemon, O. (2001). Aligning logical and psychological perspectives on diagrammatic reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Review, 13, 1–34.
Stenning, K. & Oberlander, J. (1995). A cognitive theory of graphical and linguistic reasoning. Cognitive Science, 19, 97–140.
Treisman, A. (1988). Features and objects: The fourteenth Bartlett
memorial lecture. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40, 201–237.

2888

