UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Voices and Variants: Effects of Voice on the Form-Based Processing of Words with Different
Phonological Variants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/26g0009q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
King, Sharese
Sumner, Meghan

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Voices and Variants: Effects of Voice on the Form-Based Processing of Words with
Different Phonological Variants
Sharese King (sharese@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Margaret Jacks Hall, Bldg. 460
Stanford, CA 94301-2150 USA

Meghan Sumner (sumner@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Margaret Jacks Hall, Bldg. 460
Stanford, CA 94301-2150 USA
Abstract
Spoken words have robust acoustic variation. How listeners
understand spoken words despite this variation remains an
issue central to theories of speech perception. Current models
predict listener behavior based on the frequency of a variant
in production. A phonological variant, though, is often
investigated independent of phonetic variation that provides
listeners with information about talkers. In this study, we
investigate whether standard variants in words produced by a
talker with a standard voice are recognized more quickly than
standard variants in words produced by a talker with a nonstandard voice. Conversely, we investigate whether nonstandard variants in words produced by a talker with a
standard voice are recognized more slowly than standard
variants in words produced by a talker with a non-standard
voice. These comparisons enable us to assess limitations of
current theory, illuminating the understudied influence of
talker voice in the understanding of spoken words with
different phonological variants.
Keywords: spoken-word recognition; speech perception;
variation; dialect; African American Vernacular English

Introduction
Speech varies across speakers based on a variety of social
and linguistic factors. While variation was, viewed as
problematic noise (e.g., Verbrugge, Strange, Shankweiler, &
Edman 1976), researchers have turned to investigating the
potential contribution phonetic variation has in the quick
and adept ability of listeners to understand spoken words.
For example, listeners are highly sensitive to variation in
speech (Bradlow & Bent, 2008; Bradlow & Pisoni, 1999;
Clopper & Pisoni, 2004; Johnson, 2006; Sumner & Samuel,
2009), use this information to process upcoming words
(e.g., Beddor, McGowan, Boland, Coetzee, & Brasher,
2013; Salverda, Kleinschmidt, & Tanenhaus, 2014), store
detailed talker-based acoustic detail in memory (Goldinger,
1998; Nygaard, Sommers, & Pisoni, 1994), and depend on
acoustic patterns in speech to activate acoustically-similar
representations (Johnson, 2006).
Many
contemporary
theories
oriented
toward
accommodating phonetic variation in speech perception are
episodic in nature. Such theories posit that a listener’s
ability to access a lexical item is contingent upon the
encoding of detailed episodes of spoken words (Goldinger,
1998; Johnson, 2006). Incoming speech is perceived against

the clusters arising from the storage of phonetically-rich
lexical representations. This leads to an activation benefit
of more frequently experienced acoustic patterns, as a
common structure benefits from the shared activation of a
rich, dense cluster of stored word forms, making up the
form component of a form-meaning lexical representation.
In the most simplistic and extreme interpretation of such a
theory, listeners understand and recognize frequent word
forms faster than and/or more accurately than less frequent
word forms.
The bulk of studies that have supported this view have
investigated talker-specific variation and its effect on the
recall and recognition of spoken words. For example,
Johnson (2006) found that words produced by women with
more typical female voices are recognized more quickly
than words produced by women with less typical female
voices. Nygaard and colleagues (Nygaard et al., 1994;
Nygaard and Pisoni, 1998) have shown that words are
recognized better and recalled more accurately upon second
presentation when the first presentation matched in talker
voice, and speech rate.
While these studies have provided evidence for specificity
in form at the lexical level and in a benefit for more typical
or frequent forms, words forms vary phonologically, too.
For example, speakers of General American English (GA)
may produce the word center with a medial [nt] sequence,
or with a medial [n_] sequence, stemming from a post-nasal
t-deletion process common in GA, and across regional and
ethnic varieties of American English more broadly. Recent
work has investigated the composition of lexical form-based
representations of words with different pronunciation
variants, as well. Typically, these studies compare the
effects of words produced with one variant to those of
words produced with a different variant. In other words, the
comparisons are typically purely phonological and
categorical. The similar thread tying this work to those with
episodic-based approaches to variation has been the link to
frequency. From a representational standpoint, researchers
have wondered whether one variant is dominant compared
to another. Additionally, they wonder if evidence exists as
to whether representations are tied to production frequency
or tied to a canonical, or idealized, form of a word.

2913

These studies have produced mixed results. Some work
has found that listeners are more likely to recognize a word
when it contains the variant that is most often produced
(e.g., beetle with a medial tap, which occurs 96% of the
time in American English, is recognized as a word more
often than the same word with a medial [t]; Connine, 2004).
Others have found the opposite; listeners are more likely to
recognize a word when it contains the variant that is
uncommon, but socially idealized (e.g., center with a medial
[n_], which occurs almost categorically in GA, is
recognized as a word less often than the same word with
medial [nt]; Pitt, 2009).
Recently, Sumner (2013) has argued that these mixed
results stem from using an approach that is highly sensitive
to acoustic patterns in speech, without necessarily
considering how those acoustic patterns interact with the
phonological variants, leading to less than optimal
comparisons. For example, while it is true that the [n_]
variant in a word like center is overwhelmingly the frequent
variant, that variant also occurs overwhelmingly in a
casually-articulated, phonetically-reduced word frame.
Using the semantic priming paradigm to investigate the
dependence of a phonological variant on the phonetic word
frame, Sumner found that words with both variants are
equally able to facilitate recognition to a semantically
related target as long as each variant is produced in its
typically occurring phonetic word frame (see also Gow,
2001; McLennan, Luce, & Charles-Luce, 2003; Sumner &
Samuel, 2005).
Having now established that the recognition of words
with phonological variants depends greatly on the phonetic
word frame, we might now consider how these two interact
in more nuanced uses of variants across regional and ethnic
varieties of American English. While understudied, some
work has been conducted. For example, Sumner and
Kataoka (2013) investigated the semantic priming of targets
preceded by primes ending in either rhotic (-er) or nonrhotic (-uh) vowels (e.g., slend-er/-uh – THIN) across voices
with different accents (GA-er; New York City (NYC)-uh;
Southern Standard British English (BE)-uh). They found
that the presence or absence of priming cannot be tied to a
particular variant. Specifically, for a population of GA
listeners, strong semantic priming was found for the GA/-er
pairing and for the BE/-uh pairing. No priming was found
for the NYC/-uh pairing. This asymmetry indicates that the
voice carrier of a word impacts spoken word recognition
greatly. Recent work by Sumner and colleagues (Sumner,
Kim, King, & McGowan, 2014) suggests that form-based
representations and access to those representations depend
on both the linguistic and social information conveyed
through acoustic patterns in speech. And, that listeners
integrate both in speech recognition in order to build
representations and understand spoken words.
This study builds on this work and examines the effects of
voices and variant on the form-based processing of spoken

words. Specifically, we shift to the underexplored area of
ethnic variation. Ethnic variation provides us with an
opportunity to explore the effects of standard and
nonstandard voices and variants, increasing our
understanding of how phonological and phonetic variation
interact. This study investigates whether standard variants
(e.g., [nd] in friendly) are recognized more quickly when
produced in a standard voice (e.g., GA) or in a nonstandard
voice (e.g., African American Vernacular English (AAVE)).
Additionally, we investigate whether non-standard variants
(e.g., [n_] in friendly) are recognized more quickly when
produced in a nonstandard voice or in a standard voice.
To do this, we investigate two types of variation: Dialectindependent variation and dialect dependent variation.
Dialect-independent variation refers to a production pattern
across American English that spans across regions and
ethnicities and cannot be tied to any one particular speaker
population.
Dialect-dependent variation indicates a
production pattern that is well-documented to be highly
common in and specific to one particular speaking
population. Consonant cluster deletion (CCD) is an example
of dialect-independent variation, and TH-fronting is an
example of dialect-dependent variation. We describe each
of these processes in the following section. By comparing
variants that occur generally across voices and variants that
are tied to particular voices, we can investigate both variantspecific frequency-based predictions and voice-dependent
context-based predictions stemming from past work,
providing insight into the complex process of spoken
language understanding.

Dialect-Independent vs. Dialect-Dependent
Variation
Certain types of variation can occur commonly across
dialects or specifically within dialects. Particularly, CCD,
the reduction of a consonant cluster to a single sound (CC
→ C_), is a dialect-independent pattern that occurs more
generally across all dialects of English including GA and
AAVE. TH-fronting, the production of a syllable-final
interdental fricative as a labiodental fricative (e.g., [θ] →
[f]; booth → boof) is a dialect-dependent process, occurring
more restrictively in dialects like AAVE (Thomas, 2007),
but not in GA. These types of variation patterns make it
possible for us to explore ethnic dialectal variation and the
effects of this variation on speech perception when
produced in the context of different voices.

Production Patterns
The process of CCD results in the production of a reduced
cluster, as seen in the pronunciation of friendly as frienly,
having the variants [nd] and [n_], respectively. For ease of
explication, the symbols [nd] will be used in this paper to
represent an unreduced cluster and [n_] will be used to
represent the reduced variant. Speakers across dialects tend

2914

to delete the final stop of a cluster when that stop is
followed by a consonant (Thomas, 2007). Although CCD
occurs more generally across dialects, this pattern is still
attributed to AAVE. This may result from the fact that an
AAVE speaker may also reduce the cluster when the
following sound is a vowel.
The process of TH-fronting results in the production of
the dental fricative as a labiodental fricative as seen in the
pronunciation of booth as boof with the variants [θ] and [f],
respectively. We refer to the standard variant, for simplicity,
as [θ] and the nonstandard variant as [f], though both voiced
and voiceless pairs were included in the study.
The acoustic similarity of these fricatives may make this
distinction in consonants less perceptible. At the fricativevowel boundary, Jongman, Wayland and Wong (2000)
observed a significantly higher F2 onset in dental fricatives
than labiodental fricatives. It is possible that this could be a
cue to distinguishing these consonants. Previous research
has shown that in careful versus casual speech, the acoustic
distances in minimally different places of articulation are
enhanced in clear speech (Maniwa, Jongman, & Wade,
2009). Additionally, Maniwa et al. (2009) show that
differences between /f/ and /θ/ are more discriminable in
clear speech compared to conversational speech. Listeners
are therefore likely to perceive this contrast when produced
in isolated words in a carefully articulated speech style.

Predictions
This study investigates whether GA listeners recognize
words with standard, infrequent, and dialect-independent
variants produced by a GA voice faster than when produced
by an AAVE voice. And, whether GA listeners recognize
words with nonstandard, dialect-dependent variants
produced by an AAVE voice faster than when produced by
a GA voice.
To do this, we employed a cross modal form-priming
paradigm. Participants are presented with an auditory
stimulus followed by a visual target. Previous research
suggests that the phonological similarity between the prime
and target influences the rate at which a participant
responds, with slower reaction times for unrelated primes
than identical ones (Radeau, Morais, & Segui, 1995;
Sumner & Samuel 2009). Additionally, primes that
mismatched by a single feature, word finally, [flut] versus
[flus], showed slower response times if that particular
variant ([flus]) was not part of the participant’s dialect
(Sumner & Samuel 2005; 2009).
The predictions made here are nuanced and depend
greatly on perspective and theoretical framing. From a
purely variant frequency-based approach (e.g., the more
often I hear a variant, independent of the phonetic context,
the more easily I recognize a word with that variant), we
predict the that: (1) For CCD, the more frequent variant [n_]
should show greater priming effects in comparison to the
less frequent variant [nd] for both the GA and AAVE

primes, as this pattern is common across both varieties, and
(2) For TH-fronting, we expect an asymmetry to emerge as
[f] is infrequent in GA and more frequent in AAVE. Words
with [f] should induce greater priming of form-related
targets when that variant is uttered by an AAVE speaker
than when it is uttered a GA speaker. But, words with [θ]
should induce greater priming of form-related targets when
uttered by a GA speaker than an AAVE speaker. In a theory
in which the recognition of words with different variants
depends on the phonetic context in which those variants are
experienced, we would expect to find evidence of an
interaction between voices and variants. Specifically, the
processing of words with these different variants depends on
the voice that houses each variant. In a perspective in which
the voice conveys social meaning, and we infer social or
talker-based properties from a voice, we may expect the
emergence of social differences where the standard variants
are recognized better when housed in a GA frame than in a
AAVE frame and nonstandard variants are recognized better
when housed in a AAVE frame than in a GA frame.

The Experiment
Methods
Participants Fifty-two participants participated in this study
for pay. Participants included local residents and students in
Palo Alto, CA. All participants were monolingual American
English speakers, and none were AAVE speakers.
Stimuli The two authors of this paper recorded stimuli.
Both are from Rochester, NY and share traits of the Inland
North dialect. One is an AAVE speaker and the other, a GA
speaker. All stimuli were recorded at a comfortable
speaking rate in a sound-attenuated booth.
For the CCD stimuli, we included words with final
consonant clusters (e.g., friend) followed by suffix or
another word, such as kindly (kind +ly) or handbag (hand
+bag) We chose this word structure because in production,
deletion most naturally occurs between a consonant cluster
and a following consonant.
For TH-fronting stimuli, they consisted of words with
interdental fricatives in coda position (e.g., booth, athlete).
Both words with the [θ]-[f] alternation and words with the
[ð]-[v] alternation were included. Words where the [θ] to [f]
change results in ambiguity (i.e. Ruth to Ruf/roof) were not
included.
Four types of stimuli were produced by each talker: (1)
CCD words with the standard variant [nd]; (2) CCD words
with the nonstandard variant [n_]; (3) TH words with the
standard variant [θ]; and (4) TH words with the nonstandard
[f].
Design We collected 44 mono or bisyllabic words per type
of variation (CCD and TH-fronting) for a total of 88 critical
target words. For each variation, half of the targets (=22)

2915

TH0Fronting'

Consonant'Cluster'
Deletion'

were paired with a related audio prime. A related prime is a
prime that is identical to the target, or a prime that is
mismatched by only a single sound (birth; birf). The other
half of the targets were paired with unrelated audio primes
like car. The unrelated prime and target pairs were created
by pairing each target with a different prime from the list. In
addition to the 88 target words, there were 264 fillers for a
total of 352 words in a single list. The critical items
represented 25% of the trials in the experiment. Half of the
filler targets (=132) were real words with no interdental
fricatives. The other half (=132) were pseudo words. There
were 176 real word fillers and 88 pseudo word fillers. The
design was between subject with half of the subjects
receiving words produced by the AAVE speaker with
nonstandard variants ([n_] and [f]) and the GA speaker with
the standard variants ([nd] and [θ]), and the other half
receiving words produced by the AAVE speaker with the
standard variants and the GA speaker with the nonstandard
variants.
Figure 1 displays example stimuli across
conditions. We varied relatedness (unrelated vs. related),
voice (AAVE vs. GA), and variant (CCD vs. TH-fronting).
No subject heard both variant types (dialect-independent vs.
dialect-dependent) in the same voice.
Prime
Voice'

Prime'
Variant'

GA#

[nd]#
!
!

AAVE#

[n_]#

Auditory'
Prime'

[fɹɛ̃n

[fɹɛ

#

FRIENDLY#

Unrelated#control#prime:#passive###

GA#

AAVE#

[θ]#
#
[f]#

[b u θ
]#

f]#
[b u

Table 1: Mean latencies for correct responses across speaker

Visual'
Target'

dli]#

̃nli]

Results Analyses focused on response times (RT) to
correctly identified targets. RTs more than 4 standard
deviations from the mean were removed (<6%). Due to
oversight in the development of the stimuli, responses to six
words from the CCD list were discarded, as these words
contained clusters followed by a vowel, eliminating the
appropriate context licensing deletion. Mean reaction times
across voices and variants for related and unrelated
conditions are provided in Table 1.

BOOTH#

Unrelated#control#prime:#cat###

Figure 1: Sample stimuli across conditions
Procedure Participants were presented with an audio primevisual target pair where the primes are related or unrelated
to the target. We are comparing the time it takes a listener to
respond correctly to a visual target (e.g., FRIENDLY) when
preceded by a related word (e.g., friendly GA/[nd];
GA/[n_]; AAVE/[nd]; AAVE/[n_]) compared to when that
word is preceded by a prime unrelated in form.
Listeners were tested in a sound-attenuated booth. They
were asked to perform a lexical decision to the visual target
as quickly and accurately as possible. Participant accuracy
and response latencies were recorded.

We conducted a three factor Omnibus ANOVA (voice
(GA/AAVE) x variant ([θ], [f], [nd], [n_]) x relatedness
(RELATED/UNRELATED) on the log RTs to investigate
the effects of voice, variant and relatedness on the
recognition of form-related targets. No main effect of voice
was found, suggesting that listeners were equally fast at
identifying a visual target whether followed by a GA voice
or an AAVE voice (F (1, 39) < 1; p = 0.712). Establishing
an overall priming effect, a main effect of relatedness was
found, where targets preceded by form-related primes were
recognized faster than targets preceded by unrelated control
primes (F (1, 39) = 215.959, p <. 001). We also found a
main effect of variant (F (3, 39) = 8.745, p < .001).
Critically, a voice by variant interaction was found,
suggesting that the processing of words with different
variants depends greatly on the voice in which that variant
was produced (F (3, 77) = 4.884 p < .05). We also found a
voice by relatedness interaction (F3, 77) = 2.626, p < .01),
suggesting that priming for related words differed by voice.
A marginal interaction of variant by relatedness was also
found (F3, 77) = 2.262, p = 0.0792).
Given the voice by variant interaction, we conducted a set
of planned comparisons on the difference scores from
related-unrelated pairs in order to assess the dependencies
between voices and variants in the priming paradigm.
Figure 2 plots the differences between the unrelated and
related means across voices and variants by variation type
(CCD vs. TH). As shown, the priming patterns for CCD
and those for TH-fronting are strikingly similar despite the

2916

facts that CCD is a dialect-independent process and THfronting is a dialect-dependent process.

< .001). Interestingly, though, the GA variant ([nd]) did not
show greater priming than the frequent [n_] variant when
housed in an AAVE voice frame (t (334.75) = -.501 p >.05).

Discussion

Figure 2: Differences between unrelated and related mean
response times across voices and variants.
To calculate difference scores, each participant’s
unrelated mean was used as a baseline RT and the reaction
time for each related observation was subtracted from this
baseline score. The standard variant [nd] induced greater
priming when produced with the GA voice than when
produced with the AAVE voice (t (331.826) = 1.948, p =
.052), though marginal. The standard variant [θ] induced
greater priming when produced with the GA voice than
when produced by the AAVE voice (t (398.963) = 2.443, p
< .05). These two analyses support the idea that words with
standard variants facilitate recognition to form-related
targets when the standard variants co-occur with a
subjectively perceived standard voice. Highlighting the
important role of a phonetic frame, this offers at least
speculative support that social information inferred by a
talker voice influences word recognition.
Moving to our second hypothesis, that words with
nonstandard variants are recognized more quickly when
produced in a nonstandard voice than a standard voice, we
have some support. Specifically, the non-standard variant
[n_] induced greater priming when produced with the
AAVE voice than when produced with the GA voice (t
(318.37) = -2.959, p < .01). And, the non-standard variant
[f] induced marginally greater priming when produced with
the AAVE voice than when produced with the GA voice (t
(393.929) = -1.784, p = .07).
Finally, to address the predictions of an account based
purely on variant frequency, it is important to note that in
addition to GA [nd] facilitating recognition to related targets
more than AAVE [nd], it also facilitates recognition to
related targets more than the most common variant ([n_]). In
the GA voice, the less common variant ([nd]) showed
greater priming than the GA ([n_]) (t (331.949) = -3.595, p

The purpose of this study was to examine the interaction of
voices and variants across dialects in immediate processing
tasks. Specifically, we investigated whether GA listeners
recognize words with standard, infrequent, and dialectindependent variants produced by a GA voice faster than
when produced by an AAVE voice. And, whether GA
listeners recognize words with nonstandard, dialectdependent variants produced by an AAVE voice faster than
when produced by a GA voice.
Support for both hypotheses ensued. Specifically, we
found across variants that words with standard variants
facilitate recognition to form-related targets more when
produced in a GA voice frame than when produced in an
AAVE voice frame. And, we found that the nonstandard
variant [n_] facilitates recognition to form-related targets
more when produced in an AAVE voice than when
produced in a GA voice, and the same, though marginal for
the [f] variant. What is interesting about the patterning of
[n_] is that this is a dialect-independent variant. In other
words, GA listeners are regularly (and mostly) exposed to
words that are produced with the [n_] variant. And, it is not
the case that words with [nd] simply facilitate recognition to
form-related words better than words with [n_] because
statistically there is no priming difference between GA/[nd]
and AAVE/[n_]. Rather, the results are highly nuanced and
depend less on frequency of a particular variant, or even
frequency of a particular variant housed in a particular
voice. If the latter were supported, we should have found
that the strongest priming was induced by [n_] across
voices. But, that is clearly not the case.
From these data, we have clear evidence that the phonetic
frame that carries a particular variant has an effect on the
priming of a form-related target. But, it is also clear that
neither a frequency-based nor a canonical-variant approach
alone is sufficient to account for the data. Speculatively,
what appears to be happening is that listeners are attributing
non-standard variants to stigmatized speech varieties,
despite the fact that one of the non-standard variants in the
study is used prevalently by GA speakers. We found
reduced priming in the AAVE voice for the standard
variants and increased priming in the AAVE voice for the
nonstandard variants, despite investigating variants that
differ in terms of dialect-dependency in production.
One limitation of the present study is that we do not
operationalize experience as in previous work on regional
variation (Sumner & Samuel 2009). It is difficult to do so
for an ethnic variety given the various sources of exposure
from which one can draw. To date, few studies have focused
on assessing experience with an ethnic dialect (Staum
Casasanto, 2008) or foreign-accented English (McGowan,

2917

2011). Future work will seek a method for doing so in order
to test listeners from a population of AAVE speakers.
To summarize, we have investigated the interaction of
voices and variants. Recognizing words with different
phonological variants depends greatly on the perceived
talker properties conveyed through a voice. While more
research is needed to understand the role of experience in
processing, at a minimum, variant frequency-based accounts
of speech perception do not support the divergence of
behavior from production patterns observed in this study.
The interplay of voices and variants might be better
explained by exploring the linguistic and social information
conveyed by acoustic variation in the phonetic frame of
spoken words.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge Kevin McGowan,
Seung Kyung Kim, Ed King, John R. Rickford, and Paul
Kiparsky for their feedback on this paper. This material is
based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation Grant No. 0720054 to Meghan Sumner and
Grant No. DGE-114747 to Sharese King. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

References
Beddor, P. S., McGowan, K. B., Boland, J. E., Coetzee, A.
W., & Brasher, A. (2013). The time course of perception
of coarticulation. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 133(4), 2350-2366.
Bradlow, A. R., & Pisoni, D. B. (1999). Recognition of
spoken words by native and non-native listeners: Talker-,
listener-, and item-related factors. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 106, 2074.
Bradlow, A. R., & Bent, T. (2008). Perceptual adaptation to
non-native speech. Cognition, 106(2), 707-729.
Clopper, C. G., & Pisoni, D. B. (2004). Effects of talker
variability on perceptual learning of dialects. Language
and Speech, 47(3), 207-238.
Connine, C. M. (2004). It’s not what you hear but how often
you hear it: On the neglected role of phonological variant
frequency in auditory word recognition. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 11(6), 1084-1089.
Goldinger, S. D. (1998). Echoes of echoes? An episodic
theory of lexical access. Psychological review, 105(2),
251.
Gow, D. W. Jr., (2001). Assimilation and anticipation in
continuous spoken word recognition. Journal of Memory
and Language, 45, 133–159.
Johnson, K. (2006). Resonance in an exemplar-based
lexicon: The emergence of social identity and phonology.
Journal of Phonetics, 34(4), 485-499.
Jongman, A., Wayland, R., & Wong, S. (2000). Acoustic
characteristics of English fricatives. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 108, 1252.

Maniwa, K., Jongman, A., & Wade, T. (2009). Acoustic
characteristics of clearly spoken English fricatives. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 125, 3962.
McGowan, K. (2011). The Role of Socioindexical
Expectation in Speech Perception. Dissertation.
University of Michigan Department of Linguistics.
McLennan, C. T., Luce, P. A., & Charles-Luce, J. (2003).
Representation of lexical form. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29(4),
539.
Nygaard, L. C., Sommers, M. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (1994).
Speech perception as a talker-contingent process.
Psychological Science, 5(1), 42-46.
Nygaard, L. C., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Talker-specific
learning in speech perception. Perception &
Psychophysics, 60(3), 355-376.
Pitt, M.A. (2009). The strength and time course of lexical
activation of pronunciation variants. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 35, 896-910.
Radeau, M., Morais, J., & Segui, J. (1995). Phonological
priming between monosyllabic spoken words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 21(6), 1297.
Salverda, A.P., Kleinschmidt, D., & Tanenhaus, M.K.
(2014). Immediate effects of anticipatory coarticulation in
spoken-word recognition, Journal of Memory and
Language, 71(1), 145-163.
Staum Casasanto, L. (2008). Experimental Investigations of
Sociolinguistic Knowledge. Dissertation, Stanford
University Department of Linguistics.
Sumner, M., & Samuel, A. G. (2005). Perception and
representation of regular variation: The case of final/t.
Journal of Memory and Language, 52(3), 322-338.
Sumner, M., & Samuel, A. G. (2009). The effect of
experience on the perception and representation of dialect
variants. Journal of Memory and Language, 60(4), 487501.
Sumner, M., & Kataoka, R. (2013). Effects of phoneticallycued talker variation on semantic encoding. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 134(6), EL485EL491.
Sumner, M., Kim, S. K., King, E., & McGowan, K. B.
(2014). The socially weighted encoding of spoken words:
a dual-route approach to speech perception. Frontiers in
Psychology, 4, 1015.
Thomas, E. R. (2007). Phonological and phonetic
characteristics of African American Vernacular English.
Language and Linguistics Compass, 1(5), 450-475.
Verbrugge, R. R., Strange, W., Shankweiler, D. P., &
Edman, T. R. (1976). What information enables a listener
to map a talker’s vowel space?. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 60, 198.

2918

