UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Gaze Data Reveal About Coordinating Multiple Mathematical Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hw5s599

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Wills, Thoedore
Shipley, Thomas
Chang, Briana
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Gaze Data Reveal About Coordinating Multiple Mathematical
Representations
Theodore Wills (twills@temple.edu)
College of Education, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Thomas F. Shipley (thomas.shipley@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 North 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Briana L. Chang (briana.chang@temple.edu)
College of Education, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Jennifer G. Cromley (jcromley@temple.edu)
College of Education, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Julie L. Booth (julie.booth@temple.edu)
College of Education, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Abstract
40 High school students were given a battery of paper and pencil
tests, which collectively assessed a variety of spatial abilities,
graph and table competencies, conceptual mastery of calculus, and
achievement in common topics from typical precalculus and
calculus courses. In addition, students completed a computerpresented measure of Coordinating Multiple Representations
(CMR), in which they had to assess whether two mathematical
representations (e.g. an equation and a graph) depicted the same
underlying mathematical function. Gaze data were captured
during this measure, using a Tobii T60 eye tracker. Findings
suggest that good or poor performance on several paper measures
is associated with distinct and specific gaze behaviors. Better
achievement scores are associated with fewer fixations near the
centerline of the graph, and with fewer point-plotting and function
scanning behaviors. These findings are discussed in terms of
differing approaches or strategies for engaging in CMR.
Keywords: Eye tracking; coordinating multiple representations,
graphs.

Introduction
Students of mathematics are often required to engage with a
variety of representations.
They may be asked to
understand information presented in the form of equations,
graphs, tables, and text. The ability to pass flexibly between
two or more such representations, a skill called
Coordinating Multiple Representations (CMR), is seen as a
hallmark of well developed competence, and is associated
with better math achievement (Gagatsis & Shiakalli, 2004).
However, while there is more than one way to successfully
execute CMR, there is little existing research that delineates

the sorts of granular strategies that are associated with
superior math competencies.
This study focuses on CMR strategies associated
with graphical representations.
Researchers in graph
comprehension have delineated a distinction between
locally and globally represented information, and the
different behaviors or strategies that are necessary to
successfully extract these types of information (e.g., Shah,
Freedman, & Vekiri, 2005.). Leinhardt et al. (1990) draw a
distinction between lower-order techniques in graph
interpretation, like point reading, and those associated with
higher-order information, like evaluating intervals of
increase or decrease. More recently, theorists have argued
for meaningful, hierarchical distinctions between reading
the data (e.g., reading the value of a single point), reading
between the data (e.g., find differences between points, or
compute sums or aggregations of points), and reading
beyond the data (e.g., infer information that is not explicitly
presented; Friel et al., 2001).
Differentiation of graphical coordination skills is
supported by other research that outlines the relative
challenges of different CMR tasks. For example, it is
common practice for students to manually graph data
provided in tabular format (Kozma, 2000; Roth & Bowen,
2003), but this type of coordination is more challenging
with non-linear functions (Demana, Schoen, & Waits,
1993). Likewise, younger students often focus on lowerorder information, such as specific points, rather than
understanding the function as a continuous entity with a
global structure (Elia, Panaoura, Eracleous, & Gagatsis,
2007; Elia et al., 2008; Even, 1998; Monoyiou & Gagatsis,

3113

2008). Importantly, such lower-order approaches may be
inadequate when engaging with more complex functions
(Carlson et al., 2010).
Therefore, depending on the task and the specific
form of the graph, effective information extraction may
require preferentially attending to the most relevant local
regions, or conversely, efficiently ignoring the least relevant
regions. In other cases, coordinating and integrating
multiple regions may allow access to more global kinds of
information, such as trends or patterns, which may be a
more efficient path to resolving the task. In this paper we
examine gaze behaviors of high school students who are
coordinating a graph with either an equation, or a table.
Given the lack of previous research linking specific
gaze behaviors with CMR strategies, we used an exploratory
approach to the eye tracking data. We examine both lowerorder visual behavior corresponding to specific local areas
of graphs, as well as higher-order behaviors that require
sequential coordination of multiple areas. Finally, we
explore how these behaviors are related to measures of math
achievement.

CMR Eye Tracking Measure (ET CMR): stimuli and

task
12 pairs of mathematical representations (graphs, tables and
equations), were presented. Across trials, half of the pairs
represented the same underlying function (match) and half
did not (mismatch). Each possible pair of representations
was presented four times, with left-right position and matchmismatch fully counterbalanced. The participants’ task was
to decide for each trial whether the two representations (e,g,
an equation and a graph) matched or did not, while
verbalizing their thoughts. No tools such as paper, pencil or
calculator were provided, and all work and answers had to
be provided verbally to assure continuous tracking of gaze.
Four of the CMR items, which required coordination of a
table and an equation, are not analyzed here. A sample item
is shown in Figure 1. For the current report, our questions
of interest focused on coordinations involving graphs. For
this reason, the 4 items that consisted of equation-table
coordinations were excluded from our analyses.

Method
Participants
Participants included 40 high-school students from precalculus and calculus classes at two high-achieving public
suburban schools, one in New Jersey the other in
Pennsylvania. Their mean age was 16.6; 45% were male;
77% were White, 18% Asian, 3% Black, and 5% other
races. As a proxy for SES, median parental education was a
Bachelor’s degree.

Procedure
Parental consent and student assent were acquired, after
which students were tested individually in a session lasting
approximately 70 minutes. Participants completed a series
of paper and pencil measures. Participants then completed
the computer-presented CMR measure described in more
detail below.

Figure 1: A sample item from the eye tracking CMR task.
This example pairs an equation with a graph (other relevant
items paired a graph with a table).

Paper and Pencil Measures
To assess math achievement, one of our measures was
comprised of 11 released items from AP Calculus exams.
A second measures was comprised of 11 released graph and
table items from the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP), and was intended to assess basic skills
associated with graph and table reading (in the absence of
coordination with a second representation. We used the
“Understand function representations” subscale of the PreCalculus Concept Assessment (PCA) (Carlson et al., 2010),
which feature tables and graphs, to assess CMR skill.
Finally, a researcher-designed Calculus Conceptual Measure
(CCM) was included. This measure was designed to assess
conceptual mastery as opposed to procedural knowledge.

Eye Tracking Apparatus
We used a Tobii T-60 remote eye tracking system, which
tracks eye gaze with a sampling rate of 60 Hz. Stimuli were
presented using a Lenovo T430 laptop running Tobii Studio
3.1. Screen resolution was 1280 x 1024 pixels and
participants were seated 65 cm from the screen. With this
arrangement the display subtended 32.8° of visual angle,
while individual representations subtended between 3.6°
and 6.5°.

Analysis
Each participant’s gaze data was assessed for problems of
calibration that might affect coding.
In particular,
calibration issues were expected to impact first-order
coding, where sensitive placement of a fixation within a

3114

specific Area of Interest (AOI) might lead to error. Ten
individuals with substantial calibration error were excluded
from the first-order analysis. The specific second-order
codes analyzed here proved to be more robust with respect
to calibration problems, primarily because they are based on
large AOI’s, and/or are measures of movement as opposed
to locale. For this reason, all participants were retained for
analyses of second-order codes (patterns of results did not
change when they were excluded).
Coding Gaze Data Each graph was partitioned into a set of
AOIs. Some AOIs were associated with areas of the graph,
independent of the specific function. For example, every
graph featured seven vertical “stripes,” centered on the
integer X values ranging from -3 to 3. In addition, there
were customized AOIs corresponding to potentially
meaningful features of graphed functions, such as intercepts,
the origin, points of local minima and maxima, and one
encompassing the entire contour of the plotted function. In
this way, a single point (e.g. the origin), might lie within
multiple overlapping AOIs (see Figure 2).

ease of reference). Tabulation of first-order codes was
straightforward, and consisted of simply recognizing gazes
that fell within defined AOIs. Higher level coding was
more complex.
For example, one common strategy
associated with graph comprehension is plotting, in which
the reader scans either vertically or horizontally, most
frequently to associate a value on the X or Y axis with a
specific point on the function. We expected this strategy to
be expressed in the gaze data by consecutive hits within the
graph that were displaced either horizontally (for a Y value)
or vertically (for an X value). However, we did not have a
priori values for the extent of separation between the two
fixations, nor did we have estimates of reasonable tolerances
for deviation from strictly horizontal or vertical
displacement.
For this reason, the third author coded a sample of
the data (>30%), and these codes were compared with those
of the AC. Disagreements were examined to determine
whether there were systematic discrepancies, and whether
these were attributable to inappropriate criteria being
applied by the researcher or by the AC. Where appropriate,
the researcher adjusted her criteria, and coded additional
trials, or the parameters of the AC were adjusted. This
process was iterated until the researcher and AC reached
high levels of agreement, with at least 90% of eligible
fixations receiving the same code (or affirmative absence of
a code) from both sources. In this paper we discuss the
plotting codes described above (PlotY = vertical, PlotX =
horizontal), as well as a Scan code. This latter code reflects
the strategy of examining the structure of the drawn
function, and is operationalized by consecutive hits on the
function AOI, that also satisfy a minimum displacement
threshold.

Results
Measures
Correlations among the paper measures are shown in Table
1. It is worth noting that as a whole, the ET CMR measure
did not correlate with any of the other measures, perhaps
because performance on this untimed test was generally
very high. However, in the analyses that follow we do find
associations between other measures and specific gaze
patterns during the CMR task.

Figure 2: Two images of the same graph showing different
sets of AOIs. The top image shows AOIs associated with
meaningful features of the graph, including the function, all
intercepts, local minima and maxima, and the origin. The
bottom image shows vertical and horizontal regions
common to all graphs in the stimulus set.
To facilitate flexible analysis of this very large data
set, Microsoft Excel was used to create a system of
automated coding of fixation data (hereafter termed AC for

First-Order Codes
We first examined gaze behavior for all items that featured a
graph, regardless of whether they were paired with a table or
an equation. A consistent pattern emerged in which
participants who emphasized the left and right edges of the
graph showed better performance on the paper measures
than those who emphasized the vertical midline. For
example, the total number of fixations on the central vertical
stripe was negatively associated with the PCA [r(30)= -.37,
p<.05], This pattern also applied to total fixations on
specific features that are necessarily located in the central
vertical AOI. For example, fixations on the origin were
negatively associated with scores on the PCA [r(30)=-.49,

3115

p<.01], and marginal for the AP scores [r(30)=-.32, p=.08].
Likewise, fixation on the Y-intercept were negatively
associated with the PCA [r(30)=-.46, p<.05].

For the EG items, one interesting pattern emerged
that was related to the left-right positions of the graph and
equation. Students who answered more than one item
correct on the AP measure preferentially distributed gaze
duration (log transformed) to the left-hand representation
compared with those who scored one or zero items, F(1,
115) = 4.38, p<.05, η2=.04. In short, higher AP scores were
associated with a stronger left-right bias. These students
were more likely to work left-to-right, regardless of which
representation occupied the left-hand position.

Table 1
Intercorrelations among All Measures (N = 40)
1

2

3

4

1. APC

Second-Order Codes
2. NAEP

-.04

3. PCA

.412**

.208

4. CCM

.671**

.111

5. ET CMR

.194

.228

.447**
.093

.110

Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01.

In contrast, total number of fixations in the vertical
AOI associated with the X=-3 region of the graph was
positively correlated with the subset of CCM items that
featured graphs [r(28)=.38, p<.05]. Similarly, the X=3
region was positively correlated with scores on the NAEP
[r(30)=.50, p<01] and PCA [r(30)=.38, p<.05].
A second finding was that participants who did not
continue to fixate on the orienting question at the top of the
screen after the first item tended to perform better on the
paper measures compared with those who did. After the
first item, fixations on the question were negatively
correlated with scores on the NAEP, PCA, CCM and ET
CMR measures (all p’s < .05), and marginally with APC.
We were also interested in gaze behavior at the
beginning of each trial. We speculated that by restricting
analysis to the first few visits of a trial, we might capture
relatively automatic or default strategies that might later be
obscured during subsequent processes like rechecking.
Consecutive fixations within a representation were
aggregated into visits. The first visit to a representation is
often (though not always) characterized as an orienting
event. Further, if it precedes all visits to the alternate
presentation it does not afford sufficient opportunity for
coordination between representations for meaningful
analysis. For this reason we chose as our time point the
conclusion of the second visit to the alternate representation
(the equation or table), as this is the earliest time point that
allows for both orientation and coordination. Since we
believed that early behavior may depend strongly on the
identity of the alternate representation, we further separated
analyses between equation-graph (EG) items, and tablegraph (TG) items.

We selected the PlotX, PlotY and Scan codes for analysis
because they were expected to correspond to common graph
reading behaviors. As expected, these codes were prevalent,
with every participant enacting each code at least once, and
with mean counts of 22.7 (SD=11.2), 5.7 (SD=3.5), and
25.8 (SD=13.0), respectively.
Overall vertical visual plotting (PlotY), was
associated with lower graph competency, as it was
negatively associated with both PCA scores [r(40) = -.41,
p<.01) , and scores on the subset of AP items that featured
graphs [r(40)=-.34, p<.05]. In contrast, overall horizontal
visual plotting was more common, but was not
differentiated
among
individuals
with
different
competencies.
The Scan code (consecutive hits along the
function) was also associated with poor performance on the
PCA, but only when the data was restricted to two items that
were presented on early trials of the CMR measure [r(40)=.37, p<.05].

Discussion
Our findings indicate that individuals with different levels
of competency in math enact different gaze behaviors when
asked to coordinate multiple representations that include a
graph. Stronger skills, as operationalized by our paper
measures, are associated with less attention to the center of
the graph, more to the outer edges, and a tendency to engage
the left-hand representation first irrespective of its form. In
addition, under some circumstances stronger students are
less likely to engage in the specific strategies of plotting
individual values (as operationalized by the PlotY code), or
to systematically scan along the function (Scan code).
Taken together, these findings may reflect a
weaker student who is visually drawn to the graph, and then
to features (like the origin and Y-intercept) that are most
visually salient. In contrast, the stronger student works leftto-right, regardless of the graph’s position, and is more
likely to fixate on non-central areas of the graph.
Alternatively, weaker students might be
emphasizing the center of the graph for reasons that are not
strictly perceptual. For example, a more accomplished
practitioner of CMR may be more willing to engage with
areas of the graph that are not close to zero. First, these
values are more computationally difficult for “plug and
chug” calculations. Further, examining these regions of the

3116

graph might afford assessment of the overall structure of the
function in a way that is more efficient than scanning any
two points. For instance, one could rapidly evaluate
whether the tails of a cubic function match the expected
directions with fixations to the left and right areas of the
graph (even if the fixations did not fall precisely on the
function).
Another possible interpretation is that while all
students enact the Scan and Plot codes, stronger students do
so more efficiently and reliably. In contrast, the weaker
students are more likely to repeat these steps, either because
they realize they have not executed them correctly, or
simply because they are not confident that they have. This
would be consistent with findings that greater expertise is
associated with more efficient gaze behaviors (e.g.,
Gegenfurtner, Siewiorek, Lehtinen, & Saljo, 2013)
There is also a question about the extent to which
the participants are intentionally and knowingly enacting
specific strategies, and the extent to which they are prone to
enacting (or avoiding) strategies as a function of habitual
practice. For example, our stimuli were constructed in such
a way that the Y-intercepts in both representations always
matched. This design choice was made because we felt that
evaluation of the Y-intercept is trivially easy for students at
this level of mastery, and that allowing a mismatch
determination based on this comparison alone would lead to
ceiling effects.
This design feature does raise the
possibility, however, that an observant participant might
conclude during the course of the test that the Y-intercept is
not useful in our task, and might adjust their approach in
response. We do not have the power to definitively test this
possibility. However, examining the strengths of the
relevant associations as a function of trial does not suggest
that this sort of within-task strategic shift accounts for the
overall results.
Whether it is possible to differentiate among these
possible interpretations is an open question. It may be that
there are no gaze behaviors that would serve to
disambiguate different strategies. Perhaps it is the case that
either the strategies (or the gaze patterns that enact them)
are too dependent on the detailed contextual factors of
individual graphs to be detected given the statistical power
in the present study. For example, gazes of individual
students may be sensitively dependent on features of the
stimuli like left-right position, or order of the function, or
the specific pairing of representations.
On the other hand, we may be able to develop
stronger evidence for some interpretations through any of
several future activities. First, we plan to enhance the gaze
data with concurrent analysis of the think aloud protocols
which were collected simultaneously with the eye tracking
task. This approach has the promise of revealing which
behaviors are being intentionally and consciously enacted,
and which may reflect more implicit processes.
Second, additional second-order codes may afford
clarification. For example, we plan to develop visual
sequences to operationalize the coordination of the Y-

intercept across both representations. This code may reveal
different competencies associated with each representation
type, as well as competencies in coordinating a specific
value across different representation pairs. This will also
help to determine whether participants are making conscious
adjustments to the relatively low informational value that
the Y-intercept has for our specific stimulus set.
Finally, we plan a follow up study with data
collection at two time points from each participant, to
measure changes over time. Importantly, this future data
will expand our available data. Additionally, it will provide
developmental data which may inform the detailed
relationships among acquired math competencies and the
emergence of different gaze behaviors.

Acknowledgments
The research reported here was supported by IES award
number R305A120471.

References
Carlson, M., Oehrtman, M., & Engelke, N. (2010). The
precalculus concept assessment: A tool for
assessing students' reasoning abilities and
understandings. Cognition and Instruction, 28(2),
113-145. doi:10.1080/07370001003676587
Demana, F., Schoen, H. L., & Waits, B. (1993). Graphing in
the K-12 curriculum: The impact of the graphing
calculators. In T. A. Romberg, T. P. Carpenter &
E. Fennema (Eds.), Integrating research on the
graphical representation of functions (pp. 11-40).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Elia, I., Panaoura, A., Eracleous, A., & Gagatsis, A. (2007).
Relations between secondary pupils' conceptions
about functions and problem solving in different
representations. International Journal of Science
and Mathematics Education, 5(3), 533-556.
Elia, I., Panaoura, A., Gagatsis, A., Gravvani, K., & Spyrou,
P. (2008). Exploring different aspects of the
understanding of function: Toward a four-facet
model. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics
& Technology Education, 8(1), 49-69.
Even, R. (1998). Factors involved in linking representations
of functions. The Journal of Mathematical
Behavior, 17(1), 105-121. doi:10.1016/S07323123(99)80063-7
Friel, S. N., Curcio, F. R., Bright, G. W. (2001). Making
sense of graphs: critical factors influencing
comprehension and instructional implications.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
32, 124-148.
Gagatsis, A., & Shiakalli, M. (2004). Ability to translate
from one representation of the concept of function
to another and mathematical problem solving.
Educational
Psychology,
24(5),
645-657.
doi:10.1080/0144341042000262953

3117

Gegenfurtner, A., Siewiorek, A., Lehtinen, E., & Säljö, R.
(2013). Assessing the quality of expertise
differences in the comprehension of medical
visualizations. Vocations and Learning, 1-18.
Kozma, R. (2000). The use of multiple representations and
the social construction of understanding in
chemistry. In M. J. Jacobson & R. Kozma (Eds.),
Innovations in science and mathematics education:
Advanced designs, for technologies of learning.
(pp. 11-46). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers.
Leinhardt, G., Zaslavsky, O.,& Stein, M. (1990). Functions,
graphs, and graphing: Tasks, learning, and
teaching. Review of Educational Research, 60, 164.
Monoyiou, A., & Gagatsis, A. (2008). A coordination of
different representations in function problem
solving. Proceedings of the 11th International
Congress of Mathematics Education. Monterrey,
Mexico.
Roth, W., & Bowen, G. M. (2003). When are graphs worth
ten thousand words? An expert-expert study.
Cognition and Instruction, 21(4), 429-473.
doi:10.1207/s1532690xci2104_3
Shah, P., Freeman, E. G., & Vekiri, I. (2005). The
comprehension of quantitative information in
graphical displays. In A, Miyake, & P. Shah (Eds.),
The Cambridge Handbook of Visuospatial
Thinking (pp 426-476). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

3118

