UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is the Ground? Continuous Maps for Symbol Grounding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9p5236j4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Perera, Ian
Allen, James

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What is the Ground? Continuous Maps for Grounding Perceptual Primitives
Ian Perera (iperera@cs.rochester.edu) and James F. Allen (james@cs.rochester.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, 500 Joseph C. Wilson Blvd., Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 40 South Alcaniz Street Pensacola, FL 32502 USA
Abstract

physical attributes and their combinations to learn about objects it sees (Farhadi, Endres, Hoiem, & Forsyth, 2009), but
would also be built around a framework allowing evaluation
of claims that it has actually grounded such attributes in a
perceptual model.
Various types of reasoning are also supported only by a perceptually grounded system. Reasoning by mental simulation
requires a grounding in physical form to process questions
such as “Can an open umbrella fit in the trunk of a car?”1 ,
which is trivial for a person to answer even though the answer is not explicitly stated in a knowledge base. Qualitative
reasoning also draws upon non-symbolic knowledge in reasoning over continuous spatial, temporal, or feature spaces.
Rather than explicitly stating the properties and relations between objects for every possible pair of objects, a grounded
system can draw upon its perceptual representations to answer questions about relations between objects on the fly.

Analysis of the Symbol Grounding Problem has typically focused on the nature of symbols and how they tie to perception without focusing on the actual qualities of what the symbols are to be grounded in. We formalize the requirements of
the ground and propose a basic model of grounding perceptual
primitives to regions in perceptual space that demonstrates the
significance of continuous mapping and how it influences categorization and conceptualization of perception. We also outline methods to incorporate continuous grounding into computational systems and the benefits of applying such constraints.
Keywords: Symbol Grounding; Perception; Language; Machine Learning; Topology

Introduction
The symbol grounding problem underlies a wide range of
areas in cognitive science, including perception, philosophy
of meaning, child language learning, and artificial agents –
“How can the semantic interpretation of a formal symbol system be made intrinsic to the system, rather than just parasitic
on the meanings in our heads?” (Harnad, 1990). The answer
to this question – how do our words have meaning beyond
definitions composed of other words – can guide our models
of cognition and our algorithms of artificial agents, providing
constraints on the grounding process and enabling capabilities not present in ungrounded systems.
While Harnad clearly states what a symbol system is –
a system of explicit representation, syntactic manipulability,
semantic interpretability, and systematicity – he does not go
into great detail as to what the symbols are grounded in. Attempts to formalize the Symbol Grounding Problem focus on
the symbolic aspect, but neglect to incorporate a theoretical
categorization of acceptable grounds. This gap in specificity
is a detriment to research in the area of symbol grounding
– how do we design perceptually grounded systems without
knowing what capabilities we are pursuing nor what kinds of
systems have these capabilities?

Previous Work

Advantages of a Perceptually Grounded System
To say that an ungrounded system is lacking because its
knowledge is circularly-defined is not entirely satisfying if
there is no appreciable performance difference between a
grounded and ungrounded system. The primary advantage is
that a perceptually grounded system is uniquely capable of
interfacing its knowledge with perceptual systems, even beyond current computer vision and robotics systems. A perceptually grounded ontology, for example, could be used to recognize objects that had never been seen before based on symbolic knowledge such as in work by Russakovsky and Fei-fei
(2012). A computer vision system could not only recognize

There have been a number of efforts attempting to provide a theoretical representation that crosses the divide between symbolic knowledge and perceptual representations.
Barsalou (1999) proposed a perceptual theory of knowledge
to explain the connection between symbolic knowledge and
perception. At the center of the theory is the perceptual symbol, a neural representation that is tied to the underlying sense
modality related to its symbol. A visual symbol, for example,
is a record of the neural state in the visual cortex. Perceptual
symbols are composed of perceptual components, which are
the primitives corresponding to sensory features. In this work
we consider grounding at the feature level and therefore are
concerned with the perceptual components – to convey this
level of grounding, we will refer to such components as perceptual primitives.
Gärdenfors (2004) proposed his theory of conceptual
spaces as a non-symbolic framework for information processing, representing concepts as regions in spaces defined
according to quality dimensions of the stimulus. His use of
the term conceptual space indicates that in his model, concepts are identical to the regions in what we define as perceptual space: the space where stimuli are arranged according
to a particular set of qualities. We use the term perceptual
space to make a distinction between the range of possible
stimuli and the symbols that are associated with them – symbols which might be distributed according to conceptual similarity in a different space.
In attempting to describe the geometrical constraints on regions in conceptual space, Gärdenfors claims that in such a
1 This

1156

example originated with Lenhart Schubert.

framework, natural predicates (corresponding to perceptual
primitives) are represented by convex regions with a definition of convexity extended to non-Euclidean spaces. Support
for this claim comes from shapes of regions corresponding to
colors and phonemes in perceptual space. Mormann (1993)
shows that Gärdenfors’s definition of convexity is flawed and
not applicable to arbitrary conceptual spaces, and instead proposed path-connectedness as a topological constraint on such
regions. Our characterization of such regions as contractible
spaces is stronger than Mormann’s restriction while avoiding
the problems with the convexity assumption, and therefore
allows us to explain some aspects of the shape of regions corresponding to natural predicates in perceptual space without
making the geometric assumptions Gärdenfors does about the
underlying space.
Other characterizations of the shape of category regions
have been more vague, such as Roberson, Davies, and Davidoff’s (2000) claim that similar colors are grouped together.
Our model provides a more concrete characterization that
makes a distinction between similarity and categorization and
avoids the circular definition of categories using similarity.

Criteria for Perceptual Groundings
To formalize perceptual grounding, we must first consider
what exactly is being grounded. One has an intuitive notion of
what a percept is (often defined as some element of a sensory
system such as vision or hearing), and so far previous work
has relied on this loose definition serving as an acceptable criterion for distinguishing “grounded” systems from those that
are not. We do not ground to percepts directly, but rather to
ranges of possible percepts in a perceptual space. For example, “red” refers to a range of values that we consider red, but
not one particular experience of red nor the symbolic interpretation of all red objects in the domain.
We believe that a more complete categorization of the advantages of a perceptually grounded system requires more
formal criteria for what constitutes a valid grounding for a
symbol. We set forth three criteria to characterize the domain of the function from the perceptual space to perceptual
primitives: primitiveness, semantic vacuity, and semantic disconnectedness. These are not intended to be exhaustive, but
rather are meant to provide a context and justification for pursuing continuous maps as a means for perceptual grounding
given the additional advantages we show for such a system.

Primitiveness
Primitiveness refers to an agent’s lack of awareness of the
components that make up the percepts, not the physical reality of the stimulus. For example, while our eyes process light
according to three receptors, an individual is not cognizant of
those components before they are assembled into our perception of color. At some point, in any cognitive system, there
will be some level at which the primitive perception must be
taken as a given – for us, it is what we refer to as “qualia”,
whereas for a computer, it may be the readings of its sensors.

This level, where the nature of the perceptual space is not explained by the agent’s model, is where grounding must occur
to avoid grounding in symbols – primitiveness from a perceptual perspective establishes the perceptual primitive as atomic
from the symbolic perspective.

Semantic Vacuity
While a concept has a semantic interpretation, a percept must
not contain any semantic interpretation inherently. That is,
there should be no decoding for the percept’s representation.
For example, if we claimed our agent perceived English
characters and was able to name the appropriate letter it perceived, it would be disingenuous if our percept was simply an
8-bit number corresponding to an ASCII code. The notion of
a character would not be grounded in a visual representation,
as it is simply an encoded symbol.
This constraint is especially important for systems
grounded in virtual worlds, as it is easy to learn representations that will not generalize if the agent’s knowledge is applied to sensory data. If we do not ensure that “percepts” are
semantically vacuous, we will end up where we started with
a concept that needs further decomposition to reach a ground.

Semantic Disconnectedness
We also want to avoid percepts in our perceptual space being tied to an extrinsic semantic interpretation. For example,
if we were to define “the color of an apple” as a region in
color space, then we would face the issue where the nature of
color percepts would be dependent on the agent’s knowledge
of the surrounding world. An agent that sees a red object and
claims, “That is the color of an apple” would modify the original experience simply by coming across a green apple. Because the agent misattributed a semantic concept (“the color
of an apple”) to a percept (an instance of “red”), its perception is dependent on its past and future experiences of apples
instead of solely being dependent on the current stimulus.

A Topological Model for Symbol Grounding
Through Continuous Maps
Topology is a natural choice for representing the mechanics of symbol grounding, as it is general enough to apply regardless of choice of metrics or dimensions, and can therefore
characterize the behavior of neurons and computational systems alike.
In Topology, equivalences are defined according to continuous transformations between topological spaces. A topological space is a pair consisting of a set and a topology, which
describes the open subsets within that set. An open subset is
analogous to an open interval on the number line, whereas a
closed subset is analogous to a closed interval. This notion of
open and closed sets is fundamental to Topology, as it allows
us to define higher level properties such as boundaries, continuity, and connectedness, which are not defined over ordinary
sets. These properties are known as topological invariants, as
they are not affected by certain continuous transformations
such as bending, stretching, or contracting the space.

1157

Semantic Space
The semantic space contains the symbolic representation of
perceptual primitives such that they can be used in a symbolic
reasoning process. The space representation removes the requirement for symbolic reasoning in the grounding process
while also providing a framework through which semantic
distances can be defined. We define the semantic space using the discrete topology, meaning that every point is distinct
from the others and has some neighborhood in the space consisting only of itself. Singletons (points) in this space correspond to perceptual primitives, each of which has a corresponding region in a perceptual space.
The abstraction of perceptual primitives as singletons enforces that the semantic space does not encode small differences in perceptual input because symbols are discrete entities – the map from the perceptual space to the symbol is
constant. In addition, a perceptual primitive has no subparts
and therefore maps intuitively to a singleton.
Assigning the discrete topology to the space does not constrain the representation of the semantic space to a discontinuous space - the discrete topology requires the fewest assumptions about the topology of the space, and the model does
not change if we assume a continuous space. For example,
perceptual primitives could be distributed along a continuous
semantic space as in the representation determined by Huth,
Nishimoto, Vu, and Gallant (2012).

Figure 1: To illustrate the notion of homotopy inverse, here
the semantic space S is represented as a continuous space and
the singleton representation is relaxed. The grounding function f (x) yields a region in the perceptual space P. The conceptualization function applied to that region (g( f (x))) yields
a region in semantic space that can be continuously deformed
to and from the original input (a perceptual primitive representing “green”) - fitting the definition of f and g as homotopy inverses.
Continuity of Semantically Vacuous Functions The first
assumption and the core concept of our model is that the conceptualization and grounding functions are continuous. This
is consistent with our constraints – primitiveness and semantic vacuity enforce an absence of subparts or discontinuities
in the mapping function arising from higher-level conceptualizations applied to perceptual space.

Perceptual Space
The perceptual space in this model is a map of the stimuli associated with a particular sense such that different points represent distinguishable stimuli, and is divided into regions corresponding to the perceptual primitives in the semantic space.
For example, in color vision, the perceptual space would be
placed at a higher level than the tristimulus values of colors, where metamers exist (colors that are perceived to be the
same even though they are composed of different levels of
activation from the different types of cone cells). Similarity
between stimuli is judged according to a distance metric in
the perceptual space.
We call the function mapping a region in perceptual space
to the perceptual primitive in the semantic space a conceptualization function, and the function in the opposite direction
a grounding function.

The Grounding and Conceptualization Functions
Continuity We plan to explain characteristics of symbol
grounding over continuous mappings. Continuity in Topology is not as rigidly defined as it is in other fields and can
be described roughly as small changes in input yield small
changes in output. Continuous functions are crucial to this
model because they preserve certain properties of the spaces.
Therefore, if we know that a function is continuous, then we
can make assumptions about its output given the input, allowing even a simple model to make predictions about the shape
of regions corresponding to perceptual primitives.

Grounding and Conceptualization Functions as Homotopy Inverses The second assumption we make is that the
grounding and conceptualization functions are homotopy inverses. This requires that their composition can be deformed
continuously to the input (Figure 1). Even the stronger claim
that the grounding and conceptualization functions are inverses seems to admit most conceptions of a perceptually
grounded system – if the system produces an example of a
stimulus belonging to a particular category, we would expect
that system to categorize it identically if presented with the
same stimulus. However, the homotopy inverse assumption
gives us more flexibility – it could, for example, allow for
contextual effects influencing the mapping in one direction.
Grounded Primitives as Contractible Regions By establishing that the grounding and conceptualization functions are
continuous and homotopy inverses of each other, we establish that these functions preserve the neighborhoods of the
points in perceptual space, and therefore each point in semantic space is homotopy equivalent to the corresponding region
in perceptual space – i.e. the number of holes and the limits are preserved over those functions. With perceptual primitives being represented by points in semantic space, we restrict the corresponding shapes of regions in perceptual space
to contractible spaces, or those which can be continuously deformed into a point with a corresponding continuous inverse
mapping. A contractible space cannot have any holes of any

1158

Figure 3: A system without the contractible region assumption cannot distinguish between the possibility of the interior
region being a subset of the exterior region or disjoint from
it, thus prohibiting hierarchical inference of the data.

Figure 2: Without the contractible space assumption (left),
the noise points from the minus class interfere with the decision boundary of the plus class. With the contractible space
assumption applied to the choice of model (right), the noisy
data is ignored in favor of preserving contractible decision
boundaries.

perceived only by its membership in discrete, discontinuous
categories, it is impossible to reconstruct the underlying quality dimensions to understand the relations between different
perceptual primitives. In line with this limitation, Emberson,
Liu, and Zevin (2013) showed that intraclass statistics of
stimuli aided in higher level learning of categories.
Knowledge of quality dimensions and their continuous distribution is crucial for metaphorical reasoning, as metaphor
relies on adapting quality dimensions from one context to another. For example, when applying the temperature scale to
colors, simply specifying the endpoints of “cool” and “warm”
corresponding with “blue” and “red” does not accurately provide a link between the two modalities if there is no continuous space over which the values can be correlated.

dimension, nor can it be composed of separated spaces.
This contractible property also extends to some higherorder concepts. If we have a concept that is the Cartesian
product of any number of contractible spaces, then that new
space is also contractible. For example, to model the interaction of vision and hearing in speech perception such as in
the McGurk effect (McGurk & MacDonald, 1976), we can
take the product of the visual and auditory components of
the recognition of the phoneme, and the corresponding region
will be contractible. However, other set-theoretic operations
which could construct higher-level concepts (such as intersection, union, and complementation) do not preserve contractibility.

Hierarchical Categorization
Without the contractible assumption, it is impossible to distinguish between regions that are disjoint yet contained
within a larger region, and those that are a conceptual subset
of the larger region. For example, is teal a subset of blue, or
is it a disjoint concept? With the contractible assumption, we
know that if a concept maps to a region in perceptual space
contained entirely within another region, then it must be a
subset of that region (Figure 3).

Functional Benefits of Continuous Maps
We propose a number of functional benefits of continuous
maps from an information processing and concept formation
perspective, assuming that learning takes place at the level of
perceptual primitives.

Learning from Limited Experiences
The contractible space assumption makes categorization possible given only a few labeled input points by reducing the
search space of perceptual models that explain the feature
data. Identifying points in perceptual space without any distributional assumptions corresponds to the nearest neighbor
classifier - a new point is assigned the class of the nearest
labeled point. Such a classifier is extremely susceptible to
noise, because there is no underlying assumption of the shape
of the distribution of the stimuli. With the contractible space
assumption, boundary points allow for noise reduction provided that limitations on the complexity of the model prevent
pathological cases such as infinitesimal bridges connecting
otherwise disconnected components (Figure 2).

Quality Dimensions
A perceptually grounded system will not only be able to identify stimuli (categorization), but it should also be able to
identify what quality dimensions lead to that categorization
through dimensionality reduction. However, if the stimulus is

Designing Computational Systems with Continuous
Grounding
A number of special considerations must be made when developing a computational system for learning grounded language that takes advantage of these constraints.
First, the features used to ground perceptual primitives
must be defined over a continuous vector space. This excludes
some applications of local features such as SIFT (Lowe,
1999) that provide very good performance for identifying objects corresponding to higher-level concepts. While these features themselves may be defined over a continuous space,
considering the contributions of multiple key features (each
arising from a salient part of the object) will lead to a discontinuous space because of the inherent higher-level conceptual
model.
Second, the system must be trained on attributes rather than
solely with object names. Many previous systems have attempted to learn categories of objects, such as car or building, which do not necessarily correspond to continuous re-

1159

Figure 4: (a) A map that is discontinuous (yet topographical
according to certain definitions) because of the discontinuity
in white which is not mapped to the output space. (b) A discontinuous, non-topographical map where spatial ordering is
not preserved. (c) A continuous, topographic map.
gions due to their indirect tie to perception through semantic interpretation. These categories require more complicated
models and thus do not correspond to singletons in the semantic space. However, to achieve grounded language, the
perceptual primitives must be trained with some supervision
regarding attributes.
Finally, the classification model for perceptual primitives
must be constrained to contractible decision boundaries. This
can be enforced with constraints on choice of kernels, the arrangement of mixture models, or neural network topology.

Continuity and Topographical Maps
While continuity is an abstract mathematical concept, it has
a close relation to the notion of topographical maps within the
brain. Topographical maps typically appear in relation to inputs of sensory maps, and map inputs to outputs in a spatially
ordered way. In some cases, such as in low-level vision, the
arrangement of the output corresponds to the spatial arrangement of the input. In others, such as in the gustatory system,
the arrangement corresponds to the qualities of the stimuli,
such that similar stimuli are represented on nearby positions
of the perceptual space.
Not every topographic map is a continuous function according to modern usage of the term, although a continuous function satisfies the properties of a topographic map
and historically they have been used synonymously (Luo &
Flanagan, 2007). However, the same principles that guide the
arrangement of neurons composing a topographic map also
tend towards continuous functions. Length minimization of
neurons (Koulakov & Chklovskii, 2001) and constraints on
axonal and dendritic overlap (Pinchas & Baranes, 2013) will
preserve neighborhoods of the input space assuming that the
two spaces are topologically equivalent. However, if there is
a discontinuity in one space that is not shared by the other
space, a topographical map will be discontinuous (Figure 4).

Semantic Space
Does the representation of perceptual primitives as singletons
(points) have an analogue in the human brain? While the computational approach does not presume any particular processing architecture and should be sufficient for characterizing the
relationship between such primitives and their related perceptual regions, it is interesting to note how various models of
processing in sensory cortices still permit such an abstrac-

tion. Cortical maps share many qualities with the mapping
functions in our model, responding both to bottom-up information from the organization of the perceptual map and to
top-down information through learning experiences (Polley,
Steinberg, & Merzenich, 2006). They also maintain plasticity through the periods of growth we associate with concept
formation (Buonomano & Merzenich, 1998). Finally, cortical
maps are often locally continuous, providing further evidence
for continuous mappings from the perceptual space to the cortical space (Wandell, Brewer, & Dougherty, 2005).
In searching for a corresponding analogue to singletons in
the cortex, there are no significant changes to the model if the
points in the semantic space are instead represented as contractible regions to allow for shape of the cortical structures
or activation patterns responsible for representing a perceptual primitive. Rather than saying that the regions in perceptual space are homotopy equivalent to a point, we can say that
they are homotopy equivalent to the corresponding region in
semantic space. This allows more possibilities for how perceptual primitives might be represented in the brain.
A number of neural processing models allow for a singleton representation of symbols. In localist models, a perceptual
primitive would be represented by a single neuron which either receives the most activation from another cortical layer
in the pooling model, or the neuron which is most sensitive
to a particular activation in the lower-envelope model (Parker
& Newsome, 1998). Neural codings as described in (Borst
& Theunissen, 1999) provide a computational representation,
with a specific code corresponding to a concept. Perceptual
primitives could also be represented as fixed-point attractors
in attractor networks (Plaut, 1995).

Linguistic Significance of Continuous
Mappings
While these benefits of continuous mapping have clear applications to artificial intelligence systems, it is less obvious
how continuity influences language. Language related to olfactory perception provides an example of the limitations of
language grounded in discontinuous maps. The olfactory system, unlike the visual system, maps receptors of the same
type to clusters in the olfactory bulb without any regard to the
spatial arrangement in the olfactory epithelium. The olfactory
bulb mapping begins as a continuous map, but is refined into
a discrete map according to the post-natal stimuli (Sakano,
2010). The perceptual space for odors, while defined according to continuously varying feature dimensions, is populated
discretely (Castro, Ramanathan, & Chennubhotla, 2013).
The discontinuities in the olfactory map could explain why
we have trouble giving names to odors and even further difficulty describing their underlying perceptual qualities beyond
pleasantness (Yeshurun & Sobel, 2010). When we do try to
identify smells, we identify them according to their source,
thereby “grounding” those terms in an experience rather than
a mental state. What quality descriptions of smells that do
exist in Western language often co-opt descriptive terms of
other senses, such as warmth and sourness. In some cultures,

1160

this inability is not expressed - the Jahai of the Malay Peninsula can name odors consistently and also have language to
describe various feature dimensions of smell (Majid & Burenhult, 2014). If continuity is as significant to grounding as
our model shows, then we would expect to see a more continuously populated perceptual space in those who speak languages with a rich olfactory vocabulary.

Future Work
We plan to continue work on our grounded language learning system (Perera & Allen, 2013) according to the constraints we have outlined. Our previous work demonstrated
that learning primitive concepts from only the examples the
agent was confident in allowed for faster learning in a context
inspired from child language learning. We plan to replace our
nearest neighbor classifier with a combination of topologypreserving dimensionality reduction and contractible classifiers to reduce the effect of noise and allow hierarchical inference based on overlapping perceptual regions. With such
a system, we can generate a perceptually-grounded ontology based on concepts learned from natural speech and video
demonstrations. Implementing a system based on the notion
of continuous maps for symbol grounding will allow us to
empirically determine whether such constraints improve the
performance of language learning systems.

References
Barsalou, L. (1999, August). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and brain sciences, 22(4), 577–660.
Borst, A., & Theunissen, F. E. (1999, November). Information theory and neural coding. Nature neuroscience, 2(11),
947–57.
Buonomano, D., & Merzenich, M. (1998, January). Cortical
plasticity: from synapses to maps. Annual review of neuroscience, 21, 149–86.
Castro, J. B., Ramanathan, A., & Chennubhotla, C. S. (2013,
January). Categorical dimensions of human odor descriptor
space revealed by non-negative matrix factorization. PloS
one, 8(9), e73289.
Emberson, L. L., Liu, R., & Zevin, J. D. (2013, July). Is statistical learning constrained by lower level perceptual organization? Cognition, 128(1), 82–102.
Farhadi, A., Endres, I., Hoiem, D., & Forsyth, D. (2009,
June). Describing Objects by Their Attributes. 2009 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
1778–1785.
Gärdenfors, P. (2004). Conceptual Spaces as a Framework
for Knowledge Representation. Mind and Matter, 2, 9–27.
Harnad, S. (1990). The Symbol Grounding Problem. Physica
D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1-3), 335–346.
Huth, A. G., Nishimoto, S., Vu, A. T., & Gallant, J. L. (2012,
December). A continuous semantic space describes the
representation of thousands of object and action categories
across the human brain. Neuron, 76(6), 1210–24.
Koulakov, A., & Chklovskii, D. (2001). Orientation patterns

in Mammalian Visual Cortex : A Wire Length Minimization Approach. Neuron, 29, 519–527.
Lowe, D. G. (1999). Object Recognition from Local ScaleInvariant Features. Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2([8), 1150—
-1157 vol.2.
Luo, L., & Flanagan, J. G. (2007, October). Development of
continuous and discrete neural maps. Neuron, 56(2), 284–
300.
Majid, A., & Burenhult, N. (2014, February). Odors are expressible in language, as long as you speak the right language. Cognition, 130(2), 266–70.
McGurk, H., & MacDonald, J. (1976, December). Hearing
lips and seeing voices. Nature, 264(5588), 746–748.
Mormann, T. (1993). Natural Predicates and Topological
Structures of Conceptual Spaces. Synthese, 95(2), 219–
240.
Parker, A. J., & Newsome, W. T. (1998, January). Sense and
the single neuron: probing the physiology of perception.
Annual review of neuroscience, 21, 227–77.
Perera, I., & Allen, J. (2013). SALL-E: Situated Agent for
Language Learning. In Twenty-seventh aaai conference on
artificial intelligence.
Pinchas, M., & Baranes, D. (2013, January). Dendritic branch
intersections are structurally regulated targets for efficient
axonal wiring and synaptic clustering. PloS one, 8(12),
e82083.
Plaut, D. C. (1995). Semantic and Associative Priming in a
Distributed Attractor Network. In Proceedings of the 17th
annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 37–
42).
Polley, D. B., Steinberg, E. E., & Merzenich, M. M. (2006,
May). Perceptual learning directs auditory cortical map reorganization through top-down influences. The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 26(18), 4970–82.
Roberson, D., Davies, I., & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color categories are not universal: replications and new evidence
from a stone-age culture. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129(3), 369–398.
Russakovsky, O., & Fei-fei, L. (2012). Attribute learning
in large-scale datasets. In Proceedings of the 11th european conference on trends and topics in computer vision volume part i (Vol. 6553, pp. 1–14). Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag.
Sakano, H. (2010, August). Neural map formation in the
mouse olfactory system. Neuron, 67(4), 530–42.
Wandell, B. A., Brewer, A. A., & Dougherty, R. F. (2005,
April). Visual field map clusters in human cortex. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences, 360(1456), 693–707.
Yeshurun, Y., & Sobel, N. (2010, January). An odor is not
worth a thousand words: from multidimensional odors to
unidimensional odor objects. Annual review of psychology,
61, 219–41, C1–5.

1161

