UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Diverse Evidence is (and isn’t) Inductively Privileged: The Influence of Evidence
Presentation on Children’s and Adults’ Generalization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0db179qr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Lawson, Chris

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Diverse Evidence is (and isn’t) Inductively Privileged: The Influence of
Evidence Presentation on Children’s and Adults’ Generalization
Chris A. Lawson (lawson2@uwm.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, UW-Milwaukee, 2400 E Hartford Ave
Milwaukee, WI 53211

Abstract
The ability to determine that diverse samples provide better evidence
for generalization than non-diverse samples is an important inductive
skill. Adults tend to utilize the diversity principle of induction (DP),
but evidence regarding children’s ability to do so is mixed. The two
experiments reported here examined whether the method by which
evidence is presented would have an influence on children’s tendency
to obey the DP. These experiments with undergraduates (N = 66,
Mage = 21.12 years) and preschoolers (N = 62, Mage = 5.27 years)
revealed that whether sample items were presented sequentially or
simultaneously influenced diversity-based reasoning in children, and
in some cases, adults. Specifically, sequential presentation facilitated
diversity-based reasoning, and simultaneous presentation did not.
Together these results indicate that processes elicited during the
presentation of evidence have an important influence on how children
and adults use evidence to make inductive generalizations.

Introduction
People utilize a small set of principles to make inductive
decisions (Heit, 2000; Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, López, A.,
& Shafir, 1990). One such principle, the diversity principle
(DP), dictates that evidence that covers a greater scope of
phenomena provides better support for a conclusion than
evidence that covers a narrow scope of phenomena.
Consider the following example in which statements above
the line are premises in an inductive argument and the
statement below the line represents the conclusion:
(1) Hippos secrete uric acid crystals
Hampsters secrete uric acid crystals
All Mammals secrete uric acid crystals
(2) Hippos secrete uric acid crystals
Rhinos secrete uric acid crystals
All Mammals secrete uric acid crystals
Undergraduates find the argument presented in (1) to be
stronger than the argument in (2) presumably because the
premises in the former provide better coverage of the
conclusion category (e.g., mammal), and thus better support
for generalization, than the premises in the latter (e.g.,
Osherson et al., 1990).
Findings regarding the use of the DP in children are
mixed. For example, studies that employed a category-based
induction format (in which items took the form of the
example outlined above) found that the DP does not emerge
until sometime after 7 years of age (Gutheil & Gelman,
1997; Li, Cao, Li, & Deak, 2009; Lopez, Gelman, Gutheil,
& Smith, 1992). However, research using other
methodologies found that children younger than 5 years of

age respect the diversity principle (Heit & Hahn, 2001; Lo,
Sides, Rozelle, & Osherson, 2002; Shipley & Shepperson,
2006). For example, after learning about a child who chose
to play with a diverse set of balls (e.g., basketball, cricket
ball, and tennis ball) and another who chose to play with a
non-diverse set of balls (e.g., 3 footballs), 5-year-olds
predicted that the child who played with the diverse set of
balls would pick a novel ball to play with (e.g., baseball;
Heit & Hahn, 2001).
One explanation for these mixed findings is that they
reflect differences in domain knowledge. For example
children might respect the DP in the social domain because
of their keen awareness of preferences as a guide for making
social inferences (e.g., Woodward & Somerville, 2000). In
contrast, failure to use the DP in category-based induction
tasks, which typically include animal categories and novel
biological properties, might be due to limitations in
children’s biological knowledge (e.g., Carey, 1985; cf.
Gelman, 2003).
An alternative interpretation is that these mixed findings
reflect children’s difficulty incorporating certain features of
evidence into their inductive decisions. Success on the
category-based diversity task requires, at minimum, the
ability to analyze each sample, determine the category
shared by the evidence and conclusion animals, and evaluate
the extent to which one sample provides better “coverage” of
the category. Failure to use the DP in these tasks may be due
to limitations in younger children’s capacity to process the
available input or to engage in, or integrate, all of these
different processes (Lopez et al., 1992; see also Gutheil &
Gelman, 1997). From this perspective, many have
interpreted diversity-based reasoning as a mature inductive
skill that undergoes significant developmental change
between the ages of 5 to 8 years (Gutheil & Gelman, 1997;
Lopez et al., 1992; Rhodes, Gelman, & Brickman, 2008).
A slightly different interpretation, and the focus of the
current studies, is that young children are able to engage in
diversity-based reasoning but that their ability to do so
depends on specific task features (e.g., Heit & Hahn, 2001).
Thus, rather than positing that the DP develops later in life,
the idea is that the capacity to incorporate and effectively
use diversity is a feature of early induction, but that it is
masked under certain task demands. One reason to favor this
interpretation is the substantial database of evidence
indicating that well before their preschool years children
have spent a large part of their cognitive lives detecting, and
learning from, variability within the available evidence

2537

(Quinn, Eimas, & Rosenkratz, 1993; Saffran, Aslin, &
Newport, 1996; Younger & Cohen, 1986). Second, the claim
that children’s adherence to the DP is influenced by specific
task features, is consistent with a host of other studies
showing that children are flexible inductivists insofar as they
are able to modify their generalizations to accommodate
certain aspects of the evidence (Hayes & Thompson, 2007;
Kalish & Gelman, 1992; Opfer & Bulloch, 2007).
The two studies reported here tested the prediction that the
method of evidence presentation would influence how
children use diversity information to make inductive
generalizations. These studies draw from extensive work
with adults in experimental and cognitive psychology on the
distinct outcomes of simultaneous and sequential
presentation (e.g., Krueger, 1983; Liu & Becker, 2013;
Rescorla, 1980). In general, sequential presentation elicits
identification of the differences between presented items
(Lappin & Bell, 1972; Quinn & Bhatt, 2010), while
simultaneous presentation supports identification of
similarities between presented items (Gentner & Namy,
2006). Thus, sequential presentation can potentially facilitate
two crucial components of diversity-based reasoning –
identification of variability within samples and assessment
of differences between the presented samples.
Several recent studies suggest these presentation formats
lead to different outcomes in children’s generalizations. For
example, Lawson (2014) found that 3-year-olds obeyed the
sample size principle of induction (i.e., they preferred to
generalize from large, rather than small samples of evidence)
when sample items were presented sequentially but not
when they were presented simultaneously. Work by Spencer
and colleagues (2011) revealed that presentation format
influences the scope of children’s label generalizations:
When three instances from the same subordinate (e.g., 3
green peppers) were presented and labeled sequentially 3year-olds generalized the label broadly (e.g., to other
peppers), but when the same items were presented and
labeled simultaneously children generalized the label
narrowly (e.g., to green peppers). Similarly, in a property
projection task, Lawson and Fisher (2011) found that when
evidence about a property shared by 16 mammals was
presented sequentially, 5-year-olds, but not adults,
generalized the property broadly to a range of animals (e.g.,
vertebrate and invertebrate). At least for young children
sequential presentation appears to facilitate broad
generalization.
Drawing from these prior findings, the goal of the present
studies was to test two predictions about how presentation
format might influence diversity-based reasoning in children
and adults. The first prediction was that sequential
presentation, rather than the simultaneous presentation,
would facilitate diversity-based reasoning. This pattern may
be particularly true for young children due to the information
processing demands of the task. In particular, because
children may have difficulty coordinating all of the input in
a way that would support diversity-based induction they may
be more likely to benefit when the task structure facilitates

processes necessary for diversity-based reasoning. Because
adults spontaneously engage in diversity-based reasoning,
the presentation format will likely have little or no effect on
their inferences.
A second prediction is that presentation format might
influence the scope of the diversity effect. Findings from
Spencer et al. (2011) and Lawson and Fisher (2011) indicate
that sequential presentation yields a broader scope of
generalization. Thus one prediction is that, to the extent that
sequential presentation facilitates the DP, it will support a
broad pattern of generalizations. However, one normative
prescription of diversity is that it serves an eliminative
function (e.g., Heit, Hahn, & Feeney, 2005): Diverse
evidence ought to eliminate alternatives and narrow
hypotheses. Consider an example the following example.
Suppose you learn that a diverse sample of items share a
biological property (e.g., cat, wolf, whale all have plaxium
blood) and a non-diverse sample share a different biological
property (e.g., cat, tiger, zebra all have drotium blood). Does
the diverse sample provide better evidence to support
inferences to (only) mammals, or does it provide better
evidence to generalize beyond the category of mammals?
Experiment 2 was designed, in part, to explore whether one
of the presentation formats was more likely to yield one of
these generalization functions.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined the potential influence of
presentation format on diversity-based reasoning in young
children. The main prediction was that sequential
presentation of evidence, which elicits attention to
variability within samples and encourages identification of
differences between presented items, would support
diversity-based
reasoning
in
preschoolers
while
simultaneous presentation, because it supports identification
of similarities between items, would not facilitate diversitybased reasoning. With the exception of the manipulation of
presentation format the task was modeled after a version of
category-based induction task that has shown later
development of the DP (e.g., Gutheil & Gelman, 1997;
Lopez et al., 1992). A sample of undergraduates was
included to explore whether presentation format might affect
the extent to which they engage in diversity-based reasoning
and to serve as a developmental endpoint for comparison
with the younger participants.

Method
Participants. Thirty-three undergraduates (Mage = 21.45
years, SD = .98 years; 20 females, 13 males) and 32 fiveyear-olds (Mage = 5.36 years, SD = .27 years; 18 females,
14 males) participated in Experiment 1. In both of the
experiments reported here undergraduates were recruited
from Psychology courses and received partial credit and
children were recruited from local preschools, which were
given small monetary donations. Participants were

2538

Results and Discussion
The analyses focused on the proportion of generalizations
from the diverse sample. These responses were submitted to
an ANOVA with Age (Adults, Children) and Condition
(Simultaneous, Sequential) as between-subjects variables.
Both effects were significant (Age, F(1, 62) = 27.98, p <
.001,
= .31, and Condition, F(1, 62) = 7.19, p = .009,
= .11) as was the Age by Condition interaction, F(1, 62) =
5.28, p = .03,
= .09. Overall adults were more likely to

generalize from the diverse sample than children. However,
as can be seen in Figure 1, there were no age differences in
the Sequential condition, F < 1, ns, but there were
differences in the Simultaneous condition, F(1, 30) = 26.52,
p < .001,
= .47, due to a higher rate generalizations from
the diverse sample among adults than children.
Supplemental analysis indicated the condition effect was
significant for children F(1, 31) = 14.67, p < .001,
= .33,
but not adults, F < 1, ns. As expected, children exhibited a
higher rate of diversity-based responses in the Sequential
conditions than the Sequential conditions.
Follow-up analyses compared responses to chance (M =
.50) to identify the cases for which participants exhibited a
consistent preference to generalize from the diverse sample.
In the Sequential condition both groups showed a consistent
preference to generalize from the diverse sample, both ts >
4.45, ps < .001, ds > 2.28. In the Simultaneous condition
adults exhibited a consistent preference to generalize from
the diverse sample, t(16) = 5.99, p < .001, d = 3.00, while
children’s responses were no different from chance, t < 1.3,
ns.

Proportion of generalizations
from the diverse sample

representative of the racial and socio-economic diversity of a
medium-sized Midwestern US city.
Design and Procedure. Participants responded to 12 items
each of which included a diverse sample, a non-diverse
sample, and a target. All items were from the same basiclevel (e.g., fish). For each item the diverse sample always
included a range of animals from the same basic-level (e.g.,
trout, goldfish, surgeonfish) and the non-diverse sample
always included a selection of animals from the same
subordinate (e.g., 3 different goldfish). The target was a
novel instance from the same basic-level as the individuals
in both evidence samples (e.g., shark). The 12 items
included animals familiar to young children. All items were
presented in random order.
Method of evidence presentation (Simultaneous,
Sequential) was manipulated between subjects and
participants were randomly assigned to one of these two
conditions. In the Sequential condition each evidence item
was presented individually and attributed a novel biological
property (e.g., “This animal has drotium blood”). The
individuals from one sample were presented first and placed
into a single pile to the left of the participant. Then, the
individuals from the other sample were presented and
attributed a different novel biological property (e.g., “This
animal has plaxium blood”), and grouped into a different
pile placed to the right of the participant. In the
Simultaneous condition the items from both samples were
presented at the same time and placed into two separate
piles, one to the left of the participant and the other to the
right. The experimenter gestured to one group and described,
“These animals have drotium blood”, and then to the other
group and described, “These animals have plaxium blood”.
The location of the samples (left or right of the participant)
was counterbalanced.
After presentation of the two samples participants were
shown the target item to which they were asked to generalize
the property attributed to the diverse sample or the property
attributed to the non-diverse sample (e.g., “Do you think this
(target) animal has drotium blood, like these animals, or
plaxium blood, like these animals?”). The target was placed
in front of the participant, and equidistant from the two
samples until participants responded.
The task was identical for children and undergraduates.
Undergraduates participated in a quiet laboratory room
located on their campus. Children participated in a quiet
location at their preschool. The entire experiment lasted
approximately 10 minutes.

1

Simultaneous

Sequential

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
Adults

5-Year-olds

Figure 1. Proportion of generalizations from the diverse
sample for Adults and 5-year-olds in the Sequential and
Simultaneous conditions in Experiment 1. Bars represent
one standard error from the mean.
These results are consistent with the prediction that
sequential presentation of evidence would facilitate the DP.
As predicted, this effect was pronounced for children: Adults
consistently generalized from the diverse sample regardless
of presentation format, while children only showed the
diversity effect for sequential presentation. Overall these
results are inconsistent with the idea that diversity-based
reasoning is a mature inductive skill (e.g., Rhodes et al.,
2008) and instead suggest that diversity is available early in
development but only when evidence is presented in a way
that engages processes that facilitate this type of reasoning.

Experiment 2
The results from Experiment 1 revealed that sequential
presentation, but not simultaneous presentation, of evidence
lead to diversity-based reasoning in children as young as 5

2539

properties from the diverse sample in both conditions, both
ts > 3.1, ps < .006, ds > 1.54. Children did not show a
consistent pattern of generalizations from the diverse sample
in either condition, both ts > 1.50, ns.
Proportion of generalizations
from the Large sample

years of age. Adults likely did not show the effect because
they spontaneously process input in a way that supports
diversity-based reasoning, regardless of how that evidence is
made available to them. It is possible that even though adults
routinely utilize the DP, evidence presentation might
influence the scope of generalization. For example, because
sequential presentation supports detection of the variability
within a sample primes a search of differences rather than
similarities between items it could lead to a heightened
awareness of the exemplars not “covered” by the sample.
Thus, sequential presentation may support the narrowing
function of the DP. Experiment 2 tested this prediction by
asking participants to generalize properties to targets from a
different basic-level (e.g., crustacean) than was represented
by the individuals in the diverse and non-diverse samples
(e.g., fish). Would participants prefer to generalize from a
diverse sample even when doing so involved endorsing a
broad generalization?

1
Simultaneous

Sequential

0.75

0.5

0.25

0
Adults

Method

5-Year-olds

Participants. 34 undergraduates (Mage = 20.87 years, SD =
.98 years; 20 females, 12 males) and 27 five-year-olds
(Mage = 5.31 years, SD = .54 years; 12 females, 15 males)
participated in Experiment 2.
Design and Procedure. The experiment was identical to
Experiment 1 with the exception that in Experiment 2 all of
the targets were drawn for a different basic-level category
(but still within the same superordinate) as the exemplars in
the diverse and non-diverse samples. For example, for the
fish item the diverse sample included a surgeonfish, trout,
and goldfish, the non-diverse set included 3 goldfish, and the
target was a crab. In all other respects the experiment was
identical to Experiment 1.

Figure 2. Proportion of generalizations from the diverse
sample for Adults and 5-year-olds in the Sequential and
Simultaneous conditions in Experiment 2. Bars represent
one standard error from the mean.

Results and Discussion

The two studies described here examined the extent to
which the method of evidence presentation would facilitate
diversity-based reasoning in children. Results from
Experiment 1 indicate that children as young as 5 years
respect the diversity principle under specific conditions:
Children preferred to generalize from diverse, rather than
non-diverse samples, when evidence items were presented
sequentially but not when the same items were presented
simultaneously. Additionally, the results from Experiment 2
provided some evidence that sequential presentation elicited
a broad pattern of generalizations: At least for adults, when
the conclusion represented a category from a different basiclevel as was represented in both evidence samples, they
preferred to generalize from a diverse sample. Adults
exhibited a clearer preference to generalize from diverse
samples: They showed a broader pattern of generalizations
in the sequential condition than the simultaneous condition,
but unlike children they consistently showed the diversity
effect regardless of evidence presentation. Moreover, in
both experiments adults demonstrated an overall higher rate
of generalizations from the diverse sample than did children.
Overall these results were consistent with the prediction
that sequential presentation would facilitate diversity-based

The analytic approach was the same as in Experiment 1. The
Age (Adults, Children) by Condition (Sequential,
Simultaneous) ANOVA yielded both main effects; Age, F(1,
57) = 6.99, p = .01,
= .10, and Condition, F(1, 57) =
7.33, p = .009,
= .11, however the interaction was not
significant, F < 2, ns. As in Experiment 1, adults showed a
higher rate of generalizations from the diverse sample than
children (see Figure 2). Also, there was an overall higher
rate of generalizations from the diverse sample in the
Sequential condition than in the Simultaneous condition.
Although the Age by Condition interaction was not
significant, separate ANOVAs were conducted to assess
whether the Condition effect was consistent for both age
groups. These analyses revealed the condition effect was
significant for adults, F(1, 32) = 4.41, p = .04, but for
children the effect failed to reach significance, F(1, 24) =
2.74, p = .11. Thus, these results are consistent with the idea
that sequential presentation would lead to a broad, rather
than narrow, pattern of generalizations, though the effect
was pronounced for adults.
Further analyses involved comparisons to chance (M =
.50). Adults exhibited a consistent preference to generalize

These results confirm and extend the findings from
Experiment 1. Sequential presentation facilitated diversitybased reasoning, and did so for targets from a different
basic-level as was represented in the evidence samples.
Finally, this effect was more consistent among adults than
children.

General Discussion

2540

reasoning in young children. One explanation for why the
sequential presentation facilitated diversity-based induction
is that it simplified the task for children. In the context of
category-based induction, adherence to the diversity
principle poses considerable information processing
demands. At the very least, a reasoner must assess the
composition of each sample, judge how well each sample
justifies the conclusion, and then compare the samples to
determine which provides the best support for
generalization. Sequential presentation supports detection of
differences between items (Lappin & Bell, 1972; Quinn &
Bhatt, 2010), and thus supports processes necessary for
diversity-based reasoning. These results suggest that
children, who otherwise are unable to engage and coordinate
the processes necessary for diversity-based reasoning,
benefitted from a presentation format that forces them to do.
That certain conditions can encourage diversity-based
reasoning in preschoolers presents a challenge to the idea
that this type of reasoning is the product of mature inductive
ability (Gutheil & Gelman, 1997; Li et al., 2009; Lopez et
al., 1992; Rhodes et al., 2008). Instead, the present findings
are in-line with other work showing that children respect
diversity when making inductive reasoning (Heit & Hahn,
2001; Lo et al., 2002; Shipley & Shepperson, 2006).
Moreover, the current results indicate that mixed results in
prior studies are not due to differences in knowledge about
the content of the task (e.g., Carey, 1985), but instead were
due to differences in task complexity. Thus, one explanation
for why prior category-based induction studies undermined
children’s ability to engage in diversity-based reasoning is
because the tasks involved simultaneous presentation of
samples, which encourages identification of similarities,
rather than differences, between samples (e.g., Gentner &
Namy, 2006; Lawson, 2014). Indeed, children never showed
the diversity effect in the Simultaneous condition in either
experiment reported here.
Conclusions about the effect of diversity on the scope of
generalization are less clear. A normative function of
diversity is to limit, or narrow, the range of plausible
conclusions (e.g., Heit et al., 2005). However, recent
developmental studies indicate that for samples including
diverse exemplars, sequential presentation elicits broad
rather than narrow generalization (Lawson & Fisher, 2011;
Spencer et al., 2011). One could argue that the narrowing
effect of diversity develops later, and thus these
developmental studies indicate children are not yet aware of
this important function of diverse samples. The results from
Experiment 2 do not support this conclusion. Instead, adults
consistently preferred to generalize from the diverse sample
to a broad category, and were more inclined to do so when
items were presented sequentially than when they were
presented simultaneously..
How do we reconcile the broad pattern of generalizations
with the idea that diverse evidence ought to support narrow
generalizations? One suggestion is that the standard
category-induction task is poorly suited for addressing this
question. For example, rather than showing unambiguously

that participants use diverse samples to endorse broad
conclusions, the results from Experiment 2 might suggest
that diverse samples are always favored for induction
regardless of the conclusion (though see Lawson & Fisher,
2011), or that homogenous evidence provides better support
for narrow generalizations than diverse evidence.
It is also worth noting that the narrowing function of
diverse evidence is often discussed in the context of optimal
practices in science, such that one ought to establish diverse
conditions to test a specific hypothesis. However, in most
induction tasks participants are seldom asked to generate
their own hypotheses (cf. Lopez, 1995), or establish their
own methods for data collection. One could interpret
performance on an induction task from the perspective of
hypothesis-testing, though perceptual processes can also lead
to success in these tasks (Jones & Smith, 1993; Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004). Thus, one goal for future research is to
identify whether distinct processes influence the scope of
generalizations.
Despite some uncertainty about how to interpret the
findings from Experiment 2, the overall effect of
presentation format was a replication of the results from
Experiment 1.
Across both experiments sequential
presentation facilitated diversity-based reasoning, and this
facilitative effect was greatest among 5-year-olds.
It is important to consider some alternative interpretations
of the results. For example, in addition to changing the mode
of presenting the items, there were other differences between
the sequential and simultaneous conditions. Critically, in the
sequential condition the evidence items were described as
individuals (e.g., “this animal has plaxium blood….this
animal...”) and in the simultaneous condition they were
described as a class (e.g., “these animals have plaxium
blood”). It remains to be seen whether the observed findings
were due to some, or all, of these particular features. It is
possible children’s reluctance to generalize in the
simultaneous condition was because they viewed both
samples as representing the same category. Moreover, the
preference to generalize in the sequential condition may
have been due to the redundant property label, which was
highlighted three times, compared to the single presentation
in the simultaneous condition. Both of these interpretations
will be important to examine in future studies.
In sum, although an extensive body of literature reveals
that by 5 years of age children are quite sophisticated
inductive reasoners (e.g., Gelman, 2003), there is
considerable debate about the mechanisms that guide
induction and the developmental trajectory of some of these
skills. The methodology outlined in these two studies
provides a useful framework for addressing questions
emerging from this debate. Indeed, using this approach the
current work suggests that rather than representing a
cognitive capacity that undergoes a substantial amount of
change, the diversity principle of induction appears to be
relatively stable across development, yet like other cognitive
skills, is subject to task demands that influence performance.

2541

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Susie Stanley, Chelsea Kieler, and Lily Cabrera
for assistance with data collection. Special thanks to the
generous support of the parents, children, and teachers from
Grandma’s House daycare and the UW-Milwaukee
children’s center.

References
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L.L. (2006). Analogical processes in
language learning. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 15, 297-301.
Gutheil, G., & Gelman, S. A. (1997). Children’s use of
sample size and diversity information within basic-level
categories. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64,
159-174.
Hayes, B. K., & Thompson, S. P. (2007). Causal relations
and feature similarity in children's inductive reasoning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 470484.
Heit, E. (2000). Properties of inductive reasoning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 569-592.
Heit, E., & Hahn, U. (2001). Diversity-based reasoning in
children. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 243-273.
Heit, E., Hahn, U., & Feeney, A. (2005). Defending
diversity. In W. Ahn, R. Goldstone, B. Love, A. Markman,
& P. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside of the
laboratory: Essays in honor of Douglas L. Medin. APA.
Jones, S.S., & Smith, L.B. (1993). The place of perception in
children’s concepts. Cognitive Development, 8, 113-140.
Kalish, C. W., & Gelman, S. A. (1992). On wooden pillows:
Multiple classification and children's category-based
inductions. Child Development, 63, 1536-1557.
Krueger, L.E. (1983). Probing Proctor’s priming principle:
The effect of simultaneous and sequential presentation on
same-different judgments. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9, 511523.
Lawson, C.A. (2014). Three-year-olds obey the sample size
principle of induction: The influence of evidence
presentation and sample size disparity on young children’s
generalizations. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology.
Lawson, C. A., & Fisher, A. V. (2011). It’s in the sample:
The effects of sample size and sample diversity on the
breadth of inductive generalization. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 110, 499-519.
Lappin, J.S., & Bell, H.H. (1972). Perceptual differentiation
of sequential visual patterns. Perception & Pscyhophysics,
12, 129-134.
Li, F., Cao, B., Li, Y., Li, H., & Deák, G. (2009). The law of
large numbers in children’s diversity-based reasoning.

Thinking and Reasoning, 15, 388–404.
Liu, T., & Becker, M.W. (2013). Serial consolidation of
orientation information into visual short-term memory.
Psychological Science, 24, 1044-1050.
Lo, Y., Sides, A., Rozelle, J., & Osherson, D. (2002).
Evidential diversity and premise probability in young
children’s inductive judgment. Cognitive Science, 26, 181206.
Lopez, A. ( 1995). The diversity principle in the testing of
arguments. Memory & Cognition, 23, 374-382 .
Lopez, A., Gelman, S. A., Gutheil, G., & Smith, E. E.
(1992). The development of category-based induction.
Child Development, 63, 1070-1090.
Opfer, J. E., & Bulloch, M. J. (2007). Causal relations drive
young children's induction, naming, and categorization.
Cognition, 105, 206 -217.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., López, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-Based Induction.
Psychological Review, 97:2, 185-200.
Quinn, P.C., & Bhatt, R.S. (2010). Learning perceptual
organization in infancy: The effects of simultaneous versus
sequential variability experience. Perception, 39, 795-806.
Quinn, P. C., Eimas, P. D., & Rosenkrantz, S. L. (1993).
Evidence for representations of perceptually similar
natural categories by 3-month-old and 4-month-old
infants.Perception, 22, 463-475.
Rescorla, R.A. (1980). Simultaneous and successive
associations in sensory preconditioning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 6,
207-216.
Rhodes, M., Gelman, S.A., & Brickman, D. (2008).
Developmental changes in the consideration of sample
diversity in inductive reasoning. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 9, 112-143.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Shipley, E. F., & Shepperson, B. (2006). Test sample
selection by preschool children: Honoring diversity.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 1444-1451.
Sloutsky, V.M., Fisher, A.V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Spencer, J.P., Perone, S., Smith, L.B., & Samuelson, L.K.
(2011). Learning words in space and time: Probing the
mechanisms behind the suspicious-coincidence effect.
Psychological Science, 22, 1049-1057.
Woodward, A.L., & Sommerville, J.A. (2000). Twelvemonth-old infants interpret action in context.
Psychological Science, 11, 73-76.
Younger, B.A., & Cohen, L.B. (1986). Developmental
change in infants’ perception of correlations among
attributes. Child Development, 57, 803-815.

2542

