UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Model of Systems Memory Reconsolidation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6685t52r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Helfer, Peter
Shultz, Thomas
Hardt, Oliver
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Model of Systems Memory Reconsolidation
Peter Helfer (peter.helfer@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal QC, Canada H3A 1B1

Thomas R. Shultz (thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and School of Computer Science, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal QC, Canada H3A 1B1

Oliver Hardt (oliver.hardt@me.com)
Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal QC, Canada H3A 1B1

Karim Nader (karim.nader@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal QC, Canada H3A 1B1

Abstract

Keywords: Memory
connectionism.

reconsolidation,

neural

network,

Memory Consolidation
Forgetting and amnesia. The ability to recall acquired
memories normally diminishes with time elapsed since
learning. Although there is disagreement about the precise
shape of the forgetting curve (Anderson & Tweney, 1997),
it is often represented as an exponential so-called
Ebbinghaus (1885) forgetting curve, as in Figure 1.
100
80
Recall

Memory reconsolidation, the re-stabilization of consolidated
memories after reactivation-induced destabilization, has
received considerable attention in recent years. Nevertheless,
the neural processes underlying the phenomenon remain
elusive. With the aim of contributing to the development of a
theory in this area, we here present a computational model of
reconsolidation at the “systems” level. The model is an
extension of TraceLink, which has previously been used to
account for a range of memory phenomena related to
consolidation.

60
40
20
0

Introduction

0

2

4

6

8

10

Days since learning

Figure 1: Idealized normal forgetting curve.
In contrast with normal forgetting, memory loss after
trauma affects recent memories more than remote ones
(McClelland et al., 1995; Scoville & Milner, 1957; Squire &
Alvarez, 1995), resulting in a curve with the opposite slope,
as in Figure 2.
40
30
Recall

The phenomenon of memory reconsolidation, the restabilization of consolidated memories after reactivationinduced destabilization, has received considerable attention
in recent years with the publication of a series of studies on
both animals and human subjects (Nader & Einarsson,
2010; Nader & Hardt, 2009). While several computer
simulations have modeled consolidation after initial
learning, (McClelland, McNaughton, & O’Reilly, 1995;
Murre, 1996), only one model of cellular reconsolidation
has been published (Osan, Tort, & Amaral, 2011), and – to
our knowledge – no simulation of systems reconsolidation
(Debiec, LeDoux, & Nader, 2002). In order to fill this gap,
we developed an extended version of a previously published
computational model of memory consolidation, TraceLink
(Murre, 1996), incorporating features that enable it to also
account for reconsolidation.
We begin with a brief introduction to the phenomenon of
memory consolidation, followed by a description of the
TraceLink model. We then discuss the mechanisms believed
to underpin systems memory reconsolidation, describe how
we implemented them in the model, and, finally, report our
simulation results.

20
10
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Days since learning

Figure 2: Idealized Ribot gradient.
This graph shows that the ability to recall material learned
shortly before onset of amnesia is strongly impaired,
whereas older memories are relatively spared. The curve is
commonly known as the “Ribot gradient”, after the French
psychologist Ribot who first postulated it (Ribot, 1882).
This temporally graded amnesia gave rise to the idea that a

2512

consolidation process stabilizes newly acquired memories –
older memories were less affected in amnesia because they
had had more time to stabilize.
Types of consolidation. Researchers distinguish between
two types of memory consolidation, “systems”
consolidation and “synaptic” or “cellular” consolidation
(Dudai & Morris, 2000). Systems consolidation is a process
that transitions initially hippocampus-dependent memories
to a hippocampus-independent state. In the mammalian
brain, the hippocampal formation is involved with the
consolidation of “episodic” memories, explicit memories of
experienced events. Animal studies as well as human cases
of brain damage have shown that memories initially depend
on the hippocampus, but gradually become hippocampusindependent. According to the “standard model of systems
consolidation” (McClelland et al., 1995; Squire & Alvarez,
1995), hippocampal memory traces are quickly created but
only persist for a limited time, during which they support
the more time-consuming construction of neocortical
memories. On this view, the temporally graded amnesia
observed after hippocampal lesions is due to the fact that
older memories have had more time to consolidate in the
neocortex, while newer memories are still only weakly
represented there (McClelland et al., 1995; Squire &
Alvarez, 1995). This process is called “systems
consolidation” because it involves interaction between two
brain systems, the hippocampus and the neocortex. In
contrast, the so-called “cellular” or “synaptic” consolidation
process concerns the stabilization of memories within a
single system.

The TraceLink Model of Memory Consolidation
TraceLink is a connectionist model of systems memory
consolidation (Meeter & Murre, 2005; Murre, 1996). The
model has two layers representing hippocampus (HC) and
neocortex (NC), respectively. The HC layer has 42 units and
the NC layer has 200 units. Each layer is fully connected,
i.e. there are independent (asymmetric) connections in both
directions between each pair of units, and the two layers are
also fully interconnected. Connection weights have values
in the range 0.0 to 1.0. The units have discrete activation
levels, either 0.0 (inactive) or 1.0 (active), and a stochastic
asigmoid activation function:

Pj =

1
1+ e

−

[1]
net j
temp

where Pj is the probability that unit j will become (or
remain) active, netj is the net input to unit j and temp is a
parameter that controls the steepness of the asigmoid
function, i.e. the amount of randomness in the model. (For
small values of temp, Pj(neti) approaches a deterministic
step function; for large temp, Pj(neti) is close to 0.5
everywhere, i.e. equal probability of becoming active or
inactive regardless of neti.). A temp value of 0.2 was used in
all simulations. The net input netj in equation [1] is
calculated according to the following formula:

net j = ∑ wij ai − inhibitionL

[2]

i

where wij is the weight of the connection from unit i to unit
j, and ai is the activation level of unit i. The term inhibitionL
is a layer-specific inhibition quantity that simulates the
effect of inhibitory synapses. It is calculated by a feedback
algorithm that drives the number of active units in each
layer towards a configured equilibrium value, which is also
the number of active units in training patterns for the layer.
For example, each training pattern for the NC layer has ten
active units, and the inhibition mechanism makes the layer
preferentially settle into states with that number of active
units.
The learning rule is Hebbian with an anti-Hebbian
“interference” term that accelerates forgetting of previously
learned patterns, especially in the smaller HC layer, where
there is more pattern overlap:

wij (t + 1) = wij (t ) + µT+ ai a j − µT− (1 − ai )a j

[3]

where wij(t) is the connection weight between units i and j at
time t, ai is the activation level of unit i, µT+ is the Hebbian
learning rate, and µT− is the interference or “unlearning”
rate. The learning rule strengthens connections between
units that are both active, and weakens connections from
inactive to active units. Learning rates are specified per
“tract” (hence the T subscript). A tract is a set of
connections with the same source and destination layers: all
the connections from HC units to NC units form one tract,
all connections internal to the NC layer form another tract,
etc. A tract’s learning rates ( µT+ and µT− ) may take on
different values during initial acquisition versus
consolidation. This simulates the effect of neuromodulation,
for example, an increased learning rate in hippocampus in
the presence of novel stimuli (Meeter & Murre, 2005;
Murre, 1996).
Initial acquisition. The TraceLink system is trained by
presenting a training pattern to both layers1 and applying the
learning rule to adjust connection weights. The intra-HC and
NC-HC tracts have high learning rates and learn patterns
well in a single presentation. The intra-NC tract has a much
lower learning rate, and as a result a single training cycle
only creates a weak trace there.
Recall. To test recall of a training pattern, a subset of the
pattern’s active NC units (a “cue pattern”) are held
(“clamped”) in the “on” state, and the rest of the units in
both layers are randomly set to either the active or inactive
state, with equal probability. The whole system is then
repeatedly cycled by executing the activation function for
all the unclamped units in random order and updating their
activation levels accordingly. At the end of each cycle, the
inhibition algorithm adjusts the inhibition coefficients of
both layers. After a configurable number of such cycles (we
1
It would be more realistic to present only the NC pattern, and
let the model discover an HC representation autonomously. This is
the subject of a planned enhancement of the present model.

2513

used 70 in all simulations), the activation pattern into which
the system has settled is compared to the original training
pattern. Recall accuracy is measured as the percentage of
non-cued NC units in the training pattern that have been
successfully turned on.
Lesioning. Hippocampal lesion is simulated by simply
disconnecting the HC layer (setting all inter-layer
connections weights to zero). After initial training, the intact
system can normally recall patterns quite well, because the
NC-HC and HC-HC connections provide linkage between
the pattern’s NC units, but after virtual lesioning recall is
poor, because the NC-NC connections are not strong enough
to independently enable the system to complete the pattern
correctly.

produced by the same types of intervention that can interfere
with initial consolidation, such as lesions and protein
synthesis inhibition (Debiec et al., 2002; Nader, Schafe, &
Le Doux, 2000). Some have suggested that that such postreactivation plasticity allows knowledge to be modified
when new information is acquired (Hardt, Einarsson, &
Nader, 2010; Lee, 2009). As is the case with memory
consolidation, memory reconsolidation has been
documented at both the systems and cellular level. The
former type, systems reconsolidation, is “the demonstration
that reactivation of a remote memory returns the trace to
being hippocampus dependent again for a period of time
before once again becoming independent of hippocampus”
(Debiec et al., 2002).

Method
Consolidation. Memory consolidation is simulated by
randomly setting each unit’s activation level to either 0.0 or
1.0, letting the system “settle” in the same manner as for
recall (but without any cue pattern), and reinforcing
whatever state it settles into by applying the learning rule in
the NC layer. Because the system is more likely to settle
into trained patterns (Hopfield, 1982), this procedure
gradually strengthens those patterns in the NC layer. After a
pattern has been reinforced in this manner a sufficient
number of times, its NC connections become strong enough
that the pattern can be recalled even after HC lesioning.
Simulations. In a typical TraceLink simulation, a series of
training patterns are presented, one per simulated “day”,
each followed by a number of consolidation cycles (Meeter
& Murre, 2005; Murre, 1996). Because of interference,
especially in the smaller HC layer where patterns overlap
more, earlier patterns are gradually overwritten by newer
ones. When recall is tested after training a number of
patterns, a forgetting curve can be observed: older patterns
are recalled less successfully than newer ones. The model is
thus able to account for normal forgetting (the idea that
interference plays a major role in hippocampal forgetting
may be debatable (Hardt, Nader, & Nadel, 2013)).
While patterns are slowly forgotten in the HC layer, they
are gradually strengthened in the NC layer due to
consolidation. If the HC layer is “lesioned” after a number
of days, the earlier training patterns, which have had more
time to consolidate and therefore have a stronger NC
representation, are recalled more successfully than the
newer ones. The model is thus also able to account for the
Ribot gradient observed after hippocampal lesion. See
Meeter & Murre (2005), for more details about the
TraceLink model, including accounts of simulations that
reproduce a range of human memory phenomena.

Memory Reconsolidation
It has been shown that reactivating a consolidated memory
can return it to a labile state, from which it needs to
reconsolidate in order to persist (Nader & Hardt, 2009).
During the period of instability, the so-called
“reconsolidation window”, memory impairments may be

Although the physiological events underlying systems
memory reconsolidation are not known, researchers have
proposed hypothetical mechanisms that could explain the
observed phenomena. The present work is a neural-network
model of such a hypothesis (Debiec et al., 2002; Hardt et al.,
2010; Nadel & Hardt, 2010; Nader et al., 2000). According
to this hypothesis, (1) consolidation renders remote
memories hippocampus-independent; (2) reactivation of a
consolidated neocortical memory creates a temporary
hippocampal trace (or strengthens the existing but decaying
trace); (3) the hippocampal trace stimulates the neocortical
trace through back-projections; (4) this stimulation has the
effect of initially destabilizing the neocortical synapses,
making them susceptible to decay and/or modification; (5)
continued hippocampal reinforcement prevents decay of (or
even strengthens) the neocortical trace while it restabilizes.
The model thus provides an explanation for the observed
fact that reactivation followed by hippocampal lesion
produces amnesia, but neither reactivation nor lesion alone
causes memory loss.

Implementation
In order to model this hypothesis, we implemented a twolayer network along the lines of TraceLink, but with a few
additional features: (a) connections have a plasticity
attribute; (b) connection weights are subject to time-based
decay (Hardt et al., 2013); and (c) the simulation now
includes a “reactivation” phase to trigger memory
reconsolidation.
Plasticity. The plasticity attribute has a value between 0.0
and 1.0, representing minimum and maximum plasticity,
respectively. Our new learning rule takes plasticity into
account:
wij (t + 1) = wij (t ) + p ij ( µ T+ a i a j − µ T− (1 − a i )a j ) [4]
where pij is the plasticity of the connection from unit i to
unit j. Thus the plasticity affects a connection’s sensitivity
to training and also its susceptibility to interference.
Connections are created with a pij value of 1.0 (fully
plastic), which subsequently decreases exponentially over
simulated time, as expressed by the following formula:

2514

p ij (t + 1) = p ij (t ) ⋅ (1 − pdrT )

[5]

where pdrT is a plasticity decay rate specific to the tract to
which connection ij belongs. In the simulations reported
here, the pdrT value was 0.1 for the NC-NC tract, and 0.0 for
the other tracts, i.e. plasticity variations in hippocampus
were not simulated.
Decay. Connection weights are subject to exponential decay
at a rate that is configurable on a per-tract basis. A
connection’s weight decays by its decay rate modulated by
its plasticity, according to the following formula:
[6]
wij (t + 1) = wij (t ) ⋅ (1 − p ij wdrT )
where wdrT is the weight decay rate specified for the tract to
which the connection belongs. Thus, as a connection
becomes less plastic, it becomes more resistant to decay
(Hardt et al., 2013).
Reactivation. In addition to TraceLink’s “Acquisition” and
“Consolidation” phases, our model has a “Reactivation”
phase, during which one or more previously trained patterns
are activated, the learning rule [4] is applied, and the
plasticity between active units is restored to its maximum
value 1.0. Following reactivation, a number of consolidation
periods may be executed, as after initial learning.

Simulations
The following simulations were carried out:
A. Consolidation
1. Train a single pattern.
2. Execute 40 consolidation periods (simulated
“days”). At each day, test recall in the intact system
and with “lesioned” (deactivated) HC layer.
B. Reactivation/Reconsolidation
Same procedures for training, consolidation and testing
as in simulation A, but on day 20, reactivate the trained
pattern, then continue daily consolidation and testing.
C. Reactivation and HC lesion
Same procedure as in simulation B, but on day 21,
permanently lesion the HC layer.
The same parameter settings were used in all three
simulations, as indicated in Table 1.
An explanatory note about the daily recall tests with intact
and “temporarily lesioned” HC: these tests are performed
without affecting the continued evolution of the system. No
learning or (re)consolidation takes place, and HC is turned
back on after testing. The simulation then continues as if the
tests had not taken place. Researchers with live subjects, of
course, do not have this luxury; in an analogous experiment,
they would only be able to get one data point from each
subject.

Table 1: Parameter values used in the simulations
Parameter
Learning rate during initial acquisition
Learning rate during consolidation
Learning rate during reactivation
Unlearning rate
Weight decay rate
Plasticity decay rate
Number of units
Active units at equilibrium (=pattern size)
Cue pattern size (units)

Values
NC
HC
0.06
0.4
0.02
0.0
0.0
0.2
75% of learning
rate
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
200
42
10
7
5
0

The values in the “NC” column apply to the NC layer and
intra-NC tract. The values in the “HC” column apply to the
HC layer, intra-HC tract and inter-layer tracts.

Results
A. Consolidation
Figures 3a and 3b show the weight and plasticity of a
representative individual connection in the HC-HC and NCNC tracts, respectively, during the consolidation simulation.
Each of the two monitored connections joined two units that
were simultaneously active in the training pattern, i.e. they
were connections where significant Hebbian learning took
place.

Figure 3: Consolidation. a) Connection weight of a
hippocampal connection. b) Weight and plasticity of a
neocortical connection. c) Recall performance (averaged
results from fifty simulations). Each point on the “lesioned”
curve shows the performance with deactivated HC, i.e. as if
HC had been lesioned on that day. Vertical bars show
standard error.

2515

As expected, HC connections quickly learn the presented
pattern, and then decay exponentially. NC connections, on
the other hand, quickly become very plastic, but learn only
gradually. Around day 17 the HC trace has become too faint
for any further consolidation to take place, and the NC trace
starts to decay somewhat, but the decay slows down as the
plasticity diminishes further and the trace becomes
stabilized.
Figure 3c shows the recall performance during the
simulation. The upper curve, representing recall in the intact
system, shows normal forgetting. The lower curve, recall
performance with disabled HC layer, shows a gradient
during the consolidation “window”, followed by constant
performance. These results are similar to those obtained
with the original TraceLink model (Meeter & Murre, 2005);
the difference is that forgetting there was purely
interference-based, whereas in this simulation it is caused by
a combination of interference and decay. (Interference plays
a role even though only a single pattern is trained, because
the patterns reinforced during (re)consolidation may differ
from the trained pattern.)

hippocampal trace decays after initial training as in the
previous simulation and is boosted by the reactivation

B. Reconsolidation
As shown in Figure 4, if the pattern is reactivated on day 20,
then (a) the hippocampal trace is rapidly strengthened, (b)
the necocortical trace is quickly destabilized and then
gradually strengthened and restabilized in a round of
reconsolidation, and (c) the recall performance is somewhat
improved after the reminder.

Figure 5: HC lesioning following reactivation. a)
Connection weight of a hippocampal connection. b) Weight
and plasticity of a neocortical connection. c) Recall
performance (averaged results from fifty simulations). The
points on the “intact” curve after day 21 show the
performance of the lesioned system.
on day 20. The plot ends at the hippocampal lesion on day
21. (b) The neocortical trace evolves as in experiment B
until day 20, the day of reactivation. Following the HC
lesion on day 21, instead of being strengthened by
reconsolidation, the destabilized NC trace rapidly decays.
(c) The recall performance shows rapid onset of amnesia
after the hippocampal lesion.

Discussion

Figure 4: Reconsolidation. a) Connection weight of a
hippocampal connection. b) Weight and plasticity of a
neocortical connection. c) Recall performance (averaged
results from fifty simulations).

C. Reactivation followed by HC lesion
When the HC layer is permanently lesioned after memory
reactivation, the results are as illustrated in Figure 5: (a) The

In spite of a growing number of studies on both humans and
animals, the neural mechanisms underlying memory
reconsolidation are not well understood. The present paper
seeks to contribute to the development of a theory by
introducing a computational model of reconsolidation.
The key finding in system memory reconsolidation
studies is that lesioning after reactivation produces amnesia,
whereas neither reactivation alone nor lesioning alone
causes memory impairment (Debiec et al., 2002; Nader &
Hardt, 2009). With this in mind, it is interesting to compare
Figures 3-5. Figure 3c shows that, once a memory is
consolidated in the model, hippocampal lesions without
preceding memory reactivation have little effect on it,
whereas Figure 5c illustrates that post-reactivation lesions
lead to a dramatic drop in recall performance. The cause of
this difference is that, after reactivation, the plasticity of the
neocortical trace is high, allowing for rapid decay. In Figure
4c, on the other hand, where hippocampus is left intact after

2516

reactivation, reconsolidation more than compensates for the
decay, resulting in moderate strengthening of the memory
trace after reactivation.
The neural network model presented here is able to
reproduce the empirical results by simulating microprocesses that have been hypothesized to underlie memory
reconsolidation - controlled variability in synaptic plasticity
and plasticity-dependent synaptic decay rates – and thus
demonstrates that these mechanisms in fact can account for
the observed effects.
An interesting aspect of this model is that it introduces
decay-driven forgetting, in contrast with the TraceLink
simulations, where all forgetting was due to interference
(Meeter & Murre, 2005). It is likely that both types of
mechanism play important roles in the consolidation and
maintenance of memories (Hardt et al., 2013), and we are
planning to apply the model to further investigate the
relationship between the two. In particular, work in progress
includes simulations with multiple training patterns, which
will allow us to study the combined effects of decay and
even greater interference.
Another direction in which we are planning to extend this
work is to apply the model to manifestations of
reconsolidation other than amnesia after hippocampal
lesions. These include the effects of protein synthesis
inhibition (Debiec et al., 2002; Nader et al., 2000) and
interference training in the reconsolidation window
(Hupbach, Gomez, Hardt, & Nadel, 2007; Hupbach, Gomez,
& Nadel, 2009; Walker, Brakefield, Hobson, & Stickgold,
2003).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a grant from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada to TRS. OH and KN were supported by the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research and by the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. OH
was supported by the German Research Foundation
(Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG).

References
Anderson, R. B., & Tweney, R. D. (1997). Artifactual
power curves in forgetting. Memory & Cognition, 25(5),
724–730.
Debiec, J., LeDoux, J. E., & Nader, K. (2002). Cellular and
systems reconsolidation in the hippocampus. Neuron,
36(3), 527–538.
Dudai, Y., & Morris, R. (2000). To consolidate or not to
consolidate: what are the questions? In Brain, Perception,
Memory. Advances in Cognitive Sciences (Bolhuis J.J.
Ed). Oxford University Press.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1885). Über das Gedächtnis:
Untersuchungen zur experimentellen Psychologie.
Duncker & Humblot.
Hardt, O., Einarsson, E. Ö., & Nader, K. (2010). A bridge
over troubled water: reconsolidation as a link between

cognitive and neuroscientific memory research traditions.
Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 141–167.
Hardt, Oliver, Nader, K., & Nadel, L. (2013). Decay
happens: the role of active forgetting in memory. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences.
Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical
systems with emergent collective computational abilities.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 79(8),
2554 –2558.
Hupbach, A., Gomez, R., Hardt, O., & Nadel, L. (2007).
Reconsolidation of episodic memories: A subtle reminder
triggers integration of new information. Learning &
Memory, 14(1-2), 47 –53.
Hupbach, A., Gomez, R., & Nadel, L. (2009). Episodic
memory reconsolidation: updating or source confusion?
Memory, 17(5), 502–510.
Lee, J. L. C. (2009). Reconsolidation: maintaining memory
relevance. Trends in Neurosciences, 32(8), 413–420.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the
successes and failures of connectionist models of learning
and memory. Psychological Review, 102, 419–457.
Meeter, M., & Murre, J. M. J. (2005). Tracelink: A model of
consolidation and amnesia. Cognitive Neuropsychology,
22(5), 559–587.
Murre, J. M. J. (1996). TraceLink: a model of amnesia and
consolidation of memory. Hippocampus, 6(6), 675–684.
Nadel, L., & Hardt, O. (2010). Update on memory systems
and processes. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36(1), 251–
273.
Nader, K., & Einarsson, E. O. (2010). Memory
reconsolidation: an update. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1191, 27–41.
Nader, K., & Hardt, O. (2009). A single standard for
memory: the case for reconsolidation. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 10, 224–234.
Nader, K., Schafe, G. E., & Le Doux, J. E. (2000). Fear
memories require protein synthesis in the amygdala for
reconsolidation after retrieval. Nature, 406(6797), 722–
726.
Osan, R., Tort, A. B. L., & Amaral, O. B. (2011). A
Mismatch-Based Model for Memory Reconsolidation and
Extinction in Attractor Networks. PLoS ONE, 6(8),
e23113.
Ribot, T. A. (1882). Diseases of Memory, an Essay in the
Positive Psychology. New York, NY: D. Appleton and
Company.
Scoville, W. B., & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent
memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20(1), 11–21.
Squire, L., & Alvarez, P. (1995). Retrograde-amnesia and
memory consolidation - a neurobiological perspective.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 5(2), 169–177.
Walker, M. P., Brakefield, T., Hobson, J. A., & Stickgold,
R. (2003). Dissociable stages of human memory
consolidation and reconsolidation. Nature, 425(6958),
616–620.

2517

