UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A distributional learning account of the acquisition of the locative alternation: Corpus
analysis and modeling

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0dq5h70b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Twomey, Katherine
Chang, Franklin
Ambridge, Ben

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A distributional learning account of the acquisition of the locative alternation:
Corpus analysis and modeling
Katherine E. Twomey (k.twomey@liverpool.ac.uk)
Franklin Chang (franklin.chang@liverpool.ac.uk)
Ben Ambridge (ben.ambridge@liverpool.ac.uk)

University of Liverpool, Department of Experimental Psychology, Eleanor Rathbone Building,
Bedford St South, Liverpool, L69 7WW, UK
Abstract
Early in acquisition children overgeneralize verbs to
ungrammatical
structures.
The
retreat
from
overgeneralization is linked to the acquisition of verb classes,
the semantics of which constrain the structures in which a
verb can appear (e.g., Pinker 1989; Ambridge, Pine &
Rowland, 2012). How children learn these classes remains
unclear. Some argue that distributional regularities in
linguistic input provide sufficient evidence for verb classes to
emerge and become linked to particular structures. A corpus
analysis of the English locative construction (e.g., the woman
sprayed water onto the wall/the wall with water)
demonstrated that children have similar verb classes to adults.
A correspondence analysis revealed that distributional
regularities in the input could support these verb classes.
Finally, a connectionist simulation was able to model early
overgeneralization and retreat through distributional learning
of verb classes. These results support a distributional
learning account of verb semantics.
Keywords: Child language acquisition; locative construction;
distributional learning; naturalistic speech; Dual-Path model.

Children’s acquisition of grammatical constructions remains
one of language acquisition’s most puzzling phenomena.
Even young children are readily able to generalize known
constructions to new verbs, and indeed, early in acquisition
children overgeneralize these constructions to contexts in
which they are ungrammatical (e.g., *she filled the juice into
the glass). However, over time children learn to constrain
their choice of structure, despite the lack of evidence for
ungrammaticality in the adult speech they hear (Ambridge,
Pine, Rowland, Jones & Clark, 2009).
This remarkable ability has been linked to the semantics
of the verbs that appear in these constructions. According to
this semantic verb class hypothesis (Pinker, 1989), verbs fall
into discriminable classes based on the semantics of the
event they describe. These verb classes then constrain the
structures in which verbs can appear. For example, pour
and drip both describe the movement of an object/substance
into/onto a location via gravity, and both appear in the
theme-locative (TL) structure only (e.g., the woman poured
water into the bucket vs. *the woman poured the bucket
with water). In contrast, cover and coat both describe a
location being completely covered with a layer of substance
or object(s) (e.g., the woman covered the table with the
blanket vs. *the woman covered the blanket onto the table).
Finally, spray and squirt both describe ballistic motion of a

liquid along a trajectory, are in a class that does not
emphasize theme or location, and therefore alternate
between both LT and TL structures (e.g., the woman
sprayed the wall with water vs. the woman sprayed water
onto the wall). Although Pinker’s verb classes motivated
early work on such verb-structure mappings, recent work
has questioned whether it is these particular classes which
guide structure choice (Ambridge, Pine & Rowland, 2012).
Nonetheless, it is widely agreed speakers categorize verbs,
and that these classes help to guide structural choices and
explain overgeneralization.
One account of the acquisition of semantics is based on
using situational information in the world (St. Augustine,
397/2001). For verbs, this might involve learning that verbs
like coat refer to events where an object is completely
covered with some substance. Since the object is more
saliently changed by the action than the substance, the
situational meaning would classify this verb as belonging to
a verb class that prefers the LT structure, which emphasizes
the LOCATION (e.g., the man coated the [table]LOCATION with
paint). However, this situational account of verb meaning is
limited: it may not be the case that every child hears every
verb that they know in an unambiguous situational context
that classifies it precisely (e.g., Harris, Jones & Grant,
1983).
An alternative, distributional account states that verb
semantics are learned from distributional regularities in the
linguistic input (Fisher, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 1991). For
example, if spray is always followed by a noun phrase
which specifies a liquid (e.g., spray the water), then children
might categorize spray with other verbs that take similar
arguments (e.g., splash the water). This verb class might
then be associated with certain locative structures (e.g., he
sprayed/splashed the water onto the wall). The advantage of
this account over the situational account is that it allows
verb classes to be acquired from heard input without any
situational context.
To examine how these accounts relate to behavioral data,
we performed a corpus analysis of the British English
locative.
Then, to explore whether distributional
information is sufficient to support the emergence of verb
classes, we performed a correspondence analysis on the
corpus data. Finally we investigated whether distributional
regularities can influence structural choice in a connectionist
model of sentence production which learns both syntactic

1498

structures and their verb class associations from the input
alone.

like rub and splash. Importantly, children have similar verb
classes to adults, even though these data come from a range
of different situations, which children may or may not
understand in adult-like ways.

A corpus analysis of the English locative
We queried all UK corpora in CHILDES (MacWhinney,
2000) for the 142 locative verbs listed in Pinker (1989). A
main sample of 38,231 utterances was retrieved. A
subsample of 2,685 morphologically-tagged utterances was
coded by hand for construction type (see Table 1).
Importantly, we divided transitives into those where the
post-verbal noun was a THEME (spray the water, T
transitive) or a LOCATION (spray the wall, L transitive).
Table 1: Constructions and handcoded frequency
Structure
LT locative
TL locative
L transitive
T transitive
Ambiguous transitive
L intransitive
T intransitive
Ambiguous
intransitive

Example
brushing me with it?
spread it on your biscuit
for him filling the glasses
you dump the lady’s toys
brushed it
tape on
it attached on like that
I brushing

N
100
232
271
294
608
24
20
205

Figure 1: Proportion LT structures, adult and child
speakers

The subsample was generated by selecting all utterances
containing candidate locative verbs tagged as a verb or a
participle. Utterances were separated by speaker (adult or
child) and post-verbal preposition (with, indicating a
candidate LT locative; into, onto or over, indicating a
candidate TL locative; or no preposition, indicating some
other construction). For the 13 categories containing more
than 50 utterances, a random sample of 50 utterances was
coded. Since there were very few tagged utterances for
conversations involving children over 40 months, we
extracted an extra 20% of child utterances and 5% of adult
utterances from the untagged data for this age group. We
excluded 221 non-verb utterances from the analyses. As
can be seen in Table 1, only 6% of the coded locative verbs
occurred in the LT locative structure, and 13% occurred in
the TL locative structure.
The situational account predicts that verb classes in
children and adults can differ, especially if children do not
always understand events in adult-like ways. On the other
hand, the distributional account predicts that children learn
their verb classes from adult linguistic utterances, so there
should be a close match between the two. To examine these
predictions, we calculated the proportion of LT out of total
locative constructions in the hand-coded data. This controls
for raw frequency of each form and variation due to other
structures, providing a measure of the bias for these two
structures. Figure 1 depicts proportion LT for both children
and adults for a range of verbs that occur more than 10
times in the hand-coded adult data. There seems to be a
class of non-alternating LT verbs like fill, a class of nonalternating TL verbs like pour, and several alternating verbs

To see whether these structural preferences change over
development, we calculated proportion of adult and child
transitive and locative utterances with location as object (L
or LT) for each age of child included in the sample (Figure
2). A linear model was fit to the data with Structure
(locative = 1, transitive = 0), Child Age (months) and
Speaker Group (adult vs. child) crossed. There was no main
effect of age, suggesting that L transitive proportion did not
vary over age. LT production was lower than L transitive
production (beta = -0.9, t(116) = 3.1, p <.003). An
interaction between Age and Structure (beta = 0.02, t(116) =
3.1, p <.003) provided evidence for an increase in the
production of LT structures over development. The lack of
any interaction with Speaker Group suggests that adults
adapted their structural choices to fit children’s preferences.
The TL bias in young children is also seen in experimental
studies, where children reproduce TL structures at a higher
rate than LT structures (Gropen et al., 1991a, 1991b), and in
diary studies, where TL overgeneralizations are more
frequent (Bowerman, 1982).
In our data set, transitives are more frequent than
locatives – we found 565 transitive utterances, but only 332
locative utterances. Of the 50 verbs that appeared in a
transitive, a locative or both structures, 35 appear in the
locative while 44 appear in the transitive. Using transitive
contexts to learn about locative verbs provides a better
coverage of these verbs, suggesting that children may be
able to learn about locative verbs from their appearance in L
and T transitive structures.
To examine this hypothesis, we used adult ratings of
locative verbs’ LT and TL preference from Ambridge et al.
(2012) and Bidgood, Ambridge, Pine & Rowland (under

1499

review) to create a graded LT rating measure for each verb.
This was correlated with the proportion LT and L structures
in the adult input to children from the corpora. There was a
significant correlation between the LT rating and LT corpus
distribution (r(30) = .53, p =.002), indicating that the LT/TL
biases of verbs in locative structures in child-directed
speech match adult ratings of those verbs’ LT/TL
preference. There was also a significant correlation between
LT rating and L corpus distribution (r(38) = .32, p =.04),
which shows that the L/T biases of verbs in transitive
structures in child-directed speech also reflect LT/TL
preference ratings.

preposition and all following words were excluded. Thus,
verbs that occurred in the same context (e.g., the woman
poured water and a boy dripped water) were classified as
more similar than verbs that occurred in different contexts.
In order to have a range of words to support categorization,
we only included verbs which occurred more than 40 times.
The CA generated six factor scores for each verb.
To determine which factors in the CA best predicted the
LT/TL rating measure used earlier, we submitted factor
scores for each verb to a regression with LT rating as the
dependent variable, and Factor (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) as
independent variables.
LT rating was significantly
predicted by Factor 4 (beta = 0.03, t(27) = 2.06, p =.05) and
Factor 6 (beta = 0.06, t(27) = 3.72, p <.001), explaining
39% of the variance (F(6,27) = 2.85, p =.03).
Figure 3 illustrates the relationship between Factors 4 and
6 and LT rating. Verbs rated as more grammatical in LT
structures (e.g., the woman poured water into the bucket)
cluster in the top right hand corner of the figure, and verbs
rated as more grammatical in TL structures (e.g., the woman
filled the bucket with water) cluster in the bottom left hand
corner. Furthermore, there is evidence of clusters reflecting
Pinker’s (1989) narrow semantic verb classes; for example,
fill and cover are both members of Pinker’s cover-type class
and they are clustered together. In line with existing studies
(e.g., Ambridge, Pine & Rowland, 2012), however, not all
classes generated by our data conform to these narrow verb
classes. For example, fill and pack are similar on Factor 4,
despite being members of different classes according to
Pinker’s classification.

Figure 2: Proportion L/LT locatives by child age
Correspondence analysis
The corpus analysis shows that children learn biased verb
classes in their first five years. We used correspondence
analysis (CA; Greenacre, 2007) to investigate whether
distributional regularities can support the development of
these classes. CA is a technique for clustering categorical
data in a low-dimensional space based on the similarity in
how elements co-occur.
We performed a CA on adult utterances including
utterances that were not handcoded.
Similarity was
calculated based on the co-occurrence of each verb with the
two post-verbal words, however if a preposition (on, to,
with, in, into, onto, over) occurred post-verbally, the

Figure 3. CA results for Factors 4 and 6.

1500

Overall, the distributional regularities with which verbs
and post-verbal words co-occurred generated two factors in
a CA which predicted adult ratings of verbs’ grammaticality
in LT structures. Substantial evidence exists that children
can track such statistical co-occurrences in their
environment (Fisher, Gertner, Scott & Yuan, 2010). Thus,
if children record the distributional regularities of locative
verbs, they may also create verb classes, helping them to
constrain their choice of structure and retreat from
overgeneralization. The CA provides an explicit model of
how a distributional learning mechanism can create these
classes.

current architecture, structural alternations were modeled by
associating different structures with the same message. For
example, the TL locative sentence the woman sprays water
onto the wall and LT locative sentence the woman sprays
the wall with water have approximately the same meaning
and
hence
share
the
message
ACTION=SPRAY
AGENT=WOMAN THEME=WATER LOCATION=WALL. When
given this message, the model must decide whether to
activate to LOCATION role after the verb and produce the LT
structure, or the THEME role and produce the TL structure.
Critically, because they are located in the meaning system,
the SPRAY semantics can only be used for selecting the word
spray and do not directly influence structural choices in the
sequencing system. Thus, the model must acquire a
syntactic representation of the verb within the sequencing
system using distributional learning.

A connectionist model of locative acquisition
The corpus analysis suggested that children may learn about
the semantics of locative verbs from transitive structures.
Further, the correspondence analysis showed that
distributional regularities in the input could support the
emergence of verb classes that constrain structural choice.
However, a full account requires a mechanism that can learn
not only verb classes but also syntactic structures, and link
them appropriately. Critically, if this mechanism is similar
to the language acquisition system in children, then it should
create a TL bias early in development.
To explore the nature of such a mechanism, we adapted
the Dual-Path model, a connectionist model of sentence
production (Chang, 2009, Chang, Dell & Bock, 2006). The
model learns linguistic representations from messagesentence pairs and can acquire different languages (e.g.,
English, Japanese). We trained the model with two simple
grammars that included both transitive and locative
structures. Grammars contained five classes of verbs, one
of which was L/LT -only and one of which was T/TL -only.
Our principal manipulation was the frequency with which
the remaining “alternating” verb classes were associated
with the various structures.

Testing different input distributions
Verb classes in the simple recurrent network were shaped
by the distributional properties of the input. To see if these
classes reflected the behavior of human children’s verb
classes, we compared two different input distributions: Full
and Transitive (Table 2).
Table 2: L/LT ratios in input grammars (LT:TL)

Model
The Dual-Path model’s architecture includes separate
sequencing and meaning systems. The sequencing system
is a simple recurrent network that allows the model to learn
syntactic representations (Elman, 1990). The model’s
internal representations are acquired through error-based
learning, in which the model predicts the next word in a
sentence, then uses the difference between the prediction
and target (error) to modify its internal representations.
Since categories are useful for prediction, the sequencing
system acquires syntactic categories that support syntactic
structures. Verb classes can be seen as a refinement of verb
categories to incorporate their biases. The meaning system
encodes the message as a set of weights between role and
concept units (e.g., AGENT=WOMAN). The simple recurrent
network selects appropriate concepts by activating their role
at particular positions in sentences. Detailed motivation for
the model’s architecture is provided in Chang (2002; 2009).
Messages include roles for the various concepts in the
sentence as well as a role that selects the verb. In the

Structure
Locative A
Locative B
Locative C
Locative D
Locative E
Transitive A
Transitive B
Transitive C
Transitive D
Transitive E

Full Distribution
100:0
90:10
50:50
10:90
0:100
100:0
90:10
50:50
10:90
0:100

Transitive Distribution
100:0
0:100
100:0
100:0
50:50
0:100
0:100

Our input distributions contained five classes of verbs (A,
B, C, D, E), each paired with LT and/or TL locative
structures (e.g., the woman sprayed the wall with water /
water onto the wall) and L and/or T transitive structures
(e.g., the woman sprayed the wall/water). Verbs in class A
occurred only in L/LT structures, while verbs in class E
occurred only in T/TL structures. In the “Full Distribution”
simulation, verbs occurred more frequently in L/LT
structures in Class B, equally often in either structure type
in Class C, or more frequently in T/TL structures in Class
D. The “Transitive Distribution” simulation tested the idea
suggested by the corpus and correspondence analysis that
transitive uses of verbs might be the basis for verb classes.
Classes B, C, and D were therefore only biased in transitive
structures (and more strongly than in the Full Distribution)
and hence tested whether the transitive distribution could
influence locative generalization. The raw frequency of TL
structures was also higher than that of LT structures in the
Transitive Distribution to simulate the data in Table 1.

1501

Ten randomly generated training sets were used to create
ten model subjects. Each model was trained for 40,000
epochs on 2,000 message-sentence pairs. Every 1,000
epochs the model was tested on a set of 1,000 grammatical
and ungrammatical locative sentences (100 per verb class).
Results. Figure 4 depicts proportion location-based
sentences for each of the five verb classes, for each of the
simulations.

LOCATION-type

objects in the post-verbal position. To test
this, we fitted a mixed effects model to the Transitive
Distribution data. There were no main effects of Verb Class
or Epoch on LT production, but again there was an
interaction (beta = 0.01, χ2(1) = 6.90, p =.009),
demonstrating that verb classes differentiate over
development. Finally, this model also exhibited an early TL
bias, as denoted by the negative logit intercept coefficient
(beta = -0.54). The preferences in the transitive naturally
generalize to locative structures because these structures
have similar argument preferences (i.e., TL locatives prefer
theme-type objects in the post-verbal position). Thus, the
model is able to acquire locative verb classes from transitive
distributions.
Our corpus analysis revealed that children have an early
preference for the TL locative. This was captured by the
model. Like the children, LT production increases over
development, but remains outstripped by TL production
(overall proportion LT for Transitive Distribution at epoch
10,000 = 0.36, epoch 40,000 = 0.44; Fig. 4). This simulation
captures the early TL bias because the sequencing system
does not have access to verb meaning and is biased to learn
syntactic categories that fit the frequent TL structure. This
structure becomes the default means to express three
arguments (i.e., AGENT, THEME, LOCATION). Slowly the
model develops verb classes that help predict the nouns that
follow verbs. These classes later help support the
differential use of LT and TL structures.

General Discussion
Figure 4: Proportion location-based sentences
Results from the Full Distribution (Figure 4 top panel)
suggest that distributional regularities in the input do indeed
support the emergence of verb classes. First, the Full
Distribution simulation learned nonalternating classes A and
E. To establish whether the model distinguished classes B,
C and D according to the frequency of L/LT and T/TL
structures for these classes in the input, a mixed effects
model was fit to Proportion LT (empirical logit
transformed) with Verb Class and Epoch crossed. Verb
Class was coded numerically (B = 1, C = 0, D= -1). Model
subject was included as a random variable and there were
by-subject slopes for Verb Class crossed with Epoch (Barr,
Levy, Scheepers & Tily, 2013). There were no main effects
of Verb class or Epoch on LT production, however an
interaction (beta = 0.016, χ2(1) = 14.49, p <.001), confirmed
that verb classes differentiated as epoch increased. The
negative logit intercept coefficient captures the model’s
initial TL bias (beta = -0.16).
The Transitive Distribution simulation (Figure 4 bottom
panel) also distinguished classes B, C and D in the locative,
despite receiving no locative input for these classes. It did
so based on the frequency with which these verb classes
occurred in L and T structures. Class D, for example, was a
class that preferred THEME-type objects rather than

The current study presents naturalistic data which show
that children are biased to use TL structures early in
acquisition. We hypothesized that the more frequent TL
overgeneralization errors in diary studies are due to this
general TL bias. The increase in use of LT between two and
five years can therefore be interpreted as a metric of an
underlying retreat from overgeneralization.
If, over
development, children acquire verb classes that predict
which structure to use, then they will become more likely to
produce these structures in verb-specific ways, and
consequently less likely to make errors. To explain how
children acquire verb classes when the target classes and
structures are not explicitly provided, we suggest that they
perform a distributional analysis on the words they hear, in a
similar manner to our CA. Here, we have shown that an
unsupervised clustering algorithm can create component
factors that predict structural choices.
Bayesian and other statistical mechanisms have also been
applied to verb-structure learning. These systems often
assume that the initial state of the learner includes syntactic
structures, semantic features (e.g., cause, change-of-state),
or even abstract verb classes (Alishahi & Stevenson, 2008;
Niyogi, 2002; Perfors, Tenenbaum & Wonnacott, 2010). A
clear example of this approach can be seen in Niyogi
(2002), who developed a Bayesian model of the locative
alternation. The model uses manner and path features from
scene and syntactic frame regularities to select among verb

1502

class hypotheses. A key feature of this model is that it can
assign verb classes quickly from a few exposures; it
therefore does not explain the protracted development of the
LT structure in children. Furthermore, the model cannot
learn locative classes from transitive input, because locative
verb classes are not an optimal fit for transitive structures
(superordinate motion classes are a better fit).
The
limitations of these models highlight the fact that language
development is not just the fast, optimal weighting of syntax
and semantic cues.
In contrast with these models, the Dual-Path model does
not start with syntactic structures or verb class hypotheses.
It learns its structures with a slow learning algorithm
designed to mimic the slow biological changes that support
learning in the brain (cell growth). Due to its inability to
predict when to use LT and TL structures, the frequent TL
initially dominates. As in the CA, the model develops verb
classes from the distribution of post-verbal words in
frequent transitives. Later, these verb classes become the
basis for distinguishing TL and LT structures and thus
condition their use.
Taken together, the current studies are the first to
characterize how children use a wide range of verbs in
locative structures between two to five years of age. We
showed that locative production is asymmetrical during this
period, with the TL structure dominating. This dominance
can causes children to place a newly-learned verb into the
TL structure regardless of its own bias, producing an
overgeneralization error. We also showed that distributional
regularities in child-directed speech are useful for creating
classes that predict adult ratings of locative structure
preference for this diverse set of verbs. Finally, we showed
how distributional learning in the Dual-Path model can be
used to learn both the syntactic categories that support
structures, as well as the verb classes that bias structural
choice. By trying to simultaneously solve both of these
difficult learning problems, the model can explain both the
early TL bias and slow development of verb classes that
support the retreat from that bias.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Leverhulme Trust Research
Project Grant RPG-158.

References
Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2008). A Computational
model of early argument structure acquisition. Cognitive
Science, 32(5), 789–834.
Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., & Rowland, C. F. (2012).
Semantics versus statistics in the retreat from locative
overgeneralization errors. Cognition, 123(2), 260–279.
Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., Rowland, C. F., Jones, R. L., &
Clark, V. (2009). A semantics-based approach to the “No
Negative Evidence” problem. Cognitive Science, 33(7),
1301–1316.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis

testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255–278.
Bidgood, Ambridge, Pine & Rowland (under review). The
retreat from locative overgeneralisation errors: A novel
verb grammaticality judgment study.
Bowerman, M. (1982). Reorganizational processes in lexical
and syntactic development. In E. Wanner & L. R>
Gleitman (Eds.). Language acquisition: The state of the
art (pp 319-346). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Chang, F. (2002). Symbolically speaking: A connectionist
model of sentence production. Cognitive Science, 26(5),
609–651.
Chang, F. (2009). Learning to order words: A connectionist
model of heavy NP shift and accessibility effects in
Japanese and English. Journal of Memory and Language,
61(3), 374–397. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2009.07.006
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological Review, 113(2), 234.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14(2), 179–211.
Fisher, C., Gertner, Y., Scott, R., & Yuan, S. (2010).
Syntactic bootstrapping. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Cognitive Science 1(2), 143-149.
Fisher, C., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. R. (1991). On the
semantic content of subcategorization frames. Cognitive
Psychology, 23(3), 331–392.
Greenacre, M. (2007). Correspondence analysis in practice.
Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., & Goldberg, R.
(1991a). Syntax and semantics in the acquisition of
locative verbs. Journal of Child Language, 18(1), 115–
151.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., & Goldberg, R.
(1991b). Affectedness and direct objects: The role of
lexical semantics in the acquisition of verb argument
structure. Cognition, 41(1), 153–195.
Harris, M., Jones, D., & Grant, J. (1983). The nonverbal
context of mothers’ speech to infants. First Language,
4(10), 21–30.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Niyogi, S. (2002). Bayesian learning at the syntax-semantics
interface. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (Vol. 36, p. 58)
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Wonnacott, E. (2010).
Variability, negative evidence, and the acquisition of verb
argument constructions. Journal of Child Language, 37,
607–642.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition: The
acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press..
St. Augustine (379/2001). The confessions of Saint
Augustine. C. White (Trans.) London: Frances Lincoln.

1503

