UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Natural Cure for the Pet Fish Problem: Feature Emergence as Classificatory
Composition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8338q33x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Thorton, Chris

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Natural Cure for the Pet Fish Problem:
Feature Emergence as Classificatory Composition
Chris Thornton
Informatics
University of Sussex
Brighton
BN1 9QH
UK
c.thornton@sussex.ac.uk
Abstract
Where do emergent features come from? This has long
been an intriging puzzle. The concept of pet fish illustrates the difficulty. Most people expect pet fish to live
in bowls, even though this is not something either pets
or fish normally do. The inference that pet fish have the
feature of living in bowls cannot be explained purely in
terms of the constituents themselves. The feature seems
to emerge. The present paper aims to explain this effect
using notions of classificatory composition. Adjoined
concept references are taken to construct classifications
rather than combinations; a pet fish is taken to be a
fish classified as a pet rather than a combination of a
pet a fish. It is also shown that, where concepts have a
compositional representation, feature emergence can be
accounted for in terms of compositional accommodation.

Introduction
The concept of pet fish is one of the best known examples
of a conceptual combination that produces difficult to
explain ‘emergent features.’ People expect pet fish to
live in bowls, even though this is not expected of either
pets or fish (Murphy, 1988). The feature lives-in-bowls
somehow leaps into existence when the concepts pet and
fish are combined. But how and why? The effect seems
to be something to do with the way the combination is
explained. But giving a precise and general account is
not straightforward (Rosch, 2011). This is the so-called
Pet Fish problem, also known as the Guppy problem
(Osherson and Smith, 1981)
Simple cases of concept combination are dealt with relatively easily. Let’s say we combine the concept brown
with the concept cow to form the concept, brown cow.
Linguistically, the effect is to apply an adjective to a
noun. In conceptual terms, the process is said to involve
attachment of a modifier concept (brown) to a head concept (cow). Various explanations can then be set out.
Assuming a schematic, slot/filler type of representation,
the effect can be seen as one in which the modifier concept brown becomes the new filler for the color slot in
the cow representation (cf. Hampton, 2011).
Simple explanations of this sort run into problems
quite quickly, however. One relates to typicality effects.
Consider the concept of a road bridge. For residents of
the UK, a highly typical case of a road bridge is the
Forth Road Bridge in Scotland. Unfortunately, this entity is unlikely to be considered typical of either roads or

bridges, on which basis there is a mystery about how the
combination acquires typicality attributions not given to
either constituent. This is known as the conjunction effect (Smith and Osherson, 1984).
Schematic theories of representation (Rumelhart and
Ortony, 1977; Rumelhart, 1980) seem to offer a way of
dealing with such problems. Let’s say an apple concept
is represented by a schema with slots for color and size.
The fact that apples are typically green may be captured by placing a high typicality value on green as a
color value (Murphy, 2002, p. 447). If constructing the
concept of a red apple has the effect of placing red into
the color slot of the apple schema, while also giving it a
high typicality value, the expected typicality effect is reproduced. A red apple is then modeled as more typical
of the concept red apple than it is of the concept red,
or the concept apple. This approach to typicality values
is at the heart of the selective modification proposal of
Smith and Osherson (1984; Smith et al., 1988).1
The immediate difficulty with this idea is that it depends on there being a suitably modifiable slot in the
head schema (Machery, 2009). In many cases, this seems
to be ruled out. Consider Murphy’s example of a ‘party
dog’. A plausible idea is that a party dog is a dog that
does tricks. It is much less plausible that a dog schema
will have a does-tricks slot, however. Combinations in
which the head concept seems to lack any usefully modifiable slot abound. As Murphy notes, it is simply ‘not
the case that an adjective can automatically pick out a
single dimension to modify’ (Murphy, 2002, p. 450).
The general difficulty is the way in which concept combination goes beyond what can plausibly be conjured
from constituent representations. The concept of pet
fish is the classic illustration but ‘Harvard-educated carpenter’ is also revealing. People described as instances
of this concept are likely to be seen as non-materialistic
(Kunda et al., 1990). This seems to involve reasoning
with relations that have nothing to do with the constituent concepts. Kunda et al., describe the process as
the development of a ‘causal narrative.’ A simpler ex1

In fact, the selective modification model involves modification of both typicality ‘votes’ and dimension diagnosticities, the latter being required to explain reverse conjunction
effects.

1456

ample is ‘big dog’. This entity seems to have features
that cannot be explained in terms of representations for
the concept big and the concept dog. A big dog is presumably small in relation to a house, for example. Any
theory that models the combinational process purely in
terms of constituent representations cannot explain such
effects.
Explaining how concept-combination goes beyond processing of constituent representations is thus a key part
of most proposals. In the concept specialization model
of (Cohen and Murphy, 1984; Murphy, 1988) the process
is understood to involve placing a representation of the
modifier concept into a slot selected on the basis of background knowledge. This is then interpreted and elaborated taking ‘outside knowledge’ into account (Murphy, 1988, p. 533).2 The model allows scope for emergence of features through explanation. It has also been
extended by Wisniewski to incorporate mechanisms of
property-mapping, concept hybridization and relationlinking (Wisniewski, 1997; Wisniewski and Love, 1998).
Other proposals envisage ways in which processes of
reasoning might directly mediate the combinational process. In Thagard’s Amalgam theory (Thagard, 1984)
application of procedural rules regulates slot/value selection in ways that promote an interpretation that reconciles ‘the conflicting expectations contained in the candidate concepts’ (Thagard, 1984, p. 4). Hampton’s composite prototype model (Hampton, 1987, 1988, 1991)
also deems combination to involve processes of reasoning, although here the process is based on theory-driven
relations connecting slots of the original representations.
Another proposal is the CARIN model of Gagne and
Shoben (1997; Gagne, 2000; Gagne and Shoben, 2002).
Here, the key idea is that combinational processes access
a small library of fundamental thematic relations, including Cause, Has, About, Make, For, Use and Located-at.
The model envisages combination to involve constructing an integrated slot/filler representation based around
one or more of these foundational relations.
A variety of combinatorial mechanisms are proposed in
the literature, then. Each has its pros and cons from the
explanatory point of view (Ran and Duimerang, 2009;
Murphy, 2002). The present paper aims to add a new
explanatory proposal but does not hypothesise any new
form of combinatorial mechanism. Rather it aims to explain featural effects in terms of the compositional properties that concepts inherently possess. It aims to show
the sense in which feature emergence is a natural outcome of conceptual compositionality.
The hypothesis, more specifically, is that feature emergence can be explained in terms of natural concept com2
As Ran and Duimerang note, a problem with this is
that the nature of outside knowledge is ‘not clearly defined
and is treated as a kind of black box in which the cognitive
mechanisms that guide its function are unknown’ (Ran and
Duimerang, 2009, p. 57).

position. Conceptual structure assembled by this process has the distinguishing feature of being held together
purely by the classificatory properties of concepts in
the structure. There is no superimposed, compositional
framework. The features which emerge from combining two concepts, it is argued, can be explained as the
constructs that grow out of extending a natural compositional structure to accommodate constituent representations. However, it is to emphasized that the examples
set out are intended to illustrate possible mechanisms.
They are not intended to be realistic models of cognitive
structure. The proposal is set out in two main sections.
The section immediately to follow introduces the idea of
natural concept composition. The second section shows
how this type of conceptual structure can be a way of
explaining cases of feature emergence.

Natural concept composition
Although the classificatory functions of concepts are
normally viewed as applying to non-conceptual entities,
they can also be seen as applying to concepts themselves.
A fork concept is the means of classifying something as a
fork. A plastic concept is the means of classifying something as plastic. But some forks are plastic, on which
basis the plastic concept can also be a way of classifying
the fork concept. What is picked out is the extensional
intersection—the set of all plastic forks. This is just the
extension of the concept of plastic forks. Where extensions intersect in this way, the effect of using one concept
to cross-classify another can thus be a new concept: it is
the concept whose extension is the intersection arising.
Cross-classification of one concept by another has the
potential to yield an implied concept, with an extension
that is derived by intersection.
The more complex case of this is where we have a concept that classifies an n-tuple of entities (i.e., a relation).
For example, let’s say we have a male-celebrity concept,
a female-celebrity concept and a married-couple concept.
There is the potential for a male and female celebrity to
be classified as a married couple. The married-couple
concept is a potential classification of an n-tuple comprising the male-celebrity and female-celebrity concepts,
then. The result is a celebrity-couple concept, whose extension is the set of couples made up of a male and a
female celebrity.
Classifications of this type exist whenever the extension of the classifying concept contains at least one of the
possible permutations of instances. To formalize this,
we have to work in terms of cartesian products. A crossclassification exists if the extension of the classifying concept intersects the cartesian product of the extensions of
constituents in the classified n-tuple.3 Provided we allow singleton n-tuples, this deals with all cases, since the
3
The statement that two sets intersect is taken to mean
that they have a non-empty intersection.

1457

cartesian product of a single set is just the set itself.
A general rule can be stated accordingly.
• Cross-classification rule: concept x classifies some
n-tuple of concepts (not including x) if the cartesian
product formed from their extensions intersects the
extension of x.
It is then possible to define the situation where a set
of concepts gives rise to an implied concept by means of
classificatory composition.
• Composition rule: if within some set of concepts there
is a valid cross-classification that gives rise to an
extension that is new for the set, this composition is
an implied concept.

David, George}. The extension of the couples concept
is {hBrad Angei, hDavid Poshi, hFido Qii}, and so on.
All elements of extensions are understood to be n-tuples,
but where n = 1, the angle brackets are omitted.
Examination of the definitions reveals that initially
there is just one compositional implication. The extensional cartesian product of male-celebrity and femalecelebrity intersects the extension of the couples concept, with the intersection being {hBrad Angei, hDavid
Poshi}. The classification of hmale-celebrity femalecelebrityi by the couples concept is an implication of
the set, then. For purpose of notating this, the convention used here is to enclose the classifying concept and
its constituents in square brackets, with the classifying
concept placed first. The implied construction is thus
written
[couples male-celebrity female-celebrity]

The idea of ‘compositional completion’ can then be set
out. A set of concepts may be said to be compositionally
complete just in case it has no implied concepts. This
either means all of them have already been added, or
there were none to begin with. The compositional completion of a set of concepts is the set of implied concepts
given rise to, then. The composition rule specifically requires that an extension be new for the original set of
concepts. This accommodates the possibility of having
two or more implied concepts with the same extension.
Notice the rules allow for cumulative effects: the identification of one implied concept can give rise to another.
The result in such cases is a compositional structure of
two levels—one classification inside another. There is
no limit on the number of times this can happen, and
thus no limit on the structural complexity that may
emerge. The compositional completion of a set of concepts may comprise conceptual structures of arbitrary
compositional complexity. These structures have the
distinguishing feature of being held together purely by
the classificatory properties of the concepts they contain.
There is no superimposed, compositional formalism. For
this reason, the process is called natural concept composition.

Couples example
The dynamics of natural concept composition can be
illustrated by extending the celebrity-couples example.
Let’s say we start with a set of five concepts defined as
follows.
male-celebrity = {Brad, David, George}
female-celebrity = {Ange, Posh, Rita}
pets = {Fido, Twinkle, Rover}
couples = {hBrad Angei, hDavid Poshi, hFido Qii}
pet-owners = {hBrad Ange Fidoi, hJo Sam Roveri}
These definitions should be self-explanatory. The extension of the male-celebrity concept is defined to be {Brad,

The concept is that of a celebrity couple: it is referred to
as the celebrity-couple concept below. The extensional
definition is {hBrad Angei, hDavid Poshi}.
Once this implied concept has been identified, there is
a knock-on effect resulting from the ability of the petowners concept to classify a composite of celebrity-couple
and pets. The cartesian product derived from this includes hBrad Ange Fidoi, which is within the extension
of pet-owners. A second implied concept then exists, in
which the initial construction plays the role of a constituent. This is a structure of two levels:
[pet-owners
[couples male-celebrity female-celebrity]
pets ]
The implied concept is that of a celebrity-couple classified as pet owners. In other words, it is the concept of
a pet-owning celebrity-couple. This is the final implication in the present case. The compositional completion
of this set comprises just two concepts, then.

Feature emergence
The second part of the proposal can now be set out. The
hypothesis is that feature emergence results from natural concept composition. Viewing concept combination
as classificatory composition has the effect of making feature emergence an expected outcome. Where a feature
is seen to emerge as a result of combining two concepts,
the process can be modeled in terms of compositional
conceptions brought into existence by activating compositional representations.
In the simplest cases, concept combination can be explained purely in terms of schematic representation, and
the ways in which activating one schema modifies another. Such accounts are straightforwardly translated
into the present framework. From the compositional
point of view, a slot/filler schema is a construction in

1458

which the classifying concept is that of combination, and
each constituent is a one-level construction in which a
filler value classifies a slot value. An apple schema has
something like the following form, then.
[combination [green color] [round shape]]
Any account in which concepts are deemed to be combined by means of schema modification can then be expressed in terms of conceptual integration. Taking the
concept of red to have the form [red color], an integration of the apple and red concepts would produce this
conception of a red apple, for example.

The corresponding conception of fish is
[combination [habitat water] [activity swimming]].
The two schematic inferences are then straightforwardly
accomplished—they result directly from activating the
constituent representations. Their integration, on the
other hand, requires a combining conception. Given the
understanding that a pet fish is a fish classified as a
pet, this must impose the habitat classification from the
pet conception on the habitat classification in the fish
conception. The construct obtained is then
[combination
[habitat [enclosure water]]
[role amusement]
[activity swimming]].

[combination [red color] [round shape]]
This is the sense in which compositional processes can
model schema-updates.4 But notice the classificatory
viewpoint that is imposed. On the assumption of the
combination being represented compositionally, a red apple is an apple that is classified as red. It is not a red
thing that is also an apple.
Combinations of more relevance to the Pet Fish problem are ones which yield emergent features via inferential
explanation. The account in the case of ‘pet fish’ has already been noted: people expect pet fish to live in bowls
(even though this is not the usual behavior of either pets
or fish) because this is a way of explaining how fish can
be both kept, and kept alive (cf. Murphy, 1988). The
process is seen to involve the construction of an inferential explanation in which living in bowls is inferred to be
the only way of meeting the requirement for fish to be
kept in water.
The procedure for translating an explanatory process into a compositional one involves treating each inferential step as a conception. Inferences involving a
schematic idea are seen as combinatorial conceptions
(i.e., classifications based on the concept of combination). Inferences involving a categorical idea are seen
as unifying conceptions (i.e., classifications based on the
concept of unity). The process of connecting one inference to another is conceptual construction. Such connections are established by making one conception a constituent of another.
The explanatory process prompted by ‘pet fish’ integrates the schematic inference that fish need to live in
water with the schematic inference that pets are kept in
enclosures. Assume the construction of the pet conception is
[combination [habitat enclosure] [role amusement]],
4

Most of the subtleties of schema-update proposals are
ignored, here. Conjunction and reverse-conjunction effects
(Smith et al., 1988) are potentially explained, however, assuming typicality attributions are increased by conceptual
specificity, and decreased by conceptual contradiction. This
has the effect of making red apples more typical, and brown
apples less typical of the red apple conception than either
apples or red things taken separately.

On the assumption that [habitat [enclosure water]] constructs a conception of a habitat containing water, something akin to the lives-in-bowls feature is reproduced.
pet

fish
combination

combination
habitat
enclosure

role
amusement

habitat

activity

water

swimming

pet fish
combination
habitat

role

activity

enclosure

amusement

swimming

water

Figure 1: ‘Pet fish’.

This compositional story is set out schematically in
Figure 1. In this diagram, triangles represent conceptions: the name of the conception appears at the apex,
with the classifying concept placed above the lower edge,
and the classified constituents below it. Where we have
a classification with a single constituent, a stack arrangement is used. The classifying conception is placed immediately above the classified constituent, with a line
between them.
More complex cases of feature emergence give rise
to more complex interpretations. But the principles
of translation remain the same. Consider the case of
‘Harvard-educated carpenter’. The emergent feature in
this case relates to an attitude: Harvard-educated carpenters are inferred to be ‘non-materialistic’ (Kunda et
al., 1990). The combination of high earning power and
modest remuneration in a single individual is taken to
imply that the individual must have a care-less attitude
to money. The feature that emerges is a known classification of a combination of features. But these features
are inferred rather than given.

1459

Harvard-education

...

combination
elevation

carpenter

...

...

combination
limitation

residence

A

combination
dwelling

...

examples

non-materialism

apartment

occupant

dog

correspondence
house

exercise-scope
dwelling

size
occupant

combination
earning-power

examples

suitability

remuneration

earning-power

elevation

agent

C

combination

limitation
remuneration

accomodation

restriction
size

restriction
exercise-scope

dog

B
correspondence
restriction
restriction

Figure 2: ‘Harvard-educated carpenter’.

Modeled as natural concept composition, the explanatory process has the form depicted in Figure 2. The
inference that a Harvard education produces high earning power comes from activating the relevant compositional representation (which incorporates the conception
[elevation earning-power]). The inference that a carpenter is likely to have limited remuneration is produced in
a similar same way, by activating the relevant compositional conception. An attitude of non-materialism is
then inferred by means of an existing combinatorial conception for non-materialism based on these particular
constituents. Again, the interpretation enforces a classificatory understanding. A Harvard-educated carpenter
is not taken to be a combination of a carpenter and a
Harvard education. It is seen to be the classification of
a carpenter as Harvard-educated.
More complex still is the idea of an apartment dog.
This phrase is found to suggest the idea of a dog that
is small, even though this is not normally a property of
either apartments or dogs (Murphy, 1988). The complication is the involvement of an intermediate idea. An
apartment dog is not seen to be a dog classified as an
apartment, let alone a dog that is also an apartment. It
is expected to be a dog that lives in an apartment. Part
of the explanatory process entails the idea of a particular
type of agent residing in a particular type of dwelling.
The inferential steps in the explanation are seen to
be essentially as follows (cf. Murphy, 2002). There is
the categorical inference that apartments are types of
dwelling, and the categorical inference that dogs and occupants are both types of agent. There are also three
schematic inferences: the inference that apartments offer limited scope for exercise, the inference that dwellings
have residents that are suitable, and the inference that
suitability of an occupant for a dwelling requires correspondence between the occupant’s size and exercise requirement. The structure labeled A in Figure 3 shows
these five steps as compositional conceptions. The concepts utilized for classification include that of combination, of unity, and of correspondence.
Given this model, the conclusion that apartment dogs
are small can be seen to result from an interaction be-

size

exercise-scope

occupant

dwelling

Figure 3: ‘Apartment dog’.

tween two conceptual processes. Reference to an apartment activates a dwelling conception in which exercisescope is classified as restricted. A conception of residence
is then realized, incorporating a suitability conception
that classifies the size of the occupant as corresponding
to the (restricted) exercise-scope of the dwelling. The
only way of integrating the conception activated by the
dog reference is then by inferring the dog to be the occupant in the residence conception. There is then an
implicit classification (via the suitability conception) of
the size of the dog as corresponding to the exercise-scope
of the dwelling. A restriction is inferred to apply to the
size of the dog. Emergence of the infered feature of smallness is obtained by means of a sequence of interacting,
compositional constructions.
Modeling concept combination in this way has the advantage of parsimony. Notions of schematic representation and explanatory inference are collapsed to the idea
of compositional conceptualization. The approach can
deal with simple cases involving direct transfer of features as well as more complex cases involving explanation. But it cannot be emphasized too strongly that the
examples set out are not intended to be realistic models
of human cognition. It is not claimed that these particular conceptions are the ones people use. Given a free
choice of what concepts are given, and no restriction on
the number of constructive levels that can be brought
into play, there are infinitely many ways in which any
conception can be constructed. The examples set out
are purely illustrative of the way in which feature emergence might result from classificatory composition.

Conclusion
Adjoined concept references are normally viewed as constructing combinations. The phrase ‘toy vehicle’ is considered to combine the concepts toy and vehicle, the
phrase ‘pet fish’ is considered to combine pet and fish,
and the phrase ‘apartment dog’ is considered to combine apartment and dog. Hence the name of the area

1460

of study. But as the present paper shows, these phrases
can also be seen as classifications. A ‘toy vehicle’ can
be a vehicle classified as a toy, a pet fish can be a fish
classified as a pet, and an apartment dog can be a dog
classified as living in an apartment. This leads to a new
way of explaining feature emergence. On the assumption
that concepts are represented as classificatory compositions (rather than as one-leveled schemata), explanatory
feature emergence can be seen to grow out of compositional conceptualization. This avoids the need to think
in terms of dedicated mechanisms of combination and
explanation. The phenomenon is seen to result from
activation of naturally constructed, compositional representations.

References
Cohen, B. and Murphy, G. L. (1984). Models of concepts. Cognitive Science, 8 (pp. 27-58).
Gagne, C. L. and Shoben, E. (1997). Influence of thematic relations on the comprehension of modifiernoun combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23 (pp.
71-87).
Gagne, C. L. and Shoben, E. (2002). Priming relations in
ambiguous nounnoun combinations. Memory Cognition, 30 (pp. 637646).
Gagne, C. L. (2000). Relation-based versus propertybased combinations: a test of the CARIN theory
and dual-process theory of conceptual combination.
Journal of Memory and Language, 42 (pp. 365-389).
Hampton, J. A. (1987). Inheritance of attributes in natural concept conjunctions. Memory and Cognition,
15, No. 1 (pp. 55-71).

Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending complex concepts. Cognitive Science, 12 (pp. 529-562).
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts. London, England: The MIT Press
Osherson, D. N. and Smith, E. E. (1981). On the adequacy of prototype theory as a theory of concepts.
Cognition: International Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 9 (pp. 35-58).
Ran, B. and Duimerang, P. R. (2009). Conceptual combination: models, theories, and controversies (chapter 2). In Weingarten and Penat (Eds.), Cognitive
Psychology Research Developments. Nova Science
Publishers, Inc
Rosch, E. H. (2011). “slow lettuce”: categories, concepts, fuzzy sets and logical deduction (chapter 4).
In Belohlavek and Klir (Eds.), Concepts and Fuzzy
Logic (pp. 89-120). MIT Press
Rumelhart, D. E. and Ortony, A. (1977). The representation of knowledge in memory. In Anderson, Spiro
and Montaque (Eds.), Schooling and the Acquisition
of Knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Rumelhart, D. E. (1980). Schemata: the building blocks
of cognition. In Spiro, Bruce and Brewer (Eds.),
Theoretical Issues in Reading Comprehension. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Smith, E. E. and Osherson, D. N. (1984). Categories
and Concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press
Smith, E. E., Osherson, D. N., Rips, L. J. and Keane,
M. (1988). Combining prototypes: a selective modification model. Cognitive Science, 12 (pp. 485-527).

Hampton, J. A. (1988). Overextension of conjunctive
concepts: evidence for a unitary model of concept
typicality and class inclusion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14
(pp. 12-32).
Hampton, J. A. (1991). The combination of prototype
concepts. In Schwanenflugel (Ed.), The Psychology
of Word Meanings. Hillsdale, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Hampton, J. (2011). Conceptual combination and fuzzy
logic. In Belohlavek and Klir (Eds.), Concepts and
Fuzzy Logic (pp. 209-232). MIT Press

Thagard, P. (1984). Conceptual combination and scientific discovery. In Asquith and Kitcher (Eds.), PSA
1984 vol. 1 (pp. 3-12). East Lansing: Philosophy of
Science Association
Wisniewski, E. J. and Love, B. C. (1998). Relations versus properties in conceptual combination. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38 (pp. 177-202).
Wisniewski, E. J. (1997). When concepts combine. Psychonomic Bulletin Review, 4 (pp. 167-183).

Kunda, Z., Miller, D. T. and Claire, T. (1990). Combining social concepts: the role of causal reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 14 (pp. 551-577).
Machery, E. (2009). Doing without Concepts. Oxford:
Oxford University Press

1461

