UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A quantum probability perspective on the nature of psychological uncertainty

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7hn8200k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
White, Lee
Pothos, Emmanuel
Busemeyer, Jerome

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A quantum probability perspective on the nature of psychological uncertainty
Lee C. White (l.c.white.517813@swansea.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Swansea, Singleton Park,
Swansea, SA2 8PP UK.

Emmanuel M. Pothos (e.m.pothos@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, City University London
London, EC1V 0HB UK.

Jerome R. Busemeyer (jbusemey@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University,
Bloomington 47468 Indiana, USA.

Abstract
Making a choice between alternatives can influence our
subsequent evaluation of the selected option (e.g. Sharot,
Velasquez & Dolan, 2010). Thus, in resolving psychological
uncertainty, the act of making a judgment itself appears to
have a constructive role in subsequent related decisions. This
study focuses on emotional ambivalence and the development
of affective evaluations over two stages, such that (just)
making an intermediate evaluation in the first stage is shown
to influence the overall affective evaluation in the second
stage. Models based on classical probability theory, which
assume that an intermediate evaluation simply reads off an
existing internal state, cannot accommodate this result in a
natural way. An explanation is offered with a quantum
probability model, which, under specific circumstances,
requires the measurement of an internal state to have a
constructive role. The predictions of the quantum probability
model were supported by the empirical results.
Keywords: Quantum
Affective uncertainty.

probability;

Interference

effects;

Introduction
One basic fact about cognition is that it reflects uncertainty.
In fact cognition appears to involve several kinds of
uncertainty. As well as uncertainty regarding future events,
there is uncertainty about internal states, an inevitable
consequence of the fact that life events are often
agglomerations of pleasant and unpleasant components. For
example, consider ‘emotional ambivalence’, the apparent
ability of the cognitive system to concurrently represent
positive and negative affect. Emotional ambivalence is
reflected in e.g., students’ thoughts about graduation day or
advertisements with mixed emotional appeals (Larsen,
McGraw & Cacioppo, 2001; Williams & Aaker, 2002).
Understanding how the cognitive system resolves
affective uncertainty presents challenges (e.g. Brehm &
Miron, 2006). For example, is positive and negative affect
experienced sequentially or simultaneously? What happens
when people are asked to make a judgment about their
affective state whilst experiencing affective uncertainty?
Does this judgment resolve uncertainty or does the act of

making the judgment itself influence their affect in the same
way that choice has been shown to have a constructive
influence on preference (e.g. Sharot, Velasquez & Dolan,
2010)? Our objective in this paper is to propose an
ambitious new perspective on this question, based on
quantum probability (QP) theory (note that in this work by
QP theory we simply mean the rules for how to assign
probabilities to events from quantum theory; for more
specific proposals see Aerts, 2009, or Atmanspacher, Romer
& Wallach, 2006).
We can acquire some preliminary intuition from models
for response times in choice problems, such as random walk
models (e.g., Ashby, 2000; Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993;
Ratcliff & Smith, 2004; Usher & McClelland, 2001). In this
influential class of models, discriminating between two
options involves an accumulation of evidence, so that, on
every step, the weight for a particular option is increased.
Crucially, at any time point, the system is assumed to be in a
specific state. This state may reflect large or little weight
for a particular option, but, regardless, it has to be at a
specific state. Classical approaches must assume that the
system is always at a particular state, even if knowledge of
this state is uncertain.
Such an assumption seems
straightforward. How else could we build a model?
Yet, there is an alternative, intriguing possibility, which
emerges from the recent uses of QP theory in cognitive
modeling (Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012; Pothos &
Busemeyer, in press). QP theory is a framework for
assigning probabilities to observables and, therefore,
potentially relevant wherever there is a need to formalize
uncertainty. QP cognitive models often have the same
intentions (Griffiths et al., 2010; Oaksford & Chater, 2007)
as classical probability models. But, classical and QP
frameworks are founded on different axioms. QP models
incorporate certain unique features, such as superposition
and the capacity for interference, and there has been
growing interest in exploring the relevance of such features
for cognitive modeling (e.g., Aerts, 2009; Atmanspacher,
Filk & Romer, 2004; Blutner, 2009; Busemeyer, Pothos,
Franco & Trueblood, 2011; Khrennikov, 2010; Pothos &
Busemeyer, 2009; Wang et al, in press).

1599

In QP theory, a superposition state has amplitude (weight)
across more than one possibility. Suppose we are interested
in representing whether a stimulus induces a positive or
negative affect. Classically, the situation is straightforward:
if we are uncertain about a person’s state, we assign
probabilities to the person having a positive or negative
affect. Perhaps there is a dynamic process which evolves
(reshuffles) the person’s state, until a final state is reached.
But, the person is always assumed to be at a particular state.
The situation with a QP approach is markedly different: as
long as there is weight for both possibilities, the person is in
a superposition of possibilities, and it is impossible to
interpret the person as being at a particular state, rather,
there is a potentiality for each possibility. That this has to be
the case is not obvious and it is the result of the famous
Kochen-Specker theorem in QP theory. The key
implication, which is fundamental to QP theory, is that a
transition from a superposition to a definite state must have
a constructive role.
The QP perspective enables a simple, but surprising,
empirical prediction. The relevant difference between the
classical and the QP approach is that in the former the
system is always assumed to be at a particular state, while in
the latter there is a distinction between particular states and
superposition states. Therefore, consider a situation in which
affective evaluation is developed over two steps, such that
each step involves a stimulus presentation. Classically, it
should not matter whether the person is asked to provide an
affective evaluation just after the second step, or after the
first step as well. In the latter case, the intermediate
evaluation would simply ‘read off’ the existing state and so
this should not affect the overall outcome of the affective
evaluation. However, in the QP model, an action of
affective evaluation (a “measurement”) can have a profound
impact on the state of the system and, therefore, the
intermediate evaluation influences the eventual outcome of
the second evaluation. Note that a classical model could
incorporate the possibility that an evaluation (or rating etc.)
has a constructive role, but this could only be done with
additional assumptions, which are not part of classical
probability theory.
In the current study stimuli were hypothetical
advertisements, appearing as static images. In the positivenegative (PN) condition, a single positively valenced
‘positive image’ was presented, followed by a mixed advert,
including the same positive image presented concurrently
with a ‘negative image’, and vice versa for the negativepositive condition (NP). In the ‘single rating’ condition,
participants viewed the single image advert and then
provided an overall affective evaluation for the mixed
advert. In the ‘double rating’ condition the same participants
provided an intermediate rating to the single advert, before
viewing the mixed advert and rating it. Note that the
relative order of the images is likely to impact on the final
evaluation. Moore (2002) demonstrated order effects in
Gallup poll questionnaires (see also Bergus et al., 1998;
McKenzie, Lee, & Chen, 2002). Relatedly, Vlaev et al.

(2009) argued that pain perception depends on recent pain
experiences.
Hogarth & Einhorn’s (1992) research on order effects in
belief updating has obvious similarities with the current
research, although as we shall see there are also some
important differences.
Their belief-adjustment model
describes order effects as arising from the interaction of key
variables including the complexity of stimuli, length of the
sequence of items and whether participants respond using a
Step-by-Step (SbS) procedure, where they report their
judgment after integrating each piece of evidence, or an
End-of-Sequence (EoS) procedure where they report their
judgment only after they have viewed all stimuli in the
sequence.
In a review of previous research as well as their own
experiments they argue that in the case of short sequences
(i.e. between 2 and 12 items) requiring simple judgments
(i.e. a single item for each stimulus in the sequence) the
majority of studies employing a SbS procedure result in a
recency effect whereas the majority of studies using an EoS
procedure result in a primacy effect. The belief-adjustment
model describes a sequential anchoring-and-adjustment
process in which the current belief is adjusted by the
subsequent pieces of evidence.
Although there are similarities between our research and
that described by Hogarth & Einhorn, there are also several
important differences. Most results described in Hogarth &
Einhorn’s paper, including their own experiments, involved
3 or more items in a sequence, whereas the current
experiment is concerned with two items. The effects they
described were concerned with items that were related to
each other whereas in the current experiment items were
chosen to be unrelated. In our experiment participants are
required to evaluate each individual item in its own right
whereas in the studies described in the Hogarth & Einhorn
paper each subsequent piece of evidence is evaluated with
respect to an overall judgment about a person or object (e.g.
trait adjectives used to make social judgments about
someone’s “likeableness”).
However, our objective here is not to demonstrate order
effects in affective evaluation, but rather to understand the
potential role of an intermediate evaluation on the final one.
In Hogarth & Einhorn’s terms, whether there is a difference
between evaluations produced using EoS and SbS
procedures for the same items viewed in the same order.
For this, we need to consider some elementary QP
principles.
The states of a system are represented by vectors, ψ,
within a multidimensional space. Different subspaces
represent possibilities for ψ and a projection of ψ onto a
subspace involves laying ψ onto the subspace. The squared
length of this projection gives the probability that ψ is the
possibility represented by the subspace (cf. Sloman, 1993).
Finally, the angles between subspaces correspond to the
relation between the corresponding possibilities. This can be
easily understood by noting that, if a state vector is

1600

consistent with one possibility, then we want it to have large
projections on related possibilities.

the rating for the first image is completed, as before, the
impact of introducing the negative image leads to the same
angle rotation1. But, in this case the starting state is
different (it is aligned with the positive affect subspace),
therefore the resulting state corresponding to the mixed
image is different too (labeled as ‘PN double rating’). The
resulting state is now closer to the negative affect subspace,
which predicts a more negative rating.
Finally, in both the single and double rating PN
conditions the final state is assumed to be closer to the
negative affect subspace, than to the positive affect one, to
reflect a recency effect in the importance of the negative,
final image on the affective state (Trueblood & Busemeyer,
2011).
For the NP case (Figure 2), we are led to the converse
prediction, namely that the final evaluation in the double
rating condition will be more positive than the one in the
single rating condition. Thus, a quantum approach predicts a
striking interaction in the final affective evaluation in the
PN vs. NP conditions, depending on whether single ratings
or double ratings are solicited, only on the basis of the role
of measurement in QP theory.

Figure 1: An illustration of how the state for the mixed
image is created in the PN condition.
In Figure 1 we represent various possibilities for the
affective state of the participant in the PN condition. The
positive and negative affect subspaces correspond to purely
positive and negative affect respectively; they are
orthogonal, since a state in the positive affect subspace must
have a zero projection onto the negative affect one. The
positive and negative image subspaces represent the
affective impact of seeing a positive and negative image
during the experiment, respectively. These two subspaces
are also nearly orthogonal since the images were chosen to
be unrelated. Note that, in this example, the positive image
subspace is close to the positive affect one, since perceiving
a positive image is more likely to lead to a positive affect
(the state vector created as a result of perceiving the positive
image has a large projection to the positive affect subspace).
In the single rating condition, after perceiving the positive
image, the state vector is aligned with the positive image
subspace. The impact of introducing the negative image is
represented by a rotation of the state vector, denoted as U,
which leads to the state labeled as ‘PN single rating’. The
subsequent projection to the negative affect subspace is a
measure of how negative we expect the resulting rating to
be (the thick line along the bad feeling subspace).
Specifically, the squared length of the projection of the
mixed image state onto the negative affect subspace
determines the probability of a negative rating; it is natural
to assume that the higher this probability, the more negative
the rating for the mixed image.
In the double rating condition, after perceiving the
positive image, the intermediate rating is assumed to lead to
a transition to the positive affect subspace. This is the
critical difference between the single rating and the double
rating conditions, which can lead to a prediction about
behavioral differences depending on the presence of the
intermediate rating or not. In the double rating case, once

Figure 2: An illustration of how the state for the mixed
image is created in the NP condition.

1

A consistency consideration determines the direction of
rotation. In the double rating PN condition, in transforming the
state vector from the positive affect subspace to the state
corresponding to the mixed image, an intermediate state cannot be
aligned with the positive image subspace.

1601

Method

Results

Participants
Fifty-four Swansea University students participated in the
experiment for course credit (45 women, 9 men, average age
21.74 years).

Stimuli
Realistic-looking adverts were created, so that the positive
and negative versions would make sense together. Different
advertised products were used for the PN condition
(insurance; see Figure 3 for example) and the NP one
(smartphone), so as to avoid interference between
conditions. For the PN set there were three positive images
individually presented, and three mixed images with each of
the positive images joined with a negative one, and
analogously for the NP set. All images were piloted to
confirm their intended affective response and their
unrelatedness. The images were randomly presented with
24 adverts for a camera, which were included for a different
study and acted as fillers in the current experiment.

As we had previously established the valence of the images
(with the pilot study), we excluded four participants because
their ratings for the single image adverts were over one
standard deviation below (for positive adverts) or above (for
negative adverts) the mean.
We conducted a two (advert type condition: PN vs. NP) ×
two (rating condition: single vs. double) repeated measures
ANOVA on the participants’ ratings for the mixed adverts.
There was a main effect of advert type (F(1,49)=7.98,
p=.007), but not of rating condition (F(1,49)=0.04, n.s.).
Crucially, the advert type x rating condition interaction was
significant (F(1,49)=10.96, p=.002). Paired samples t-tests
further showed that double rated PN adverts (M=4.04,
SD=1.17) were rated significantly lower (i.e. unhappier),
compared to single rated adverts (M=4.34, SD=1.43;
t(49)=2.18, p=.02, two tailed; d=.31). For the NP adverts,
double rated adverts (M= 4.94, SD=1.21) were rated
significantly higher (i.e. happier) than single rated adverts
(M=4.60, SD=1.22; t(49)=-2.39, p=.01, two tailed; d=.34).

Figure 3: Sample advert used in PN condition and
procedure for presentation of single and double rated
adverts.

Procedure
Participants first completed a six-item current mood
questionnaire. They were then told that they would see
several adverts and that for each advert, when asked, they
should answer the question ‘how does this advert make you
feel?’, responding on a nine-point scale, with anchors “very
unhappy/very happy”. Each trial involved the presentation
of a single image, followed by a request for rating (double
rating condition) or not (single rating condition), followed
by the mixed image and a final request for rating (Figure 3).
Trials were organized into two blocks. One block contained
the six single rating PN adverts and six double rating NP
ones, together with 12 filler adverts (which were also rated).
The other block contained the same adverts, but switching
the requirement for single vs. double rating. Block order and
trial order within blocks were randomized across
participants.

Figure 4: Mean participant ratings of single and double
rated PN and NP adverts (error bars represent standard
deviations).
We also considered a plausible alternative explanation,
that it is the availability of a rating after the first advert,
rather than the act of measurement as such, drives the
observed result, a possibility consistent with anchoring
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). In the double rating
condition, the more readily accessible rating for the first
advert is perhaps a reference point, against which the rating
for the second advert is computed. However, there was no
evidence for such an anchoring effect, as there were low,
non-significant correlations between participant ratings for
the first and second advert in the PN (r=.26,n.s.) and NP
(r=.18,n.s) conditions.

1602

Discussion
The results of the experiment confirmed our predictions.
For the NP mixed adverts, an intermediate rating led to a
higher final evaluation and, for the PN mixed adverts, an
intermediate rating led to a lower final evaluation. Such a
finding is difficult to reconcile with a classical probability
perspective, without additional assumptions, since an
intermediate rating should simply read off an existing
internal state. However, the QP approach can predict a
change of the state of the system, as a result of a
measurement, and so is able to predict how an intermediate
evaluation could affect the final one. Our finding resonates
with the uncertainty intensification hypothesis (Bar-Anan,
Wilson & Gilbert, 2009), according to which uncertainty
about an event will prolong and intensify how people feel
about it. In single rating trials the impact of the first image
on the final evaluation is higher, than in the double rating
ones (e.g., in PN trials with a single rating, the final
evaluation is more positive than with double rating).
Perhaps uncertainty about the internal state, after viewing
the first image, intensifies its effect on the final rating, but in
the double rating condition, reducing this uncertainty results
in a greater impact on the final rating from the second image
(that is, the component of the mixed image which is novel).
The QP model can be seen as a formalization of such ideas.
We can elaborate on the intuition of why the QP approach
works. The critical point concerns the state prior to the
second, final rating. In, e.g., the PN condition, the single
rating case, the state prior to the second rating reflects the
impact of seeing the mixed image, that is, the original
positive image, together with the new negative one. The
impact of this mixed imaged would be slightly weighted in
favor of the negative image, since this is shown last. In the
double rating case, the intermediate evaluation (which
produces a result of positive affect) can be understood as a
process of abstracting away some information from the first
image, but emphasizing its positive affective qualities.
Therefore, this makes the introduction of the negative image
produce a more contrasting affective impression. In other
words, accepting that the first image is positive, creates a
‘perspective’ of positive affect for processing the
subsequent negative image, which makes it look, well, more
negative. The result of the intermediate rating is thus a
larger negative final rating in the PN condition and exactly
vice versa in the NP one.
The intuition that a measurement is not simply a record of
an existing state, but rather it creates a state, is not alien to
psychology. Notably, Shafer and Tversky (1985, p.337)
proposed “A probability judgment depends not just on the
evidence on which it is based, but also on the process of
exploring that evidence.” Quantum theory provides a formal
framework within which to express this intuition.
There are plenty of possible extensions to the present
work. First, it would be worth exploring more the putative
role of reference points in such experiments, perhaps with
the provision of an external rating. Second, we would like to
explore this paradigm with changes in procedure and

materials, so as to establish its robustness. Finally, there
have been recent interesting analyses on the putative
constructive role of decisions (e.g. Sharot et al., 2010) and it
would be worth exploring further the conceptual links
between these ideas and the quantum approach.

References
Aerts, D. (2009). Quantum structure in cognition. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 53(5), 314-348.
Ashby, F. G. (2000). A stochastic version of general
recognition theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
44(2), 310-329.
Atmanspacher, H., Filk, T. & Romer, H. (2004). Quantum
Zeno features of bistable perception. Biological
Cybernetics, 90(1), 33-40.
Atmanspacher, H., Romer, H., & Wallach, H. (2006). Weak
quantum theory: formal framework and selected
applications. Weak quantum theory: complementarity and
entanglement in physics and beyond. Foundations of
Physics, 32, 379-406.
Bar-Anan, Y., Wilson, T.D. & Gilbert, D.T. (2009). The
feeling of uncertainty intensifies affective reactions.
Emotion, 9(1), 123-127.
Bergus, G. R., Chapman, G. B., Levy, B. T., Ely, J. W., &
Oppliger, R. A. (1998). Clinical diagnosis and the order
information. Medical Decision Making, 18(4), 412-417.
Blutner, R. (2009). Concepts and bounded rationality: An
application of Niestegge’s approach to conditional
quantum probabilities. In L. Accardi, G. Adenier, C.
Fuchs, G. Jaeger, A.Y. Khrennikov, J. Larsson, & S.
Stenholm (Eds.), Foundations of probability and physics5 (Vol. 1101).
Brehm, J.W. & Miron, A.M. (2006). Can the simultaneous
experience of opposing emotions really occur? Motivation
and Emotion, 30(1), 13-30.
Busemeyer, J. R. & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field
theory: A dynamic cognition approach to decision
making. Psychological Review, 100(3), 432-459.
Busemeyer, J. R. & Bruza, P. (2011). Quantum models of
cognition and decision making. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Busemeyer, J. R., Pothos, E., Franco, R., & Trueblood, J. S.
(2011). A quantum theoretical explanation for probability
judgment errors. Psychological Review, 118(2), 193-218.
Griffiths, T. L., Chater, N., Kemp, C., Perfors, A., &
Tenenbaum, J. B. (2010). Probabilistic models of
cognition: exploring representations and inductive biases.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(8), 357-364.
Hogarth, R.M., & Einhorn, H.J. (1992). Order effects in
belief updating: The belief-adjustment model. Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 1-55.
Khrennikov, A. Y. (2010). Ubiquitous quantum structure:
From psychology to finance. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Larsen, J.T., McGraw, A.P. & Cacioppo, J.T. (2001). Can
people feel happy and sad at the same time? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81(4), 684-696.

1603

McKenzie, C. R. M., Lee, S. M., & Chen, K. K.
(2002).When negative evidence increases confidence:
change in belief after hearing two sides of a dispute.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 15(1), 1-18.
Moore, D. W. (2002). Measuring new types of questionorder effects. Public Opinion Quarterly, 66(1), 80-91.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality:
The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2009). A quantum
probability explanation for violations of 'rational' decision
theory. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 276(1665), 2171-2178.
Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (in press). Can quantum
probability provide a new direction for cognitive
modeling? Behavioral & Brain Sciences.
Ratcliff, R. & Smith, P. L. (2004). A comparison of
sequential sampling models for two-choice reaction time.
Psychological Review, 111(2), 333-367.
Shafer, G., & Tversky, A. (1985). Languages and designs
for probability judgment, Cognitive Science, 9, 309-339.
Sharot, T., Velasquez, C.M., & Dolan, R.J. (2010). Do
decisions shape preference? : Evidence from blind choice,
Psychological Science, 21(9) 1231–1235.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25(2), 231-280.
Trueblood, J. S. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2011). A quantum
probability account of order effects in inference.
Cognitive Science, 35(8), 1518-1552.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124–
1130.
Usher, M. & McClelland, J. L. (2001). The time course of
perceptual choice: The leaky, competing accumulator
model. Psychological Review, 108(3), 550-592.
Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J. R., Atmanspacher, H., & Pothos,
E. (in press). The potential of using quantum theory to
build models of cognition. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Williams, P. & Aaker, J.L. (2002). Can mixed emotions
peacefully coexist? Journal of Consumer Research, 28(4),
636-649.
Vlaev, I., Seymour, B., Dolan, R.J. & Chater, N. (2009).
The price of pain and the value of suffering.
Psychological Science, 20(3), 309-317.

1604

