UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Achievement Motivation and Strategy Selection during Exploratory Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5w619961

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
DeCaro, Daniel
DeCaro, Marci
Rittle-Johnson, Bethany

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Achievement Motivation and Strategy Selection during Exploratory Learning
Daniel A. DeCaro1 (ddecaro@indiana.edu)
Ostrom Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

Marci S. DeCaro1 (marci.decaro@louisville.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA

Bethany Rittle-Johnson (bethany.rittle-johnson@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

problems. Similar findings have been observed for ninthgrade students learning descriptive statistics (Kapur, 2012;
Schwartz & Martin, 2004) and college students learning
cognitive psychology (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998).
Although exploratory learning can enhance conceptual
understanding, such exploration can be challenging for the
learner. Compared to more traditional tell-then-practice
instruction, learners typically make more mistakes during
exploratory learning activities, and they must focus on those
mistakes in order to develop more sophisticated
conceptualizations of the problem (Kapur, 2010). This
learning process often entails considerable effort, as
individuals engage in trial-and-error learning or hypothesistesting (Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006; Rittle-Johnson,
2006). Learners also may encounter considerably more
confusion about how to proceed (Dewey, 1910). In some
cases, these learning challenges may pose a “desirable
difficulty” (Bjork, 1994) or “productive failure” (Kapur,
2010) that encourages learners to rethink their previous
conceptions and develop better understanding, thereby
preparing them to learn from further instruction (Schwartz
& Bransford, 1998). In other cases, the difficulty posed by
exploratory learning may be too high (Kirschner et al.,
2006).

Abstract
Exploratory learning before instruction can benefit
understanding, but can also be challenging. Individual
differences in response to challenge, such as achievement
motivation, may therefore moderate the benefits of
exploratory learning. Higher mastery orientation generally
leads to increased effort in response to challenge, whereas
higher performance orientation leads to withdrawal. Children
(2nd-4th grade; N=159) were given mathematical equivalence
problems to solve as either an exploratory learning activity
(before instruction) or as practice (after instruction). Higher
mastery orientation was associated with improved learning
from exploration. In contrast, performance orientation did not
lead to learning improvements—and sometimes even hurt
learning. Higher mastery orientation was also associated with
more sophisticated problem-solving strategies during
exploration. Although exploratory activities have the potential
to advance strategy selection and subsequent learning,
achievement motivation may boost or hinder these benefits.
Keywords: exploratory learning, achievement motivation,
mathematics, strategy selection

Introduction
Exploratory instructional activities can increase individuals’
understanding of new concepts. By wrestling with different
solution approaches or conceptual perspectives in a trialand-error fashion, learners encounter a broader range of
both correct and incorrect strategies than might normally be
encountered during more traditional “tell-then-practice”
methods of instruction (Bonawitz et al., 2011). As a result,
learners who explore a new concept before receiving direct
instruction on the topic may develop a more sophisticated
appreciation for why or how a particular solution approach
is better, or worse, than another. This training potentially
translates into deeper understanding and better retention of
the material (Schwartz, Lindgren, & Lewis, 2009).
For example, Schwartz et al. (2011) examined the
learning of eighth-grade students who explored density
problems before receiving instruction. These students
exhibited better understanding of the problem structure and
better transfer to novel problems at a later test compared to
those who received instruction before solving the density

Achievement Motivation and Challenge
In this study, we ask whether some learners may be better
motivated than others to cope with the challenges posed by
exploratory learning and thereby capitalize on the
instructional experience. Research on achievement
motivation demonstrates that individuals approach learning
events with different goals and conceptions of what
constitutes “ideal” learning performance. These differences
influence how individuals interpret and respond to challenge
during learning (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Elliot &
McGregor, 2001). Individuals can have both mastery and
performance goals to different degrees (Barron and
Harackiewicz, 2006). Individuals higher in masteryorientation desire personal growth (i.e., learning goals) and
tend to view challenge as an opportunity to learn something
new. Therefore, they generally seek challenge and respond
________________________________
1

370

Joint first authorship

to it with increased effort and interest. Individuals higher in
performance-orientation desire to prove their ability (i.e.,
performance goals). As such, they tend to interpret effort as
a sign of incompetence, leading them to interpret difficult
learning activities as a potential threat and to withdraw from
challenges (Dweck, 1986).
For example, Diener and Dweck (1978) compared how
mastery- versus performance-oriented 4th-6th graders reacted
to failure in a difficult category-learning task. Participants
first completed several solvable categorization problems
matched to their age group (with accuracy feedback).
Afterward, they encountered four unsolvable problems,
known to be too advanced for their age group. While
completing the solvable problems, children with higher
performance- versus mastery-orientation exhibited equal
degrees of problem-solving accuracy and positive affect.
They also had equally sophisticated problem-solving
approaches. However, their behavior quickly diverged
during the unsolvable trials. Children with higher masteryorientation responded with increased interest and effort—
attributing the setback to a need for more effort. In addition,
they maintained a high degree of strategy sophistication or
invented more sophisticated problem-solving strategies to
successfully deal with the new challenge. In contrast,
children with higher performance-orientation responded
with increased negative affect and disinterest—attributing
failure to lack of ability. These children defensively
withdrew their effort or regressed to developmentally
simpler strategies that could not lead to success. Thus,
children with higher mastery-orientation learned more from
this difficult task and solved more developmentally
challenging problems. Similar observations have been made
in confusing learning conditions (Licht & Dweck, 1984).

equivalence (e.g., understanding that 2+3 is “the same as”
5). Children often demonstrate their misconceptions of the
equal sign with the strategies they use for mathematical
equivalence problems such as 4+5+3=_+3 (e.g., McNeil &
Alibali, 2005). In these problems, children often view the
equal sign as a procedural cue. For example, they may
ignore the values to the right of the equal sign and sum the
numbers on the left side (resulting in the incorrect answer
12; add-to-equals strategy). Or, they may sum every number
in the equation, ignoring the sides delineated by the equal
sign (resulting in the incorrect answer 15; add-all strategy).
These types of incorrect strategies reflect an operational
understanding of the equal sign, and indicate a
developmentally immature understanding of mathematical
equivalence (Rittle-Johnson et al., 2011). Such responses
also resemble learning errors identified in the achievement
motivation literature, in which performance-orientation
leads learners (e.g., 4th-6th graders) to perseverate on
disconfirmed strategies or revert to less mature (e.g.,
preschool level) representations of a problem following
failure trials (e.g., Diener & Dweck, 1978).

Hypotheses
Considering the literatures on exploratory learning and
achievement motivation, we predicted different learning
outcomes depending on the type of knowledge assessed. We
assessed learner’s knowledge of mathematical equivalence
both immediately after they completed an individual
tutoring session, and approximately two weeks later. We
also examined problem-solving strategies during the
tutoring session itself. These questions were examined by
reanalyzing previously-reported-data (DeCaro and RittleJohnson, 2012) to examine the role of achievement
motivation.

Current Study
Individuals may respond to exploratory learning activities
like they respond to challenge more generally. That is, based
on their typically positive reaction to challenge, learners
with higher mastery orientation may be better equipped to
deal with the potential confusion and intellectual obstacles
posed by exploration. We examined this possibility by
comparing the problem-solving strategies, and subsequent
learning, of individuals higher or lower in mastery versus
performance orientation. Children were instructed on a
novel mathematical concept. Half were given instruction,
and then solved practice problems with accuracy feedback
(instruct-first condition). The other half received the same
materials, but in reverse order: They first completed
exploratory problem-solving with accuracy feedback, and
then received instruction (solve-first condition).
Second- through fourth-grade children were taught the
concept of mathematical equivalence—that values on both
sides of the equal sign represent the same quantity. This
concept is fundamental for future conceptual development
in mathematics, such as early algebra understanding
(McNeil & Alibali, 2005). Children in these grades often
lack a relational understanding of mathematical

Conceptual Knowledge Our main interest in the present
research was how achievement motivation affects learners’
conceptual knowledge, their ability to grasp the underlying
principles of mathematical equivalence, following
exploration. Prior work suggests that exploration primarily
benefits conceptual knowledge (Schwartz et al., 2009), but
is mistake-prone and initially more confusing than a tellthen-practice instructional approach (e.g., Alfieri et al.,
2011). Previous research also indicates that individual
differences in achievement motivation influence learning
and performance primarily when learners encounter
challenging tasks (Dweck, 1986). Mastery orientation
typically leads learners to respond to initial setbacks with
increased resolve, and by maintaining or inventing more
sophisticated learning strategies (e.g., Diener & Dweck,
1978). Thus, we expected higher mastery orientation to be
associated with improved conceptual knowledge,
specifically in the more demanding solve-first condition.
The prediction for performance orientation in the solvefirst condition is less straightforward. Higher performance
orientation often leads learners to respond to setbacks with
defensive withdrawal of effort and regressive thinking (e.g.,

371

Diener & Dweck, 1978). Therefore, performance orientation
may be detrimental to conceptual knowledge in the solvefirst condition. Alternatively, performance orientation may
not actually hurt conceptual knowledge, compared to that
obtained in the instruct-first condition; instead, it may
simply hinder one’s ability to profit from the exploratory
learning opportunity. This prediction is supported by Barron
and Harackiewicz’s (2005) multiple-motive hypothesis,
which suggests that mastery and performance motives
represent separate signals with different degrees of
relevance for conceptual versus procedural knowledge.
According to this hypothesis, the mastery motive is more
relevant to conceptual knowledge than the performance
motive, because understanding and deeper processing of
information are more clearly central to personal
development and less diagnostic of ability.

Method
Participants
Participants were 2nd-4th grade children at a suburban public
school. Children who scored below 80% on a pretest
assessing procedural and conceptual knowledge of
mathematical equivalence were selected (N=159, 56%
female, age M = 8.5 years, range 7.3-10.8 years).
Approximately 18% were ethnic minorities (10% AfricanAmerican, 6% Asian, and 2% Hispanic).

Research Design and Procedure
Consenting children first completed a pretest in their
classrooms, followed by a self-report measure of their
achievement motivation. Within one week following the
pretest, children selected for the study participated in
individual tutoring sessions on mathematical equivalence.
Children were randomly assigned to the instruct-first
condition (n = 79) or the solve-first condition (n = 80).
Children were additionally assigned to either self-explain
(i.e., explain why particular answers were correct/incorrect)
or solve extra problems instead; however, this manipulation
had no discernible effects and will not be discussed further.
The session ended with a posttest assessing children’s
procedural and conceptual knowledge. Approximately two
weeks later, children completed an equivalent retention test.

Procedural Knowledge We also evaluated procedural
knowledge, or the ability to execute the correct action
sequences to solve problems. Procedural knowledge is
strongly correlated with conceptual knowledge (RittleJohnson & Alibali, 1999). However, problem-solving
assessments provide especially diagnostic information about
ability. Therefore, according to Barron and Harackiewicz’s
(2005) multiple-motive hypothesis, performance orientation
may be more relevant to procedural knowledge than mastery
orientation (cf. Grant & Dweck, 2003). We therefore
predicted a positive, but weaker, relationship between
mastery orientation and procedural knowledge in the solvefirst condition. Moreover, we predicted a negative
relationship between performance orientation and
procedural knowledge acquisition (cf. Dweck & Leggett,
1988; Grant & Dweck, 2003).

Tutoring Session
Conditions The instruct-first and solve-first conditions were
identical, except that the presentation order for the
instruction (“instruct”) and problem-solving (“solve”)
portions of the lesson were reversed. Thus, in the instructfirst condition, the problems served as practice after a lesson
on mathematical equivalence. In the solve-first condition,
these problems served as an exploratory learning activity
followed by formal instruction.

Problem-Solving Strategies In addition to assessing
knowledge outcomes (after tutoring), we examined
children’s problem-solving strategies during tutoring. Such
information may reveal how achievement motivation
impacts learning from exploration. Because children in the
solve-first condition completed the problems as an
exploratory activity, we expected them to use poorer
problem-solving strategies. Specifically, they might use
fewer relational strategies that evidence understanding of
the equal sign as a relational symbol. Instead, they might
rely more on operational strategies, in keeping with
developmentally simpler views of the equal sign as an
operational symbol (i.e., “add-all” or “add-to-equals”).
Although we thought the solve-first condition would be
more challenging, we expected mastery orientation to
promote a more adaptive response to these setbacks (cf.
Diener & Dweck, 1978). Specifically, mastery orientation
should be associated with increased use of relational
strategies and decreased use of operational strategies. In
contrast, performance orientation should be associated with
increased reliance on these developmentally simpler,
operational strategies (and decreased use of relational
strategies).

Instruction During instruction (adapted from Matthews &
Rittle-Johnson, 2009), children were taught about the
relational meaning of the equal sign. Five number sentences
(e.g., 3+4=3+4) were individually shown on the computer.
The experimenter explained the structure of each number
sentence (i.e., that there are two sides) and the explicit
meaning of the equal sign (i.e., that the equal sign means
that both sides are “equal or the same”).
Problem-Solving During the problem-solving phase,
children completed six mathematical equivalence problems
presented individually on the computer. Problems increased
in difficulty from three operands (i.e., 10=3+_) to five
operands (e.g., 5+3+9=5+_). Children could use pencil and
paper to solve each problem. After entering their answer on
the computer, children were asked to report their problemsolving strategy. Then they were shown the correct answer.

372

represents the independent and joint effects of achievement
motivation and tutoring condition on the dependent
variables (Barron & Harackiewicz, 2001). We also included
children’s age and conceptual and procedural knowledge
pretest scores to control for prior knowledge. Each predictor
was centered. Significant interactions were explored through
simple slopes analyses. Estimated means were plotted at one
SD above and below the mean, to represent the effect of low
versus high achievement motivation on the dependent
variable as a function of condition.
No significant main effects of performance or mastery
orientation emerged (Fs<1). Therefore, only the results for
Condition and Condition × Achievement Motivation
interactions will be reported. Children in the instruct-first
and solve-first conditions did not differ at pretest by their
procedural knowledge, conceptual knowledge, or
achievement motivation (Fs<1). Mastery and performance
orientation were not correlated: r(156) = .08, p=.151.

Learning Assessments
Problem-Solving Strategies, Children’s problem-solving
strategies in the tutoring session were categorized as
relational, operational, or other incorrect (kappa=.80).
Relational strategies evidenced a deliberate attempt to
equalize the values on each side of the equation or
conceptualize the values as equivalent (Rittle-Johnson et al.,
2011). Operational and other incorrect strategies both
evidenced an erroneous conceptualization of the equal sign.
However, operational strategies represented misconceptions
previously identified as developmentally less sophisticated
and fundamentally inadequate (i.e., add-all and add-toequals strategies; McNeil & Alibali, 2005).
Posttest and Retention Test We measured children’s
conceptual and procedural knowledge of mathematical
equivalence by adapting assessments from past research
(Rittle-Johnson et al., 2011). Conceptual knowledge items
assessed two key concepts: the symbolic meaning of the
equal sign and the structure of equations (8 items;
kappas=.89-.96). Procedural knowledge items consisted of
ten mathematical equivalence problems. Answers to
procedural knowledge items were scored as correct if they
came within one point of the correct answer, to reduce false
negatives. The retention test was identical to the posttest,
but also included eight far-transfer items that will not be
discussed further, due to space limitations. Because we were
most interested in long-term learning, and because the
results of the posttest mirrored those of the retention test, we
report only the results of the retention test.

Conceptual Knowledge
At retention test, a marginally significant main effect of
condition emerged (B=.05, SE=.03, p=.078). Learners in the
solve-first condition demonstrated higher conceptual
knowledge than learners in the instruct-first condition. This
effect of condition was qualified by a Mastery Orientation ×
Condition interaction (B=.08, SE=.04, p=.059). As depicted
in Figure 1, higher mastery orientation was associated with
higher conceptual knowledge acquisition in the solve-first
condition (B=.08, SE=.03, p=.009), indicating that higher
mastery orientation helped children learn from exploration.
Mastery orientation was unrelated to conceptual knowledge
in the instruct-first condition (B=0). There was no
Performance Orientation × Condition interaction (B=0),
indicating that performance orientation did not hurt
conceptual knowledge.

Achievement Motivation
Achievement motivation items were adapted from Elliot and
Church (1997). Two items assessed mastery orientation
(e.g., “I want to learn as much as possible about math, even
if I have to work hard”). Two items assessed performance
orientation (e.g., “In math class, it is important for me to do
well compared to others in my class”). Children responded
on a 6-point, Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (Strongly
Disagree) to 6 (Strongly Agree). Mastery-orientation and
performance-orientation scores were created by averaging
the two responses on each subscale (Elliot & Church, 1997).

Conceptual Knowledge

Procedural Knowledge

Results
We examined the relationship between mastery and
performance orientation and learning in the two tutoring
conditions. We also examined children’s problem-solving
strategies during tutoring. We used hierarchical linear
regression for all analyses. The predictors in the model were
mastery orientation score, performance orientation score,
condition (dummy-coded), and two interaction terms
(Condition × Mastery Orientation, Condition × Performance
Orientation). Preliminary analyses showed no significant
two-way interactions between mastery and performance
orientation, or three-way interaction with condition, so they
were not included in the final model. Thus, the final model

Figure 1. Conceptual and Procedural Knowledge

373

Relational Strategies

Procedural Knowledge

Operational Strategies

At retention test, the condition term was not significant (B
=.02; Figure 1). A Mastery Orientation × Condition
interaction emerged (B =.12, SE=.06, p=.036). Higher
mastery orientation was associated with a trend towards
higher procedural knowledge in the solve-first condition (B
=.07, SE=.04, p=.118), whereas it was associated with a
trend towards poorer procedural knowledge in the instructfirst condition (B =-.05, SE=.04, p=.159).
A significant Performance Orientation × Condition
interaction also emerged (B=-.11, SE=.05, p=.041; Figure
1). Higher performance orientation was associated with
lower procedural knowledge in the solve-first condition
(B=-.09, SE=.04, p=.035) but was unrelated to procedural
knowledge in the instruct-first condition (B=.02). Higher
performance orientation reduced gains in procedural
knowledge from exploration.

Performance during Tutoring Intervention
To provide further insight into how the knowledge
acquisition observed at retention test may have emerged, we
examined the problem-solving strategies children used
during the tutoring session. Doing so indicates how children
responded to difficulties encountered during exploration.
There was a main effect of condition on use of both
relational strategies (B=-.12, p=.01) and operational
strategies (B=.09, p=.01). On average, children in the solvefirst condition used relational strategies less than children in
the instruct-first condition—reflecting the overall difficulty
of exploratory learning in the solve-first condition. This
effect was qualified by interactions with both mastery
orientation (B=.15, p<.01) and performance orientation (B=.16, p<.01). As shown in Figure 2, higher mastery
orientation was associated with increased use of relational
strategies in the solve-first condition (B=.11, p<.05). In
contrast, higher performance orientation was associated with
decreased use of relational strategies in this condition (B=.11, p<.05). Neither mastery nor performance orientation
were associated with relational strategy use in the instructfirst condition (B=-.03 and B=.04). In fact, children in the
solve-first condition with higher mastery orientation appear
to have matched their instruct-first counterparts in use of
relational strategies.
Operational strategy use was consistent with these
findings. As shown in Figure 2, children in the solve-first
condition used operational strategies more than children in
the instruct-first condition. No interaction with mastery
orientation was found (B=-.04). However, performance
orientation interacted with condition (B=.10, p<.05). In the
solve-first condition, higher performance orientation was
associated with increased use of operational strategies
(B=.09, p<.01). This finding suggests that the difficulty of
exploratory learning leads children higher in performanceorientation to adopt developmentally immature strategies.
No relationship with performance orientation was found in
the instruct-first condition (B=-.02).

Figure 2. Strategy Use during Tutoring Session

Discussion
As predicted, children higher in mastery orientation
learned a new mathematics concept better when a problemsolving session was used as an exploratory activity, rather
than practice. That is, higher mastery orientation was
associated with improved conceptual knowledge acquisition
(and somewhat improved procedural knowledge) in a solvefirst condition where problem-solving preceded formal
instruction. Higher performance orientation, in contrast, did
not facilitate learning from exploration: These children
performed at normal levels on conceptual knowledge
acquisition and did worse than normal on procedural
knowledge acquisition (i.e., problem-solving success).
These differences in learning from exploration could be
attributed to the challenge inherent in such activities.
Children in the solve-first condition were less likely to use
relational problem-solving strategies, which indicate a
sophisticated understanding of mathematical equivalence.
They relied more on operational strategies, erroneously
treating the equal sign as a procedural cue (e.g., to add only
the numbers to the left of the equal sign).
However, this overall effect of condition was moderated
by achievement motivation. Children higher in mastery
orientation tended to use relational strategies during
exploration, not operational strategies. Moreover, children
higher in performance orientation—who desire to prove
their ability and, therefore, avoid challenge—tended to
revert to developmentally simpler operational strategies.
This finding is consistent with findings in the achievement
motivation literature (cf. Diener & Dweck, 1978), and may
help explain why exploration was only useful to some
children. The challenge and confusion associated with
exploratory learning may lead some children to explore

374

better strategies during learning, but lead others to
perseverate on poorer strategies, which impede learning.
Recent discussions on exploratory learning versus direct
instruction have concluded that there may be benefits of
combining aspects of both approaches (cf. Alfieri et al.,
2011). The current findings demonstrate that using
exploratory problem-solving activities prior to instruction
can be beneficial—but namely for children who have a
mastery-oriented approach to learning mathematics.
Hence, the current findings highlight the importance of
considering motivational influences on learning and strategy
selection. Teachers may want to emphasize mastery and
promote a forgiving learning environment to help nonmastery oriented students cope better with the inherent
challenge posed by exploration. Future research is needed to
see if the deleterious effects of performance orientation on
strategy selection can be mitigated with mastery framing.

Elliot, A. J., & Church, M. A. (1996). A hierarchical model
of approach and avoidance achievement motivation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 461475.
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2×2 achievement
goal framework. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 80, 501-519.
Grant, H., & Dweck, C. S. (2003). Clarifying achievement
goals and their impact. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 541-553.
Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept
of variance. Instructional Science, 40, 651-672.
Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why
minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An
analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery,
problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching.
Educational Psychologist, 41, 75-86.
Licht, B. G., & Dweck, C. S. (1984). Determinants of
academic achievement: The interaction of children’s
achievement orientations with skill area. Developmental
Psychology, 20, 628-636.
Matthews, P., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2009). In pursuit of
knowledge: Comparing self-explanations, concepts, and
procedures as pedagogical tools. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 104, 1-21.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2005). Why won't you
change your mind? Knowledge of operational patterns
hinders learning and performance on equations. Child
Development, 76, 883-899.
Rittle-Johnson, B. (2006). Promoting transfer: Effects of
self-explanation
and
direct
instruction.
Child
Development, 77, 1-15.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M. W. (1999). Conceptual
and procedural knowledge of mathematics: Does one lead
to the other? Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 175189.
Rittle-Johnson, B., Taylor, R., Matthews, P. G., &
McEldoon, K. (2011). Assessing knowledge of
mathematical
equivalence: A
construct
modeling
approach. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103, 85104.
Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, (1998). A time for telling.
Cognition and Instruction, 16, 475-522.
Schwartz, D. L., Lindgren, R., & Lewis, S. (2009).
Constructivist in an age of non-constructivist assessments.
In S. Tobias & T. M. Duffy (Eds.), Constructivist
Instruction: Success or Failure. New York, NY:
Routledge.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare
for future learning: The hidden efficacy of encouraging
original student production in statistics instruction.
Cognition and Instruction, 22, 129-184.
Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., Oppezzo, M. A., & Chin, D.
B. (2011). Practicing versus inventing with contrasting
cases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 103, 759-775.

Acknowledgments
Research supported by NSF grant DRL-0746565 to B.
Rittle-Johnson and IES, U.S. Department of Education,
training grant R305B080008 to Vanderbilt University.
Portions of these findings were presented at the 2011
Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness meeting.

References
Alfieri, L., Brooks, P. J., Aldrich, N. J., & Tenenbaum, H.
R. (2011). Does discovery-based instruction enhance
learning? Journal of Educational Psychology, 103, 1-18.
Barron, K. E., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2001). Achievement
goals and optimal motivation: Testing multiple goal
models. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
80, 706-722.
Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalfe & A. Shimamura (Eds.). Metacognition:
Knowing about knowing. Cambrige, MA: MIT Press.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gewon, H., Goodman, N. D.,
Spelke, E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword
of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration
and discovery. Cognition, 120, 322-330.
DeCaro, M. S., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2012). Exploring
mathematics problems prepares children to learn from
instruction. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
113, 552-568.
Dewey, J. (1910). How we think. Boston: Heath.
Diener, C. I., & Dweck, C. S. (1978). An analysis of learned
helplessness: Continuous changes in performance,
strategy, and achievement cognitions following failure.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 451462.
Dweck, C. S., (1986). Motivational processes affecting
learning. American Psychologist, 41, 1040-1048.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive
approach to motivation and personality. Psychological
Review, 95, 256-273.

375

