UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An eyetracking study of children's relational thinking: The role of labels and sustained
attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ft830fm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Carvalho, Paulo
Vales, Catarina
Fausey, Caitlin
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An eyetracking study of children's relational thinking:
The role of labels and sustained attention
Paulo F. Carvalho, Catarina Vales, Caitlin M. Fausey & Linda B. Smith
({pcarvalh, cvales, cfausey, smith4} @indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University,
1101 E. Tenth St., Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
Relational match-to-sample is a difficult task for young
children. However, it has been shown that either presenting
two examples of the relation or adding a label to a single
presentation can improve children’s performance. The role of
labels has been seen as increasing the likelihood of comparing
the instances available. In this paper, we present sustained
attention as an alternative to this view. Children completed a
relational match-to-sample task in different conditions while
an eyetracker registered their eye movements. When only one
instance was available, children benefited from the addition of
a label. This benefit was associated with an overall decrease
in switching behavior, indicating greater sustained attention.
Moreover, in the absence of a label, children who showed
greater sustained attention were able to achieve good
performance by the end of the task.
Keywords: relational matching; comparison; sustained
attention; labels; language and cognition; eyetracking.

Introduction
Relational thinking is a fundamental activity of human
cognition and everyday experience and might be uniquely
human (Gentner, 2003). For example, knowing why both
"left shoe goes with right shoe" and "left glove goes with
right glove" entail a sameness relation transcends the
properties of individual shoes and gloves. This kind of
thinking involves going beyond superficial properties of
stimuli and noticing the underlying commonalities and
differences (Gentner, Rattermann, Markman, & Kotovsky,
1995). Relational thinking, however, is a developmental
feat: early in life, children appear to categorize based
primarily on perceptual features, and only begin to attend to
the relational properties of the objects after four years of age
(Gentner & Namy, 1999; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005).
One typical task used to study relational thinking in
children is the relational match-to-sample task (see Figure 1
for an example). In this kind of task, children are presented
with an object that instantiates a relational property (the
sample) and are then presented with two choices where only
one matches the relational property instantiated by the
sample. The youngest children in this task do not reliably
pick the object that matches the relation depicted in the
sample. The research reported here concerns two task
manipulations that have been shown to increase relational
matching in young children.

How to promote relational thinking:
Compare instances
Multiple instances If given the right amount of support,
children can succeed at the initially difficult task of
relational match-to-sample. One way this can be achieved is
by presenting multiple examples in the same trial
(comparison). For instance, Christie and Gentner (2010)
showed 3- and 4-year old children cards depicting the
relation of sameness. Children saw either only one card
(solo condition), or two cards simultaneously (comparison
condition) or two cards sequentially (sequential condition).
Only children who saw two sample cards simultaneously
reliably picked the relational match between two choice
cards. Multiple instances have been proposed to benefit
relational reasoning by encouraging comparison of the
instances.
The benefits of multiple instances have been shown many
times in children in a variety of tasks (Gentner & Namy,
1999; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001; Namy & Gentner,
2002; Oakes & Ribar, 2005; Pruden, Hirsh-Pasek,
Shallcross, Golinkoff, 2008; Wang & Baillargeon, 2008)
and also in adults (Gentner, Loewenstein, & Thompson,
2003; Gick & Holyoak, 1983). In the context of relational
matching, “comparison” has two meanings: (1) the name of
the task manipulation of the simultaneous presentation of
another object that, although perceptually different,
instantiates the same relation and (2) the presumed
psychological mechanism that leads to better performance,
that is, joint (or temporally close) inspection of the instances
which fosters the discovery of deep relational similarities.
Label a single instance Another way to improve children's
performance in the relational match-to-sample task is by
labeling an original instance.
For example, Christie and Gentner (2007) presented 4and 8-year old children as well as adults with only one
sample instantiating the relation of ‘sameness’ and then
asked participants to pick which of two options matched the
sample. When the sample was not labeled, only the adults
reliably picked another card instantiating sameness in this
condition. However, when a label was added during the
presentation of the original sample (e.g., “Look, this is a
truffet!”), children reliably picked the relational match and
even adults’ performance improved. It has been proposed
that labeling benefits performance through comparison, this
is, that a label prompts people to compare the original

1988

sample to each choice, and through this comparison they
discover relations (Christie & Gentner, 2007; Gentner &
Namy, 1999; Namy & Gentner, 2002).
In sum, presenting multiple instances, or labeling an
instance, is hypothesized to invite comparison at some point
during the relational match-to-sample task and this
comparison supports successful relational matching.

A role for sustained attention?
The fact that two rather different manipulations – adding
another instance and labeling one single instance – help
children to discover matching relations should provide
insight into a more precise specification of the processes
(i.e., of comparison) that limit children’s relational
comparisons. Our working hypothesis is that each of these
manipulations change how children visually inspect
instances, perhaps when initially presented or during the
difficult step of figuring out what choice to make. One
possibility is that when multiple instances are available,
children may establish links between the two samples by
looking back and forth between them. They may also switch
between these samples and the choice options, as they try to
make their decision, which may also link the instances and
choices and thus reveal the common relations (see Vurpillot,
1968). The process of switching among instances could be
the critical behavior that highlights relational similarities
between the objects and foster relational choices.
But why would a label encourage switching? The addition
of a label to a single sample has been interpreted as inviting
just this comparison process and more back-and-forth
examination of the sample and choices, resulting in more
links between the sample and the options and thus the
discovery of the underlying common relation (Christie &
Gentner, 2007; Gentner & Namy, 1999; Namy & Gentner,
2002). By fostering this sort of sampling, relational
similarities can be discovered and children can successfully
choose the relational match. Note that this hypothesized
mechanism requires two steps: using a label leads to
comparison, which then highlights relational features. The
power of labels works only through comparison.
However this is not the only way that labels might work
to promote relational matching. Using labels has been
shown to improve performance across a great number of
tasks other than making relational matches in both adults
and children (Lupyan, Rakison, & McClelland, 2007;
Waxman & Leddon, 2011; Vales & Smith, 2012). One
leading possibility on why labels help is that labeling an
object increases sustained attention (see Baldwin &
Markman, 1989; McDuffie, Yoder & Stone, 2006).
Sustained attention is generally good for learning in young
children (Smith & Yu, 2013; Yu & Smith, 2012) and so
may be critical to success in challenging tasks. That is,
whenever children face challenges, if they can sustain
attention to the relevant stimulus information they may be
able to move beyond superficial or salient properties to the
underlying structure. The power of labels could come, not

from comparisons in the sense of back-and-forth looking,
but from more sustained looking to individual stimuli.
A third issue important to understanding how comparison
works concerns how performance changes across trials in
the task. The two presented hypotheses concern what
happens in a single trial.
But relational-matching
experiments present children with a series of trials that
present, successively, instances of the same relation. By
definition, successive presentation does not involve direct
comparison, but if children remember what they have seen
in previous trials, then comparison to items in memory
becomes a factor that may affect either back-and-forth
comparison or sustained attention. Critically, past research
has shown that there can be accrued effects across trials that
influence children’s relational matching (Gentner,
Loewenstein, & Hung, 2007; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996).
The main goal of the current experiment was to test the
competing hypotheses about the power of labels to promote
relational matching: Either they increase (switch) or
decrease (sustain) the rate that children visually sample
available information.
If labels work through sustained attention, then we might
also see improved performance when sustained attention is
present in other ways. In order to detect this, the experiment
includes both Multiple and Single instance conditions. The
Single No Label instance condition is critical to our analysis
as to the best of our knowledge, no research has reported
that young children can successfully match relations when
they see only one unlabeled instance on each trial. However,
labeling this single instance has been shown to dramatically
improve performance.
In the case of unlabeled single instances, children might
need to accumulate enough evidence to allow them to
understand the relation being instantiated across trials. They
might only do so if they show sustained attention. Do
children who show sustained attention over several trials
reach the same level of success as children who got a single
labeled sample?
To answer these questions, we designed a novel
eyetracking relational match-to-sample task. To examine
how labels and sustained attention matter for relational
matching over time, we analyzed children's performance
across eight trials. To capture how children sample visual
information in different conditions, we used eye-tracking
technology. We included a full set of four conditions:
multiple or single sample, with or without label. As in
previous studies, conditions with multiple exemplars (both
labeled and unlabeled) should support relational matching.
We included these conditions to show that our novel
paradigm replicates well-known effects.
By considering learning over time as well as finer-grained
measures of visual sampling, this study offers novel insight
into the role of labels in children's relational thinking.

1989

An Experiment
Method
Participants Fifty-eight children (M = 54 months, range =
42-68 months) were randomly assigned to one of four
conditions: Multiple presentation without label, Multiple
presentation with label, Single presentation without label,
Single presentation with label. Twenty additional children
were recruited but not included in the final sample due to
inappropriate calibration, missing video data, refusal to
complete the task or eye tracking data missing for more than
half of the total number of samples. Children had no known
developmental disorders and were reported to have normal
(or corrected to normal) visual acuity. Parental consent was
obtained for all participants in compliance with the IRB of
Indiana University.
Apparatus and procedure Children were seated
approximately 211cm from a 55’’ LED screen. A freestanding Tobii X120 eye tracker (Tobii Technology BA,
Stockholm, Sweden) was used to capture children’s eye
movements at 60 Hz sampling rate. E-Prime software (PST,
Pittsburg, PA) was used to control stimuli presentation and
to record eye gaze data. Before starting the main
experiment, children completed a 9-point eyetracking
calibration that was followed by a familiarization to the
structure of the task. The main experiment included 8 trials,
and each trial consisted of an Exposure phase followed by a
Choice phase (see Figure 1). During the Exposure phase,
children saw either one exemplar of a same-relation (Single
Conditions) or two different exemplars of a same-relation
(Multiple Conditions) on the top half of the screen. A prerecorded voice oriented children to the exemplar(s). In the
Single No Label condition this prompt was “See this one?”
or “This is one”. In the Multiple No Label condition we
added to the prompts of the Single condition the following
prompts: “See this one too? See how they are the same kind
of thing?” or “This is one too. They are both the same kind
of thing!”.
In the Label conditions, on each trial the pre-recorded
voice said the name of the Target during the Exposure (e.g.
“See this dax?” / “See this dax too? See how they are both
daxes?” and “This is a dax” / “This is a dax too. They are
both daxes!”). A different label was used on each trial (dax,
ryke, fode, pabe, zup, kiv, mell or cheem), with target-word
assignment randomized across participants.
After the original instance(s) were presented, two new
exemplars appeared on the bottom half of the screen for the
Choice phase: one same-relation (Target) and one different
relation (Foil). Children were asked to point to the choice
that was “the same kind of thing” (no label conditions) or
“another {dax}” (label conditions). Across trials, the Target
appeared equally often on the left and right side of the
screen. There was no time limit for children’s response. The
prompts used throughout the experiment were recorded by a
female native English speaker at a sample rate of 44.1 KHz.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the structure of a trial
in the multiple and single conditions without label. In the
label conditions prompts had a unique label for each trial.
The top row represents the Exposure Phase and the bottom
row the Choice Phase. Example prompts are presented in
the picture for illustration purposes only and were not
presented to children.

Results
Accuracy Did children successfully find the relational
match? In the first four trials, the pattern of responses is
consistent with prior findings (see Figure 2). Specifically,
children performed above chance when given multiple
instances (No Label: M = .65, t (14) = 3.16, p = .007; Label:
M = .62, t (15) = 1.94, p = .07) and also when a single
instance was labeled (M = .63, t (15) = 2.18, p = .04).
Children who got a single unlabeled instance did not
reliably choose the relational match (M = .51, p > .05). Thus
as in previous research, both multiple samples and labels
support relational matching.
We then analyzed performance during the last four trials
of the task to examine if children are able to establish
relational matching over several trials. In the second half of
the task, only one group of children performed above
chance. Children who got single unlabeled instances
throughout the task learned over the course of the task and
successfully found relations (M = .63, t (14) = 3.16, p =
.007). Thus, performance did not get better over trials but
declined in the multiple samples conditions and improved in
the condition usually associated with the poorest relational
matching in young children. On the last of the experiment,
the single unlabeled condition yielded the highest
performance.

1990

Figure 2: Proportion of relational choices for each condition
across the task. The dotted line represents chance
performance in the task.
Sampling of information How did children sample the
visual information that was available to them when making
a relational match-to-sample decision? One of the
hypotheses for the benefit of labeling in the Single condition
is that labels encourage children to compare the sample with
each of the choices. An alternative hypothesis is that labels
increase sustained attention to each instance. Critically,
these two hypotheses make opposite predictions about the
number of switches between the sample and choice options:
the label either increases switching (more comparing) or the
label decreases switching (more sustained attention).

Accordingly, we analyzed how often children switched
back to the original sample(s) while they made a decision in
each condition (Multiple or Single) in the presence and
absence of labels. The results are clear: Children switched
less when instance(s) were labeled (see Figure 3).
Adding a label reduced considerably the number of
switches for both presentation conditions. An ANOVA
looking at the mean number of switches with label condition
(Label vs. No Label) and condition (Multiple vs. Single) as
between-subject factors revealed a main effect of label, F
(1,54) = 4.74, p = .03, and no main effect of condition, F
(1,54) = 1.86, p = .18 or interaction between the two, F
(1,54) = 1.31, p = .26.
These results are consistent with the sustained attention
hypothesis: Less switching would be associated with greater
sustained attention on each object. Could sustained attention
also be critical for learning over time, as children in the
unlabeled Single condition did?
To answer this question we divided children in the Single
No Label condition into two groups based on how much
children switched from the options back to the sample
during the first half of the task. Children who switched back
more than the median for the sample were considered “High
Switchers” while the remainder was considered “Low
Switchers”. If the benefit of time in the Single No Label
condition were associated with sustained attention during
the initial part of the task, Low Switchers would show better
performance in the second half compared to High Switchers.
Indeed, children who showed sustained attention during the
initial learning trials were the children who learned over the
task (see Figure 4).

Figure 4: Proportion of relational choices for the Single No
Label conditions across the task as a function of the amount
of switching back to the original instances while making the
choice. The dotted line represents chance performance in the
task.
Figure 3: Median number of switches back to the original
instances during the choice phase for each condition.

Although less switching in this condition during the initial
part of the task does not result in better performance during

1991

that part of the task it does seem to be associated with
improved relational matching performance by the second
half of the task. Indeed, only performance of Low Switchers
on the second half of the task was significantly above
chance levels, M = .68, t (7) = 3, p = .02. Moreover, this
group’s improvement from performance in the first half (M
= .57) to the second half is also significant, t (7) = 2.78, p =
.03.

Discussion
Can sustained attention play a role in relational thinking? In
answering this question, we need to take into consideration
how children sample the information presented and what are
the dynamics between sampling and sustained attention.
In the present work we aimed to investigate this question
in the context of children’s relational thinking – an
important cognitive tool in human development. We asked
children to match one of two options to a sample relation by
visually inspecting the objects. The inclusion of labels,
which have been shown to enhance relational matching, did
so in the present study on early trials (but not later ones) and
also led to more sustained looking and less switching.
Performance in the one-instance condition was
particularly informative. This condition has been shown to
be particularly challenging to children. Furthermore, to
measure children’s sampling and attentional behavior we
used eyetracking technology. This method allowed us to
gain initial knowledge on the dynamics of single
presentation of evidence, labeling and relational matching.
The evidence from the present work shows that relational
match-to-sample performance is related to accumulation of
evidence, effective sampling of information and sustained
attention.
Behaviorally, the results presented here replicate previous
evidence that single presentation of an instance of the
relation does not provide enough support for children’s
relational thinking without the addition of a label. However,
if we analyze the progress of children’s performance across
the task, we see that even in the absence of a label, children
in the single condition can achieve above chance
performance.
Accumulation of evidence Children who are presented
with multiple initial instances of the target relation are more
likely to choose the relational match from the beginning.
Conversely, children who are only presented with one
instance of the target relation in each trial require more trials
to achieve this level of performance. Thus, learning the
relational structure of objects requires children to relate
several instances of the target relation. This can be more
easily done when two instances are presented in each trial
(Multiple condition).
Our results show that children in the Single No Label
condition were able to achieve above change relational
match behavior by the end of the task. However, only
children who switched less from the choices back to the
sample were able to achieve higher levels of performance by
the second half of the task. This indicates a role for both

accumulation of evidence and sustained attention on
performance in a relational match-to-sample task.
Focal attention and effective sampling Overall, adding a
label to the presentation of the original instances decreases
the mean number of times children check back to the
original instances. This result is in line with previous
evidence that labels increase sustained attention to objects
(Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Baldwin & Markman, 1989;
Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007, McDuffie, Yoder & Stone,
2006). This increased attention to each object is essential for
a better identification of the target relation, particularly
when the support from multiple samples is not readily
available (the Single conditions).
In sum, the present work demonstrates the important role
of sustained attention in learning how to make a relational
choice when only one sample is presented. When a label is
present in this condition it will increase sustained attention
and result in better, faster, learning. In the absence of
learning, sustained attention is important in the
accumulation of evidence across several individual trials.
The importance of sustained attention is evidently
dependent on some switching between the objects to
establish relevant links among them. However, it does show
an alternative to the hypothesis that comparison involves
greater amounts of switching between samples and that
labeling improves performance by promoting comparison.
At present, the specific mechanisms that underlie the
usual positive effects of simultaneously presented multiple
instances, labeling, and accrued effects of repeated trials
have all been explained under the rubric of “comparison”.
The present approach – seeking micro-level behavioral
evidence of direct comparison – suggests that all these
phenomena are not the same. By pulling these factors that
benefit children’s relational matching apart, we may get a
better handle on the processes that limit relational matching
and on just what “comparison” is.
Accordingly, we believe the biggest contributions of the
work presented here is the use of a new analysis paradigm to
the investigation of comparison benefits to learning across
development and the introduction of sustained attention as
an important player in relational thinking.

Acknowledgements
The work presented here was supported by National
Institute of Health National Research Service Award
HD007475-17. CV was supported by a Graduate Fellowship
from the Portuguese Foundation for Science and
Technology. PFC was supported by a Fulbright Research
Fellowship and by a Graduate Fellowship from the
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology. We
would also like to thank Char Wozniak for help recording
audio stimuli, the Cognitive Development Lab members for
discussion and Charlene Tay, Ipek Gencer, Anna
Mackinnon, Alyssa Ruffier, Madison Singell, Tracy Kelsey
and Blakeley Meyer for help with stimuli creation,
recruitment, data collection and coding.

1992

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64(1), 3–26.
Baldwin, D. a, & Markman, E. M. (1989). Establishing
word-object relations: a first step. Child development,
60(2), 381–98.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where Hypotheses
Come From: Learning New Relations by Structural
Alignment. Journal of Cognition and Development,
11(3), 356–373.
Christie, S., Gentner, D.. (2007). Relational similarity in
identity relation: The role of language. In . S. Vosniadou
& D. Kayser (Eds), Proceedings of the Second European
Cognitive Science Conference, Routledge.
Fulkerson, A. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2007). Words (but not
Tones) facilitate object categorization: Evidence from 6and 12-month-olds. Cognition, 105(1), 218–228
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press
Gentner, D. & Namy, L.L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007).
Comparison facilitates children's learning of names for
parts. Journal of Cognition and Development,8(3), 285307.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2),
393.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M.J., Markman, A.B., &
Kotovsky, L. (1995). Two forces in the development of
relational similarity. In T.J. Simon & G.S. Halford
(Eds.), Developing cognitive competence: New
approaches to process modeling. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15(1), 138.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational
similarity. Child Development, 67, 2797–2822.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-353.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D.H., & McClelland, J.L. (2007).
Language is not just for talking: labels facilitate learning
of novel categories. Psychological Science 18(12): 10771083.
McDuffie, A. S., Yoder, P. J., & Stone, W. L. (2006).
Labels increase attention to novel objects in children
with autism and comprehension-matched children with
typical development. Autism, 10(3), 288-301.
Namy, L. L., & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a silk purse out
of two sow’s ears: Young children's use of comparison

in category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 131(1), 5–15.
Oakes, L. M., & Ribar, R. J. (2005). A comparison of
infants' categorization in paired and successive
presentation familiarization tasks. Infancy, 7(1), 85-98.
Pruden, S., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Shallcross, W. L., & Golinkoff,
R. M. (2008). Foundations of verb learning: Comparison
helps infants abstract event components. In H. Chan, H.
Jacob, & E. Kapia (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32st
Annual Boston University Conference on Language
Development (Vol. 2, pp. 402-414).
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2013). Visual Attention Is Not
Enough: Individual Differences in Statistical WordReferent Learning in Infants. Language Learning and
Development, 9 (1), 25-49.
Wang, S. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2008). Can infants be
“taught” to attend to a new physical variable in an event
category? The case of height in covering
events. Cognitive Psychology, 56(4), 284-326.
Waxman, S. & Leddon, E. (2011). Early word learning and
conceptual development: Everything had a name, and
each name gave birth to a new thought. In U. Goswami
(Ed.) The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook of Childhood
Cognitive Development. Malden, MA:Wiley-Blackwell.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied attention and
word learning by toddlers. Cognition, 125 (2), 244–262.
Vales, C. & Smith, L.B. Words cue children’s attention in a
visual search task (2012). Poster presented at the 2012
VSS Annual Meeting, Naples, FL, USA.
Vurpillot, E. (1968). The development of scanning
strategies and their relation to visual differentiation.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 6(4), 632650.

1993

