UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Information Foraging Model of Interactive Analogical Retrieval

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6k06n6mn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vattam, Swaroop
Goel, Ashok

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Information Foraging Model of Interactive Analogical Retrieval
Swaroop S. Vattam & Ashok K. Goel
Design & Intelligence Laboratory, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
Abstract
An essential first step in analogy is retrieval of a source
analogue appropriate for the target situation. In this paper, we
focus on the phenomenon of interactive analogical retrieval
(IAR) wherein the source analogues are obtained through
interaction with online information environments. We first
provide a descriptive account of IAR based on two in situ
studies. We then describe an information-processing model
(called PRISM) that provides an explanatory account of IAR.
We conclude with a discussion of some of the theoretical and
technological implications of this work.
Keywords: analogy, analogical retrieval, biologically
inspired design, design cognition, information foraging.

Introduction
Analogy appears to be ubiquitous in human cognition and
thus has received much attention in cognitive science (e.g.,
Burstein 1986; Carbonell 1986; Clement 2008; Gentner
1983; Davies, Goel & Nersessian 2009; Dunbar 2001;
Gentner & Markman 1997; Hofstadter 1995; Holyoak &
Thagard 1989; Indurkhya 1992; Keane 1988; Kokinov &
Petrov 2001; Kunda, McGreggor & Goel 2013; Nersessian
2008). An essential first step in analogical reasoning is the
retrieval of a source analogue appropriate to the target
situation. Here we focus on situated analogy wherein source
analogues are obtained through interactions with an external
environment rather than being recalled from internal longterm memory. In particular, we focus on the phenomenon of
interactive analogical retrieval (IAR) wherein source
analogues are accessed from Web-based online information
environments.
In this paper, we first present a descriptive account of
IAR based on two in situ studies of cross-domain analogies
in biologically inspired design. Then, we develop an
information-processing model that provides a partial
explanation of IAR in terms of its underlying cognitive
processes. Our model builds on Pirolli’s (2007) information
foraging theory of human online information-seeking
behavior and Thagard et al.’s (1990) model of analogical
retrieval by constraint satisfaction.
Interactive Analogical Retrieval (IAR)
We investigate IAR in the domain of biologically inspired
design (Benyus, 1997; Vincent & Mann, 2002), the practice
of developing innovative technology using analogies to
biological systems. Some well-known examples of products
of biologically inspired design include Velcro (inspired by
the attachment mechanism of burr seeds), high-performance
wind turbines (inspired by the pectoral fins of humpback
whales), self-cleaning surface coatings (inspired by the

super-hydrophobic effect of lotus leaves), and fog
harvesting devices (inspired by the arrangement of
hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces on Namibian beetles).
From a cognitive standpoint, biologically inspired design
entails cross-domain analogies for solving a target design
challenge in, say, engineering, by transferring elements of a
source analogue from a different domain (biology). In
biologically inspired design, designers (often from
engineering) typically are novices in biology: they know of
only a small fraction of the vast space of biological systems
that comprise the source domain. Thus, in practice the
designers often try to access biological analogues from the
Web. We call this phenomenon interactive analogical
retrieval. (Due to limitations of space, our discussion of the
in situ studies below is very brief; Vattam (2012) provides
more details.)
Study Context and Methodology
We conducted two in situ studies of designers engaged in
biologically inspired design in Fall 2006 and Fall 2008
respectively. Both studies were conducted in the context of
an interdisciplinary, senior-level, project-based course on
biologically inspired design taught at Georgia Tech. The
most important element of the course for us was the
semester-long design projects. Each design project grouped
an interdisciplinary team of 4-6 engineers and biologists
based on similar interests. Yen et al. (2011) provide details
of the teaching and learning in this course.
As external observers in the Fall 2006 study and
participant observers in the Fall 2008 study, we attended
almost all the classroom sessions, collected all the course
materials, documented lecture content, and observed
teacher-designer and designer-designer interactions in the
classroom. We documented a total of ten biologically
inspired design projects in the two studies. We attended the
design meetings of selected teams many times to observe
firsthand how the design process unfolded. We took field
notes, collected all the design related documentation
produced by the teams, and also collected their idea
journals. We analyzed the gathered data focusing on the
processes and the products of the designers. In terms of the
practices, we observed and documented frequently
occurring problem-solving and representational activities of
designers. In terms of the design products, we observed and
documented their “design trajectory” – the evolution of the
conceptual designs over time.
Main Findings
We found that designers often searched online for biological
systems that are analogous to their target design problem. In

3651

fact, this was one of the dominant approaches for finding
biological analogues. Designers reported using a range of
Web-based information environments, including (1) online
libraries of scholarly articles such as the Web of Science,
Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, etc., (2) online
encyclopedias like Wikipedia, (3) popular life sciences blog
sites like Biology Blog, (4) biomimicry databases like
AskNature, and (5) general search engines like Google.
Online libraries like Web of Science and Google Scholar
were the most frequently used websites.
We noted that designers used several heuristics in order to
find relevant biology articles, including “biologizing” the
problem, problem reformulation, functional decomposition,
and using domain-bridging abstractions such as functions,
mechanisms, physical principles, etc.
We noted that online information environments on which
the designers relied upon did not adequately support the task
of finding useful biological analogues. In particular, the
designers reported that the online search for analogies was
not only time consuming, but often also work intensive,
tedious and frustrating.
Our analysis of the designers’ online search activity
identified three main challenges. The first challenge is
findability. The relative frequency of encountering relevant
articles containing biological analogues was very low.
Designers often went for long periods without finding a
single source analogue in a retrieval process that typically
extended over several weeks. A rough calculation suggests
that designers spent approximately three person-hours of
search time on the Web in order to find a relevant article.
The second challenge is recognizability. The designers
were prone to making errors in judgment about the true
utility of the information resources that they encountered. In
almost all online environments, search queries brought back
a ranked list of search results. An important aspect of the
search process was assessing and selecting promising
information resources from this list for further consumption.
However, this decision had to be made based on limited
information, (e.g., titles, keywords and abstracts of biology
articles). In many instances, designers picked up on lowutility articles and spent a lot of time and effort trying to
understand its contents, only to realize later that they were
not actually very useful (false positives). False positives
have both resource and opportunity costs. Conversely, there
were situations where designers dismissed a resource that
they encountered during the search as having low utility
even though it actually contained useful information about a
relevant biological analogue (false negatives). The false
negatives represent missed opportunities.
The third challenge is understandability. The designers
often found it challenging to understand the contents of the
biological cases described in the online information
resources and develop the knowledge required to transfer to
their target problems. This was in part due to the scholarly
nature of the biology articles that were encountered and
partly because the articles often did not explicitly describe
how a biological system worked from a design perspective.

PRISM: A Model of Interactive Analogical Retrieval
We now present an information-processing model of IAR.
Our goal here is to find explanations for the observed
challenges of online analogy seeking, both for (i)
understanding cognition in IAR and (ii) developing a
technology for supporting online search for cross-domain
analogies. Here we focus on the challenges of findability
and recognizability; Vattam (2012) addresses the challenge
of understandability of biological cases that requires a
different kind of explanation.
Our model builds on two existing theories: Analogical
Retrieval by Constraint Satisfaction (ARCS) (Thagard et. al.
1990), and Information Foraging Theory (IFT) (Pirolli
2007). IFT is itself a biologically inspired theory of online
information seeking behavior. According to IFT, the online
information seeking behavior of people is analogous to how
animals forage for food in their natural environments. IFT
posits that the human information seekers use information
scent to navigate from one information region to another in
an information environment that is inherently patchy in
nature, and from one information patch to another within a
region. IFT suggests that the information seekers adapt their
behavior to the structure of the information environment in
which they operate such that the system as a whole
(comprising of the information seeker, the information
environment, and the interactions between the two) tries to
maximize the ratio of the expected value of the knowledge
gained to the total cost of the interaction.
Although several models of analogical retrieval from
internal long-term memory informed our work (e.g., Forbus,
Gentner, & Law 1995; Kokinov & Petrov 1997; Kolodner
1993; Yaner & Goel 2006), we chose to build specifically
on ARCS because it provides a content account of the types
of similarity that best explains our observational data.
ARCS posits that in order to access sources (represented as
schemas in long-term memory) that are analogous to a target
(a schema in short-term memory), the access mechanism
should simultaneously consider satisfying three kinds of
constraints: semantic similarity (the overlap in terms of the
number of similar concepts between the target and potential
sources), structural similarity (the overlap in terms of the
higher-order relationships between the target and potential
sources), and pragmatic similarity (the overlap in terms of
the pragmatic constraints or goals surrounding the target and
potential sources). It is these three pressures acting
simultaneously that distinguish analogical retrieval from
other kinds of information retrieval.
Thus, on one hand, ARCS explains how source analogues
are retrieved from the long-term memory but is silent about
analogies situated in external information environments. On
the other, IFT explains how people seek information in
online information environments in general, but it does not
address the pressures of analogical retrieval. Our model
specializes IFT to online analogy seeking by introducing the
pressures of analogical retrieval from the ARCS model into
information foraging. Thus we call our model PRISM
(PRessurized Information Scent foraging Model).

3652

Figure 1. PRISM: An information-processing model of interactive analogical retrieval.
Similar to IFT, as Figure 1 illustrates, in PRISM the task
of retrieving a source analogue is accomplished by two
iterative processes that constitute the general information
seeking behavior: between-patch processes (on the left side
of the vertical dotted line) and within-patch processes (on
the right side). Furthermore, the structure of Web-based
information environments has evolved to exhibit certain
regularities in the distribution of information resources and
the navigation mechanisms that lead to those resources. For
instance, when an analogy seeker encounters patches in an
online environment, the seeker cannot perceive the contents
of those patches all at once. Instead, they are presented with
snippets of information, called proximal cues, which the
analogy seeker uses to perceive the information scent of the
distal information patches. The information scent leads to
judgments about the utility of distal information patches and
the information seeker can choose to either navigate towards
or away from those patches.
Between-patch foraging
Between-patch foraging explains the navigation process
where the analogy seeker browses the information
environment looking for high-utility information patches to
consume. In the context of IAR, high-utility information
patches correspond to information resources describing
sources cases that are analogous to the target. In this
process, numerous information patches (e.g., online articles,
etc.) compete for the information seeker’s attention. These
patches may or may not contain information relevant to the
goals of the information seeker. Thus, the analogy seeker

expends time and effort navigating from one patch to
another until one that can be exploited is found. This is
captured by the Formulate Query–Retrieve–Compute
Information Scent cycle depicted in Figure 1.
Between-patch foraging using information scent in IAR
works as follows. Given a target problem or situation:
1. The analogy seeker probes the environment by
formulating and issuing a query. This query is contextdependent and represents the target problem.
2. In response, the environment retrieves and conveys an
information region consisting of a set of information patches
{(P1,{c11,c12,…}),(P2,{c21, c22,…})…}, where Pi is an
information patch and cij’s are the proximal cues associated
with the patch Pi.
3. The analogy seeker perceives the information scent of the
patches based on the proximal cues; the information scent is
an estimation of the analogical relevance of different
patches to the target: {(P1, S1), (P2, S2)…}, where Pi is an
information patch and Si is the information scent that the
analogy seeker associates with the patch Pi.
4. If the information scent of an information patch exceeds a
certain threshold, it is considered relevant (high perceived
utility). In this case, the information seeker goes to that
patch (by acting on the environment like clicking the
associated hyperlink), at which point the environment
presents the information patch to the forager. This initiates
within-patch foraging.
5. If the scent does not exceed the threshold, it is considered
irrelevant (low perceived utility). In this case, one of two
things may happen as depicted in Figure 1: (i) the analogy

3653

seeker may stay within the same information region but
loop back to Step 3 for processing the next patch in the
region, or (ii) the analogy seeker may abandon the current
information region and loop back to Step 1 in order to look
for more fruitful regions.
Within-patch foraging
Once the analogy seeker picks up the scent of a potentially
useful information patch, the seeker goes to the patch and
starts consuming information in it. In the context of
biologically inspired design, this involves comprehending
the contents of an article and constructing a mental model of
the biological system described in the article. In the withinpatch foraging process, the analogy seeker is also
simultaneously evaluating the actual utility of the patch by
comparing/aligning/mapping the emerging mental model of
the biological system against the target problem. If the
evaluation is successful, the agent has obtained a source
analogue. If this evaluation fails, then the between-patch
foraging process is again initiated, either within the same
information region that led to the current patch or with a
search for new information regions as depicted in Figure 1.

source analogues. Following the between-patch foraging
process described above, the analogist encounters a set of
information patches with associated proximal cues. When
the analogy seeker encounters proximal cues in the
environment, she builds corresponding scent schemas as
indicated in Figure 2.
Given the target schema and competing scent schemas,
the analogy seeker computes the similarity between the
target and scent schemas in four stages similar to ARCS.
We illustrate this process with an example. Let us suppose
that the conceptual structures representing the dots in Figure
2 consist of predicates. Table 1 illustrates a target schema
(P1) consisting of two predicates (P1-1 and P1-2), and two
scent schemas (S1 and S2) consisting of two predicates each
(S1-1, S1-2, and S2-1 and S2-2, respectively). Let us also
suppose that A and M are semantically similar concepts, and
likewise concepts B and N are semantically similar. For
example:
A(a, b) is Regulate(kidney, potassium_ions);
M(m, n) is Control_Production(pituitary, estrogen);
B(b, a) is Is_Secreted_By(erythropoietin, kidney); and
N(n, m) is Is_Released_By(hypothalmic_hormone, pituitary)

Incorporating Pressures of Analogical Retrieval
There are two potential places in our model where the three
pressures of semantic, structural and pragmatic similarity
might apply: Retrieve and Compute information scent tasks
that are shaded in gray in Figure 1. The Retrieve process
may use some notion of similarity to access information
patches. But in our model, the Retrieve process is
implemented in the environment (e.g., the Google Scholar
search mechanism) and thus is black-boxed here. The
Compute information scent process computes the perceived
utility of an information patch as described below.

Let us further suppose that A(a, b) is more important than
the other predicates as dictated by the pragmatics of the
target situation.

Information Scent Perception in PRISM
While IFT explains the scent perception for non-analogy
information seeking tasks, it has to be adapted to account for
the semantic, structural and pragmatic pressures of
analogical retrieval. Hence, as part of PRISM, we developed
a different model of information scent perception.

Suppose that predicates A and M are semantically similar; B
and N are semantically similar; A(a,b) is more important
(dictated by the pragmatics of the context).

Figure 2. Scent perception in PRISM
Our model of scent perception assumes that the analogy
seeker has represented the target problem as a target schema
as depicted in Figure 2. With a target problem in mind, the
analogy seeker forages the information environment for

Table 1: Example Target and Scent schemas (adapted
from Thagard et al. (1990), pp. 275).
Scent-schema-1 1 Scent-schema 2
Target-schema
1
P1
S1
S2
P1-1: A(a, b)
S1-1: M(m, n)
S2-1: M(n, m)
P1-2: B(b, a)
S1-2: N(n, m)
S2-2: R(n, m)

Network Setup: In a manner similar to the original ARCS
model, PRISM uses information about the semantic
similarity of predicates in the target and scent schemas to
create a constraint network. Figure 3 depicts the network
corresponding to Table 1: units in the network represent the
predicates in the target and scent schemas, and the links
between units represent correspondences between the
predicates.
The most important units hypothesize that a scent schema
is analogous to the target schema. These units have names
of the form TARGET=SCENT. (“=” here means
“corresponds to,” not identity). If the target is P1 and the
scent is S1, then the P1=S1 unit represents a correspondence
between them. If P1-1 is a proposition in P1 that
corresponds to proposition S1-1 in scent S1, then the unit
P1-1=S1-1 will have an excitatory link with the unit P1=S1.
Excitatory links are also set up from a special semantic
unit to predicate-predicate units based on the degree of

3654

semantic similarity of the predicates (in Figure 3, there are
excitatory links from the semantic unit to (A=M) and (B=N)
because they are semantically similar according to our
assumption). Similarly, excitatory links are also set up from
a special pragmatic unit to predicate-predicate units that are
!
considered more important than others (in Figure 3, there
are excitatory links from pragmatic unit to (A=M) because
!
predicate A was assumed to be more important than others).
The activation level of the special semantic and pragmatic
units is always kept at the maximum value of 1. Thus, they
serve to pump activation to all units that are linked to it.
Inhibitory links are constructed between units
representing incompatible hypotheses, for example, between
P1=S1 and P1=S2. These make utility calculation
competitive, in that choosing one scent will tend to suppress
choosing of an alternative.

Figure 3. Constraint satisfaction network for computing
analogical similarity between target and scent schemas of
Table 1 (following Thagard et al. (1990), pp. 275).
Running the Network: The constraint network is run by
setting the activation of all units to a minimal initial
(random) level, except for the special semantic and
pragmatic units for which activation is clamped at 1. Then
the activation of each unit is updated by considering the
activations of those units to which it has links. Cycles of
activation adjustment continue until all units have reached
asymptotic activation. As in ARCS, the activation of unit j
on cycle t + 1 is given by:
a j (t +1) = a j (t)(1 " d) + enet j (max" a j (t)) + inet j (a j (t) " min)

!

Here d is a decay parameter, enetj is the net excitatory input,
and inetj is the net inhibitory input (a negative number),
with minimum activation min = -1 and maximum activation
max = 1. Inputs are determined by the equations:

enet j = " w ij oi (t) for w > 0; and
ij
i

inet j = " w ij oi (t) for w < 0.
ij
i

oi(t) is the output of unit i on cycle t: oi (t) = max(ai (t),0) .
Updating the constraint network continues until all units
have reached asymptote, that is, a cycle is reached at which
the activation change of each unit is less than a specified
! (e.g., 0.01). (See Thagard et
value, typically a low number
al. (1990) for more details about setting up the activation
network, running such a network, computational
complexity, etc.)
Scent of a Patch: When the network settles, the similarity
between a target schema, P, and a particular scent schema,
Si, is equal to the activation value of the unit P=Si in the
constraint network. Higher the activation accumulated by
the unit P=Si the more analogically similar is the scent
schema Si to the target. The scent of a particular patch, IPi,
which is associated with a set of proximal cues, {Cij}, is
equal to the similarity between the scent schema, Si,
obtained from {Cij}, and the target schema, P.
Explaining the Challenges of IAR using PRISM
The findability challenge is attributable to the current
keyword-based indexing and access mechanisms in which
the Retrieval process in Figure 1 supports access to
information based on literal similarity (word-for-word
matching) while ignoring semantic, structural and pragmatic
similarity. As a result, each attempt at access can contain a
large number of superficially similar cases as opposed to
cases that are truly analogous, which entails a lower average
information yield per region. This yield is inversely
proportional to the number of times the Formulate-RetrieveCompute Information Scent loop is executed in the PRISM
model depicted in Figure 1: a low yield implies more
executions of the cycle. Therefore, between-patch foraging
time is higher, the period between successive useful finds is
longer, and the frequency of encountering useful
information resources is lower.
The recognizability challenge is attributable to the nature
of proximal cues that the information seeker encounters in
common online environments – specifically, their lack of
affordance for accurately perceiving information scent.
Perceiving the scent of an information resource in the
context of analogical retrieval requires accurately judging
the deeper similarity between that target and the source case
as represented by their proximal cues. However, the design
of proximal cues typically contains small snippets of
information, which is insufficient to construct richer
schemas. This likely explains why the designers made many
recognition errors in our studies.
Conclusions
In this paper, we identified interactive analogical
retrieval (IAR) as an important phenomenon in the context
of biologically inspired design. We provided a descriptive

3655

account of the phenomenon based on our in situ studies of
designers engaged in online search for biological analogues
to their problems. Our descriptive account identified three
main challenges associated with IAR: findability,
recognizability, and understandability. Although our in situ
studies were conducted in the context of a classroom
environment, we posit that these cognitive challenges are
quite general: the same challenges are likely to occur in
actual practice of biologically inspired design because
although practicing designers are experts in their design
domain, they are likely to be novices in biology. We posit
further that IAR is a general phenomenon: IAR is not
limited to biologically inspired design, but occurs whenever
people are searching for cross-domain analogies in external
online information environments.
We also developed a causal model of IAR called PRISM
combining Pirolli’s (2007) information foraging theory
(IFT) and Thagard et al.’s (1990) ARCS model of
analogical retrieval. PRISM extends IFT to account for
analogy seeking; it expands ARCS into a model of
information scent perception. PRISM provides explanations
for the findability and recognizability challenges of IAR we
observed in our studies of biologically inspired design.
PRISM could help develop new technology for helping
designers find biological analogues more efficiently and
easily: the model predicts that the findability and
recognizability issues could be addressed, respectively, by
changing the indexing and access mechanism and enriching
the proximal cues in online environments. Biologue (Vattam
& Goel 2011) is an interactive tool for supporting
biologically inspired design based on the PRISM model.
In terms of cognitive theory, we view analogy as situated
in external information environments. If we take the
boundaries of the cognitive system as including online
information environments, as seems to be the case in
biologically inspired design, then the phenomenon of IAR
becomes an important element of understanding the
situatedness of analogical reasoning. By folding in
interactions with external information environments,
PRISM may provide a starting point to think about a general
theory of situated analogy.
Acknowledgments
We thank Michael Helms and Bryan Wiltgen for their
contributions to this work. We are grateful to the instructors and
students of the ME/ISyE/MSE/BME/BIOL 4740 class, especially
Professor Jeannette Yen, the prime coordinator of the course. We
thank the US National Science Foundation for its support through
the CreativeIT Grant (#0855916) Computational Tools for
Enhancing Creativity in Biologically Inspired Engineering Design.

References
Benyus, J. (1997) Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature.
William Morrow.
Burstein, M., (1986) Concept formation by incremental analogical
reasoning and debugging. In R. Michalski, J. Carbonell & T.
Mitchell (eds.), Machine Learning 2, Los Altos: Morgan
Kauffman, pp. 351-370.

Carbonell J. (1986) Derivational analogy: A theory of
reconstructive problem solving and expertise acquisition In
Michalski, Carbonell & Mitchell (eds.), Machine Learning 3,
Los Altos: Morgan Kauffman.
Clement, J. (2008). Creative Model Construction in Scientists and
Students: The Role of Imagery, Analogy, and Mental Simulation.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Davies, J., Goel, A., & Nersessian, N. (2009) A Computational
Model of Visual Analogies in Design. Journal of Cognitive
Systems Research 10:204-215.
Dunbar K. (2001) The Analogical Paradox. In Gentner, D,
Holyoak, K., & Kokinov, B. (Eds.) The Analogical Mind:
Perspectives from Cognitive Science. MIT Press. Boston.
Forbus, K., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC: A model
of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science, 19(2), 141-205.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: a theoretical framework
for analogy. Cognitive Science, 23, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. (1997). Structure Mapping in
Analogy and Similarity. American Psychologist, 52:45-56.
Hofstadter, D.H. (1995). Fluid concepts and creative analogies.
New York: Basic Books.
Holyoak, K., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13(3), 295-355.
Indurkhya, B. (1992) On the Role of Interpretive Analogy in
Learning. New Generation Computing, 8(4): 385-402.
Keane M. (1988) Analogical Problem Solving. Ellis Horwood.
Chichester
Kokinov, B., & Petrov, A. (2001) Integration of Memory and
Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model. In Gentner,
D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B. (editors) The Analogical Mind:
Perspectives from Cognitive Science, MIT Press.
Kolodner, J. (1993). Case-based reasoning. San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Kunda, M., McGreggor, K., & Goel, A. K. (2013). A
computational model for solving problems from the Raven’s
Progressive Matrices intelligence test using iconic visual
representations. Cognitive Systems Research, 22-23, 47-66.
Nersessian, N. (2008) Creating Scientific Concepts. MIT Press
Cambridge.
Pirolli, P. (2007) Information foraging theory: Adaptive
interaction with information. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thagard, P., Holyoak, K. J., Nelson, G., & Gochfeld, D. (1990).
Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction. Artificial Intelligence,
46, 259-310.
Vattam, S. (2012) Interactive Analogical Retrieval: Practice,
Theory and Technology, Ph.D. Dissertation, Georgia Institute of
Technology, December 2012.
Vattam, S., & Goel, A. (2011) Semantic tagging of research
articles for interdisciplinary design. In Proc. 6th International
Conference on Knowledge Capture . Banff, Canada.
Vincent, J. & Man, D. (2002) Systematic Technology Transfer
from Biology to Engineering. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 360(1791): 159-173.
Yaner, P., & Goel, A. (2006) Visual Analogy: Viewing Retrieval
and Mapping as Constraint Satisfaction. Journal of Applied
Intelligence, 25(1):91-105.
Yen, J., Weissburg, M., Helms, M., & Goel, A. (2011)
Biologically inspired design: a tool for interdisciplinary
education. In Biomimetics: Nature-Based Innovation, Y. BarCohen (editor), Taylor & Francis.

3656

