UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Reasoning with Rational Numbers: Semantic Alignment Based on Discrete Versus
Continuous Quantities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qs473hh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
DeWolf, Melissa
Bassok, Miriam
Holyoak, Keith

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Reasoning with Rational Numbers: Semantic Alignment
Based on Discrete Versus Continuous Quantities
Melissa DeWolf (mdewolf@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Miriam Bassok (mbassok@u.washington.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Abstract

without having grasped how fractions relate to decimals, or
how either number type relates to integers. This conceptual
disconnection in turn contributes to a compartmentalization
of mathematical operations (e.g., multiplication of fractions
is treated as unrelated to multiplication of integers; Siegler
et al., 2011; Siegler & Pyke, 2012).
Although mathematical relations are typically construed
as internal to the formal system of mathematics, the
application of mathematics to real-world problems also
depends on grasping relations between mathematical
concepts and the basic ontological distinctions among the
concepts to which mathematics must be applied. Rather than
treating mathematical concepts as purely formal, both
children and adults are naturally guided by a process of
semantic alignment, which favors mapping certain
mathematical concepts (and their associated operations)
onto certain conceptual types. Bassok, Chase and Martin
(1998) demonstrated that the basic mathematical operations
of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division are
typically conceptualized within a system of relations
between mathematical values and objects in the real world.
Specific mathematical operators are semantically aligned
with particular relationships among real-world objects. For
example, addition is aligned with categorical object
relations (e.g., people find it natural to add two apples plus
three oranges, because both are subtypes of a common
category, fruit), whereas division is aligned with functional
object relations (e.g., a natural problem would be to divide
ten apples between two baskets). Semantic alignment has
been demonstrated with both children and adults (e.g.,
Martin & Bassok, 2005), and for many adults the process is
highly automatic (Bassok, Pedigo, & Oskarsson, 2008).
Although natural semantic alignments are implicitly
acknowledged in the construction of textbook word
problems (Bassok et al., 1998), teachers seldom discuss
these alignments with their students. This gap may
contribute to the difficulty of conveying how and why
mathematical formalisms “matter” in dealing with realworld problems.

Non-integer rational numbers, such as fractions and decimals,
pose challenges for learners, both in conceptual
understanding and in performing mathematical operations.
Previous studies have focused on tasks involving access and
comparison of integrated magnitude representations, showing
that adults have less precise magnitude representations for
fractions than decimals. Here we show the relative
effectiveness of fractions over decimals in reasoning about
relations between quantities. We constructed analogical
reasoning problems that required mapping rational numbers
(fractions or decimals) onto pictures depicting either partwhole or ratio relations between two quantities. We also
varied the ontological nature of the depicted quantities, which
could be discrete, continuous, or continuous but parsed into
discrete components. Fractions were more effective than
decimals for reasoning about discrete and continuous-parsed
(i.e., discretized) quantities, whereas neither number type was
particularly effective in reasoning about continuous
quantities. Our findings show that, when numbers serve as
models of quantitative relations, the ease of relational
mapping depends on the analogical correspondence between
the format of rational numbers and the quantity it models.
Keywords: analogy; relational reasoning; number concepts;
fractions; decimals; semantic alignment; math education

Introduction
Mathematical Understanding as Relational
Reasoning
Mathematics is in essence a system of relations among
concepts based on quantities. A core problem with math
education, particularly in the United States, is that greater
focus is placed on execution of mathematical procedures
than on understanding of quantitative relations (Richland,
Stigler & Holyoak, 2012; Stigler & Hiebert, 1999; RittleJohnson & Star, 2007). An early manifestation of this
problem involves teaching of non-integer rational numbers
in the standard curriculum—typically, first fractions and
subsequently decimals. Students often leave middle-school
(and often enter community college: see Stigler, Givvin &
Thompson, 2010; Givvin, Stigler & Thompson, 2011)

388

Discreteness Versus Continuity

(continuous to discrete) nearly impossible (Bassok &
Holyoak, 1989; Bassok & Olseth, 1995).

A particularly important ontological distinction relevant to
mathematical modeling involves the nature of quantities,
which can be viewed as either discrete or continuous.
Roughly, some entities are viewed as comprising a set of
individual objects (e.g., a number of apples in a basket),
whereas others are viewed as a continuous mass without
individuation (e.g., a bucket of water). Although continuous,
as well as, discrete quantities can be subdivided, in the case
of continuous quantities the divisions are arbitrary in the
sense that they do not isolate conceptual parts (e.g., one
could distinguish between subsets of red and green apples in
a basket by saying that 2/3 of the apples are red and 1/3 are
green, but there is no psychological difference between the
water contained in 2/3 of a bucket and in the complementary
1/3 of the bucket). Importantly, discreteness versus
continuity is a distinction based fundamentally not on
physics, but on psychology. For example, a pile of sand is
viewed as a continuous quantity even though we know it is
composed of individual grains, because those units are too
small and interchangeable to be typically viewed as
“important”. The impact of this basic ontological distinction
has been documented both in young babies (e.g., Spelke,
Breilinger, Macomber, & Jacobson, 1992) and in adults
(Bassok & Olseth, 1995). For example, Bassok and Olseth
found that college students viewed an increase in attendance
at an annual conference as discrete (since it is based on a
change between magnitudes associated with two discrete
events well-separated in time), but viewed an annual
increase in a city’s population growth as continuous (since it
is based on changes stemming from the psychologicallyconstant process of gaining and losing undifferentiated
individual residents).
The ontological distinction between discreteness and
continuity underlies the linguistic distinction between count
and mass nouns, which is syntactically important in English
and many other natural languages (Bloom & Wynn, 1997).
Infants and young children are able to make distinctions
among continuous quantities (Clearfield & Mix, 2001;
Fiegenson, Carey & Spelke, 2002). However school-aged
children have an advantage when performing operations
with discrete quantities (e.g., counting; Gelman, 1993) over
performing operations with their continuous counterparts
(e.g., measurement in general; Nunes, Light & Mason,
1993). Indeed, measurement of continuous quantities
depends on the introduction of arbitrary equal-sized units,
which serve to parse a continuous whole into countable
subparts (e.g., a continuous length can be broken down into
some number of inches or centimeters). The ability to
discretize continuous concepts (as contrasted with the lack
of a natural operation to make discrete concepts continuous)
leads to asymmetries in transfer of mathematical operations.
For example, college students can transfer the equation for
calculating the sum of an arithmetic progression (discrete
concept) to solve a physics problem requiring solving for
final velocity after constant acceleration (continuous
concept), but find transfer in the opposite direction

Fractions as Relational Representations
As the first non-integer number type introduced to
elementary-school students, fractions pose particular
challenges. Research indicates that children have difficulty
integrating fractions into their already well-established
understanding of whole numbers (Staflyidou & Vosniadou,
2004; Vamvakoussi & Vosniadou, 2010; Ni & Zhou, 2005),
and even adults at community colleges seem to lack
fundamental understanding of how to use fractions (Stigler
et al., 2010). Research on understanding fractions has
primarily focused on the ability to grasp and manipulate
their integrated magnitude value associated with the a/b
form. Although adults can compare fractions based on
integrated magnitudes (Schneider & Siegler, 2010), this
process is very slow and error-prone relative to performing
the same task with decimal equivalents (DeWolf, Grounds,
Bassok & Holyoak, in press). The difficulty of making
magnitude comparisons with fractions presumably reflects
their bipartite structure (numerator divided by denominator),
which makes them both formally and conceptually distinct
from integers. In contrast, decimals have a unitary structure
more similar to integers (though not identical; Cohen,
2010).
However, even though the internal structure of fractions
apparently hinders access to precise integrated magnitudes,
this same structure may facilitate understanding of key
relations. In particular, the a/b form can be aligned with the
concepts underlying relations such as part/whole, subset/set,
ratio, and rate. When children are first taught the concept of
a fraction, some type of pictorial representation is often
provided, such that each of the two values in the fraction are
structurally aligned with two separate elements in the
picture. For example, take the very common example of
cutting up a pizza pie into pieces. A child might be taught
that 4/5 is equivalent to 4 slices of a pizza pie that is divided
into 5 slices. This type of mapping is also encouraged with
verbal examples (e.g., 4 out of every 5 dentists recommend
a certain toothpaste). Such instructional practices highlight
the relational nature of fractions and encourage children to
reason about fractions relationally.
We propose that semantic alignment will also modulate
people’s understanding of fractions. Fractions seem
particularly appropriate as models of relations between sets
of discrete elements. The representations typically used to
teach fractions focus on discrete countable units that can
map to the numerator and denominator values. For example,
the pizza is sliced into exactly the number of pieces in the
denominator before the numerator pieces are counted up.
Rapp and Bassok (in preparation) reviewed a math textbook
series and found that very rarely are students encouraged to
think about fractions with continuous representations, such
as a number line. In fact, continuous measures (e.g., length,
weight) are almost exclusively represented with decimals.
Rapp and Bassok also found that, consistent with this

389

Figure 1: Examples of types of pictures used in analogy
problems.

Figure 2: Example of an analogy problem (part/whole
fraction trial with continuous-parsed pictures).

training, college students show a preference for using
fractions rather than decimals to describe relations between
discrete quantities, and use decimals to describe magnitudes
of continuous quantities.

type: continuous, continuous-parsed, discrete) design, with
number type as a between-subjects factor and relation type
and picture type as within-subjects factors.
The analogy problems were constructed using each of the
three ontological types illustrated in Figure 1: discrete,
continuous-parsed, and continuous. An example problem
appears in Figure 2. These analogy problems were in the
format A:B :: C:D vs. D’, where the source analog (A:B)
consisted of a picture and a number (fraction or decimal).
The task required making a choice of the correct number to
complete the target analog. The number type was always the
same across the source and target.
Solving an analogy problem required first identifying the
relationship in the A picture characterized by the number
given as B. This relationship could be part-whole or a ratio
between two parts. In Figure 2, the A picture indicates 4
green units out of a total of 6, making a part-whole relation
of 4/6 (.67 in a matched problem using decimals). An
alternative ratio relation in Figure 2 is based on the units of
red relative to green (i.e., 2/4, or .50 in decimal notation).
Once the higher-order relation between A and B was
extracted, the solution required identifying the same relation
type in target picture C, and choosing the corresponding
number as D term. D’ mapped to the alternative
relationship.
As Figure 2 illustrates, the same two colors were used in
the A and C pictures, and the color relationship was
maintained, such that the same color mapped to the same
part of the relation in both A and C. This constraint served
to identify which part (lesser or greater) mapped to the
numerator in a ratio relation. Color assignments varied
across trials, so the same color might indicate the lesser
subset on one trial and the greater subset on another. The
actual test trials contained only red and green colors
(practice trials were given that had yellow and brown
colors). The discrete items were circles, squares, crosses,
trapezoids, and cloud-like shapes. Continuous and
continuous-parsed items differed in width, height and

Analogical Reasoning with Quantitative Relations
Our study was designed to test the hypothesis that, due to
their relational structure (a/b), fractions are better suited
than decimals for representing relations between countable
quantities. To this end, we compared analogical reasoning
with either fractions or decimals, while varying the
ontological distinction between discrete and continuous
concepts. Figure 1 shows examples of variations in
discreteness versus continuity. The pictorial stimuli were
based on discrete elements (top), continuous rectangles
(bottom), or continuous rectangles parsed into discrete units
(middle). We hypothesized that semantic alignment would
yield higher accuracy and faster response times for solving
analogies using fractions rather than decimals for the
discrete and continuous-parsed pictures. The fraction
advantage was predicted to disappear or even reverse for the
continuous pictures, where the semantic alignment is most
difficult.

Method
Participants
Participants were 52 undergraduates at the University of
California, Los Angeles (mean age = 21; 30 females) who
received course credit, randomly assigned in equal numbers
to the two between-subjects conditions.

Materials and Design
The study was a 2 (number type: fractions vs. decimals) X 2
(relation type: ratios vs. part/whole fractions) X 3 (picture

390

Figure 3: Percent accuracy for solving analogy problems
using fractions or decimals for each quantity type.

Figure 4: Response times for correctly solving analogy
problems using fractions or decimals for each quantity type.
for the number shown on the left and the m key for the
number shown on the right. The z and m keys were labeled
with “L” and “R”, respectively, so that participants could
remember which key went with each number. After
completing the initial example trial, participants were shown
the correct answer, with an explanation of which
relationship was shared between the source and target.
Participants then completed 12 practice trials. Feedback
was given for incorrect trials, in the form of a red “X” on
the screen. After the practice trials had been completed, a
screen was displayed informing participants that the actual
test trials were beginning. For each trial, the source was
shown, then the participant pressed the spacebar when they
determined the relationship. The target was then shown in
addition to the source. Feedback was continued for
incorrect trials. There were 72 test trials (12 for each of the
6 within-subjects conditions). The specific pictures,
numbers, and pairings used in the test trials were different
from those used in practice trials. Relation types and picture
types were shown in a different random order for every
participant.

orientation (vertical or horizontal). For each trial, the source
and target were randomly assigned for each participant so
that the only thing that was consistent between the two was
the higher-order relationship (ratio or part/whole) and the
color mapping. The fractions and decimals were always
less than one and decimals were shown rounded to two
decimal places.

Procedure
Stimuli were displayed with Macintosh computers using
Superlab 4.5, and response times and accuracy were
recorded. Extensive instructions and practice was provided
prior to beginning the test trials. Participants were told that
there were two different types of relations between the
pictures and values. For the ratio relationship, participants
were shown a picture with 1 O and 2 X’s. For the fractions
condition this was explained as “1/2 amount of O’s per
amount of X’s;” for the decimals condition it was explained
as “.50 amount of O’s per amount of X’s.” The part/whole
relationship was represented with a picture of 2 O’s and 3
X’s. For the fractions condition this was explained as “2/5
of the total is the amount of O’s;” for the decimal condition
it was explained as “.40 of the total is the amount of O’s.”
The first of these explanations of the ratio and part/whole
relations was shown with discrete items. The following
screen showed the same values paired with continuousparsed pictures. A third screen showed the same values
paired with continuous pictures.
After this introduction, participants completed an example
trial in which they were shown the source (A:B), asked to
figure out the type of relation (ratio or part/whole) in their
head, and press the space bar. After the space bar was
pressed, the target (C:D vs. D’) was shown on the screen
below the source so that the two components were on the
screen simultaneously. Participants were asked to select
which of two numbers (D or D’) shared the same
relationship with the picture as the relationship provided in
the source. Half of the time, D appeared on the right side of
the screen. They made their selection by pressing the z key

Results
Accuracy and mean response time (RT) on correct trials
were computed for each condition for each participant. A
mixed factors ANOVA was used to compare differences in
RT and accuracy. No reliable overall differences were
obtained between the two relation types (part-whole and
ratio) on either measure; hence all results are reported after
collapsing across this variable. Figure 3 presents the pattern
of performance based on accuracy, and Figure 4 presents the
pattern based on mean correct RT. Both dependent measures
revealed an overall advantage for solving analogies based
on fractions rather than decimals, with the advantage most
pronounced for pictures of discrete quantities. For accuracy,
both number type, F(1, 50) = 8.65, p = .005), and picture
type, F(2, 49) = 33.52, p < .001, were highly reliable, as was
the interaction of the two factors, F(2, 49) = 25.20, p < .001.
Planned comparisons indicated that accuracy was higher for
fractions than decimals for the discrete condition (87% vs.

391

66%; t(50) = 5.38, p < .001) and the continuous-parsed
condition (80% vs. 67%; t(50) = 3.17, p = .003), but did not
differ for the continuous condition (61% vs. 65%; t(50) =
.93, p = .36).
RTs were measured from the onset of the source display
on the screen to the selection of the target answer. Response
times for incorrect answers were excluded from analyses.
In addition, outliers were trimmed to exclude any times that
were greater than three standard deviations from the mean
(roughly 2% of response times). As shown in Figure 4, the
RT pattern closely resembled that for accuracy. In
particular, there was a reliable interaction between number
type and picture type, F(2, 49) = 16.19, p < .001. Planned
comparisons indicated that RTs were faster with fractions
than decimals for the discrete condition (8.5 s vs. 12.8 s;
t(50) = 2.70, p = .01), with a strong trend for the continuousparsed condition (8.3 s vs. 11.2 s; t(50) = 1.87, p = .067).
RTs for fractions versus decimals did not differ reliably for
the continuous condition (9.3 s vs. 7.7 s; t(50) = 1.45, p >
.15).

becomes more like a magnitude assessment. Despite the
explicit relation (a/b), it is difficult to assess the magnitude
of A and the magnitude of B, which makes the overall
mapping more complicated. Decimals represent magnitudes
of relations without specifying the relational parts. Hence,
mapping to the A and B sets is difficult irrespective of
whether the sets are shown as discrete or continuous
quantities.
The current pattern of results is consistent with the
schooling experience of our participants (Rapp & Bassok, in
preparation). Typically, students learn about fractions from
part/whole and set/subset examples (Sophian, 2007; Mack,
1993). However, the goal of such examples is not to help
children understand that fractions represent relations.
Rather, they are provided to help children understand the
existence of values smaller than 1. That is, as discussed
earlier, the main focus of initial instruction about fractions is
to convey their magnitude. This focus is problematic
because, while fractions are well-suited for representation of
relations, they are poorly suited for representation of
magnitudes (DeWolf et al., in press; Stigler et al., 2010).
Our findings also suggest that if decimals were taught prior
to fractions, children might have a better opportunity to
learn about magnitudes smaller than 1. Because decimals
have a unitized format, like whole numbers, they might
provide an easier opportunity for children to master the idea
of magnitudes smaller than 1. Fractions, then, might be
taught later than decimals with an emphasis on their status
as a relationship between two natural numbers. The
magnitude of such relational representations would not be
limited to values smaller than 1 (ratios).
Interestingly, Moss and Case (1999) implemented a
curriculum with 4th graders in Canada that reorganized the
order of rational number instruction. Children were first
taught percentages (in the context of volumes and on
number lines), then decimals, and lastly fractions. Fractions
were explained simply as another way to represent a
decimal. By contrast, typical curricula describe teaching
decimals as another way to represent a fraction. Moss and
Case found that children taught number types in this novel
sequence suffered less interference from whole-number
strategies when using other rational numbers, and achieved
a deeper understanding of them. Though Moss and Case
did not emphasize fractions in the relational context we have
discussed here, it seems that introducing the idea of
magnitudes less than 1 with decimals rather than fractions
may be preferable.
In summary, understanding how non-integer rational
numbers align to specific types of quantities, and how
format can affect ease of semantic alignment, has important
implications for how we conceptualize and teach fractions
and decimals. It is important to foster understanding of
fractions beyond simple algorithmic procedures, and to
bolster conceptual understanding in order to address the
difficulties children and adults face in understanding
fractions.

Discussion
The results of the current study demonstrated an overall
advantage for fractions over decimals in a relational task.
Moreover, this advantage was moderated by the ontological
nature of the depicted quantities. Participants were better
able to extract relationships for discrete and continuousparsed pictures when fractions were mapped to the
quantities, rather than decimals. There was no difference in
performance on the continuous pictures between fractions
and decimals. This pattern suggests that fractions are
semantically-aligned with relations between countable,
discrete quantities. Performance with decimals was
relatively flat (and generally poorer) for all picture types.
These results support two basic claims about semantic
alignment for specific types of quantities. First, people can
and do align quantities with numbers. Second, ease of
alignment depends on two factors: the type of number
format (fractions vs. decimals), and the type of quantities
(countable, i.e., discrete and continuous-parsed, vs.
continuous).
The central difference between fractions and decimals is
that their formats provide an explicit representation of
relations (fractions) or of relation magnitudes (decimals).
That is, fractions have a bipartite structure (a/b) that
expresses a specific relationship between two natural
numbers, a and b. Decimals represent the magnitudes of
such fractional relations. This difference has important
implications for how people align these numbers with
specific quantities. For fractions, alignment should be
simple when the numerator and denominator can be readily
mapped onto distinct subsets, A and B. Our results show
that this is indeed the case when A and B are comprised of
countable entities, depicted by the discrete and continuousparsed picture types. However, alignment should be
difficult when A and B are continuous quantities, as the task

392

Martin, S. A., & Bassok, M. (2005). Effects of semantic
cues on mathematical modeling: Evidence from wordproblem solving and equation construction tasks. Memory
& Cognition, 33, 471-478.
Moss, J., & Case, R. (1999). Developing children’s
understanding of the rational numbers: A new model and
an experimental curriculum. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 30, 122–147.
Ni, Y., & Zhou, Y. (2005). Teaching and learning fractions
and rational numbers: The origins and implications of
whole number bias. Educational Psychologist, 40, 27–52.
Nunes, T., Light, P., Mason, J. (1993) Tools for thought:
The measurement of length and area. Learning and
Instruction, 3, 39-54.
Rapp, M., & Bassok, M. (in preparation). Form and
meaning of rational numbers. Department of Psychology,
University of Washington.
Richland, L. E., Stigler, J. W., Holyoak, K. J. (2012).
Teaching the conceptual structure of mathematics.
Educational Psychologist, 47, 189-203.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2007). Does comparing
solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural
knowledge? An experimental study on learning to solve
equations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 561574.
Schneider, M., & Siegler, R.S. (2010). Representations of
the magnitudes of fractions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 36,
1227-1238.
Siegler, R. S., & Pyke, A. A. (2012). Developmental and
individual differences in understanding of fractions.
Developmental Psychology http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0031200
Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. A., & Schneider, M. (2011).
An integrated theory of whole number and fractions
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 273-296.
Sophian, C. (2007). The origins of mathematical knowledge.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, K., & Jacobson,
K. (1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review,
99, 605-632.
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). The development of
student’s understanding of the numerical value of
fractions. Learning and Instruction, 14, 508–518.
Stigler, J. W., Givvin, K. B., & Thompson, B. (2010). What
community college developmental mathematics students
understand about mathematics. The MathAMATYC
Educator, 10, 4-16.
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap: Best
ideas from the world’s teachers for improving education
in the classroom. New York: Free Press.
Vamvakoussi, X., & Vosniadou, S. (2010). Understanding
the structure of the set of rational numbers: A conceptual
change approach. Learning and Instruction, 14, 453- 467.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by grant
R305C080015 from the Institute of Education Sciences.

References
Bassok, M., Chase, V. M., & Martin, S. A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99-134.
Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K., J. (1989). Interdomain transfer
between isomorphic topics in algebra and physics.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15, 153-166.
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between cases of continuous and
discrete models of change. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 15221538.
Bassok, M., Pedigo, S. F., & Oskarsson, A. T. (2008).
Priming addition facts with semantic relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition, 34, 343-352.
Bloom, P., & Wynn, K. (1997). Linguistic cues in the
acquisition of number words. Journal of Child Language,
24, 511-533.
Clearfield, M. W., & Mix, K. S. (2001). Infants use
continuous quantity—not number—to discriminate small
visual sets. Journal of Cognition and Development, 2,
243-260.
Cohen, D. J. (2010). Evidence for direct retrieval of relative
quantity information in a quantity judgment task:
Decimals, integers, and the role of physical similarity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 36, 1389-1398.
DeWolf, M., Grounds, M. A., Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J.
(in press). Representation and comparison of magnitudes
for different types of rational numbers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (2002). Infants’
discrimination of number vs. continuous extent. Cognitive
Psychology, 44, 33-66.
Gelman, R. (1993). A rational-constructivist account of
early learning about numbers and objects. In D. Medin
(Ed.). Learning and motivation, Vol. 30 (pp. 61-96). New
York: Academic Press.
Givvin, K. B., Stigler, J. W., & Thompson, B. J. (2011).
What community college developmental mathematics
students understand about mathematics, Part II: The
interviews. The MathAMATYC Educator, 2, 4-18.
Mack, N. K. (1993). Learning rational numbers with
understanding: The case of informal knowledge. In T. P
Carpenter, E. Fennema, & T. A. Romberg (Eds.),
Rational numbers: An integration of research (pp. 85105). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

393

