UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are we still talking about the same thing? MEG reveals perspective-taking in response to
pragmatic violations, but not in anticipation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8k14j65p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bogels, Sara
Barrett, Dale
Garrod, Simon
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

"Are we still talking about the same thing?" MEG reveals perspective-taking in
response to pragmatic violations, but not in anticipation
Sara Bögels¹ (Sara.Bogels@mpi.nl), Dale Barr² (Dale.Barr@glasgow.ac.uk), Simon Garrod²
(Simon.Garrod@glasgow.ac.uk), & Klaus Kessler²,³ (Klaus.Kessler@glasgow.ac.uk)
¹MPI for Psycholinguistics, P.O. Box 310, 6500 AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands
²Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Glasgow, UK
³Dept. of Psychology, University of Essex, UK
"breaks" the precedent and suddenly uses a different term
(e.g., 'sausage') for the same referent, this is expected to
confuse the listener; perhaps the speaker now refers to a
different object? Such confusion, resulting in longer latency
times to look at objects, has indeed been attested in eyetracking studies (Brown-Schmidt, 2009; Metzing &
Brennan, 2003; Kronmüller & Barr, 2007). However, to test
whether this confusion was not just related to "egocentric"
processing, because this was the last name the listener heard
for this object, a second speaker was introduced. This
second speaker, unaware of the precedent that the first
speaker had set, also breaks the precedent. This situation
should be much less confusing to the listener as there has
never been a common ground with the second speaker. All
studies cited above consistently showed evidence of
perspective-taking at some point after breaking the
precedent; listeners were slower to look at the intended
object when the same speaker broke a precedent than when
a different speaker did so. However, the eye-tracking studies
did not conclusively distinguish between two different
theoretical accounts. First, a shared perspective could be
maintained throughout the conversation. In that case,
listeners can easily anticipate speaker's naming intentions, if
the object and its name are in common ground. Thus,
breaking a precedent would immediately lead to confusion,
but only by the same speaker. This was supported by some
research (Metzing & Brennan, 2003), whereas other
research suggests that, in first instance, breaking a precedent
leads to confusion regardless of the speaker (Kronmüller &
Barr, 2007). This latter result implicates that listeners might
not use common ground in the form of a shared perspective
with the speaker by default, instead, only when it becomes
necessary due to a pragmatic violation. According to this
view, the speaker's referential intentions would not be
anticipated based on the previously shared perspective (i.e.,
mentalizing), but rather, perspective-taking would only be
engaged after a violation has taken place.
Using MEG within a "precedents" paradigm offers unique
insights into whether mentalizing is used to interpret
language throughout a conversation, or whether it is only
engaged in reaction to pragmatic violations. Like eyetracking research, MEG has an excellent temporal resolution
that allows effects to be localized in time, while also
localizing these effects in the brain. We devised a paradigm
that allowed for live interactive dialog between a participant
in the MEG scanner with two different (confederate)

Abstract
The current study investigates whether mentalizing, or taking
the perspective of your interlocutor, plays an essential role
throughout a conversation or whether it is mostly used in
reaction to misunderstandings. This study is the first to use a
brain-imaging method, MEG, to answer this question. In a first
phase of the experiment, MEG participants interacted "live"
with a confederate who set naming precedents for certain
pictures. In a later phase, these precedents were sometimes
broken by a speaker who named the same picture in a different
way. This could be done by the same speaker, who set the
precedent, or by a different speaker. Source analysis of MEG
data showed that in the 800 ms before the naming, when the
picture was already on the screen, episodic memory and
language areas were activated, but no mentalizing areas,
suggesting that the speaker's naming intentions were not
anticipated by the listener on the basis of shared experiences.
Mentalizing areas only became activated after the same speaker
had broken a precedent, which we interpret as a reaction to the
violation of conversational pragmatics.
Keywords: Language; Pragmatics; Precedents; Common
Ground; Conversation; MEG.

Introduction
Humans have the special capacity to think about what others
are thinking or feeling (Tomasello et al., 2005) and employ
such "mentalizing" in everyday conversations. In the current
study, we employ Magneto encephalography (MEG) to
investigate the neural basis of mentalizing and how this
process interacts with other brain areas during interactive
language use. We focus on the critical question of whether
mentalizing plays an immediate and constant role in
conversation, or whether it mainly comes into play to enable
interlocutors to detect and recover from misunderstandings.
In a conversation, it is important to know what is in
"common ground" between you and your interlocutor. For
example, you need to make sure that you are talking about
the same thing, when referring to an object. One of the
strategies interlocutors use in this situation is to establish
conceptual pacts (Brennan & Clark, 1996) or conversational
precedents (Barr & Keysar, 2002). This entails that, once
they have agreed on (or "grounded", Clark & Brennan,
1991) a certain referential expression for the object (e.g.,
'salami' for a particular piece of meat), interlocutors in a
certain conversation will continue referring to that same
referent with the same term. Listeners generally expect
speakers to adhere to this strategy. Thus, if a speaker

215

speakers. The speakers and the participant/listener viewed
pictures of everyday objects on separate computer monitors
(see Figure 1). The experiment was divided into a series of
blocks, each consisting of an "interactive" phase in which
precedents were established for various pictures, and a later
"test" phase in which some of these pictures were named
once again by either the same or a different speaker. For
example, in the test phase, the listener might see a picture of
a piece of meat (see Figure 1, right) that had been called
'salami' during the interactive phase, but now hears the
(same or different) speaker say 'sausage'. Based on how the
test-phase speaker named their object, listeners had to
decide whether or not the speaker saw the same object as
them. This task provided a cooperative reason why the
(same) speaker might break the precedent, namely to signal
that this was a different sausage than the salami that they
saw together before. This "broken precedent" condition was
contrasted with a baseline "no precedent" condition in
which the picture named in the test phase had been referred
to by its location (i.e., not named), during the interactive
phase (see methods). Importantly, in the test phase, listeners
viewed the picture for 800 milliseconds before the object
was named. Also, the speaker for a particular block of testtrials was announced in advance. Thus, listeners could
anticipate the referential expression based on the picture and
the speaker, before the name was actually given.
We hypothesized that listeners would engage episodic
memory areas (medial temporal lobe, e.g., Baddeley, 2000;
lateral prefrontal cortex, Sakai & Passingham, 2004; Kessler
& Kiefer, 2005) together with language areas (e.g., temporal
pole, Imaizumi et al., 1997) in this anticipation period and
possibly after naming. Especially objects that had been
named during the interactive phase (in contrast to objects
without a precedent) should engage these areas, since the
picture would serve as a retrieval cue for retrieving the
precedent. Episodic memory might be activated even more
for objects that had been named by the same speaker, if
speaker identity is used as a further retrieval cue.
For our research question, the involvement of mentalizing
networks (i.e., temporo-parietal junction: TPJ, ventromedial prefrontal cortex: vmPFC, and possibly precuneus:
PC; e.g., van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009) and the timing of
such involvement was of particular importance. The
"anticipation" account would predict that episodic retrieval
of common ground information while viewing the picture
would lead to anticipation of the speaker's naming
intentions, by employing mentalizing areas, already before
naming. Crucially, such anticipation of naming intentions is
only very meaningful when the current speaker has named
this picture before. In contrast, the "egocentric" account
would predict that, despite episodic retrieval of common
ground information, mentalizing areas would not be
employed to anticipate naming preferences based on these
memories. Instead, this account would predict late,
deliberate, post-naming activation of the mentalizing
network, suggesting that it is only called upon to make
sense of the experienced violation.

Methods
Participants
Seventeen British students from Glasgow University (8
males) with English as their native language participated in
the MEG experiment, with approval of the local ethics
committee. They were paid for their participation and gave
their informed consent. One female participant was
excluded from the analyses because she clicked the wrong
picture too often in the interactive phase (22 times).

Materials and Apparatus
Materials consisted of 320 experimental pictures that could
be named in two roughly equivalent ways (based on a pilot
study) and 640 filler pictures. The names for the test phase
(320 experimental names and 190 filler names) were
recorded beforehand, divided equally among the two
confederates. Some of the filler names were presented with
a hesitation, to make naming on-the-spot more plausible.
The experimental names were always preceded by 800 ms
of recording noise (600 to 1200 ms for the fillers).
MEG data were acquired using a 248-channel 4DNeuroimaging magnetometer system, sampled at 508.63 Hz
and band-pass filtered between 0.1 and 400 Hz.

Figure 1: Example of the participants' screen in the
interactive phase (left) and the test phase (right).

Procedure
Participants were first prepared for the MEG, including head
digitization, in about 45 minutes. They were introduced to
the confederates ("the speakers"), who would talk to them
from separate rooms and were not able to hear each other.
Participants had the role of listener. After two practice
blocks in which the participants had the role of listener and
speaker, 20 experimental blocks followed, all consisting of
an interactive and a test phase, divided into 5 parts of 20
minutes each, with breaks in between. In the interactive
phase, participants saw 9 pictures on the screen at a time
(see Figure 1, left). In each interactive phase, one speaker
asked them to click on one of these pictures, for a total of 42
times. Each critical picture was clicked on twice by the
participants, using a trackball. Eight critical pictures were
named and another eight were referred to by their location
(e.g., 'top left'; participants were told that the speaker saw a
question mark in place of these pictures). Participants could

216

freely interact with speakers in this phase. In the test phase,
the speaker was the same as for the preceding interactive
phase in half of the cases and different in the other half.
Participants saw one picture at a time on the screen (see
Figure 1, right) and were told that the speaker also saw one
picture and had to name that picture. Participants had to
indicate whether the speaker saw the same or a different
picture than they, with a button press. The listeners were
instructed not to interact with the speaker in this phase as
they were unaware of hearing recorded utterances. Each
phase consisted of 8 broken precedent trials (named
differently than in the interactive phase), 8 no precedent
trials (indicated by their location in the interactive phase), 4
maintained precedent fillers (named the same way in the
interactive phase) and some new fillers.

Data analysis
Pre-processing and statistical analysis of MEG data was
conducted using the Fieldtrip Matlab® toolbox (Oostenveld,
Fries, Maris, & Schoffelen, 2011). We extracted epochs
from 500 ms before the picture was shown until 500 ms
after the response for all test trials. These epochs were
detrended, denoised, and subjected to ICA to remove eye,
heart, and movement artefacts. For evoked responses (ERF),
trials of the same condition were averaged per participant,
with a baseline of 200 ms prior to picture onset and a bandpass filter between 0.5 and 35 Hz. For these averages, planar
gradient representations were calculated prior to sensor level
analysis. For time-frequency representations, the power of
frequencies between 2 and 30 Hz was calculated over time
using a Hanning taper with a window of 4 cycles. For
statistical analysis, we used the cluster-based approach
implemented in the Fieldtrip toolbox (Maris & Oostenveld,
2007), to circumvent the multiple-comparisons problem. We
employed 2-step analyses for emulating the interaction
between two factors. We first calculated a t-statistic for the
difference between two conditions per participant and then
included these t-values into a group statistic that compared a
second difference. To identify sources underlying the
sensor-level effects, individual single-shell head models
were generated based on the individual MRI (6 mm voxel
size) aligned with the MEG sensor array, subsequently
normalized to a standard brain. A Linearly Constrained
Minimum Variance (LCMV) beam former (van Veen and
Buckley, 1988), common for all conditions (to increase
SNR), was used for ERFs to transform individual conditions
into source space for comparisons between conditions.
Dynamic Imaging of Coherent Sources (DICS) beam
formers (Gross et al., 2001) were used for theta source
analysis. In this case we used condition-specific spatial
filters to reveal qualitative differences between conditions.

both same (t(15) = -5.63, p < .001) and different speakers
(t(15) = -3.97, p = .001), but this was more pronounced for
same speakers (F(1,15) = 21.15, p < .001). Participants were
slower when an established precedent was broken, but only
when the same speaker broke the precedent (t(15) = 3.47, p
= .003), resulting in an interaction (F(1,15) = 8.43, p =
.011). Thus, listeners experienced greater confusion when a
speaker broke his or her own precedent than when a speaker
broke another’s precedent (confirming Metzing & Brennan,
2003; Kronmüller & Barr, 2007). Note that this does not
imply that common ground is considered by default or in
anticipation, since it might also mean that listeners still
experience conflict when a different speaker breaks the
precedent, but resolves the conflict more quickly and/or in a
different way than when the same speaker does so.
0.4
0.3

Choice responses
**
**

1.4

*

1.3
**

0.2

1.2

0.1

RT (s)
*
Precedent
Broken
No

1.1

0
same different

same

different (speaker)

Figure 2: Behavioural responses in the test phase:
proportion of "different" responses (left) and RTs (right).
These behavioural data confirmed our approach to look at
the interaction effect in the MEG data (using the two-step
analysis, see Data analysis), which we did for the theta
source analysis (see Theta Oscillatory Results).
Furthermore, on the basis of these behavioural data, it is
most likely that mentalizing occurred for trials in which a
precedent was broken by the same speaker and where
participants responded to have seen a different picture. By
this behavioural response, they show that they are aware of
the conflict between the precedent and the new term and
have resolved this by deciding that the speaker probably
sees a different picture now. Next to that, especially slow
responses, probably reflecting confusion upon hearing the
new term, could also reflect the engagement of mentalizing
processes. In contrast, in trials that elicited a quick "same
picture" response, listeners might not even be aware of the
conflict. Thus, we selected the "different"-responses plus
one third of the slowest "same"-responses for the same
speaker/broken precedent condition and refer to them as
"deliberation trials". We used separate analyses of these
trials as corroborative evidence when necessary (see ERF
Results), next to analysing all trials of this condition.

ERF Results
In a cluster analysis between 300 and 500 ms after
naming (on the basis of visual inspection), a significant
cluster was found for same speaker between 318-454 ms (p
= .009) and a marginally significant cluster for different
speaker between 300-415 ms (p = .048) (see Figure 3, panel
A). The topography of the effects was slightly more anterior
(left) for the same speaker and more posterior (left) for the

Results
Behavioural results
As shown in Figure 2, the proportion of "different picture"
responses was increased when a precedent was broken by

217

different speaker. However, a direct comparison between
the two contrasts did not reveal significant clusters. We also
analysed the deliberation trials between -800 and 1000 ms.
This revealed a cluster with a similar topography and timing
of peak activity as the previous analysis (67-680 ms after
naming, p < 0.00001, Figure 3, panel B right) plus two
clusters in an early time interval before naming, when the
target object was visually presented, (550 to 23 ms before
naming onset, p = .004, and 306 to 0 ms before naming
onset, p = .004; Figure 3, panel B left). This strongly
suggests anticipatory processing in deliberation trials.

recently also with integration of social, communicative, and
paralinguistic context (e.g., Rankin et al., 2009). Thus, this
activation might reflect retrieval of the episodic context of
the interaction with the target object, including information
about the speaker and the used name. We also found
language-related areas, possibly indicating retrieval of the
referent established during the interaction (in the prenaming interval, cf. Duff & Brown-Schmidt, 2012) and
semantic matching processes between the object and the
used name (in the post-naming interval, e.g., Grabowski,
Damasio et al., 2001; Pobric et al., 2007). We found
differences in visual (attention) areas in the early interval
Same speaker
Different speaker
A
which could suggest more visually detailed episodic
retrieval of previously named objects, when anticipating a
Broken precedent
naming by the same speaker. In the late interval, we found
Same speaker
activation of motor areas which could reflect more intense
Broken
No
precedent
or more conflicting motor preparation. Anterior cingulate
No precedent
Different speaker
300-500 ms
cortex activity was found in both intervals, suggesting an
Broken
No precedent anticipation of conflict in the early and monitoring of
Broken vs. no precedent: sign. clusters
conflict during the late interval. Most importantly for our
research question, we found activation of so-called
"mentalizing" areas only after naming. These areas have
been found to be part of a mentalizing network, for example
401
346 ms
involved in social judgments (van Overwalle & Baetens,
ms
2009), in visuo-spatial perspective taking tasks (Blanke et
Same speaker
al., 2005), and in reasoning about other's beliefs (Samson et
Broken precedent: different & slow response
B
al., 2004).
Broken precedent
No precedent

-277
msec

Table 1: Brain areas involved in the pre- and post-naming
interval for ERFs in the deliberation trials vs. no precedent
same speaker comparison (l/r: left and right hemispheres).
Brain areas Pre-naming
Post-naming
Episodic
Parahippocampal
Parahippocampal
memory
gyrus (l),
gyrus (l)
dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (r)
Language
Temporal cortex (r)
Temporal pole (l)
Visual
occipital cortex (r),
(attention)
occipital temporal
cortex (r), parietal
occipital cortex (r)
Motor
Anterior cingulate
ACC(l),
(conflict)
cortex (ACC) (r)
premotor cortex(l),
supplementary
motor area(l)
Mentalizing
TPJ (r), vmPFC (l/r)

401 ms

Figure 3: Sensor level ERF. A: comparisons for “broken –
vs. no precedent” for same speaker (left column) and
different speaker (right column). B: comparisons for the
deliberation trials (dotted dark blue line) compared to the no
precedent trials (light blue line), within the same speaker
condition. Significant clusters for this contrast are indicated
pre-naming (left) and post-naming (right).
Source analysis was employed for the comparison
between deliberation and no-precedent trials within the
same speaker for both time intervals. The post-naming
analysis between 300 and 500 ms revealed one significant,
spatially distributed cluster (p < 0.00001) and the prenaming analysis between -350 and -150 ms also revealed
one significant, spatially distributed cluster, (p < 0.00001).
Table 1 lists the brain areas included in the pre- and postnaming clusters. See Bögels et al. (submitted), for figures
and a more detailed description of these source-level results.
In both intervals, we found activation related to episodic
memory processing, suggesting that participants were
continuously retrieving the episodic context for a particular
target object. Parahippocampal gyrus has been associated
primarily with episodic encoding of the visuo-spatial
context (e.g., Epstein & Kanwisher, 1998), but more

Theta Oscillatory Results
Time-frequency analysis (-800 to 1000 ms) revealed a
significant cluster (p = .012) in the theta range (4-6 Hz) for
"same speaker, broken precedent" compared to "same
speaker, no precedent" in a time window around 350-650
ms after naming onset. No results were found in the
corresponding comparison for different speaker.
We localised the sources of this theta effect in a postnaming time-window (200-800 ms) for 3 to 7 Hz, using a
two-step analysis to look at the speaker by precedent

218

interaction (p<.008; see Bögels et al. (submitted) for more
details and figures). In Figure 4, results are displayed of
another two-step analysis within same speaker, comparing
anticipatory and reactive intervals (p<.01).

domain). Successful retrieval of the name and speaker on
the basis of the picture probably allowed listeners to notice
the conflict with the actual name that was given by the
speaker and decide that the speaker might see a different
picture.
With regards to our main research question, we found
(both in the time and the frequency domain) that
mentalizing areas were clearly more engaged in response to
the violation than in response to the other conditions (in
accordance with Kronmüller & Barr, 2007; Metzing &
Brennan, 2003). Crucially for our research question,
however, mentalizing was not engaged more strongly in the
anticipatory time interval in the condition in which the same
speaker was going to name an object he or she had named
before. Thus, while retrieval of the precedent and probably
the speaker associated with that precedent took place on the
basis of the picture, this did not lead to inferences of the
current speaker's naming intentions using mentalizing. One
might argue that listeners will try to infer the speaker's
intentions in every condition. However, only in the case in
which the same speaker has named this object before, does
the listener really have grounds to use the speaker's
perspective for this anticipation. Therefore, we argue that it
would be expected, under the anticipation view, that
mentalizing areas should be involved more strongly in
precisely that condition, but this is not corroborated by our
findings. Even when focussing only on "deliberation" trials
(only for the time domain), where mentalizing was most
likely to occur, since listeners show that they are aware of
the conflict, we found no evidence for anticipation of the
speaker’s referential intentions (mentalizing).
These findings are in accordance with earlier eye-tracking
results by Kronmüller and Barr (2007), showing that
common ground is not taken into account by default since a
broken precedent at first leads to confusion regardless of the
speaker. In this context, recent approaches involving a
second-person perspective (e.g., Schilbach et al., 2012)
could also be of interest. A different processing "mode" and
differential activation of brain areas is assumed for
observation of others or "third person perspective" (as was
used in most previous research) and for direct interaction
with others, or "second person perspective". The latter type
of processing (which might involve the posterior temporal
sulcus; Tylén et al., 2012), related to fine temporal
coordination during interaction, might be involved
throughout a conversation, dealing for example with
building up common ground by setting up new precedents.
In the current study, all conditions probably involve such
processes, resulting in no differential effects. In contrast, the
pragmatic violations listeners encounter in the current study
could invoke a mode that resembles the third person
perspective, since listeners try to infer why the speaker
breaks the precedent, involving the "classic" mentalizing
areas (e.g., vmPFC; Tylén et al., 2012).
In conclusion, anticipating the speaker’s referential
intentions based on previously established common ground
does not seem to be a default process. In contrast,

Theta: Late vs. early interval (same speaker)
language

episodic memory
motor
PPC
visual (attention)

MC

mentalizing

SM1

OCC

OCC

TP

TC

PHG TPJ
PC
TP

TP

TP
vmPFC

OCC

Figure 4: Theta sources comparing same speaker (broken vs.
no precedent) effects before and after naming.
Again, both analyses show episodic (working) memory
areas (parahippocampal gyrus: blue circle in Figure 4;
prefrontal cortex). Together with stronger activation of
visual (attention) areas (occipital cortex: yellow circles in
Figure 4) in the early than the late interval, this suggests
stronger episodic retrieval in the right hemisphere along
with stronger visual reactivation in response to the naming.
In both analyses, we also see language (green circles in
Figure 4) and motor areas (black circles in Figure 4) again,
as in the ERF analysis. Importantly, mentalizing areas in
right TPJ, right precuneus and vmPFC showed stronger
theta effects for the same speaker contrast than the different
speaker contrast, but also within the same speaker contrast
in the post- vs. the pre-naming interval (pink circles, Figure
4).

Discussion
Our results indicate that brain areas related to language,
vision, episodic (working) memory, and mentalizing are
dynamically and jointly involved in encountering and
resolving conflict after a previously negotiated precedent is
broken by the same speaker, and more so than when it is
broken by a different speaker.
Episodic memory (together with language and vision)
areas were engaged already in anticipation, suggesting a
retrieval of the circumstances in which this picture was
encountered before. Specifically, seeing a picture that was
named before by the same speaker resulted in a stronger
involvement of episodic memory (Theta localisation
results), suggesting that the name was retrieved based on the
picture and the identity of the speaker. We found especially
strong anticipatory episodic memory activation for the trials
in which listeners later on decided that the speaker saw a
different picture ("deliberation trials", only for the time

219

anticipation seems to rely only on episodic retrieval of
visual and linguistic associations without any inference of
the speaker’s current mental states. Mentalizing about the
other's perspective seems to be engaged "on demand" once a
pragmatic violation or misunderstanding has occurred.

Kessler, K., & Kiefer, M. (2005). Disturbing visual working
memory: electrophysiological evidence for a role of the
prefrontal cortex in recovery from interference. Cerebral
Cortex, 15, 1075-1087.
Kronmüller, E., & Barr, D. J. (2007). Perspective-free
pragmatics: Broken precedents and the recovery-frompreemption hypothesis. Journal of Memory and
Language, 56, 436-455.
Maris, E., & Oostenveld, R. (2007). Nonparametric
statistical testing of EEG-and MEG-data. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods, 164, 177-190.
Metzing, C., & Brennan, S. E. (2003). When conceptual
pacts are broken: Partner-specific effects on the
comprehension of referring expressions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49, 201-213.
Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., & Schoffelen, J. M.
(2011). FieldTrip: open source software for advanced
analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological
data. Computational intelligence and neuroscience.
Pobric, G., Jefferies, E., & Ralph, M. A. L. (2007). Anterior
temporal lobes mediate semantic representation:
mimicking semantic dementia by using rTMS in normal
participants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104, 20137-20141.
Rankin, K. P., Salazar, A., Gorno-Tempini, M. L.,
Sollberger, M., Wilson, S. M., Pavlic, D., & Miller, B. L.
(2009). Detecting sarcasm from paralinguistic cues:
anatomic and cognitive correlates in neurodegenerative
disease. NeuroImage, 47, 2005-2015.
Sakai, K., & Passingham, R. E. (2004). Prefrontal selection
and medial temporal lobe reactivation in retrieval of
short-term verbal information. Cerebral Cortex, 14, 914921.
Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., Chiavarino, C., & Humphreys,
G. W. (2004). Left temporoparietal junction is necessary
for representing someone else's belief. Nature
neuroscience, 7, 499-500.
Schilbach, L., Timmermans, B., Reddy, V., Costall, A.,
Bente, G., Schlicht, T., & Vogeley, K. (2012). Toward a
second-person neuroscience. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll,
H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The
origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 28, 675-690.
Tylén, K., Allen, M., Hunter, B. K., & Roepstorff, A.
(2012). Interaction vs. observation: distinctive modes of
social cognition in human brain and behavior? A
combined fMRI and eye-tracking study. Frontiers in
human neuroscience, 6.
Van Overwalle, F., & Baetens, K. (2009). Understanding
others' actions and goals by mirror and mentalizing
systems: a meta-analysis. Neuroimage, 48, 564-584.
Van Veen, B. D., & Buckley, K. M. (1988). Beamforming:
A versatile approach to spatial filtering. ASSP Magazine,
IEEE, 5, 4-24.

Acknowledgments
SB was funded by NWO (Rubicon: 446-10-020) and ERC
(269484 INTERACT), SG by ESRC/MRC (RES-060-250010), and KK by ESRC (RES-000-22-4325). We thank our
two confederates, Louis Renn and Hellen McNair, and
Laura Steenhuis for help with stimulus preparation.

References
Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: a new component
of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4,
417-423.
Barr, D. J., & Keysar, B. (2002). Anchoring comprehension
in linguistic precedents. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46, 391-418.
Blanke, O., Mohr, C., Michel, C. M., Pascual-Leone, A.,
Brugger, P., Seeck, M., & Thut, G. (2005). Linking outof-body experience and self processing to mental ownbody imagery at the temporoparietal junction. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 550-557.
Bögels, S., Barr, D., Garrod, S., & Kessler, K. (submitted).
Do I see what you mean? Mentalizing during
conversational language processing as revealed by
MEG.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 1482.
Brown-Schmidt, S. (2009). Partner-specific interpretation of
maintained referential precedents during interactive
dialog. Journal of Memory and Language, 61, 171-190.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition, 13, 127-149.
Duff, M. C., & Brown-Schmidt, S. (2012). The
hippocampus and the flexible use and processing of
language. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6.
Epstein, R., & Kanwisher, N. (1998). A cortical
representation of the local visual environment. Nature,
392, 598-601.
Grabowski, T. J., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Ponto, L. L. B.,
Hichwa, R. D., & Damasio, A. R. (2001). A role for left
temporal pole in the retrieval of words for unique entities.
Human Brain Mapping, 13, 199-212.
Groß, J., Kujala, J., Hämäläinen, M., Timmermann, L.,
Schnitzler, A., & Salmelin, R. (2001). Dynamic imaging
of coherent sources: studying neural interactions in the
human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 98, 694-699.
Imaizumi, S., Mori, K., Kiritani, S., Kawashima, R.,
Sugiura, M., Fukuda, H., & Nakamura, K. (1997). Vocal
identification of speaker and emotion activates different
brain regions. Neuroreport, 8, 2809-2812.

220

