UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Aspectual Coercion in Non-native Speakers of English

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2w16q0m5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Chan, Ho Leung

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Aspectual Coercion in Non-native Speakers of English
Ho Leung Chan (ellchl@nus.edu.sg)
Department of English Language & Literature, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Abstract
This study examined the processing correlates of aspectual
coercion among native and non-native speakers of English.
For native English speakers, results suggested that the
processing delay associated with aspectual coercion is
minimal. Aspectual coercion was perhaps cognitively easy
to perform. By contrast, non-native speakers of English from
unlike first language (L1) backgrounds differed in their
reading performance. The differences varied systematically
as a function of aspectual contrasts in L1 after controlling
for second language (L2) English proficiency. Korean
participants showed trends of aspectual coercion despite the
absence of significant effects; German participants exhibited
indifference across experimental conditions; Chinese
participants showed aspectual coercion effects opposite to
the predictions specified by the English grammar. A
coupling of these data with evidence from the semelfactive
progressive (e.g. coughing) in English suggests that the socalled online aspectual coercion effects may arise from a
prototype organization of aspectual categories that is prone
to L1 influence.
Keywords: Aspectual coercion; semelfactive progressive;
prototype; L1 transfer

Introduction
The study of aspectual coercion in non-native speakers
provides an unusual opportunity to understand how
aspectual conflicts are recognized and resolved in the course
of language processing. Presumably, the challenge for nonnative speakers to process subtle semantic nuances on the
fly is far greater than that of native speakers. If aspectual
coercion incurs an extra processing cost, it will be more
likely to find evidence of that in non-native speakers than in
native speakers. This may in turn shed light on aspectual
coercion research conducted on native speakers that have
reported mixed findings in the literature.

Aspectual Coercion
Verbs denote events that take place in time. A semelfactive
verb (e.g. cough) denotes a single-stage, atelic situation
(Smith, 1991; 1997). When the semelfactive verb cough
combines with an adverbial modifier of duration or durative
adverbial for an hour in the sentence Sam coughed for an
hour, the combination becomes problematic. The
semelfactive verb and durative adverbial are aspectually
incompatible with each other. However, the sentence is
neither ill-formed nor ungrammatical. Often an iterative
interpretation is derived, namely Sam coughed repeatedly
for an hour. Researchers have hypothesized that a
computational process is invoked to resolve the
incompatibility and construe a more coherent interpretation.

Such a process is commonly known as aspectual coercion.
The discussion of coercion phenomena first appeared in
Moens and Steedman (1988).
Empirical studies to date have yet to provide conclusive
evidence about the processing consequence of aspectual
coercion. Also, it remains unexplored that semelfactive
progressive (e.g. coughing) in English derives an iterative
interpretation even in the absence of durative adverbials.
Whether a construction such as Sam was coughing for an
hour incurs an extra processing cost or not, and how nonnative speakers respond to aspectual coercion relative to
native speakers, become the twin goals of this study. It is
hypothesized that a greater processing cost can be found in
non-native speakers than in native speakers if aspectual
coercion is computationally costly. Another prediction is
that a construction like Sam was coughing for an hour will
not incur an extra processing cost, because there is not any
aspectual mismatch between the verbal predicate and the
adverbial in the first place.

Psycholinguistic Evidence
A small number of empirical studies have examined the
psycholinguistic evidence of aspectual coercion using
behavioral and brain-imaging techniques. The reported
findings were mixed. Some studies found longer decision
times and/or higher reading latencies in cases of aspectual
coercion, while others reported null results.
Task differences may be responsible for these dissimilar
findings. Piñango, Zurif, and Jackendoff (1999) first
examined the processing load associated with aspectual
coercion using a cross-modal lexical decision task. They
found longer decision times at the probe positions of
coercion sentences. Todorova, Strab, Bedecker, and Frank
(2000) employed a self-paced, makes-sense judgment task,
and found higher reading latencies in coercion sentences.
Piñango, Winnick, Ullah, and Zurif (2006) later reported
that online effects of aspectual coercion could only be found
when a secondary lexical decision task was administered at
a delayed interval of 250ms. Unlike previous paradigms,
Pickering, McElree, Frisson, Chen, and Traxler (2006)
employed the self-paced reading and eye-tracking
techniques to foster more naturalistic reading in
experimental settings. Nonetheless, Pickering et al. found no
behavioral differences in terms of reading times and other
eye-tracking estimates across conditions. The researchers
attributed the null results to an underspecification account,
which claimed that native English speakers did not commit
to the telicity of situations immediately during normal
sentence comprehension.
Another challenge stems from lexical aspect. Lexical
aspect (or Aktionsart) refers to the temporal meanings

2006

inherent in verbal predicates. A semelfactive verb (e.g.
cough) is, by definition, semelfactive because it conveys a
single-stage, atelic situation (Smith, 1991; 1997). The
classification of lexical aspect can be tricky. Brennan and
Pylkkänen (2008) addressed this by first norming a selection
of verbs for punctuality with native English speakers. Only
a set of strongly punctual verbs (all semelfactives indeed)
was then chosen for their self-paced reading and MEG (i.e.
magnetoencephalography) experiments. As illustrated in (1),
the critical sentences varied in adverbial type (either a
durative adverbial or a punctual adverbial), followed by a
genuine semelfactive verb:
(1) a. Throughout the day the student sneezed in the back of
the classroom.
b. After twenty minutes the student sneezed in the back
of the classroom.
Crucially, Brennan and Pylkkänen reported significantly
longer reading times at the inflected verb in 1a than in 1b in
native English speakers from the self-paced reading
experiment.
In addition to tasks and experimental control, previous
empirical studies have only narrowly examined aspectual
coercion in which a punctual situation is interpreted as
iterative by means of an interaction with a specific type of
temporal modifier, namely durative adverbial. Little is
known about how other factors such as grammatical aspect
could affect aspectual coercion. Comrie (1976) stated that
grammatical aspect encodes different ways of viewing the
internal temporal constituency of a situation. One can
therefore distinguish what happened from what was
happening owing to grammatical aspect, which is often
marked via verbal morphology. In this light, semelfactive
progressive in English (e.g. coughing) provides an
exceptional window to elucidate this issue, precisely
because it denotes iterative action-in-progress (Smith, 1991;
1997) without any temporal adverbials. A psycholinguistic
investigation along this line shall cast some light on the
study of aspectual coercion phenomena at large.

Experiment
This study examined the influence of grammatical aspect
and temporal adverbials on aspectual coercion in the course
of language processing. The two research questions were:
1.
2.

Does aspectual coercion incur an extra processing
cost in native and non-native speakers of English?
Does grammatical aspect mediate the online effects
of aspectual coercion? In other words, is there a
trade-off between grammatical aspect and temporal
adverbial?

Method
Participants Participants consisted of native English
speakers and non-native speakers of English from Korean,
Mandarin Chinese, and German L1 backgrounds. The

profiles of the participants were summarized as follows:
native English speakers (15 women, 9 men, Mage = 20.2
years, age range: 18-25 years); Korean (14 women, 1 man,
Mage = 21.7 years, age range: 18-29 years); Chinese (16
women, 5 men, Mage = 23.8 years, age range: 21-30 years).
These participants enrolled at the University of Pittsburgh
and Carnegie Mellon University in the US. The German
participants (21 women, 4 men, Mage = 25.5 years, age
range: 20-41 years) were recruited from the Ruprecht-KarlsUniversität Heidelberg, Germany. All participants took part
in the experiment for compensation.
Also, all non-native speakers completed a standardized
English proficiency test — the Michigan Test of English
Language Proficiency (MTELP) of the Michigan Test
Battery (Corrigan, Dobson, Kellman, Spaan, Strowe, &
Tyma, 1979). The maximum score was 100. At the time of
testing, both Korean (M = 81.13, SE = 3.67) and German (M
= 79.88, SE = 2.85) participants were more proficient in
English than their Chinese (M = 63, SE = 3.11) counterparts,
ps = .001.
Stimuli Twenty-four sentences were constructed from
seventeen semelfactive verbs. These verbs were selected
based on the norming results of punctuality (Brennan &
Pylkkänen, 2008) as well as ratings for telicity (Wulff, Ellis,
Römer, Bardovi-Harlig, & Leblanc, 2009). Participants’
knowledge of English was also taken into consideration.
The experiment implemented a 2x2 design crossing
Grammatical Aspect (SIMPLE, PROG) and Adverbial
(Punctual, Durative). Here, SIMPLE means the grammatical
aspect is unspecified, whereas PROG denotes the
progressive aspect. All critical items were distributed into 4
lists such that each list contained one token of each of the 24
critical items and six items from each of the four conditions.
The 4 sets of experimental stimuli were each embedded into
a list of 120 filler sentences, plus an additional 84 items
from two other experiments (Chan, 2012). Presentation
orders were completely randomized. Table 1 summarizes
the quadruple design crossing grammatical aspect and
adverbial.
Table 1: Conditions and sample stimuli
Punctual adverbial
Durative adverbial
SIMPLE At noon the kid All day the kid
jumped
into
the jumped
into
the
swimming pool.
swimming pool.
A
B
PROG
At noon the kid was All day the kid was
jumping
into
the jumping into the
swimming pool.
swimming pool.
C
D
Condition A is a control condition. It serves as a baseline for
condition B, in which there is an aspectual mismatch
between the durative adverbial all day and the verb jumped.
Condition B is an example of aspectual coercion. Previous
studies described this as an instance of iterative coercion

2007

(e.g., Brennan & Pylkkänen, 2008). Because iteration is
triggered by an adverbial, condition B is called Adverbial
Coercion. This term is not new; it first appeared in
Todorova et al (2000). Conditions C and D represent new
manipulations, as they have never been tested before. As
discussed earlier, Smith (1991; 1997) asserted that
semelfactive verbs marked in English progressive denote
iterative action-in-progress. The combination of the
semelfactive progressive jumping with the punctual
adverbial at noon therefore creates an aspectual conflict in
condition C. Although conditions B and C both involve
aspectual mismatch, the iteration in condition C arises via
the progressive marking on the semelfactive verb, whereas
that in condition B is enforced by a durative adverbial
external to the verbal predicate. To differentiate between the
two, condition C is therefore called Grammatical (Aspect)
Coercion. Lastly, condition D serves as a baseline to
Grammatical Coercion in condition C.
Two predictions are made for native English speakers.
First, Adverbial Coercion sentences (Condition B) will incur
longer reading times than respective control sentences
(Condition A). This is based on previous findings that
durative adverbials could trigger coercion (e.g. Todorova et
al., 2000). Second, a new prediction for this study is that
Grammatical Coercion sentences (Condition C) will take
longer time to read than control sentences (Condition D)
because of the aspectual mismatch. Therefore, the 2 × 2
design predicts aspectual coercion effects as a trade-off
between adverbial and grammatical aspect.
It is generally assumed that native and non-native speakers
will have similar reading performance. Of course, one may
predict some variations as a result of L1 differences. For
example, Korean participants may perform similarly to
native English speakers, considering the many meaning
overlaps between aspectual systems of Korean and English.
Because German lacks a grammatical aspectual system, a
reasonable prediction is that German participants may not
exhibit any differences between SIMPLE and PROG. The
Chinese participants may as well perform similarly to native
English speakers. It must be emphasized that Chinese has
richer perfective and imperfective contrasts, in addition to
the optional marking system. The progressive aspect is
obligatory in English, however. Given these cross-linguistic
differences in aspectual meaning and grammar, the above
predictions are speculative at best.
Procedure The current study involved a computerized selfpaced reading experiment, which was administered
individually to participants in a laboratory setting.
Participants were instructed to read English sentences as
quickly as possible and answer comprehension questions as
accurately as possible. Six practice items were given before
the actual experiment.
The self-paced reading task was implemented on Linger
software (Rohde, 2001), following a word-by-word noncumulative moving window paradigm presentation
technique (Just, Carpenter, & Woolley, 1982). Each

sentence was masked by a series of dashes (-). These dashes
were replaced by a word from left-to-right every time the
participant pressed the space bar. Only one word was shown
on the computer screen at a time.
An optional break was provided in between every 50
trials. To ensure meaningful comprehension, a yes/no
comprehension question prompt was presented to each of
the 120 filler sentences embedded throughout the
experiment. Feedback on accuracy was also provided. The
majority of participants finished the experiment in an hour.

Data Analysis
The following procedures were employed. First, I
ascertained that all participants scored 90% or above for the
comprehension questions. For native English speakers, the
mean accuracy was 94% (SD = 3.9%). For non-native
speakers, Korean participants achieved a mean accuracy of
94.2% (SD = 3.4%), German 94.6% (SD = 2.9%), and
Chinese 91% (SD = 4.8%). The overall high accuracy
confirms that all participants paid attention and read the
sentences carefully.
Next, extreme reading times (RTs), including those
shorter than 100 ms or longer than 2,500 ms per word, were
discarded. These criteria excluded 0.59%, 1.36%, 1.26%,
and 2.31% of data points among the English, Korean,
German, and Chinese participants, respectively.
RTs were then transformed logarithmically. A linear
regression was performed on the log RT data to correct for
word length differences across conditions, while taking into
account each participant’s individual reading speed. This
procedure utilized all words from experimental items and
fillers for each participant (e.g., Ferreira & Clifton, 1986;
Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994). The values
predicted from the regressions were subtracted from the
actual reading times to produce residual reading times for
each participant. Thus, word-length adjusted residual log
RTs became the dependent variable for subsequent
statistical tests.
Separate analyses were conducted on RTs at four target
word regions: 1) the verb; 2) the first word following the
verb (V+1) to capture spill-over effects; 3) the second word
following the verb (V+2) to assess further downstream
effects; and 4) the sentence-final (SF) word to investigate
sentence wrap-up effects (Just & Carpenter, 1980).
Furthermore, a number of problematic items were
excluded from statistical analyses. All trials containing
yesterday, last night, last week and the verb open that were
intended to serve as punctual adverbials and semelfactives
were excluded. This procedure reduced the entire data set by
another 36.98%.

Results
A three-way mixed-design ANCOVA was performed with
Grammatical Aspect (SIMPLE, PROG) and Adverbial
(Punctual, Durative) as within-participant variables, group
(English, Korean, German, and Chinese) as a between-

2008

English

Korean

German

A
At noon the kid jumped into
the swimming pool.

B
All day the kid jumped into
the swimming pool.

C
At noon the kid was
jumping into the swimming
pool.
Figure 1: ANCOVA reading time results. Error bars indicate ±1 standard error.

Chinese

D
All day the kid
jumping
into
swimming pool.

was
the

participant variable, and English proficiency as a covariate.
A default score of 100 was entered for native English
speakers in the covariate for ANCOVA analyses. An α-level
of .05 was used. Figure 1 plots the ANCOVA RT results for
each participant group.

was significantly slower than that of native English
participants (M = -.03, SE = .01), p = .001, as well as
German participants (M = .000, SE = .008), p = .014,
respectively. No other comparisons were significant, ps >
.107.

Verb An ANCOVA controlling for English proficiency at
the verb revealed a significant Adverbial × Grammatical
Aspect interaction by both participants and items, F1(1, 80)
= 5.773, p = .019; F2(1, 56) = 4.607, p = .036. The main
effect of grammatical aspect was significant by participants,
F1(1, 80) = 7.265, p = .009; F2 < 3.072. No other effects
approached significance by either participants or items:
adverbial, F1 (1, 80) = 3.757, p = .056; F2 < .071; language,
F1(3, 80) = 1.412, p = .245; F2 < .892; all interactions, Fs <
1.128.
To explore the Adverbial × Grammatical Aspect
interaction collapsed across language groups, a follow-up
simple main effect of adverbial across levels of grammatical
aspect was performed in this word region. However, none of
the comparisons reached significance, ps > .113.

V+2 An ANCOVA controlling for English proficiency at
the second word after the verb revealed a significant
Adverbial × Grammatical Aspect interaction by participants,
F1(1, 80) = 11.736, p = .001; F2 < .39, and a three-way
Adverbial × Grammatical Aspect × Language interaction by
participants, F1(3, 80) = 3.251, p = .026; F2 < .169,
suggesting that the four language groups may behave
differently across levels of adverbial and grammatical
aspect. All other main effects and interactions were not
significant by either participants or items: grammatical
aspect, F1(1, 80) = .848, p = .36; F2 < .038; adverbial, F1(1,
80) = .923, p = .34; F2 < .143; language, F1 (3, 80) = 1.025,
p = .386; F2 < .149; all interactions, Fs < 2.206.
Because of a significant three-way interaction, a followup simple main effect of adverbial across levels of
grammatical aspect was performed separately for each
language group in this word region. Native English speakers
slowed down at Adverbial Coercion sentences (M = -.011,
SE = .017) relative to corresponding control sentences (M =
-.061, SE = .019), p = .052. Also, they read Grammatical
Coercion sentences (M = -.011, SE = .016) marginally
slower than respective control sentences (M = -.047, SE =
.016), p = .096. Although these results were only marginally
significant, native speakers in this experiment behaved in
accord with the prediction that sentences involving
aspectual coercion generally took longer to read than noncoercion sentences. These results provided a reasonable
baseline when evaluating non-native speakers’ reading
performance in the same experiment.
Unexpectedly, Chinese participants read Adverbial
Coercion sentences (M = -.071, SE = .018) significantly
faster than the respective control sentences (M = .01, SE =
.02), p = .003, which is opposite to the prediction of
adverbial coercion. All other comparisons were not
significant in this word region, ps > .164.

V+1 An ANCOVA controlling for English proficiency at
the first word after the verb revealed a significant Adverbial
× Grammatical Aspect interaction by participants, F1(1, 80)
= 5.036, p = .028; F2 < .002. The main effect of language
was significant by both participants and items, F1(3, 80) =
5.456, p = .002; F2(3, 56) = 2.893, p = .043. All other main
effects and interactions were not significant by either
participants or items: grammatical aspect, F1(1, 80) = .119,
p = .731; F2 < .559; adverbial, F1(1, 80) = 1.605, p = .209;
F2 < .818; all interactions, Fs < 1.025.
To explore the Adverbial × Grammatical Aspect
interaction, a follow-up simple main effect of adverbial
across levels of grammatical aspect was conducted in this
word region. No comparisons approached significance, ps >
.492.
In order to understand how different language groups
performed in this word region, posthoc pairwise
comparisons with Bonferroni adjustment revealed that the
reading speed of Chinese participants (M = .041, SE = .011)

2009

SF An ANCOVA controlling for English proficiency at the
sentence final word revealed a significant main effect of
language by both participants and items, F1(3, 80) = 7.122,
p < .001; F2(3, 56) = 11.948, p < .001. All other main
effects and interactions were not significant by either
participants or items: grammatical aspect, F1(1, 80) = 1.207,
p = .275; F2 < .952; adverbial, F1(1, 80) = .155, p = .695; F2
< .049; all interactions, Fs < 1.549.
To explore how different language groups performed in
this word region, posthoc pairwise comparisons with
Bonferroni adjustment revealed that the reading speed of
German participants (M = .162, SE = .016) was significantly
slower than that of native English speakers (M = .066, SE =
.021), p = .004, and Chinese participants (M = .077, SE =
.022), p = .01, respectively. German participants also
appeared to be slower than Korean participants (M = .098,
SE = .02), p = .087. All other comparisons were not
significant, ps > .087.
Taken together, the ANCOVA analyses revealed several
interesting results. At the verb, there were no RT differences
by condition collapsed across language groups. The same
was generally true for V+1. At V+2, native English speakers
exhibited marginally significant trends that Adverbial
Coercion and Grammatical Coercion sentences took longer
time to read. The Chinese participants, however, took
significantly longer to read control sentences relative to
Adverbial Coercion sentences (p = .003). At the sentence
final word, the German participants showed elevated RTs
across all conditions when compared to Korean, Chinese,
and native English participants.
General Discussion
Overall, results provided partial support for the first research
question that there is a processing cost for aspectual
coercion. Native English speakers had the tendency to slow
down at sentences involving Adverbial Coercion (All day
the kid jumped…) and Grammatical Coercion (At noon the
kid was jumping…), even though the reading time results
were only marginally different from their control
counterparts. These findings were consistent with the
general prediction that aspectual coercion may incur a
somewhat greater processing cost. However, it is noted that
these results were delayed, and emerged only at the second
word after the verb (V+2). It is unclear why no strong,
immediate online effects emerge as other self-paced reading
studies have shown. Brennan and Pylkkänen (2008), for
example, presented evidence that iterative coercion can
produce significant, immediate effects. The highly salient
semelfactive verbs used in this experiment may have been
responsible for the diminished online effects within native
English speakers.
Despite these suggestive findings, one unambiguous result
was that aspectual coercion is mediated by the interaction
among grammatical aspect, lexical aspect, and adverbial.
This is evident in the significant Adverbial × Grammatical
Aspect interaction effect collapsed across language groups

at three of the four word regions probed, ps < .028. As
predicted, not only adverbials but also grammatical aspect
triggers aspectual coercion. This finding provides a new
theoretical insight to aspectual coercion phenomena, as
previous studies showed that a durative adverbial is
responsible for iteration involved in a semelfactive predicate
(e.g., Todorova et al., 2000). Here, results clearly show that
there is no reason to believe that temporal adverbials
independently cause processing slowdown. Instead, lexical
aspect, grammatical aspect, and adverbial conspire to shape
the aspectual interpretation of a sentence.
Moreover, the findings here were at odds with the
underspecification account put forward by Pickering et al.
(2006) to account for their null results. Pickering et al.
asserted that readers routinely underspecify aspectual
properties of an interpretation during comprehension. The
underspecification account seemed to be untenable here
because of the strong interaction between adverbial and
grammatical aspect. In this light, the current study is more
compatible with Brennan and Pylkkänen (2008), among
others.
For the first time, this study extended the psycholinguistic
investigation of aspectual coercion to non-native speakers.
Although native English speakers behaved differently from
non-native speakers in general, non-native speakers also
differed systematically from one another after removing preexisting differences in L2 English proficiency. For example,
the Chinese participants showed significantly shorter
reading times in Adverbial Coercion (All day the kid
jumped…) sentences than control sentences (At noon the kid
jumped…), which was opposite to the prediction (p = .003).
These results seemed puzzling at first glance. One potential
explanation may rest on the differences in the aspectual
systems of English and Chinese. According to Yang (1995),
the perfective marker le strongly prefers telic and bounded
situations in Chinese. This explains why the semelfactive
predicate kesou ‘cough’ in (2) cannot felicitously co-occur
with le, because semelfactives are by definition atelic (i.e.,
Activities). However, when a bounded temporal situation is
introduced via a verbal classifier phrase yi-sheng ‘once’ as
shown in (3), the utterance becomes felicitous.
(2) *Lisi kesou le
Lisi cough PERF
“Lisi coughed”
(3) Lisi kesou le
yi-sheng
Lisi cough PERF one-CL
“Lisi coughed once”
(Yang, 1995; cited in Xiao & McEnery, 2004, p. 103)
Xiao and McEnery (2004) adduced native Chinese corpus
data to support the idea that the sensitivity of le to
boundedness is relative rather than absolute. In their sample,
an overwhelming 89.4% of all 1138 tokens of le occur in
bounded contexts, whereas a meager 10.6% occurred in
unbounded contexts. Of the 27 tokens of semelfactives
taking le in the same corpus, 16 are bounded by additional

2010

adverbials that impose a spatially or temporally bounded
situation. This distributional pattern suggests that the
semelfactive plus durative adverbial combination is
quantitatively more common in Chinese. Although Xiao and
McEnery did not articulate the underlying reason for such a
language-specific bias in Chinese, they maintained that
semelfactive verbs taking perfective le prefers to be
bounded, particularly by means of a verbal classifier phrase,
verb reduplication, or by a for-adverbial as shown in (4).
(4)

Da-le
ni
ji-tian
beat-PERF you how-many-day
“For how many days did they beat you?”
(Xiao & McEnery, 2004, p. 111)
The co-occurrence of a semelfactive verb taking le in the
presence of a durative adverbial in (4) is equivalent to the
Adverbial Coercion construction in English. Accordingly,
the processing advantage found in Chinese participants can
be attributed to the skewed distribution of le in bounded
contexts for semelfactives. Although I consider such a
possibility using Xiao and McEnery’s Chinese corpus data,
future Chinese sentence processing experiments will need to
independently verify this claim. What is remarkable here is
that Chinese participants exhibited a language-specific bias
from their L1 Chinese aspectual system even when they
were reading in English. If that’s the case, results from
Chinese participants provided crucial support for L1
transfer.
Korean participants did not show any within-subject
differences in terms of their reading performance across
experimental conditions. They exhibited trends of aspectual
coercion, despite the absence of statistically significant
results. The same can be said about the German participants
in which the reading times performance were highly
comparable across conditions. I reckon that the lack of
grammatical aspect (and associated grammaticized
meanings) is responsible for their indifference (e.g.,
Stutterheim & Carroll, 2006).

Conclusion
What is interesting about aspectual coercion is that it
involves contextual re-interpretation of aspectual
information, rendering it computationally more demanding
for non-native speakers. Although this prediction has not
been borne out in all non-native speaker groups, the current
study revealed important L1-based variations that could not
have been exposed otherwise. A psycholinguistic
investigation comparing both the performance of native and
non-native speakers can thus reveal rather than obscure
aspectual coercion operations in the course of language
processing. Importantly, I contend that the so-called online
aspectual coercion effects arise from a prototype
organization of aspectual categories, which is, not
surprisingly, prone to L1 influence in a systematic way.

Acknowledgments
I thank my advisors Shirai Yasuhiro and Charles Perfetti,
three anonymous reviewers, and the Language Learning
Dissertation Grant for financial support.

References
Brennan, J., & Pylkkänen, L. (2008). Processing events: Behavioral
and neuromagnetic correlates of aspectual coercion. Brain &
Language, 106, 132-143.
Chan, H. L. (2012). Tense-aspect Processing in Second Language
Learners. University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh.
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect: An introduction to the study of verbal
aspect and related problems. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Corrigan, A., Dobson, B., Kellman, E., Palmer, A., Peterson, J., Spaan,
M., et al. (1979). English placement test. Ann Arbor, MI: University
of Michigan English Language Institute.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of syntactic
processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 348-368.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). A theory of reading: From eye
fixations to comprehension. Psychological Review, 87, 329-354.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Wooley, J. D. (1982). Paradigms and
processes in reading comprehension. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 111, 228-238.
Moens, M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Temporal ontology and temporal
reference. Computational Linguistics, 14, 15-28.
Pickering, M. J., McElree, B., Frisson, S., Chen, L., & Traxler, M. J.
(2006). Underspecification and aspectual coercion. Discourse
Processes, 42, 131-155.
Piñango, M. M., Winnick, A., Ullah, R., & Zurif, E. (2006). Timecourse of semantic composition: The case of aspectual coercion.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 35, 233-244.
Piñango, M. M., Zurif, E., & Jackendoff, R. (1999). Real-time
processing implications of enriched composition at the syntaxsemantics interface. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 395414.
Rohde, D. (2001). LINGER (Version 2.9.4). Retrieved from
http://tedlab.mit.edu/~dr/Linger/
Smith, C. S. (1991). The parameter of aspect. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Smith, C. S. (1997). The parameter of aspect (2nd Ed.). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Stutterheim, C. von, & Carroll, M. (2006). The impact of grammatical
temporal categories on ultimate attainment in L2 learning. In H. D.
Weger-Guntharp, H. Byrnes & K. A. Sprang (Eds.), Educating for
advanced foreign language capacities: Constructs, curriculum,
instruction, assessment. Washington DC, USA: Georgetown
University Press.
Todorova, M., Straub, K., Badecker, W., & Frank, R. (2000).
Aspectual coercion and the online computation of sentential aspect.
In Proceedings of the twenty-second annual conference of the
cognitive science society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Garnsey, S. M. (1994).
Semantic influences on parsing: Use of thematic role information in
syntactic disambiguation. Journal of Memory and Language, 33,
285-318.
Wulff, S., Ellis, N. C., Römer, U., Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Leblanc, C. J.
(2009). The acquisition of tense-aspect: Converging evidence from
corpora and telicity ratings. The Modern Language Journal, 93,
354-369.
Xiao, R., & McEnery, T. (2004). Aspect in Mandarin Chinese: A
corpus-based study. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

2011

