UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Associative strength and semantic activation in the mental lexicon: evidence from
continued word associations.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1596128p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
De Deyne, Simon
Navarro, Daniel
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Associative strength and semantic activation in the mental lexicon: evidence from
continued word associations
Simon De Deyne (simon.dedeyne@ppw.kuleuven.be)a,b
Daniel J. Navarro (daniel.navarro@adelaide.edu.au)b
Gert Storms (gert.storms@ppw.kuleuven.be)a
a

University of Leuven, Department of Psychology, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
b University of Adelaide, School of Psychology, 5005 Adelaide, Australia
Abstract

ity of recall in cued-recall tasks (Nelson, Zhang, & McKinney, 2001), reaction times in lexical decision (De Deyne,
Navarro, & Storms, 2012) and generation frequencies in fluency tasks (Griffiths, Steyvers, & Tenenbaum, 2007). Moreover, the overlap of the distributions of these strengths for two
words indicates how semantically related they are and this is
the basis of the success of lexico-semantic models such as
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA, Landauer & Dumais, 1997)
and topic models (Griffiths et al., 2007).

In a word association task, the probability of producing a certain response to a cue is considered to be a direct measure of
associative strength between words in the mental lexicon. The
common single word association procedure is limited, since
the number of words connected to a cue might be underestimated when a single response is asked. The continued association task overcomes this limitation by asking a person to
generate multiple associative responses. To test whether continued strengths allow a better approximation of our lexicon,
an experiment was conducted in which participants judged the
associative strength between words.
Our results show that in contrast to other semantic tasks, continued strength predicts weak to moderate judgments only.
Two explanations based on the sampling of information and
differential semantic activation of later responses in continued
association are proposed. Theoretical implications for semantic activation and methodological implications for derivation
of strength are discussed.
Keywords: associative strength, semantic relatedness; word
associations.

The free word association task has been used extensively to
investigate processes and structure in semantic and episodic
memory. The task is attractive because it is unconstrained
and straightforward, and no apriori restrictions are formulated
about what types of relationships between words are deemed
relevant. It leads to a rich and varied source of information.
Compared to constrained tasks such as feature generation,
it tends to provide more thematic relations like DOCTOR NURSE . There is increasing agreement that this thematic information determines much of how natural language concepts
are used both in daily life and in language phenomena studied
in the lab including semantic priming, metaphor comprehension, categorization and induction (e.g. Lin & Murphy, 2001;
Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999).
An influential metaphor for the representation of this
knowledge presents the mental lexicon as a weighted graph,
where the structure of the links between the nodes (words)
determines how words relate to each other and get their meaning. Obviously, the value of such a representation hinges on
how the words are connected and on what determines the
strength of these connections. The key assumption underlying the word association task, is that the number of people that generate a specific response to a cue is an indication of the strength between cue and response. Approximating the relations in the lexicon through word associations explains numerous phenomena: facilitation of word processing in associative priming (Hutchison, 2003), the probabil-

Associative strength is central to how we process the meaning of words, but the traditional way of measuring it, through
asking a participant a single word association, is not without limitations. The response frequencies from the single
word association task are considered reliable only for the very
strong associates, since weaker responses are often missing
(Nelson, McEvoy, & Dennis, 2000). This lack of weak associations is seen as a general drawback of the word association
procedure (Aitchison, 2003, p. 101) and has been responsible for questioning the results of previous findings in numerous tasks such as mediated priming (e.g., Chwilla, Kolk, &
Mulder, 2000). Presumably, this reflects dominance effects
where for a cue like UMBRELLA a single strong associate
such as RAIN accounts for almost all responses (Nelson &
Bajo, 1985). While the exact causes of dominance effects are
not well understood, it is obvious that they make the response
distributions overly sparse, and bias all kinds of association
derived strength measures.
Recently, a large-scale continued word association
database was completed involving over 70,000 participants
and 3 million responses (De Deyne, Navarro, & Storms,
2012). In contrast to previous studies, a continued word association task was used in which subjects were presented a short
list of stimulus or cue words and asked to give three different
responses to each of these cues. The goal of the present study
is to investigate how word association frequencies in continued tasks map onto associative strength. If single word associations tend to underestimate or be unreliable for weaker
responses, then we would expect that using information encoded in later responses might alleviate this problem. This
would support previous findings where semantic relatedness
derived from continued association norms results in a better predictor of semantic tasks including pair-wise similarity
judgments (De Deyne, Peirsman, & Storms, 2009), prototypicality judgments (De Deyne, Voorspoels, Verheyen, Navarro,

2142

& Storms, 2011), and response times in the lexical decision
task (De Deyne et al., 2012).
Since continued word association data only became available recently (cfr. De Deyne et al., 2012), few have studied
strength derived from multiple responses and how it relates
to other measures of associative strength. For instance in the
study of Garskof (1965) calculated strength using continued
associations to 20 cues and found that a weighted sum depending on the rank of the response correlated higher than a
measure of strength that did not take into account response
position. In contrast to previous work, this study presents
a systematic comparison of measures of strength by looking at the contribution of continued responses alongside that
of single responses using a recently proposed task in which
participants judge associative strength of word pairs directly
(Koriat, 2008; Maki, 2007) and compare it to single associate
strength measures.
Sometimes the best way to understand a phenomenon is to
take a step back. To aid the interpretation of the pattern of results from the judgment of associative strength task, the second part of this paper describes additional evidence by comparing expected strengths of continued responses with the observed strengths of these responses in the continued task. This
analysis allows us to interpret quantitative differences (due to
the sampling regime in continued association), and qualitative differences in terms of the types of semantic information
activated in later responses.

Judgment of Associative Strength Experiment
In a series of experiments on associative strength, Maki
(2007) asked subjects to estimate how many people out of 100
would consider two words to be associated. Using a similar
judgment of association strength task, our goal was to find out
whether continued responses provide a better approximation
compared to a single response procedure.
To test this hypothesis we compared various models, starting with a simple one that predicts judgments using the word
association counts of the first three response positions (R1 ,
R2 , R3 ). Strength can be forward strength (FS), or the probability that a certain response is generated given a cue or backward strength (BS): the probability of a certain cue given a
specific response. These measures are easily derived by dividing the frequency of a certain response by the total number
of responses for that cue.

Method
Participants Fifty native Dutch speaking psychology students participated in exchange for course credit.
Stimuli and Materials The stimuli were selected from a set
of more than 12,000 Dutch cues that were part of a large scale
continued word association database described in De Deyne
et al. (2012). Similar to De Deyne et al. (2012) single and
multiple response strength were derived from the graph G1
based on the first response G2 based on the secondary and G3
for tertiary responses. These graphs were obtained by con-

verting the bimodal cue by response matrix to a unimodal cue
by cue matrix by retaining those responses present in the set
of cues. This makes it possible to get estimates of both backward and forward strength since all responses are also present
as a cue in such a graph. For each cue, FS was calculated using only the first response (G1 ) or including the sum of all
three responses G123 . The cues were determined randomly
subject to following conditions. Only responses that were
present both in G1 and G123 were considered. The difference in response strength was calculated and responses were
selected that differentiated between both graphs.
A total of 80 associated cues and responses were chosen
to cover the entire range of forward and backward strength
between 0 and 1. All words in the judgment tasks were
unique and only Dutch words were admitted that had a word
frequency larger than one in the SUBTLEX-NL word frequency norms (Keuleers, Brysbaert, & New, 2010). Similar
as in Maki (2007), 20 unrelated pairs such as RAFT–LION or
TASK – SIN were added to the 80 related pairs. Since these
do not share any associations, their forward and backward
strengths equaled zero.1
Procedure Participants were tested during a collective session in a computer room using an online survey. Similar to Maki (2007) the subjects were familiarized with the
word association task. Each participant was asked to give
three responses to a set of 15 cues in a task identical to the
one described in De Deyne et al. (2012). Upon completion
of the word association study they were directed to the instruction page for the judgment of associative strength study
and asked to estimate how many out of a hundred persons
from Belgium, would give a certain association. An example
was shown for a highly related pair (CAPTAIN–BOAT) and a
weakly related pair (CAPTAIN–HAT). Finally, they were told
to use a sliding scale to indicate their judgments and to consider the entire range of the scale from 0 to 100. A total of
100 items were presented in a randomized order and had the
following format: In a word association task, the word X
was presented. How many people out of 100 responded with
the word Y? The judgment of associative strength task took
about 10 minutes on average to complete.

Results and Discussion
The average of all ratings was calculated and the SpearmanBrown formula for split-half reliability was applied on the
data from 50 subjects. The result showed that the ratings were
highly reliable: rsplithal f (100) = .99.
The judgment of association strength as a function of
normed association based on single response strength FS1 is
plotted in Figure 1. This Figure shows that weak and moderately strong normed associates are overestimated in the judgments of strength (as indicated by their relative position toward the diagonal), while strong associates tend to be underestimated. This is in line with the previous findings reported
1 A full list of the stimuli is available from http://www
.smallworldofwords.com/experiments/

2143

Table 1: Regression models (#M) for the prediction of judged
associative strength. Only significant models are reported and
adjusted R2 s are used throughout.
M
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5

Figure 1: Scatter plot for judged and normed FS1 together
with regression line and confidence bounds.
by Maki (2007). The relative contribution of different instantiations of associative strength measures based on continued
association was investigated through a series of regression
analyses where we focused on straightforward predictors that
corresponded to interpretable and theoretically interesting aspects of strength.2
Strength in related pairs In a first series of analyses, only
the related items are considered as these data have non-zero
values for both forward and backward strength measures. The
results of the analyses are presented in Table 1. The simplest model predicts judgments of associative strength by
the normed strength of the first response (FS1 ). Model 1
accounts already for 56% of the variance and found a significant effect of FS1 , β = .75, p < .01. A second model
is one where strength is averaged over all three responses:
FS123 = (FS1 + FS2 + FS3 )/3). This predictor was significant (β = .70, p < .01), but the model only captured 49% of
the variance. In contrast to previous studies (cfr. De Deyne
et al., 2011, 2012), the added information from R2 and R3
does not improve the prediction of the judgments of associations strength. Model 3 considers the possibility that judged
strength is a function of both forward and backward strength
of R1 . Both FS1 (β = .70, p < .01) and BS1 (β = .21, p < .01)
were significant predictors and provided the best account of
the data so far.
Next, we investigated if R2 and R3 responses provide additional information beyond that captured in R1 . Model 4
expands Model 1 by including FS2 , resulting in significant
effects for FS1 (β = .75, p < .01) but not FS2 (β = .11, ns)
resulting in little extra variance accounted for (see Table 1).
Similarly, no effect was found for FS3 in any additional analysis that was not accounted for by either FS1 or FS2 . So these
will not be discussed further.
2 To reduce the skew in the count-based strength measures a logtransformation was used.

F-test

Related
Regression Equation

F(1,78) = 99.8
F(1,78) = 75.9
F(2,77) = 58.9
F(2,77) = 51.7
F(3,76) = 52.0

69 + 22FS1
88 + 14FS123
83 + 21FS1 + 16BS1
74 + 22FS1 + 7FS2
90 + 17FS1 + 8BS1 + 29Rel

ns

25% Quantile
–

F(1,37) = 6.4
F(1,37) = 4.3
F(2,36) = 8.5
F(3,35) = 11.3

71 + 91FS123
59 + 14FS2
102 + 16FS2 + 43BS1
107 + 17FS2 + 22BS1 + 38Rel

R2
.556
.487
.594
.562
.659
–
.125
.080
.284
.448

A final model considered the role of relatedness. It is
quite possible that when faced with uncertainty about exact
strength, participants use the semantic relatedness between
the cue and target to infer how strongly associated they are.
Semantic relatedness was calculated as the cosine between
the cue and response vector (see De Deyne et al. (2012) for
additional details). Intuitively a high cosine indicates many
shared associates between two words, while a low cosine
indicates few shared associates. Model 5 gave the best fit
of the data (R2 = .66), with significant effects for both FS1
(β = .59, p < .01) and relatedness (Rel, β = .31, p < .01). BS1
was no longer significant (β = .10, ns).
Modeling weak strengths Still, it might be too early to
conclude that normed strength from later responses never predicts strength judgments. As can be seen from Figure 1, FS1
at the low end of the scale does not distinguish much of the
observed judged data. Possibly, strength derived from later
responses results in more stable estimates for those responses
that occur less frequent as R1 . At this low end of the FS1
scale, participants might make use of richer information, corresponding to information encoded in FS2 , FS3 , backward
strength, or semantic relatedness.
To investigate if the weak strengths are better captured by
R2 and R3 , a subsection of the data presented was selected by
placing a cut-off at the first quartile of FS1 , as most of the
remaining data were not explained by FS1 .
The same models as presented before were now used to
predict these data. The results for FS1 in Model 1 confirmed
the pattern in Figure 1, as it was unable to predict any data.
A significant effect for summed strength FS123 (β = .38, p <
.05) was found in Model 2, explaining 13% of the variance.
Since FS1 did not explain the data, a new model consisting
of FS2 was tested and found significant (β = .32, p < .05).
The following models therefore use FS2 rather than FS1 . In
Model 4, both FS2 (β = .38, p < .01) and BS1 (β = .47, p <
.01) were significant and accounted for 28% of the variance.

2144

The final model including relatedness explained most of the
variance (45%) with a significant effect of FS2 (β = .40, p <
.01) and relatedness (β = .47, p < .01), but no significance
for backward strength BS1 (β = .24, ns).
Together, these results support the idea that the judgment
of association strength task is sensitive to normed associative strength, and closely replicates the previous findings of
(Maki, 2007). However, our main goal was to investigate
whether continued responses lead to better approximations
of judged strength. Our findings support this hypotheses, but
only for weak or moderate strengths. Since no large-scale
studies have looked at the effect of continued associations,
the next section will go into detail about which mechanisms
might cause these results.

What factors determine the contribution of
continued responses?
A question that arises from the previous findings is why
strength measures that include R2 and R3 responses systematically improve the prediction in a variety of semantic tasks
such as similarity judgment tasks or lexical decision tasks
(De Deyne et al., 2012), but not in the judgment of association task. Can we provide an explanation why they capture no
additional information compared to R1 strengths at the high
range of the scale?
Sampling without replacement hypothesis. A first explanation is based on the idea that continued responses are biased due to the continued nature of the task. More precisely,
participants are not allowed to repeat a response. Especially
when a certain R1 association is very dominant, the proportion of participants who did not generate it as R1 but could
generate it as R2 , will be very low. Summing strengths in
these cases might bias strength for such a response. In other
words, the strength measures for R2 and R3 do not take into
account this sampling without replacement. As consequence
of the restriction of sampling without replacement, we expect
FS2 to be heavily biased for the strong responses, but at least
capture moderate and weak strengths. If sampling without
replacement is the main factor governing the observed frequencies for continued responses, then the derived expected
strengths for the secondary and tertiary association response
should closely agree with the observed strength for R2 and
R3 .
Given a specific cue with N different responses one can derive the expected R2 response count for x from its probability
as a first response R1 as follows:
N

P(R2 = x) = P(R1 = x)

P(R1 = i)
i=1,i6=x 1 − P(R1 = i)

∑

(1)

The same principle holds for the derivation of the joint
expected response for R3 . For each of the 12,428 cues in
G1 , the expected R2 strengths were calculated using Equation 1. If differences between expected and observed FS2
strengths are primarily caused by the sampling without re-

Figure 2: Averages and SD for correlation between expected
and observed FS2 (left-hand y-axis) grouped by entropy (H).
A histogram of entropy for each cue with counts was added
(right-hand y-axis).
placement, then the expected and observed values should be
similar up to some random noise. For each of the cues,
the correlations between expected and observed strength distributions were obtained and had an average correlation of
r(12428) = .71(SD = .13). At this point, it is not clear what
determines high or low agreement. A corollary from the
strength without replacement explanation is that the degree of
bias in FS2 or FS3 will depends on the set-size or heterogeneity of the R1 response distribution which can be formalized as
entropy H:
N
1
(2)
H = ∑ pi log2
pi
i=1
where N is the size of the vocabulary or number of different
responses and pi is the probability for the ith response. H
increases as the responses become more heterogeneous and
equals zero if all responses were identical.
Figure 2 shows the average correlations binned as function
of the entropy for the cues. For cues with few responses, the
correlation between expected and observed counts is lower.
Similarly, the cues with a very heterogeneous response set
corresponding to the high entropy words at the right-hand
side of Figure 2 also exhibit lower agreement than average
entropy cues. A possible explanation of the former effect
is due to dominance effects previously observed in cued recall (Nelson & Bajo, 1985), where a single strong response
inhibits the retrieval of other weaker ones. For these low
entropy cues we expect higher utility of FS2 or FS3 in the
judgment of associative strength assuming that the effect of
dominance is removed once the response is generated and
additional information becomes accessible. The latter effect
could be due to unreliability, where at the high extreme cues
elicit only idiosyncratic responses. Little benefit of FS2 can
be expected for high entropy cues, since there is no reason
to expect very heterogeneous responses to become more coherent in the later responses. For these cues it should be dif-

2145

ficult predicting associative strength whether this strength is
based on FS1 or FS2 . New pilot studies seem to support this
entropy interaction. However, there are number of reasons
why sampling restrictions cannot completely explain the observed response distributions for continued responses. First
of all, this does not explain why the heterogeneity or entropy
increases when more than one response per cue is asked. Second, it might be the case that for different response positions,
distinct types of semantic information becomes available.
Time course of Semantic Activation Hypothesis. A possible explanation why some R2 and R3 responses are generated much more (or less) frequent than expected based on
R1 when sampling without replacement is taken into account
stems from the idea that qualitatively different sources of information are accessed. A first possibility is that the type
of response for R2 and R3 is influenced by the previous response beyond previously noted sampling restrictions. Such
an order effect is called chaining, and can be illustrated for
the cue S WISS, where MOUNTAINS is given more frequently
as an R1 (57%) than R2 (16%), while it is expected 26% of
cases in R2 . Together with the observation that SNOW is given
less frequently than expected from its R1 counts, one can assume an associative chain: S WISS → MOUNTAINS → SNOW.
The presence of chaining can be quite easily investigated,
and previous research suggest this phenomenon is quite rare
(De Deyne & Storms, 2008).
Second, the different time course of automatic and qualitatively different types of semantic information might be a more
important factor. Consider for example the cue GORILLA
where MONKEY is generated in 72 times as R1 . It is expected
to occur 21 times as R2 yet occurs only 6 times. At the same
time, BIG is generated 18 times as R2 , but is expected to occur 6 times at most. Perhaps linguistic or superficial information like superordinate labels precede entity properties as in
this example. Both behavioral (Santos, Chaigneau, Simmons,
& Barsalou, 2011) and fMRI studies (Simmons, Hamann,
Harenski, Hu, & Barsalou, 2008) support the idea that gradually deeper semantic information becomes activated. For example, in an experiment by Santos et al. (2011), participants
generated about 1.7 responses in a continued time delimited
task. In this study, later responses tended to convey a shift
from primarily linguistic responses towards taxonomic- and
especially thematic- and entity-related responses.
Perhaps a better way to study the time course of semantic activation is based on a comparison between observed and
expected response frequencies for continued responses given
the response distribution of the first response. Such a comparison is more accurate compared to previous approaches since
it is not biased by (lack of) opportunity to generate a previous
response in the continued procedure. To investigate what type
of information is different in the second and third response of
the word associations, we calculated the expected response
frequencies for R2 and R3 (cfr. Equation 1) and compared
them with the observed response frequencies by subtracting
observed from expected R2 and R3 . A positive value indicates

Figure 3: Distribution of semantic knowledge for observed
responses in R2 and R3 that are either over- or underestimated
based on expected R2 and R3 responses.
that the observed response in R2 or R3 is less likely to be generated than expected and this information is underestimated
in R2 or R3 . A negative value indicates that the response is
generated more often than expected and is overestimated in
the observed R2 or R3 counts. Since it is practical unfeasible
to manually code all possible cue-response pairs only a subset
of the data was used. For each of the +12,000 cues the most
extreme (one positive, one negative) responses were listed,
once for R2 and once for R3 . Both sets were sorted and only
the 1,000 most negative and 1,000 most positive differences
were retained for further analysis.
The relationship between 2,000 R2 and 2,000 R3 cueresponse pairs was coded as either as entity, introspective,
lexical, thematic or taxonomic using similar guidelines as
those described in De Deyne and Storms (2008) and Santos
et al. (2011). Entity responses encode properties of the cue
(e.g., MOON-YELLOW), introspective pairs encode evaluation
or affect towards the cue (MOON-PRETTY), lexical attributes
encode linguistic properties such as word compound completions, idioms, or rhyme (MOON-walk), thematic information
could refer to agents, time and place of an action etc. (MOONASTRONAUT ), taxonomic encodes super-,sub- and coordinates, synonyms and antonyms (MOON-PLANET). A detailed
discussion of the implications for various types of semantic is
beyond the scope of our illustration. For current purposes, we
are mainly interested in identifying potential systematicity in
qualitative response changes as a function of response position. The results in Figure 3 indicate that this is strongly the
case. The largest effect is for taxonomic information which
is much less likely to occur R2 and R3 than expected. To a
lesser extend, there is also a shift where less lexical responses
are generated as R2 or R3 . The positive shift shows that entity and thematic responses are generated more frequent than
expected for R2 and R3 . These findings support the previous conclusions that linguistic information (encoded lexical)
precedes conceptual types of information such as entity and
thematic information. In contrast to the findings of Santos et
al. (2011), our findings also show that taxonomic information
is available early in the generation process.

2146

This result also offer a potential qualitative interpretation
of the contrast between a lack of effect of FS2 in the judged
associative strength task and its significant contribution in
similarity judgment and other more semantic tasks if semantic knowledge related to entity features and thematic roles is
better encoded in R2 and R3 . Clearly, follow-up studies are
needed to further evaluate these hypotheses.

Discussion and Conclusion
Using a judgment of associative strength task, we investigated
the role of normed strength derived continued word associations. In contrast to previous reports where denser representations derived from second and third responses provided
better estimates of distributional relatedness and lexical centrality (De Deyne et al., 2012), we found that the contribution
of these responses is limited to weak or moderate response
strengths. Moreover, in contrast to previous studies, simply
summing response frequencies systematically resulted in inferior predictions for judgments of associative strength. Our
interpretation of this finding is based on the notion that later
responses are likely to underestimate the highest strengths
due to sampling without replacement.
When comparing expected strengths under sampling without replacement against the observed strengths, the differences in R2 and R3 are very systematic and point out how
semantic activation of types of knowledge changes over time,
an issue which has been notoriously difficult to measure using other paradigms including priming. Importantly, using
expected response frequencies for continued responses in
comparison with actual observed response frequencies might
provide a less biased baseline for tracking the time-course
of semantic activation through continued association tasks.
While different semantic information in continued responses
strongly reflects the divergence between expected and observed counts for R2 and R3 , it should be noted that other factors might also play a role. Since none of the responses in the
association data is stemmed, it is quite likely that some part
of the discrepancies will disappear when the data is processed
this way. Our findings also result in a number of methodological recommendations as we have shown that ignoring
sampling without replacement is problematic for low entropy
cues and the use of single or combined strength measure depends on the type of task under consideration (ranging from
associative to more semantic in nature).
At a theoretical level, our results challenge the main conclusions about the supposed overestimation bias of weak
and moderate associates in judgments of associative strength
(Maki, 2007; Koriat, 2008). The previous interpretation rests
on the assumption that word association frequencies veridically reflect strength and only a small number of different
responses are available (as is the case in single word association). Instead, we propose that this bias might not be due to
the judgments themselves but could equally be an artifact of
the single association procedure which underestimates low to
medium responses.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a research grant funded by the Research
Foundation - Flanders (FWO) to the first author and by the interdisciplinary research project IDO/07/002. Special thanks to Toon Van
Borm, Steven Verheyen and Amy Perfors for helpful comments.

References
Aitchison, J. (2003). Words in the mind: An introduction to the
mental lexicon. Wiley-Blackwell.
Chwilla, D., Kolk, H., & Mulder, G. (2000). Mediated priming in the
lexical decision task: Evidence from event-related potentials and
reaction time. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 314-341.
De Deyne, S., Navarro, D., & Storms, G. (2012). Better explanations of lexical and semantic cognition using networks derived
from continued rather than single word associations. Behavior
Research Methods, Advance online publication. 10.3758/s13428012-0260-7.
De Deyne, S., Peirsman, Y., & Storms, G. (2009). Sources of semantic similarity. In N. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 31th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(p. 1834-1839). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
De Deyne, S., & Storms, G. (2008). Word Associations: Network
and Semantic properties. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 213231.
De Deyne, S., Voorspoels, W., Verheyen, S., Navarro, D. J., &
Storms, G. (2011). Graded structure in adjective categories.
In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(p. 1834-1839). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Garskof, B. E. (1965). Relation between single word association
and continued asociation response hierarchies. Psychological Reports, 16, 307-309.
Griffiths, T. L., Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Topics in
semantic representation. Psychological Review, 114, 211-244.
Hutchison, K. (2003). Is semantic priming due to association
strength or feature overlap? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
10, 785-813.
Keuleers, E., Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2010). Subtlex-nl: A new
measure for dutch word frequency based on film subtitles. Behavior Research Methods, 42(3), 643–650.
Koriat, A. (2008). Alleviating information of conditional predictions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
106, 61-76.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s
Problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review,
104, 211-240.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). Thematic relations in adults’
concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 1, 3-28.
Maki, W. (2007). Judgments of associative memory. Cognitive
psychology, 54(4), 319–353.
Nelson, D. L., & Bajo, M. T. (1985). Prior knowledge and cued
recall: Category size and dominance. The American Journal of
Psychology, 98, 503-517.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Dennis, S. (2000). What is free
association and what does it measure? Memory & Cognition, 28,
887-899.
Nelson, D. L., Zhang, N., & McKinney, V. M. (2001). The Ties That
Bind What Is Known to the Recognition of What is New. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
27, 1147-1159.
Santos, A., Chaigneau, S., Simmons, W., & Barsalou, L. (2011).
Property generation reflects word association and situated simulation. Property generation reflects word association and situated
simulation. Language and Cognition,, 3, 83-119.
Simmons, W., Hamann, S., Harenski, C., Hu, X., & Barsalou, L.
(2008). fMRI evidence for word association and situated simulation in conceptual processing. Journal of Physiology - Paris, 102,
106-119.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Bassok, M. (1999). What Makes a Man Similar
to a Tie? Cognitive Psychology, 39, 208-238.

2147

