UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attentional Processing in Bistable Perception is Influenced by Genetic Effects Associated
with Sinistrality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/77g3b8g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Hancock, Roeland

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attentional Processing in Bistable Perception is Influenced by Genetic Effects
Associated with Sinistrality.
Roeland Hancock (rhancock@email.arizona.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1503 E. University Blvd.
Tucson, AZ 85721 USA
Abstract

and Necker cube displays (Shannon, Patrick, Jiang, Bernat,
& He, 2011). Several factors, including the visual properties
of the stimuli (e.g. intensity (Levelt, 1967)), eye movements
and attention, have been proposed to affect perceptual reversals.

Binocular rivalry displays and ambiguous figures such as the
Necker cube elicit a perceptual reversal effect mediated by
attentional and perceptual processes. Perceptual dominance
times are highly variable between individuals and may be partially influenced by genetic factors. This study examined the
role of putative genetic effects associated with familial sinistrality, derived from a novel pedigree-based genetic model. In
a continuous Necker viewing task, dominance times were significantly correlated (R2 = .36) with a multifactorial estimate
of genetic effects associated with non right-handedness. No
association with genetic estimates was found in an intermittent
viewing condition. These results suggest that genetic factors
associated with functional asymmetries may also affect noisebased perceptual alternation, but not short term visual memory.

Eye movements are related to perceptual reversals, but it is
not clear that eye movements directly cause reversals. Fixating on one face of the Necker cube biases perception, but
does not eliminate perceptual alternation, suggesting that reversals are not merely the result of scanning different areas
of the visual field (Toppino, 2003). Scotto, Oliva, and Tuccio (1990) showed Necker cube images that were partially
corrected for eye-movements which resulted in an increased
reversal rate over normal viewing conditions, further suggesting that bistable perception is not merely a product of
scanning eye movements across the visual field. van Dam
and van Ee (2005) examined the relation between perceptual reversals and eye movements and found no correlation
between reported reversals and involuntary micro-saccades,
however saccades and eye blinks were suppressed prior to
button presses. This suppression occurred both when subjects reported perceptual flips and experimentally controlled
stimulus flips. The number of blinks and saccades did not decrease prior to random button presses that were unrelated to
the stimulus. Thus, bistable perception appears to be related
to a cognitive process that then directs visual attention, rather
than the direct result of visual field changes.

Keywords: Bistable Perception; Attention; Individual Differences; Familial Sinistrality

Introduction
Functional cerebral lateralization has been proposed to arise
from a combination of constraints on interhemispheric connectivity (Ringo, Doty, Demeter, & Simard, 1994) and the
properties, such as excitability, of neural assemblies within
each hemisphere (Levitan & Reggia, 2000). Cerebral lateralization, particularly for language, is often associated with
individual hand preference as well as the handedness of close
relatives (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2010), suggesting a genetic
contribution to functional asymmetry. Genetic effects associated with familial handedness may in turn be linked to subtle neurobiological differences, including the distribution of
neurotransmitters involved in regulating neural excitability,
noise or interhemispheric connectivity. We adopt a simple
behavioral paradigm, the Necker cube viewing task, that may
be sensitive to these factors at multiple time scales to identify possible associations between neural function and familial handedness.
A variety of ambiguous visual displays can induce bistable
(or multistable) perception in observers, a state in which the
subjective interpretation of the display alternates between
perspectives. This can be induced through ambiguous figures (e.g. the Necker cube and Rubin’s face/vase illusion),
ambiguous motion or binocular rivalry displays in which different images are shown to each eye. Binocular rivalry displays allow more control over stimulus presentation and are
more widely studied than ambiguous displays, but similar
processes are assumed to drive alternation in both types of
displays. Dominance times–the duration for which a particular interpretation is perceived–are highly variable between individuals (Aafjes, Hueting, & Visser, 1966) and may be partially influenced by genetic factors in both binocular rivalry

The present study investigates individual variability in
Necker cube dominance times as a function of putative genetic effects associated with hand preference. Handedness
and familial sinistrality are known to affect lateralization of
other brain functions, notably language (Tzourio-Mazoyer et
al., 2010). Familial sinistrality has also been found to influence spatial processing (e.g. Mckeever (1986)) and resting brain states (Hancock, 2012), but has not been widely
studied with respect to the cognitive processes involved in
bistable perception. Although Necker cube viewing is typically not a lateralized task, fMRI and EEG studies suggest
that the reversal phenomenon is right-lateralized, at least initially (Pitts, Martı́nez, Stalmaster, Nerger, & Hillyard, 2009;
Britz & Pitts, 2011) and dominance time is associated with
grey matter volume in the right, but not left, superior parietal lobe (Kleinschmidt, Sterzer, & Rees, 2012). Unilateral
transcranial magnetic stimulation and caloric stimulation can
disrupt binocular rivalry and Necker cube reversals (Miller et
al., 2000), supporting bilateral contributions to bistable perception. While interhemispheric transfer across the corpus

543

may play some part in normal switching, it is unlikely to have
a critical effect on dominance cycles (Miller et al., 2000; Pettigrew, 2001). Instead, Pettigrew suggests that a subcortical
oscillatory mechanism, perhaps in the ventral tegmental area,
may drive rivalry. A model of interhemispheric switching
between two percepts is also difficult to reconcile with the
similar dynamics found in multistable perception, including
tristability (Wallis & Ringelhan, 2013).
Factors known to influence asymmetric brain function—
such as familial sinistrality—may have effects on bistable
perception, but these likely reflect neural differences within
hemispheres that could contribute to lateralization during development (Levitan & Reggia, 2000). Specifically, we hypothesize that familial sinistrality may partially account for
individual differences in neural excitability or noise, two critical parameters that determine dominance times in many models of bistable perception (e.g. Moreno-Bote, Rinzel, & Rubin, 2007). In addition, bistable perception offers an interesting test case for identifying such effects at multiple levels of
processing. The two Necker cube viewing tasks used here—a
continuous viewing and intermittent viewing condition—are
likely to differentially recruit perceptual processes. Bistable
perception recruits a fronto-parietal network of brain regions,
presumed to reflect contributions of both frontal, higherlevel attention processes and lower-level perceptual processes
(Sterzer, Kleinschmidt, & Rees, 2009). Intermittent viewing
conditions extend dominance times (Leopold, Wilke, Maier,
& Logothetis, 2002), likely reflecting in increased role for
visual memory processes in posterior brain regions. Functional studies suggest that brain asymmetries are multifactorial with partially independent factors controlling lateralization in brain regions associated with language, attention
and vision (Liu, Stufflebeam, Sepulcre, Hedden, & Buckner,
2009). Genetic effects associated with familial sinistrality are
proposed to influence one or more of these functions, which
may be observed as individual variability in the continuous
Necker cube task (reflecting contributions of attention and visual processing, modulated by short-term dynamics ) or in the
intermittent viewing task (reflecting primarily visual working
memory or slow neural processes).

handed relatives (Corey & Foundas, 2005), but these are not
widely used. Even when more genetically informed familial handedness measures are used, these are sometimes based
on a particular theory of genetic transmission and expression,
thus confounding familial handedness effects with a specific,
and likely incorrect, genetic model (e.g. McManus (1995)).
Applying these theories to calculate the likelihood of individual genotypes (which might then be used a covariate) also
requires assumptions regarding allele frequencies to be made.
Recently, Karev (2011) proposed a quantitive measure of familial handedness based on weighting left-handed relatives
by relatedness, finding that this measure correlates with hand
preference measures.
In an effort to increase power and more robustly associate familial sinistrality effects with putative genetic effects,
a standard multifactorial threshold model was used to estimate genetic load for left handedness in individual subjects.
This model treats the phenotype as function of multiple genetic loci, each probably associated with small genetic effect,
and multiple environmental effects. Unlike single gene models (Annett, 1985; McManus, 1991; see McManus, Davison
and Armour (in press) for a multi-locus variant of the dextral
chance model), this approach does not assume that the genetic
component of the phenotype is controlled largely or entirely
by posited genes with a given transmission probability and
penetrance, however it can account for such effects when alleles make additive contributions to the phenotype (as is this
case in McManus’s model). This approach extends Karev
(2011) by considering not only the relatedness of left-handed
relatives but also their expected genetic effects. This is similar to McManus (1995), but relies only a standard multifactorial model, as opposed to a particular major gene model. The
basic assumption of the multifactorial genetic model is that
multiple loci additively contribute to a continuous phenotype
and interact with environmental effects. For example, a multifactorial model of height would assume a set of loci with
alleles at each loci adding or subtracting a small amount from
the phenotype. The summed contribution of these alleles is
the additive genetic effect or genetic load. The genetic effect
interacts with environment, for example hormones or nutrient
levels, to produce the expressed phenotype. Formally, we can
consider the contribution of genes to a phenotype as being
described by the linear model

Genetic Models of Handedness
Most studies of familial handedness effects treat familial
handedness as a categorical variable, broadly classifying subjects as those reporting only right-handed relatives (FS-)
or reporting at least one non right-handed relative (FS+).
Considering the low heritability of handedness (20-30%,
Medland et al. (2009)), problems introduced by considering variable family sizes and family envelopes of interest
(Bishop, 1990), and placing subjects who may have vastly
different susceptibilities into the same group, categorical classification is likely to be an underpowered approach to studying genetic effects associated with handedness. Power can be
increased substantially with the use of non-categorical measures of familial sinistrality, such as the proportion of left-

y = Xβ + Aa + e.

(1)

where y is the measured phenotype, X is a matrix of observations for fixed effects (sex and founder status, in this case),
β is the vector of fixed effects, a is the vector of additive genetic effects and e is a vector of environmental effects. A is
an n × n matrix describing how n individuals are related in
terms of their expected allele sharing. For example, Ai, j = .5
indicates that individuals i and j share (theoretically) 50% of
their genes, i.e. i and j are siblings or a parent/offspring pair.
For simplicity, we consider only autosomal effects.
We employ the Bayesian formulation of (1)

544

y|β, a, σ2e ∼ N(Xβ + Aa, Iσ2e )

(2)

a|A, σ2a ∼ N(0, Aσ2a )

(3)

the posterior distribution of additive genetic effects is fixed
by the prior distribution. To improve the mixing properties of the model, effects were estimated only for individuals in FS+ families and individuals with missing data who
did not form an ancestral link in a given pedigree were removed from the pedigree. For example, avuncular relatives
and grandparents of unknown handedness were removed, but
a parent of unknown handedness who had multiple children
of known handedness would be retained. Families with fewer
than three phenotype individuals were also removed. Pedigrees were pruned using the prunePed function in the R
MCMCglmm package (Hadfield, 2010). Phenotypes of the remaining unknown individuals were replaced at random, conditional on known family members. Convergent logit models were estimated with MCMCglmm using a slice sampling
Monte Carlo Markov chain (MCMC) algorithm with block
updating (Sorensen & Gianola, 2002; Hadfield, 2010) for
2,500,000 iterations with a burn in period of 500,000 iterations and thinning interval of 100.

with
and an uninformative prior for fixed effects β, e.g.
β ∼ N(0, 106 )

(4)

For binary phenotypes, we assume that the observed phenotype is obtained by thresholding a latent continuous variable (the liability) (Falconer, 1965). If the liability, `, exceeds a threshold value t0 (say t0 = 0, since the liability distribution can be shifted arbitrarily), then the binary phenotype
(e.g. disease or left-handedness) is expressed. The liability is
distributed as in (2)
`|β, a, σ2e ∼ N(Xβ + Aa, Iσ2e ).

(5)

where ` is mapped to a categorical phenotype c = 1, 2, . . . , k
by the partition
t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tk−1 < tk .

Methods

(6)

Participants
Nineteen participants (10 female) with no reported non righthanded relatives and 26 (14 female) participants with at least
one reported left-handed relative, all native English speakers,
were recruited from introductory psychology courses at the
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA and received course
credit for participation. Participants were screened by self
report for history of brain injury, neurological and psychiatric disorders, medication, and normal vision. Research was
approved by the University of Arizona Institutional Review
Board.

so that
(
1 tc−1 < li ≤ tc
Pr(yi = c|li ,tc−1 ,tc ) =
0 otherwise.

(7)

Fitting this model to family pedigrees provides a posterior
distribution of additive effects for each individual in the pedigree that can be then be used as a covariate.

Pedigrees
Data for fitting the model were obtained from a survey of
hand preferences for blood relatives distributed to 4561 students in introductory psychology courses at the University of
Arizona. Respondents were asked to report hand preferences
(left, right, ambidextrous or unknown) for each parent and
grandparent. For brothers, sisters, aunts and uncles, respondents were asked to provide the number of relatives in each
relation with left, right, ambidextrous or unknown hand preference from the options 0, 1, 2 and ”3 or more” (coded as
3 relatives). Respondents also reported their sex, hand preferences for writing, drawing and throwing a ball (on a five
point scale from ’strong left’ to ’strong right’) and foot preference for kicking a ball. Respondents were considered righthanded if they reported a ’moderate right’ or ’strong right’
preference for writing hand, ambidextrous if they reported
’no preference’ and left-handed if they reported a ’strong left’
or ’moderate left’ hand preference. Respondents were not
given any criteria for determining relatives’ handedness. A
similar questionnaire was administered to each experimental
participant.
Since the observed liability for right-handed individuals
is always below threshold, purely right-handed families are
uninformative with respect to random effect estimates, i.e.

Procedure
A white-on-black Necker cube (Figure 1A) was presented,
centered on a 15 inch LCD display at a viewing distance of
15 inches. Stimuli subtended a visual angle of approximately
4 degrees. Stimuli were presented using the MATLAB-based
(Mathworks, Natick, MA) Psychtoolbox (Brainard, 1997) on
Windows XP. Participants were seated at eye level with the
center of the display using a chin rest to minimize movement. Participants were instructed to focus on a small cross in
the center of the Necker cube, to avoid deliberately switching
perspectives and to report perspective changes by pressing a
key corresponding to the new perspective. The left and right
arrow keys of a standard keyboard were labeled with images
of the ”left” (Figure 1B) and ”right” (Figure 1C) perspectives,
respectively. Participants were instructed to respond with the
first and second fingers of their right hand and were familiarized with the two perspectives prior to the experiment. The
experiment consisted of a continuous viewing condition, designed to elicit spontaneous perceptual reversals followed by
an intermittent viewing condition designed to extend dominance times (Leopold et al., 2002) and recruit memory processes (Pastukhov & Braun, 2008) or slow neural dynamics.

545

Dominance times were significantly shorter for the ”right”
perspective (β = .47, p < .001).
Mean Dominance Times

A

35

FS+

35

FS−

Figure 1: A Necker cube (A) and the perceived left (B) and
right (C) perspectives.

30
25
20

20

●●

15

15

●
●

10

●
●

●

●

●
●● ●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

0

0

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

● ●

●●
●
●●
●
● ●

5

10

C

●

5

B

Dominance time (s)

25

30

●

−0.6

−0.4

●●

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

a

In the continuous viewing condition, the Necker cube was
continuously presented during four blocks, with self-paced
breaks between each block. In each block, the complete
Necker cube was shown for 200 seconds. As a check for random responses, one perspective, selected at random, of the
complete Necker cube was reduced in intensity over 30 seconds to gradually produce a partially unambiguous cube and
a corresponding increase in dominance time. This process began 0-30 seconds (uniformly distributed) after the end of each
block, followed by a 30 second presentation of the complete
Necker cube. In the intermittent viewing condition, participants saw an alternating sequence of a Necker cube followed
by a fixation screen without the cube. On each intermittent
trial, the Necker cube was shown for 750, 1225 or 2000 ms
followed by a fixation screen for 1000, 2236 or 5000 ms. All
combinations of stimulus duration and inter stimulus interval
(ISI) were repeated 24 times. Participants reported their perspective at the beginning of each trial and again if a reversal
was experienced.

Figure 2: Correlation (R2 = .36) between continuous viewing
dominance times and estimated additive genetic effects (a).
FS- individuals are shown for comparison only.

Intermittent Viewing
Intermittent viewing times were uncorrelated with continuous viewing times (r = −.05, p = .74) or estimated genetic
effects (r = .13, p = .53; Figure 3) and were significantly
longer (M = 17.84 sec, SD = 17.65) than continuous dominance times (t(43) = 6.70, p < .001).

Discussion
Increasing estimated genetic load for non right-handedness
in right-handed subjects was associated with increased dominance times in the continuous viewing condition. Although
no control for differences in overall motor response speed
as a function of familial sinistrality was included, the increase in dominance time during disambiguated display periods and intermittent viewing suggests that participants’ responses were directly related to the perceived orientation of
the Necker cube. Current models of bistable perception propose that reversals are the result of an interaction between
parietal/occipital perceptual and visual working memory processes and noisy frontal attentional processes (Sterzer et al.,
2009). In the context of these models (Gigante, Mattia,
Braun, & Del Giudice, 2009; Moreno-Bote et al., 2007), the
dissociation between familial sinistrality effects in the continuous and intermittent viewing conditions suggests that the
genetic effects of interest selectively act on frontal processes
or the interaction between frontal and parietal regions.
No group differences were found when familial sinistrality
was considered as a dichotomous variable. Although the FS-

Results
Log-transformed dominance times, defined as the time between alternate-side button presses, were analyzed using linear mixed effects models with random intercepts per subject
and sex, block, perspective and genetic load as fixed effects.
Likelihood ratio tests were used to select models. Reported
p-values were estimated using MCMC as implemented in the
languageR package (Baayen, 2007).

Continuous Viewing
Dominance time increased for all participants during the
partially disambiguated display periods (M = 11.88 sec,
SD = 6.94), indicating their responses were not stimulusindependent. No significant effect of sex or block was found.
There was a significant positive association between additive genetic effects and dominance time (β = .68, p = .005).

546

Ian Rios and Ankit Takyar assisted with data collection. Dr.
Thomas G. Bever provided comments and laboratory resources.

Mean Intermittent Dominance Times

●

FS+

References

●

40

40

FS−

Aafjes, M., Hueting, J. E., & Visser, P. (1966). Individual
and interindividual differences in binocular retinal rivalry
in man. Psychophysiology, 3(1), 18–22.
Annett, M. (1985). Left, right, hand and brain. Psych Press
UK.
Baayen, R. H. (2007). Analyzing Linguistic Data: A practical
introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge Univ Press.
Bishop, D. V. M. (1990). On the futility of using familial sinistrality to subclassify handedness groups. Cortex,
26(1), 153–155.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10(4), 433–436.
Britz, J., & Pitts, M. A. (2011). Perceptual reversals during
binocular rivalry: ERP components and their concomitant
source differences. Psychophysiology, 48(11), 1490–1499.
Corey, D. M., & Foundas, A. L. (2005). Measuring familial sinistrality: problems with dichotomous classification.
Laterality, 10(4), 321–335.
Falconer, D. (1965). The inheritance of liability to certain diseases, estimated from the incidence among relatives. Annals of Human Genetics, 29(1), 51–76.
Gigante, G., Mattia, M., Braun, J., & Del Giudice, P. (2009).
Bistable perception modeled as competing stochastic integrations at two levels. PLoS Computational Biology, 5(7),
e1000430.
Hadfield, J. (2010). MCMC methods for multi-response generalized linear mixed models: the MCMCglmm R package.
Journal of Statistical Software.
Hancock, R. (2012, May). Bayesian estimates of genetic
handedness predict oscillatory brain activity. Presented at
the 14th Annual Meeting of the International Behavioral
and Neural Genetics Society.
Karev, G. B. (2011). Quantitatively assessed familial sinistrality in right-, mixed-, and left-handers. Laterality, 16(1),
93–106.
Kleinschmidt, A., Sterzer, P., & Rees, G. (2012). Variability
of perceptual multistability: from brain state to individual
trait. Philosophical Transactions Of The Royal Society BBiological Sciences, 367(1591), 988–1000.
Leopold, D. A., Wilke, M., Maier, A., & Logothetis, N. K.
(2002). Stable perception of visually ambiguous patterns.
Nature Neuroscience, 5(6), 605–609.
Levelt, W. J. (1967). Note on the distribution of dominance
times in binocular rivalry. British Journal of Psychology,
58(1), 143–145.
Levitan, S., & Reggia, J. A. (2000). A computational model
of lateralization and asymmetries in cortical maps. Neural
computation, 12(9), 2037–2062.
Liu, H., Stufflebeam, S. M., Sepulcre, J., Hedden, T., & Buckner, R. L. (2009). Evidence from intrinsic activity that

●

30

30

●
●
●●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●

●

20

20

Dominance time (s)

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

10

10

●

●

●

●

0

●

0

●

●

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

a

Figure 3: Correlation between intermittent viewing dominance times and estimated additive genetic effects (a). FSindividuals are shown for comparison only.

group might be expected to have fewer genetic effects found
in the FS+ group, and therefore show an overall group difference in dominance times, the obtained result is consistent
with a gene-gene interaction model for handedness. Under
this model, the estimated genetic effects, a, associated with
phenotypic handedness may be decomposable into alleles that
influence bistable perception and possibly other aspects of
cognition and brain organization (ab ) and one or more alleles (ah ) that contribute to hand preference in the presence
of ab effects. Thus the FS- and FS+ groups may have similar distributions of ab effects and dominance times while the
FS- group lack the ah alleles needed to express non righthandedness in conjunction with ab alleles. With handedness
as a phenotype, the ab effects of interest can only be estimated
in conjunction with ah effects and not at all in the FS- group.
These findings validate the utility of applying a multifactorial genetic model of handedness to account for individual
differences in cognitive behavior and support views of lateralization and related brain function as a complex trait, both in
terms of phenotype and genetics. The neural mechanisms of
the familial sinistrality-related increase in dominance times
are unknown, but likely reflect differences in attentional processing or the coupling of attentional and visual levels of
processing. The increases in dominance times could reflect
changes at the local circuit or neurotransmitter level leading
to decreased levels of neural noise that trigger perceptual reversals (e.g. Moreno-Bote et al., 2007) .

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a fellowship to R.H. from
the Arizona Center for the Biology of Complex Diseases.

547

asymmetry of the human brain is controlled by multiple
factors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
106(48), 20499–20503.
Mckeever, W. F. (1986). The influences of handedness, sex,
familial sinistrality and androgyny on language laterality,
verbal ability, and spatial ability. Cortex, 22(4), 521–537.
McManus, I. C. (1991). The inheritance of left-handedness.
Ciba Foundation symposium, 162, 251–67; discussion
267–81.
McManus, I. C. (1995). Familial sinistrality: the utility of calculating exact genotype probabilities for individuals. Cortex, 31(1), 3–24.
McManus, I. C., Davison, A., & Armour, J. (2013).
Multi-locus genetic models of handedness closely resemble single-locus models in explaining family data and are
compatible with genome-wide association studies. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences.
Medland, S. E., Duffy, D. L., Wright, M. J., Geffen, G. M.,
Hay, D. A., Levy, F., . . . Boomsma, D. I. (2009). Genetic
influences on handedness: data from 25,732 Australian and
Dutch twin families. Neuropsychologia, 47(2), 330–337.
Miller, S. M., Liu, G. B., Ngo, T. T., Hooper, G., Riek, S.,
Carson, R. G., & Pettigrew, J. D. (2000). Interhemispheric
switching mediates perceptual rivalry. Current biology :
CB, 10(7), 383–392.
Moreno-Bote, R., Rinzel, J., & Rubin, N. (2007). NoiseInduced Alternations in an Attractor Network Model of
Perceptual Bistability. Journal of Neurophysiology, 98(3),
1125–1139.
Pastukhov, A., & Braun, J. (2008). A short-term memory of
multi-stable perception. Journal of Vision, 8(13), 7–7.
Pettigrew, J. D. (2001). Searching for the switch: Neural
bases for perceptual rivalry alternations. Brain and Mind,
2(1), 85–118.
Pitts, M. A., Martı́nez, A., Stalmaster, C., Nerger, J. L., &
Hillyard, S. A. (2009). Neural generators of ERPs linked
with Necker cube reversals. Psychophysiology, 46(4), 694–
702.
Ringo, J. L., Doty, R. W., Demeter, S., & Simard, P. Y.
(1994). Time is of the essence: a conjecture that hemispheric specialization arises from interhemispheric conduction delay. Cerebral Cortex, 4(4), 331–343.
Scotto, M. A., Oliva, G. A., & Tuccio, M. T. (1990). Eye
movements and reversal rates of ambiguous patterns. Perceptual and motor skills, 70(3 Pt 2), 1059–1073.
Shannon, R. W., Patrick, C. J., Jiang, Y., Bernat, E., & He,
S. (2011). Genes contribute to the switching dynamics of
bistable perception. Journal of Vision, 11(3).
Sorensen, D., & Gianola, D. (2002). Likelihood, Bayesian
and MCMC methods in quantitative genetics. Springer.
Sterzer, P., Kleinschmidt, A., & Rees, G. (2009). The neural bases of multistable perception. TRENDS in Cognitive
Sciences, 13(7), 310–318.
Toppino, T. C. (2003). Reversible-figure perception:
mechanisms of intentional control. Perception and Psy-

chophysics, 65(8), 1285–1295.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., Petit, L., Razafimandimby, A., Crivello, F., Zago, L., Jobard, G., . . . Mazoyer, B. (2010). Left
hemisphere lateralization for language in right-handers is
controlled in part by familial sinistrality, manual preference
strength, and head size. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(40),
13314–13318.
van Dam, L. C. J., & van Ee, R. (2005). The role of (micro)saccades and blinks in perceptual bi-stability from slant
rivalry. Vision Research, 45(18), 2417–2435.
Wallis, G., & Ringelhan, S. (2013). The dynamics of perceptual rivalry in bistable and tristable perception. Journal of
Vision, 13(2).

548

