UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Balancing Fairness and Efficiency in Repeated Societal Interaction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0m11m61g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ben-Asher, Noam
Lebiere, Chrisitan
Oltramari, Alessandro
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Balancing Fairness and Efficiency in Repeated Societal Interaction
Noam Ben-Asher (noamba@cmu.edu)1
Christian Lebiere (cl@cmu.edu)2
Alessandro Oltramari (aoltrama@andrew.cmu.edu)2
Cleotilde Gonzalez (coty@cmu.edu) 1
1

Dynamic Decision Making Laboratory, Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
2

Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

it for a while and then the other will have the joy of playing
with the desired toy as well. However, if only one of the
toddlers gets to play with the toy and the other does not get
the same opportunity, feelings of unfairness and frustration
that might lead to aggressive behavior when facing similar
conflicts in the future can arise.
Such social conflicts are well captured in Game Theory
using the Chicken Game (CG), as introduced by Russell
(1959). According to this game, two drivers are heading
towards each other on a single lane road from opposite
directions at full speed. Just before colliding, each of the
drivers has to choose simultaneously and independently
between driving straight towards a possible collision (i.e.,
Dare) or turning the steering wheel (i.e., Swerve) and
avoiding the accident. As represented in the game's payoff
matrix (see Table 1), this is a prototypical dangerous game,
because a player has to risk the lowest payoff [-10] to have a
chance of winning the highest payoff [10]. Under reasonable
assumptions for single-trial CG, the best outcome is for a
player that Dares while the other player Swerves [10,-1]; the
second-best for each is if both Swerve [1,1]; the third-best is
for a player that Swerves while the other player Dares [1,10]; and the worst for each is if both Dare [-10,-10],
because then the outcome is mutually destructive. Thus, the
best strategy in single-trial CG depends on the opponent‘s
expected behavior and a player can maximize the outcome
by doing the opposite of what the other player does.
However, for repeated CG (infinitely repeated in theory;
finitely repeated with unknown endpoint in practice),
successful alternations, where one player wins the highest
payoff in one round and then the other player wins the
highest payoff in the next round, is the best strategy to
obtain a joint maximum outcome. This type of cooperation
corresponds well to the situation where, over time, the wellbeing of one player depends of the well-being of the other.
The need to consider the well-being of the other
challenges traditional economic theories, which assume that
people act selfishly. In contrast, there is growing
experimental evidence that actual behavior is also shaped by
factors inconsistent with pure selfishness (e.g., Dufwenberg
& Kirchsteiger, 2004; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Roth, 1995).
The psychology literature also provides evidence for other

Abstract
Fairness and efficiency are important aspects that influence
cooperation in social dilemmas. During a repeated interaction,
they have the potential to serve as competing goals for the
decision maker. The ability to balance between fairness and
efficiency depends, among other things, on available
information regarding mutual accountability for the outcomes
in an interaction. In this paper, we examine how information
regarding mutual interdependencies influences the interplay
between fairness and efficiency in repeated Chicken Game.
We distinguish between three possible types of fair behavior:
mutual cooperation, alternating cooperation, and mutual
destruction. Our results show that the first two types of
fairness are positively correlated with the availability of social
information. In contrast, mutual destructive fairness is not
sensitive to the availability of information and is generally
avoided. We also find that without information regarding
mutual interdependencies, unfairness increases in parallel
with efficiency. When social information is available,
however, increases in fairness is coupled with a decrease in
efficiency, and the best compromise between fairness and
efficiency is reached when mutual interdependencies are
learned through repeated experiences. We highlight the
significance of our results for fair and efficient interaction in
repeated social interactions.
Keywords: Efficiency; Fairness; Cooperation; Game Theory;
Interdependence; Information; Social Interaction

Introduction and Background
In our daily lives, we constantly face situations in which our
well-being and success depends on the actions of others.
Whether the interactions occur between individuals or
between organizations, there is mutual accountability for the
outcomes. For example, the interaction between two
toddlers that learn to share a toy by taking turns holds some
similarities with the interaction between companies that
adopt a competitive brinkmanship pricing policy while
trying to gain control over a certain market. If the toddlers
are not willing to behave in a fair manner they will both end
up screaming and none of them will play with the desired
toy. An alternative behavior is that both toddlers decide
simultaneously to switch interest to other toys and thus
eliminate the conflict. A more mutually beneficial behavior
is where the toddlers will share the toy so one can play with

175

factors that individuals consider, beyond their own wellbeing, and acknowledges the importance of reciprocity by
incorporating it into models of human behavior. Heider
(1958) introduced the idea that causal inference, where one
takes into account another person’s motives and situational
constraints, as an important cognitive process for perceiving
social contexts. Similarly, Game Theory incorporates these
ideas by considering altruism and fairness (Bolton &
Ockenfels, 2000; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999). Altruism can be
simply defined as an interaction in which people care not
only about their own well-being but also about others. This
over-simplified definition is extended through fairness into
different directions by incorporating distributive concerns
(Bolton & Ockenfels, 2000), inequity aversion (Fehr &
Schmidt, 1999), and reciprocity theories (Rabin, 1993).
CG is particularly suitable to studying different aspects of
fairness in social interaction. In its basic form, fairness is
achieved when one player's outcome is identical to the other
player's. Considering the payoff matrix presented in Table 1,
fairness can happen when both players make the same
decision in a given round. It is possible that both players
selected Dare (i.e., mutual Dare) and therefore received an
outcome of [-10, -10], or when both players selected Swerve
(i.e., mutual Swerve) and received the outcome of [1, 1].
Repeated CG adds another kind of fair interaction where the
players alternate for consecutive rounds, [10, -1] followed
by [-1, 10] and so on, resulting in alternating cooperation.
This type of fairness is also the optimal strategy in repeated
CG (the one that results in the highest long-term outcome).
It is possible that fair coordination like [1, 1] would be
easier to achieve than alternating coordination because the
latter require a more complex coordination of choices.
However, once a state of alternating coordination is
achieved, it might be more stable compared to simple
coordination (Rapoport, Guyer, & Gordon, 1976).
One common but unrealistic assumption in research on
strategic social interaction is that players possess full
information about their interdependence, usually presented
using a payoff matrix. However, several studies
demonstrated the value of certain types of information in
well-known social games, such as the repeated Prisoner's
Dilemma (Camerer, 2003; Rapoport & Chammah, 1965).
Recently, Gonzalez and Martin (2011) proposed the
Hierarchy of Social Information (HSI), a theoretical
framework for conceptualizing and organizing the major
categories of interpersonal information that may play a role
in social interactions. Martin, Gonzalez, Juvina, and Lebiere
(2012) used this framework to examine the effects of
information on cooperation in repeated Prisoner's Dilemma.
Their findings reveal a generally positive impact of
information on joint performance and satisfaction. They
showed that an increase in cooperation with an increase in
the availability of social information was driven in part by
players’ greater willingness to reciprocate the other player's
prior cooperation, and concluded that players possessing
more interdependence information were more likely to
enforce social norms of reward and retribution. Such social

norms depend heavily on perceptions of fairness and how it
is expressed in repeated interaction. Furthermore, the
availability of interdependence information can influence
awareness of fair and unfair aspects of the interaction. Thus,
it is possible to assume that having enough information to
compare between one’s own and another's payoffs might be
a minimal requirement for fairness. However, it is currently
unclear how more information systematically influences
fairness, and more specifically the impact of different types
of fairness that can occur as part of the interaction between
two interdependent players. Furthermore, there is a need to
understand the costs of maintaining fairness during a social
interaction. Some social settings emphasize the tradeoff
between fairness and performance. For example, in one-shot
Ultimatum Game, a proposer maintains fairness and
cooperation with a responder by decreasing her own
personal gain. Other social settings completely disentangle
such relationship between fairness and performance like in
one-shot Dictator Game, where there is no need to maintain
fairness and the proposer can keep all the gains for herself.
Forsythe and colleagues (1994) demonstrated that on
average offers in the Ultimatum game were higher than in
the Dictator Game, confirming the tradeoff between
efficiency of cooperation and fairness. However, people do
care about fairness and in some situations are willing to
sacrifice some of their own to maintain fairness (Bolton &
Ockenfels, 2000, Güth, Kliemt, & Ockenfels). Thus, it is
possible that a fair distribution of payoffs is appealing from
a social perspective, but it might have some negative
influence on performance in repeated interaction.
Table 1: Chicken game payoff matrix, with Action A
denoting Dare and Action B denoting Swerve. The cells
show a pair of outcomes (x, y) where x is the payoff to
Player 1 and y is the payoff to Player 2.

Player 1
Action

A (Dare)
B (Swerve)

Player 2 Action
A(Dare)
B (Swerve)
-10, -10
10, -1
-1, 10
1, 1

The current paper presents an experiment to examine how
information regarding mutual interdependencies can
influence fairness in CG. We start by providing background
information on a repeated CG game that was used to collect
the behavioral data, and present the four levels of
information proposed in the HSI framework (Gonzalez &
Martin, 2011). Then, we distinguish between three types of
fair outcomes in repeated CG and examine the interactions
between fairness and the availability of social information.
Following that, we focus on the relations between fairness
and efficiency in alternating cooperation. Finally, we
discuss how awareness of interdependence may encourage
efficient and fair behavior in real-world interactions and
describe potential future directions of this research.

176

positive payoff of +1 with the risk of experiencing a
moderate loss of -1 if the other player deviates from
fairness; mutual Dare where both players lose 10 points with
the potential of winning +10 if the other player deviates; and
the alternating cooperation, which requires that both players
successfully alternate between Swerve and Dare in a way
that the payoffs in one round are [+10, -1] and players then
get [-1, +10] in the following round.

Experiment
Participants and Procedure
Participants (N=240; 120 pairs, 45% of whom were women,
Mage=22.8, SDage=4.53) were recruited to a computer
laboratory at Carnegie Mellon University, and randomly
paired to play 200 rounds of repeated CG over the
laboratory's network. Players were not told the number of
rounds in the game, and the rounds were not numbered in
the course of play. In each round, the two anonymous
members of a pair (seated in different rooms without having
met one another) chose simultaneously between buttons
labeled Action A and Action B with payoffs as in Table 1.
These payoffs were converted to incentive pay (one cent per
point) beyond $10 base pay. One pair was excluded from
the analysis due to communication failure during the
experiment.

General Fairness Preferences
Overall, the joint proportion of fair interactions increased
with more information given: .38 in the Individual
condition, .50 in the Minimal condition, .71 in the
Experiential condition, and .74 in the Descriptive condition.
However, as illustrated in Figure 1, behavior varied for the
different types of fairness. Next, we examine each of the fair
interactions separately.

Information Conditions

Alternating Cooperation

All participants saw their own action and payoff in each
round. Thirty pairs (60 participants) were assigned to each
of the four conditions that determined the amount of
information available about their interdependence. These
conditions were modeled after the layers of the Hierarchy of
Social Information (HSI) outlined by Gonzalez and Martin
(2011). We briefly describe each of the information
conditions here.
In the “Individual” condition, players were not informed
that they were interacting with another player, so the
selection of an action in each round was most likely
perceived as an independent binary choice between two
options with probabilistic payoffs. Participants may have
realized that the outcome probabilities for each of the two
actions were not static, as they in fact varied with the other
player’s actions, but this could more easily be attributed to a
computerized process that shifted exogenously or in
response to their own actions.
In the “Minimal” condition, players knew that their
outcomes depended on the actions of another player and
vice versa, yet they still did not know the other’s specific
actions and payoffs. With this information, individuals may
have been able to speculate about the other’s motivations,
but it would remain difficult to infer the other’s actions and
payoffs.
Next, pairs in the “Experiential” condition saw each
other's actions and outcomes in each round. This
information allowed players to reason about the mutual
interdependencies through repeated experiences.
Finally, in the “Descriptive” condition, in addition to
seeing each other’s actions and outcomes, players were
shown the complete payoff matrix (as in Table 1) from the
outset and throughout the repeated interaction.

The average proportion of alternating cooperation varied
significantly across the four information conditions and
generally increased with greater availability of information,
F(3, 115)=7.086, p<.001. As shown in
Figure 1, the average proportion of alternating cooperation
in the Individual condition was extremely low (M=.03,
SD=.05). Knowing that the payoffs depend on the decisions
of another human player provided in the Minimal condition
(M=.1, SD=.19) increased the alternating cooperation
significantly, t(57)=2.106, p=.040. The average proportion
of alternating cooperation increased substantially more in
the Experiential condition (M=.29, SD=.34), where each
player observed the actions and payoffs of the other player,
and was significantly higher than the Individual and
Minimal conditions, t(58)=4.202, p<.001 and t(57)=2.575,
p=.012, respectively. Similarly, in the Descriptive condition
(M=.22, SD=.28) the average proportion was significantly
higher than the Individual condition and marginally higher
than the Minimal condition, t(58)=3.765, p<.001 and
t(57)=1.880, p=.065, respectively. No significant differences
were found between the Descriptive and Experiential
conditions, t(58)=.847, p=ns.

Mutual Swerve
The average proportion of mutual Swerve varied
significantly across the four information conditions,
F(3,115)=2.78, p=.044. As shown in Figure 1, on average,
the proportion of fair rounds where both players swerved
increased with the availability of information: M=.21
(SD=.23) in the Individual condition, M=.21 (SD=.17) in
the Minimal condition, M=.27 (SD=.24) in the Experiential
condition, and M=0.36 (SD=.27) in the Descriptive
condition. The average proportion of mutual Swerve in the
Descriptive condition was significantly higher than in the
Individual and Minimal conditions, t(58)=2.341, p=.023 and
t(57)=2.466, p=.017, respectively. These results suggest that
participants in the Descriptive condition tended to prefer the
less risky option that could yield a small gain but also a

Results
We analyzed the three different fair outcomes described
above: mutual Swerve, where both players receive a small

177

small loss compare to the risky option that could yield a
large gain or a large loss. Also, the ability to see the
interdependencies as they are represented by the payoff
matrix highlights the fairness of mutual Swerve. Thus, it is
possible that some synergy between these two
interpretations of the social information can explain the
increased proportion of mutual Swerve.

game in which one player dominated the other player
throughout the 200 rounds, resulting in DS=200 or SD=200.
The sum of DS and SD reflects the exclusiveness of the
asymmetric payoffs compared to other possible payoffs.
Thus, it represents the efficiency of the alternating
cooperation. On the other hand, the absolute value of the
difference between DS and SD reflects the balance or
fairness between the two players and serves as a penalty for
unfair behavior. The magnitude of the penalty determines
whether one player dominated the other. For the sake of
simplicity and clarity, we decompose k to its terms (i.e.,
efficiency and unfairness penalty) and converted them to
proportions by dividing each term by the number of rounds
(i.e., 200). Furthermore, we use 1 – the proportion of
unfairness penalty to calculate the proportion of fairness.
Similar to alternating cooperation, k varied significantly
across the information conditions. We observed a general
increase of k with more information: M=.25 (SD=.18) in the
Individual condition, M=.32 (SD=.23) in the Minimal
condition, M=.46 (SD=.28) in the Experiential condition,
and M=.39 (SD=.28) in the Descriptive condition.
To gain a better understanding of how the availability of
social information influenced the alternating cooperation
index (k) and especially the relations between its efficiency
and fairness components, we analyzed each of the terms that
construct k separately. As seen in Figure 2, fairness
increased significantly with the availability of social
information, F(3,115)=12.778, p<.001. The average fairness
in the Descriptive condition (M=.91, SD=.11) was
significantly higher than the average fairness in the
Individual (M=.61, SD=.26) and Minimal (M=.72, SD=.28)
conditions, t(58)=5.826, p<.001 and t(57)=3.601, p<.001,
respectively. Similarly, the average fairness in the
Experiential condition (M=.88, SD=.18) was significantly
higher than in the Individual and Minimal conditions,
t(58)=4.817, p<.001 and t(57)=2.869, p=.005.
As shown in Figure 2, the analysis of the efficiency term
also indicated that efficiency varied significantly across the
information conditions, F(3,115)=3.030, p=.032. However,
we found an trend opposite of fairness, where efficiency in
the Descriptive condition (M=.48, SD=.25) was
significantly lower compared to the Individual (M=.64,
SD=.21) and Minimal (M=.61, SD=.17) conditions, t(58)=2.756, p=.008, t(57)=2.296, p=.025.
The analysis above indicates that the availability of social
information influenced the alternating cooperation index in
general and differentially influenced the efficiency and
fairness terms that compose it. It seems that the relatively
high fairness in the Experiential and Descriptive came at the
cost of decreased efficiency. However, the decrease in
efficiency when moving from the Minimal condition to the
Experiential condition is not significant, while the increase
in fairness is. This suggests that best compromise between
fairness and efficiency was reached in the Experiential
condition.

Mutual Dare
When both players select Dare in the same round, they both
receive the same negative payoff. As seen in Figure 1, the
average proportion of mutual Dare was not affected by the
availability of information, F(3,115)=.37, p=ns. The average
proportion of rounds where both players dared remained
similar while the available information increased: M=.15
(SD=.08) in the Individual condition, M=.18 (SD=.10) in
the Minimal condition, M=.15 (SD=.11) in the Experiential
condition, and M=.16 (SD=.21) in the Descriptive
contrition. The SD in the Descriptive condition is relatively
higher compared to the other conditions, mainly due to two
pairs in the Descriptive condition who mutually dared in
more than 80% of the 200 rounds.

Figure 1. Average proportion of fair outcomes for four
levels of social information across 200 rounds.

Efficiency and Fairness tradeoff in Alternating
Cooperation
Rapoport et al. (1976) suggested the alternating cooperation
index (k) as a measure suitable for evaluating cooperation
between two players in games where the optimal collective
strategy is coordinated alternations. This measure uses the
frequencies of the asymmetric payoffs in the following
form: k= (DS) + (SD) - |(DS) - (SD)|
Where DS and SD refer to the number of times that the
asymmetric payoffs occurred. The maximal value of k is
achieved when DS and SD occur exclusively and with equal
frequencies, which would correspond to perfect alternation.
Considering the setting of the study presented here, the
maximal value of k is 200 and it is achieved when
DS=SD=100. The minimal value of k is 0 and it represents a

178

Figure 2: Average proportion of efficient and fair alternating
cooperation for four levels of social information across 200
rounds.
To gather a better understanding of the relations between
fairness and efficiency, we analyze efficiency and fairness at
the pair level, for each of the information conditions (see
Figure 3). Results indicate that efficiency and fairness were
strongly and negatively correlated in the Individual and
Minimal conditions, r=-.73, p<.001 and r=-.56, p=.002,
respectively, in contrast to the Experiential and Descriptive
conditions, where no significant correlations were found,
r=.10, p=ns. and r=-.02, p=ns. This finding suggests that as
the efficiency of alternating cooperation increased in the
Individual and Minimal conditions, fairness between the
two players decreased. This means that one player
dominated the other more often, resulting in an unfair and
heedless behavior.

Figure 3: Correlations between proportions of efficiency and
fairness in alternating cooperation for each pair, for four
levels of social information, across 200 rounds.
the nature of the interaction.
Mutual destructive fairness stands out from the other two
types of fairness as it was not influenced by the availability
of information. Even without the knowledge of
interdependence, players managed to avoid the mutually
destructive escalation of the conflict which leads to negative
outcomes for both sides. However, individuals possessing
interdependence information were more likely to behave in
a social manner and preferred other fair interactions. In
contrast, individuals that did not possess such information
were more likely to exhibit unfair and unsocial behavior
where one exploits the other.
We also find that when only experiential information is
available, the proportions of mutual cooperation and
alternating cooperation are relatively similar. In contrast,
when descriptive information is also provided, there is a
greater preference towards the fair outcome resulting from
mutual cooperation, compared to alternating cooperation.
This might relate to the increased complexity of
coordination that alternating cooperation requires, compared
to mutual cooperation (Rapoport et al., 1976). Alternatively,
it is possible that players concluded from the descriptive
information (i.e., the payoff matrix) that there is a relatively
low risk in choosing to Swerve compared to Dare and thus
preferred this option more.
The alternating cooperation index (k) provided us with
important insights regarding the relations between fairness
and efficiency within this type of interaction. Both fairness
and efficiency were influenced by the availability of social
information. While fairness increased with more
information regarding mutual accountability, efficiency
decreased. Moreover, increases in fairness between the
information conditions were steeper and more drastic,
compared with decreases in efficiency. This finding
suggests that under certain conditions, increases in fairness

Discussion and Conclusion
We tested how fairness is influenced by the availability of
social information regarding mutual accountability in a
social dilemma, as represented by the Chicken Game.
Drawing upon Gonzalez and Martin’s (2011) Hierarchy of
Social Information, we find that fairness in such social
dilemmas depended on the availability of information and in
general increased when more information was available to
the decision makers. Thus, information availability
moderates unfairness and can increase fair social behaviors.
First, the overall high proportion of fair outcomes in the
Descriptive and Experiential conditions implies that the
availability
of
detailed
information
regarding
interdependencies with others elicit fair behavior. This holds
mainly for the two constructive interactions (mutual
cooperation and alternating cooperation), which leads to
positive outcomes for both sides of the conflict. On the
other hand, when there is no awareness of the counterpart’s
conditions, unfairness increases on the expense of fairness.
This results in an antisocial interaction where one exploits
the other, even unintentionally and without being aware of

179

might have some cost, and lead to a minor decrease in the
interaction's efficiency. This finding in repeated interaction
is consistent with the tradeoff between efficiency and
fairness in one-shot Ultimatum Game (Forsythe et al., 1994;
Güth et al., 2003). However, it seems that for repeated
interactions, fairness is more sensitive to the changes in the
availability of social information compared to efficiency.
The best compromise between fairness and efficiency was
achieved when mutual interdependencies were learned only
through repeated experiences. In this condition, fairness
increased significantly while any decrease in efficiency was
insignificant. This suggests that the availability of complete
information, as in the Descriptive condition, do elicit
fairness, but not necessarily the most efficient kind of
fairness.
Examining the relations between fairness and efficiency
at the pair level provided supporting evidence for these
ideas. Where there is no or limited information regarding
mutual accountability (i.e., the Individual and Minimal
conditions), we find a decrease in fairness as the efficiency
of a pair increases. This stands in contrast to the
Experiential and Descriptive conditions, where we find no
correlation between fairness and efficiency at the pair level.
This demonstrates how overall the availability of
information serves as a guard for fairness, and the efficiency
of the interaction within the boundaries of fair behavior,
depends on the specific interaction between individuals.
A key implication of this study is the importance of
information to the fair resolution of conflicts. We show that
social fairness is sensitive to the availability of information
regarding mutual interdependencies between the members
of the community. It is illuminating to see that the mere
knowledge of interdependence with another person given in
the Minimal condition is insufficient to promote alternating
cooperation compared to the Individual condition. Further
availability of social information increases cooperation and
fairness. Thus, a preliminary requirement of fair conflict
resolution should involve sharing information that sheds
light on the interdependencies between the different entities
involved in the conflict.
Even though it seems that overall fair behaviors in the
Descriptive and Experiential conditions were somehow
similar and less sensitive to the different way in which
social information was conveyed, studies of individual
decision making distinguish between these two sources of
information (descriptive and experiential), and demonstrate
how decisions from experience and description differ (e.g.,
Hertwig & Erev, 2009). Recently, a similar distinction has
been made in social dilemmas involving more than one
decision maker (Martin et al., 2012). We believe that
descriptive and experiential information influences the way
fair behavior evolves over time. Thus, further analysis
should carefully examine and compare the dynamics of fair
interaction over time for different levels of social
information.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Defense Threat Reduction
Agency (DTRA) grant to Cleotilde Gonzalez and Christian
Lebiere (HDTRA1-09-1-0053); and by the U.S. Army
Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement No.
W911NF-09-2-0053. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes
notwithstanding any copyright notation here on. We are also
thankful for the help and insightful comments of Hau-yu
Wong.

References
Bolton, G., & Ockenfels, A. (2000). ERC: A theory of
equity, reciprocity, and competition. American Economic
Review, 90(1), 166–193.
Camerer, C.F. (2003). Behavioral game theory:
Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Dufwenberg, M., & Kirchsteiger, G. (2004). A theory of
sequential reciprocity. Games and Economic Behavior,
47(2), 268–298.
Fehr, E., & Schmidt, K. (1999). A theory of fairness,
competition, and cooperation. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114(3), 817–868.
Forsythe, R., Horowitz, J. L., Savin, N. E., & Sefton, M.
(1994). Fairness in simple bargaining experiments. Games
and Economic Behavior, 6(3), 347-369.
Gonzalez, C., & Martin, J. M. (2011). Scaling up instancebased learning theory to account for social interactions.
Negotiation and Conflict Management Research, 4(2),
110-128.
Güth, W., Kliemt, H., & Ockenfels, A. (2003). Fairness
versus efficiency: An experimental study of (mutual) gift
giving. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
50(4), 465-475.
Heider, F., (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
relations. New York City: Wiley.
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description-experience
gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(12),
517-523.
Martin, J. M., Gonzalez, C., Juvina I., & Lebiere, C. (2012).
A description-experience gap in social interactions:
Information about interdependence and its effects on
cooperation. Manuscript under review.
Rabin, M. (1993). Incorporating fairness into game theory
and economics. The American Economic Review, 83(5),
1281-1302.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. M. (1965). Prisoner's
dilemma: A study in conflict and cooperation. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press.
Rapoport, A., Guyer, M. J., & Gordon, D. G. (1976). The 2
x 2 game. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Roth, A. E., (1995). Bargaining experiments. In J. Kagel &
A. E. Roth (Eds.), Handbook of experimental economics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Russell, B., (1959). Common sense and nuclear warfare.
New York City: Simon & Schuster.

180

