UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beliefs About a Speaker Affect Feeling of Another's Knowing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8w03w4ch

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Mol, Lisette
Kuhlen, Anna
Van der Steen, Ruben
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beliefs About a Speaker Affect Feeling of Another's Knowing
1

2

Lisette Mol (l.mol@tilburguniversity.edu)1
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities, Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90135, NL-5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Anna K. Kuhlen (anna.kuhlen@bccn-berlin.de)2, 3, 4
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
3
Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany
4
Berlin Center of Advanced Neuroimaging, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany

Ruben van der Steen (r.p.vdrsteen@tilburguniversity.edu)1
Mike Obbens (m.p.obbens@tilburguniversity.edu)1
Abstract
People's estimations of how certain speakers are of their
knowledge (FOAK) match speakers' own estimation (FOK) of
how certain they are (Brennan & Williams, 1995). This is
because others can interpret the verbal and nonverbal cues of
(un)certainty that a speaker displays (Brennan & Williams,
1995; Swerts & Krahmer, 2005). Estimating another's
certainty thus seems to be driven by the bottom-up processing
of speaker-displayed cues. In this paper, we explore the topdown influence of beliefs about a speaker on judgments of a
speaker's certainty. In a perception study, we varied whether a
speaker's proclaimed profession would make him an expert or
a novice on the topic he was questioned on. Such beliefs were
shown to influence participants' ratings of the speaker's
certainty, in addition to speaker-displayed cues. Thus, next to
the bottom-up processing of speaker-displayed cues, the topdown processing of beliefs about a speaker influences
judgments of others' certainty.
Keywords: FOK, FOAK, top-down processing, bottom-up
processing, speaker-displayed cues, person perception.

Introduction
When watching the news on television or online, we often
are informed by so-called 'experts' on the current topic, for
example, an economist may comment on the Euro crisis and
an architect may be interviewed on the progress of a
construction site. Often, the person's expertise is displayed
in a header once their contribution starts, or announced
upfront by the newsreader conducting the interview. Does
such knowledge of people's expertise affect our judgment of
their certainty? And if so, does this effect depend on
whether the expert displays certain or uncertain behavior?
This study assesses the influence of knowing another
person’s expertise, on the judgment of their certainty when
answering questions. We thereby test the influence of this
factor relative to the verbal and nonverbal cues of
uncertainty displayed by the person answering the questions
(henceforth referred to as the 'respondent'). In the following,
we first provide an introduction on the production and
perception of cues of (un)certainty. Then we discuss the

different types of processing involved in utilizing speakerdisplayed cues, and in making use of beliefs about the
speaker. This leads to our research question and hypotheses.

Displaying (Un)certainty
Sometimes, when unable to remember the answer to a
particular question, we have a strong intuition that we do
know the answer, despite our momentary inability to
retrieve it from memory. This meta-cognitive phenomenon
is known as feeling-of-knowing (FOK), (Hart, 1965).
Participants' FOK has been shown to be a reliable predictor
of whether they can later recognize the sought-after answer
in a multiple-choice test (Blake, 1973; Hart, 1965). This
shows that people's intuition on whether particular
knowledge is stored in their memory or is absent from it,
tends to be correct.
When sharing our knowledge with others, we tend to share
our intuition on the certainty of this knowledge as well, by
displaying auditory and visual cues of (un)certainty
(Brennan & Williams, 1995; Goffman, 1967, 1971, 1978;
Smith & Clark, 1993; Swerts & Krahmer, 2005). This may
be done to save face in case of being incorrect, or to be as
informative as needed, in accordance with Grice's maxim of
quantity (Grice, 1989). FOK-ratings can be obtained by
asking respondents how certain they are of their answer to
particular knowledge questions (Hart, 1965). By matching
such ratings to the auditory and visual behavior respondents
exhibit while answering, characteristic cues of displays of
(un)certainty have been identified. Auditory cues of
uncertainty were shown to include: rising intonation, an
initial pause, the use of fillers ("um", "uh"), hedging ("I
think", "Most likely"), and self-talk ("Let's see, what was
that again..."), (Goffman, 1978; Smith & Clark, 1993).
Certainty, on the other hand, is displayed auditorily by the
absence of such cues, and a falling intonation.
Visually, uncertainty can be displayed by rising the
eyebrows, smiling (when recognizing the answer should be
known), producing a marked facial expression (a 'funnyface'), and diverted gaze (Swerts & Krahmer, 2005).

3086

Certainty is displayed visually by the absence of such cues
(e.g., not diverting gaze), although particularly easy
questions can also elicit smiles, which then signal certainty.
If these auditory and visual cues serve to convey a level of
certainty to an interaction partner, it is expected that people
can correctly interpret them.

Perceiving (Un)certainty
People are indeed sensitive to the cues of (un)certainty
others display. The intuition we have of whether another
person is likely to know the correct answer to a question, is
known as feeling-of-another's-knowing (FOAK), (Brennan
& Williams, 1995). FOAK-ratings can be elicited by
presenting participants with other's answers and asking them
how certain they are that the respondent gave the correct
answer. This way, answers with rising intonation and longer
response latencies were found to elicit lower FOAK-ratings
than answers with falling intonation and shorter latencies
(Brennan & Williams, 1995). Also, adding filled pauses to
answers led to lower FOAK-ratings than adding unfilled
pauses. Participants' FOAK-ratings were found to match
respondents' own FOK-ratings (Brennan & Williams, 1995).
Therefore, it seems that people can correctly interpret the
auditory cues of (un)certainty others display.
When participants had access to both visual and auditory
cues displayed by respondents, the accuracy of their FOAKratings increased as compared to when they had access to
either auditory or visual information (Swerts & Krahmer,
2005). Thus, people can reliably estimate how certain others
are of their knowledge, by interpreting their auditory and
visual displays of (un)certainty.

Top-down vs. Bottom-up Processing of Cues
Next to speaker-displayed cues, more global information
about a person’s expertise can also inform inferences about
this person’s knowledge and credibility (for an overview,
see Pornpitakpan, 2004). Along these lines, expectations
concerning another person’s knowledge can be guided by
that person’s presumed gender (Fussell & Krauss, 1992),
age (Newman-Norlund, et al., 2009), or geographic origin
(Isaacs & Clark, 1987). Also, previous experiences with the
person shape expectations about what they are likely to
know (Galati & Brennan, 2010; Metzing & Brennan, 2003).
Beliefs about a person’s expertise may therefore influence
metacognitive assessments of that person’s knowing in a
top-down fashion.
In fact, global information may influence the interpretation
of locally available verbal and nonverbal displays of
(un)certainty. Along these lines, people have been shown to
interpret a person’s speech disfluencies differently if they
can attribute them to a cognitive impairment (Arnold, Kam,
& Tanenhaus, 2007). And speakers interpret their
addressees’ verbal and nonverbal feedback behavior based
on the expected involvement of the addressees in the
interaction (Kuhlen & Brennan, 2010; Kuhlen, Galati, &

Brennan, 2012). Bottom-up processes informed by locally
available verbal and nonverbal displays of knowing may
therefore be shaped by top-down processes informed by
global information about the respondents’ expertise.
Investigating how these two processes inform complex
social judgments, such as assessing another person’s
knowledge, will contribute to our understanding of human
social cognition.

Present Study
The present study assesses whether the top-down processing
of global information affects judgments of others' certainty,
in addition to the bottom-up processing of locally available
cues. To this aim, we manipulated participants' belief about
a respondent's expertise, as well as the locally available
verbal and nonverbal cues, displayed by the respondent.
Based on previous work (Brennan & Williams, 1995;
Swerts & Krahmer, 2005), we expect the respondent's
verbal and nonverbal displays of certainty to influence
participants’ FOAK-ratings in a bottom-up fashion. In
addition, we expect that the interpretation of these displays
is influenced top-down by participants’ beliefs about the
respondent’s expertise. Lastly, since displays of certainty
have been primarily described by the absence of cues of
uncertainty, bottom-up processes may be less important
when judging high-FOK as compared to low-FOK displays.
Therefore, the top-down processing of global cues may
affect FOAK-ratings differently for each type of display.
Below, we first describe how we created stimuli in which
a respondent clearly displays verbal and nonverbal cues of
high and low FOK. Then follows a description of the main
experiment, in which we manipulated participants' beliefs
about the respondent's profession, and thereby his expertise.

Method
Material
Selecting Knowledge Domains To elicit high- and lowFOK answers, a 30-year-old male tax advisor was
interviewed on two domains relating to his interests:
gardening and Dutch literature. In two separate pretests,
participants were presented with a picture of the respondent
and asked how likely it was that he was of certain
professions. Ten professions were tested on either pretest,
including gardener and Dutch teacher. Each pretest included
16 participants. On a six-point scale, participants rated the
possibility that the respondent was a gardener (M = 3.50, SD
= 1.14) equally likely to the possibility that he was a Dutch
teacher (M = 3.50, SD = 1.41), t(31) = .00, p = 1.00.
Participants also rated the professions (ten per test) for
how knowledgeable someone of this profession would be in
gardening and Dutch literature. A paired samples t-test
revealed that on a six-point scale, a gardener was indicated
to be more knowledgeable in gardening (M = 5.75, SD =
.68) than a Dutch teacher (M = 2.69, SD = 1.35), t(15) =

3087

Table 1: Mean (SD) FOAK-ratings in the pretest.

7.42, p < .001. Vice versa, a Dutch teacher was rated more
knowledgeable in Dutch literature (M = 5.89, SD = .34) than
a gardener (M = 2.00, SD = .63), t(15) = 31.00, p < .001.
Eliciting Audiovisual Displays of High and Low FOK
The respondent was asked 40 multiple-choice questions on
gardening, followed by 40 multiple-choice questions on
Dutch literature. Multiple-choice questions were used to
avoid non-answers (e.g., “I don’t know”) and to manipulate
the difficulty of the questions. Each question had four
alternatives, see examples (1) and (2). The respondent was
instructed to say the answer out loud, e.g., "Blauwe regen".
The experimenter asking the questions was located behind
the respondent, such as not to give the respondent any cues
of the answer being correct or incorrect. Answers were
captured with a video camera situated in front of the
respondent. After answering, the respondent indicated on a
six-point scale how certain he was of his answer being
correct, '6' indicating 'definitely correct' and '1' indicating
'definitely incorrect'. Following Hart (1965), this was taken
as a measure of the respondent’s feeling-of-knowing (FOK).
(1) Welke plant is giftig? (Which plant is toxic?) A: Blauwe
regen, B: Geranium, C: Orchidee, D: Waterlelie
(2) Wie schreef in 1947 de roman 'De avonden'? (Who
wrote the novel 'De avonden' in 1947?) A: Jan Cremer,
B: Herman Bursselmans, C: Harry Mulisch, D: Gerard
Reve.
This way, 40 answers were collected in each domain.
Since the respondent never indicated a FOK-score of 1,
answers with a FOK-score of 2 or 3 were regarded lowFOK and those with a FOK-score of 5 or 6 were regarded as
high-FOK. Answers with a score of 4 were few and were
disregarded. Sometimes, the respondent's answer contained
information about the question being a multiple-choice
question, for example "the first one". These responses were
disregarded as well. For each domain, ten high- and ten lowFOK answers were then selected, based on their
intelligibility and on how clear the displayed cues seemed to
be. Whether these clips indeed included clear displays of
high- and low-FOK was assessed in a third pretest.
Selecting FOK Displays In the third pretest, 20 native
Dutch participants (ten female) watched clips of the 40
selected answers and indicated on a six-point scale how
certain they were of the respondent’s answer being correct.
Following Brennan and Williams (1995), this was taken as a
measure of participants' feeling-of-another's-knowing
(FOAK). Since participants were only presented with the
respondent's answers and not the questions asked, they had
to rely on their estimation of how certain the speaker was
(FOAK), to tell whether the answer was correct or not.
A 2 x 2 ANOVA with within-factors FOK (levels: high,
low) and Domain (levels: gardening, Dutch literature)
revealed a main effect of FOK on participants' FOAKratings, F(1, 18) = 157.85, p < .001, ηp2 = .90, see Table 1.

FOK:
High
(N = 20)
Low
(N = 20)

Domain:
Gardening (N = 10)
Dutch Literature (N = 10)
Total (N = 20)
Gardening (N = 10)
Dutch Literature (N = 10)
Total (N = 20)

FOAK (SD):
4.32 (.46)
4.64 (.60)
4.48 (.11)
3.09 (.66)
2.78 (.49)
2.93 (.10)

There was no main effect of Domain, F(1, 18) = .001, p =
.91. Domain and FOK did interact, F(1, 18) = 17.41, p <
.001, ηp2 = .49. The difference in FOAK-ratings on highFOK and low-FOK clips was larger for the Dutch literature
than for the gardening domain, see Table 1. These results
evidence that the clips contained speaker-displayed cues.
For each domain, those sets of clips were selected that
participants rated most consistently as portraying either
high- or low-FOK answers (assessed by Cronbach's alpha).
This way, we could be most certain that our selected FOK
displays contained informative cues about the respondent’s
feeling of knowing. Our final set of stimuli contained seven
high-FOK clips for both domains, seven low-FOK clips for
the literature domain and five low-FOK clips for the
gardening domain. Unfortunately, we did not obtain more
suitable low-FOK clips from the gardening domain.

Task
Participants' task in the main experiment was to judge the
respondent’s answers in the selected clips, indicating on a
six-point scale how certainly the respondent's answer was
correct: '1' indicating 'certainly incorrect' and '6' indicating
'certainly correct'. This way, we elicited participants'
FOAK-judgments of the respondent's answers.

Design
The factors FOK (levels: low, high) and Domain (levels:
gardening, literature) were manipulated within participant.
The factor Profession (levels: gardener, Dutch teacher,
profession not mentioned) was manipulated betweenparticipants. An equal number of men and women
participated in each condition. The order in which the two
domains were presented was counterbalanced across each
condition and across sex. Each participant saw the clips
within a domain in a different, randomly generated order.

Procedure
The main experiment was conducted as an online survey.
Participants received a link through email, which led them
to the website of the experiment. Clips were grouped by
domain. A short instruction, which announced the domain
that the questions were in, preceded the clips in either
domain. This instruction also included a description of the
respondent, mentioning his age (30) and city of residence
(Spijkenisse), along with, depending on the experimental

3088

Table 2: Mean (SD) FOAK-ratings for answers in the
Gardening domain.

Table 3: Mean (SD) FOAK-ratings for answers in the
Literature domain.

Clips:
Gardening,
Low FOK
(N = 5)
Gardening,
High FOK
(N = 7)

Profession:
Gardener (N = 24)
Not mentioned (N = 22)
Dutch Teacher (N = 22)
Total (N = 68)

FOAK
3.41 (.68)
3.16 (.93)
2.88 (.53)
3.15 (.75)

Clips:

Gardener (N = 24)
Not mentioned (N = 22)
Dutch Teacher (N = 22)
Total (N = 68)

5.37 (.58)
4.99 (.64)
5.08 (.57)
5.15 (.61)

Literature,
High FOK
(N = 7)

condition, his profession. The experiment was self-paced
and participants could view each clip as often as they
wished. They indicated their answer by clicking a radiobutton on a horizontally laid-out six-point scale, before
proceeding to the next clip. After all clips had been rated,
participants were asked for the respondent’s profession (as a
manipulation check) and for their own knowledge of
gardening and Dutch literature.

Analyses
Data of participants who did not correctly remember the
respondent’s profession (five cases), or who mentioned a
profession in the condition in which no profession was
mentioned (four cases) were excluded from our analyses.
Data from any non-native speakers of Dutch were excluded
as well (four cases). Subsequently, data from a minimal
number of participants were removed from the sample to
ensure counterbalancing of sex, and order of presentation of
the domains (seven cases). For this purpose, data from
participants who participated last were eliminated first.

Participants
Our final sample contained data of 68 native Dutch
participants (34 female). They were aged between 17 and 37
years old (M = 22.85, SD = 3.33) and did not take part in
any of our pretests.

Results
Initially, we conducted a 3 x 2 x 2 ANOVA, with betweenfactor Profession (levels: not mentioned, gardener, Dutch
teacher), and within-factors: Domain (levels: gardening,
literature) and FOK (levels: high, low). This revealed a main
effect of FOK, such that participants' FOAK-ratings were
higher for high-FOK clips (M = 5.10, SD = .53) than for
low-FOK clips (M = 2.71, SD = .44), F(1,65) = 726.14, p <
.001, ηp2 = .92. We also found a main effect of Domain,
such that FOAK-ratings were higher for the gardening
domain (M = 4.32, SD = .50) than for the Dutch literature
domain (M = 3.71, SD = .05), F(1, 65) = 42.47, p = .001, ηp2
= .40. Domain and FOK interacted, F(1, 65) = 34.46, p <
.001, ηp2 = .35. The difference in rating between high- and

Literature,
Low FOK
(N = 7)

Profession:
Dutch Teacher (N = 22)
Not mentioned (N = 22)
Gardener (N = 24)
Total (N = 68)

FOAK
2.41 (.58)
2.40 (.49)
2.35 (.47)
2.38 (.51)

Dutch Teacher (N = 22)
Not mentioned (N = 22)
Gardener (N = 24)
Total (N = 68)

5.11 (.50)
5.09 (.62)
4.93 (.67)
5.04 (.60)

low-FOK clips was larger for the Dutch literature domain
than for the gardening domain, see Tables 2 and 3.
Profession did not exert a main effect on participants'
FOAK-ratings, F(2, 65) = 1.01, p = .37, ηp2 = .03, revealing
no overall differences in FOAK-ratings between the three
conditions. As expected, Profession and Domain interacted,
F(2, 65) = 6.05, p = .004, ηp2 = .16. Because of the
differential influence of domain on our main variables of
interest (Profession and FOK), we analyzed each domain
separately, by means of a 2 x 3 ANOVA with FOK as
within-factor and Profession as a between factor. Pairwise
comparisons were performed using least square differences.

Results for the Knowledge Domain Gardening
Table 2 provides an overview of the mean FOAK-ratings in
the gardening domain. There was a main effect of FOK on
FOAK, such that high-FOK clips (M = 5.15, SD = .61) were
rated as more certainly correct than low-FOK clips (M =
3.16, SD = .75), F(1, 65) = 316.78, p < .001, ηp2 = .83.
Profession showed a main effect on FOAK, F(2,65) = 4.56,
p = .014, ηp2 = .12. Pairwise comparisons revealed that the
respondent was rated as more certainly correct when he was
labeled a gardener, than when he was labeled a Dutch
teacher (p = .005), or when no profession was mentioned (p
= .033). Ratings between the latter two did not differ
significantly (p = .499). The factors FOK and Profession
were not found to interact, F(2,65) = .89, p = .416.

Results for the Knowledge Domain Literature
Table 3 provides an overview of the mean FOAK-ratings in
the Dutch literature domain. There was a main effect of
FOK on FOAK, such that high-FOK clips (M = 5.04, SD =
.60) were rated more certainly correct than low-FOK clips
(M = 2.38, SD = .51), F(1, 65) = 811.92, p < .001, ηp2 = .93.
We did not find a main effect of Profession (F < 1, n.s.), nor
an interaction between Profession and FOK (F < 1, n.s.).
To see if the null-result for Profession should be
interpreted as evidence against our hypothesis, we
conducted a Bayesian analyses on the difference between
the Dutch teacher and gardener condition. In the gardening
domain, an independent samples t-test showed higher
FOAK-ratings for the gardener (M = 4.55, SD = .44) than

3089

for the Dutch teacher condition (M = 4.16, SD = .37), t(44)
= 3.26, p = .002. In the literature domain, no difference was
found between the gardener (M = 3.64, SD = .44) and Dutch
teacher condition (M = 3.76, SD = .42), t(44) = .961, p =
.342. Modeling the predicted effect in the literature domain
as a normal distribution, with its mean equal to the effect in
the gardening domain (.39), and a standard deviation of half
this effect (also see Dienes, 2011), rendered Bf = .45. This
indicates that the results from the literature domain do not
discriminate between the null-hypothesis and the hypothesis
of an effect of Profession on FOAK.

Results for Participants' Expertise
A paired samples t-test showed that on a 7-point scale,
participants reported to be more knowledgeable in Dutch
literature (M = 3.90, SD = 1.56) than in gardening (M =
2.69, SD = 1.25), t(67) = 5.35, p < .001, 95% CI = (.76,
1.66). Adding self-reported expertise as a covariate did not
reveal an effect of this factor on participants' FOAK-ratings.

Discussion
Our results showed strong effects of the respondent's feeling
of knowing (FOK) on participants' feeling of another's
knowing (FOAK). Following the hypothesis that people
make use of verbal (Brennan & Williams, 1995) and nonverbal (Swerts & Krahmer, 2005) cues when judging
someone's certainty, this indicates that our clips contained
clear speaker-displayed cues, which participants used to
judge the respondent's certainty.
Going beyond the results of earlier studies, we found that
beliefs about the respondent, specifically about the
respondent’s expertise, influenced participants' judgment of
the respondent's certainty as well. When asked questions
about gardening, the same respondent was rated as more
certainly correct when participants were told he was a
gardener, compared to when they were told he was a Dutch
teacher, or when no information on the respondent's
profession was provided. This shows that, in addition to the
information that could be obtained from cues displayed by
the respondent, participants' beliefs about the respondent’s
expertise influenced their judgment of how certain the
respondent was of his answers. Therefore, top-down
processes informed by global information about a speaker
can influence assessments of another person’s feeling of
knowing too. This top-down effect held both for clips in
which the respondent was uncertain of his answer (low
FOK) and for clips in which he was certain (high FOK).
Our between-subjects manipulation of expertise allowed
us to use the same clips in each condition, ensuring identical
speaker-displayed cues and speaker attributes. Participants
were randomly assigned to conditions, and our analyses did
not show evidence for an overall difference in FOAKratings between the conditions. Hence, we are confident that
our results cannot be ascribed to a priori differences
between the three groups of participants.

People sometimes use their own knowledge to estimate
others' knowledge (Fussell & Krauss, 1991; Jameson,
Nelson, Leonesio, & Narens, 1993; Nickerson, Baddeley, &
Freedman, 1987). In our study, participants reported having
more knowledge on Dutch literature than on gardening.
Nevertheless, they rated the speaker to be more certain in
the gardening domain than in the Dutch literature domain.
Entering participants' self-reported knowledge as a covariate
did not render any significant results. Hence, reported
effects seem unaffected by participants' own knowledge.
Follow-up studies need to assess if our results generalize
to different respondents, domains, and beliefs. In this study,
we only found evidence for an additional effect of beliefs
about the respondent's expertise in one domain: gardening.
We did not find this effect for the literature domain.
However, a Bayesian analyses indicated that the results
from the literature domain should not be interpreted as
evidence against, nor in favor of our hypothesis. It seems
that more factors are at play still, which attenuated the effect
of beliefs about a speaker in this domain. One difference
between the two domains was that the effect of speakerdisplayed cues was even stronger in the literature than in the
gardening domain. It may be the case that the role of beliefs
diminishes when speaker-displayed cues are very clear.
Future studies are needed to uncover what factors moderate
the effect of beliefs about a speaker.
Our findings have important implications for our
understanding of the social and cognitive processes involved
in person perception. From a social perspective, it is striking
that simple information, such as labeling someone as being
an expert by assigning them a certain profession, can sway
perceivers towards judging them to be more knowledgeable
in their domain of expertise. This is in line with social
psychological literature on persuasion, which shows that
perceived experts are expected to provide information that is
valid (e.g., Clark, Wegener, Habashi, & Evans, 2012;
Hovland & Weiss, 1951). Our study thereby contributes to a
better understanding of the mechanisms behind perceiving
expertise and taking advice from experts (see e.g.,
Jungermann & Fischer, 2005). From a cognitive
perspective, our study contributes to a growing literature on
social cognition showing that the interpretation of social
cues cannot be separated from global attributions about the
person displaying these cues (Teufel, Fletcher, & Davis,
2010).
Previous work has suggested that the processing of
nonverbal cues is shaped by top-down expectations about
the person (Kuhlen & Brennan, 2010; Kuhlen et al., 2012).
In these studies participants responded differently to similar
nonverbal behavior of their conversational partners
depending on how they had expected their partners to
behave. In the present study, it is difficult to disentangle
how exactly nonverbal cues are integrated with global
beliefs about the respondent. Possibly, evidence from both
top-down and bottom-up cues accumulates additively,

3090

swaying the perceiver’s judgments in one or the other
direction. Future work will investigate further how these
two sources of information interact.

Conclusion
Our study showed that next to speaker-displayed cues of
(un)certainty, beliefs about a speaker can also affect FOAKratings. This shows that people's feeling of another's
knowing is affected both by the bottom-up processing of
local cues displayed by the speaker and the top-down
processing of global beliefs they have about this speaker.

Acknowledgements
We thank the reviewers for their insightful comments,
Zoltan Dienes for help with the Bayesian analysis, Joe
Walther for his advice on the Social Psychology literature,
Jacqueline Dake for her assistance with the online surveys,
and Paul Eijkenaar for volunteering as the respondent.

References
Arnold, J. E., Kam, C. L., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2007). If
you say thee uh you are describing something hard: the
on-line attribution of disfluency during reference
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(5), 914-930.
Blake, M. (1973). Prediction of recognition when recall
fails: Exploring the feeling-of-knowing phenomenon.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12,
311-319.
Brennan, S. E., & Williams, M. (1995). The feeling of
another's knowing: Prosody and filled pauses as cues to
listeners about the metacognitive states of speakers.
Jounral of Memory and Language, 34, 383-398.
Clark, J. K., Wegener, D. T., Habashi, M. M., & Evans, A.
T. (2012). Sourse expertise and persuasion: the effects of
perceived opposition or support on message scrunity.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38(1), 90100.
Dienes, Z. (2011). Bayesian versus orthodox statistics:
Which side are you on? Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 6(3), 274-290.
Fussell, S. R., & Krauss, R. M. (1991). Accuracy and bias in
estimates of others' knowledge. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 21, 445-454.
Fussell, S. R., & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Coordination of
knowledge in communication: Effects of speakers'
assumptions about ohters' knowledge. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 378-391.
Galati, A., & Brennan, S. E. (2010). Attenuating
information in spoken communication: For the speaker, or
for the addressee? Journal of Memory and Language, 62,
35-51.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays on face to
face behavior. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

Goffman, E. (1971). Relations in public. New York: Harper
and Row.
Goffman, E. (1978). Response cries. Language, 54, 787815.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press.
Hart, J. T. (1965). Memory and the feeling-of-knowing
experience. Journal of Educational Psychology, 56, 208216.
Hovland, C. I., & Weiss, W. (1951). The influence of source
credibility on communication effectiveness. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 15, 635-650.
Isaacs, E. A., & Clark, H. H. (1987). References in
conversation between experts and novices. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 116(1), 26-37.
Jameson, A., Nelson, T. O., Leonesio, R. J., & Narens, L.
(1993). The feeling of another person's knowing. Journal
of Memory and Language, 32, 320-335.
Jungermann, H., & Fischer, K. (2005). Using expertise and
experience for giving and taking advice. In T. Betsch & S.
Haberstroh (Eds.), The routines of decision making.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kuhlen, A. K., & Brennan, S. E. (2010). Anticipating
distracted addressees: How speakers' expectations and
addressees' feedback influence storytelling. Discourse
Processes, 47, 567-587.
Kuhlen, A. K., Galati, A., & Brennan, S. E. (2012).
Gesturing
integrates
top-down
and
bottom-up
information: Effects of speakers' expectations and
addressees' feedback. Language and Cognition, 4, 17-41.
Metzing, C., & Brennan, S. E. (2003). When conceptual
pacts are broken: Partner-specific effects on the
comprehension of referring expressions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49, 201-213.
Newman-Norlund, S. E., Noordzij, M. L., NewmanNorlund, R. D., Volman, I. A. C., De Ruiter, J. P.,
Hagoort, P., & Toni, I. (2009). Recipient design in tacit
communication. Cognition, 111, 46-54.
Nickerson, R. S., Baddeley, A., & Freedman, B. (1987). Are
people's estimates of what other people know influenced
by what they themselves know? Acta Psychologica, 64,
254-259.
Pornpitakpan, C. (2004). The persuasiveness of source
credibility: A critical review of five decades' evidence.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(2), 243-281.
Smith, V. L., & Clark, H. H. (1993). On the course of
answering questions. Journal of Memory and Language,
32, 25-38.
Swerts, M., & Krahmer, E. (2005). Audiovisual prosody and
feeling of knowing. Journal of Memory and Language,
53, 81-94.
Teufel, C., Fletcher, P. C., & Davis, G. (2010). Seeing other
minds: attributed mental states influence perception.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 376-382.

3091

