UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Category Change in the Absence of Falsifying Feedback

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6842n36f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ramsburg, Jared
Ohlsson, Stellan

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Category Change in the Absence of Falsifying Feedback
Jared T. Ramsburg (jramsb2@uic.edu)
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Psychology (MC 285)
1007 West Harrison Street
Chicago, Illinois, 60607-7137

Abstract
Many conceptual change theories posit that change occurs
when the learner becomes dissatisfied with the current
conception (Ohlsson, 2011; Strike & Posner, 1992). A
necessary component of dissatisfaction is falsifying feedback.
The present experiments investigate whether participants
exposed to a novel method for eliminating the ability to
directly falsify a misconception will still be able to
recategorize compared to participants that can directly falsify.
The results suggest that direct falsification of a misconception
is not necessary for recategorization, and that direct
falsification may slow the learning process. Implications are
discussed.
Keywords: Learning,
monotonic change.

recategorization,

feedback,

non-

Introduction
Both common sense and past research have assumed that
conceptual change in particular and non-monotonic
cognitive change in general is driven by a person’s
dissatisfaction with his or her current conception (Ohlsson,
2011). Dissatisfaction is in turn caused by falsifying
information and experiences that are inconsistent with the
current conception. Without falsification a person would
presumably lack motivation to change (Chi, 2005; Chi,
2008; Chi & Brem, 2009; Gopnik & Wellman, 2012; Slotta
& Chi, 2006; Strike & Posner, 1982, 1992). But once
dissatisfaction has set in, the learner is ready to search for an
alternative conception (Elio & Pelletier, 1997; Strike &
Posner, 1982, 1992; Chi & Ohlsson, 2005; Ozdemir &
Clark, 2007). The theme of falsification first became
dominant in the history of science via the works of Karl
Popper and Thomas Kuhn, but it has since spread to all
aspects of knowledge change.
For example, Strike and Posner’s (1982) claimed that
students in a science classroom must be dissatisfied with
their current conception before they are ready to learn a new
conception. Moreover, dissatisfaction must surpass the
threshold at which accommodation supersedes assimilation.
The threshold is surpassed by the accretion of falsifying
pieces of information that accumulate until the discrepancy
cannot be ignored.
Similarly, the Theory-Theory posits that the knowledge
revision process takes place when dissatisfaction with the
current conception reaches an individual’s threshold for

conceptual change in the course of cognitive development
(Gopnik & Wellman, 2012).
As a final example, the Categorical Shift Theory describes
conceptual change as a process that requires one to abandon
or reject prior misconceptions via the recognition of
differences between two or more general categories (Chi,
2005; Chi & Brem, 2009). Failure to filter information
through an existing knowledge base leads to dissatisfaction
with the current conception. Dissatisfaction leads to a search
for an alternative knowledge structure capable of
accommodating the new information.
In short, these and other theories of cognitive change
assume that dissatisfaction is a necessary prerequisite for
cognitive change in children, students, and both lay adults
and scientists. However, both common sense and
psychological research agree that although people respond
to falsifying information by trying to reduce the cognitive
dissonance it causes, they tend to process the falsifying
information in such a way as to minimize its impact on
current knowledge (Ohlsson, 2011). If so, why should we
believe that falsifying information is a necessary component
of conceptual change?
In contrast to the theories mentioned above, the
Resubsumption Theory claims that conceptual change can
occur even in the absence of falsification of a person’s
current conception. This is possible when the learner
possesses two alternative theories that apply to the same
case or phenomenon. Change from one theory to the other
occurs through competitive evaluation on the basis of
cognitive utility rather than truth or falsity (Ohlsson, 2009).
Competitive evaluation triggers a change by revealing that
the alternative theory is more applicable in a given instance.
In the current study, we used the re-categorization
paradigm (Cosejo, Oesterreich & Ohlsson, 2009) to create a
situation in which the participants needed to change a newly
learned definition a category into a different definition of
the same category in the absence of information that
falsified the latter. Specifically, the participants learned how
to categorize a novel set of stimuli through the standard
procedure used in countless categorization experiments
(Ashby & Maddox, 2005): view a potential category
member, judge whether it is a member, receive feedback on
the judgment, and go to the next trial. Once the participants
showed that they had mastered the category, the category
was changed without warning. To succeed, the learner had

3239

to re-learn the category, i.e., learn a new definition of it, and
consequently, a different way of categorizing the relevant
stimuli. The particular version of recategorization that we
used in this study presented stimuli that mimicked a
science-learning scenario. Images of fictitious alien bacteria
were categorized with respect to their resistance to
atmospheric oxygen; see details in the Method section.
The present study used the recategorization paradigm to
investigate whether falsification is necessary for a learner to
recategorize. All participants were given both supportive
and falsifying feedback on their categorization judgments
during the initial phase of the study. We refer to this as
initial learning, and the category definition learned as the
initial category or the ‘misconception’. After learning the
initial category, the participants were exposed to one of two
feedback conditions during the second phase of the
experiment. We refer to the second phase as the target
learning, and the new category definition acquired in this
phase as the target category.
The participants in the complete feedback condition
received both confirmatory and falsifying feedback (the
complete condition). The participants in the second
feedback condition were presented with stimulus items that
had been altered in such way that the initial category, once
acquired, could not be directly falsified (the confirmation
only condition). This was accomplished by deleting crucial
features from the stimuli; see Method section for details.
However, they received the same information required to
learn the target category as the participants in the complete
condition. In short, the purpose was to compare recategorization in the presence and absence of falsifying
feedback.
Predictions
There are three potential outcomes of this experiment. We
could find that having complete feedback (i.e., both
confirmation and falsification) yields the most efficient
categorical change. Alternatively, we could find that the
absence of falsification has no effect on recategorization,
that is, learners need confirmation to learn, not falsification.
Finally, we could find that falsification is not necessary, but
harmful. That is, the presence of falsification might hinder
recategorization, perhaps by creating cognitive conflicts that
trigger defensive processing mechanisms (Ohlsson, 2011).
The latter might use up cognitive resources that are needed
for learning.
We have specific quantitative predictions regarding these
outcomes. The predictions relate to different measures of
performance. The first measure examines overall success,
that is, do the groups learn the target when compared to
chance. Specifically, it is hypothesized that the complete
condition (i.e., those with both types of feedback) will
perform better than chance because the combination of
confirmatory feedback and falsifying feedback will allow
the learner to adopt the target category. The confirmatory
condition is hypothesized to perform better than chance
because of the availability of confirmatory feedback.

The first measure (i.e., overall success) is examined
between groups. That is, are there differences between
groups in their ability to learn the target category? It is
hypothesized that there will be no difference in target
learning between the confirmatory and complete condition.
This is expected because the use of confirmatory feedback
will allow learners to adopt the target category (for both
confirmatory and complete conditions). No differences
between the confirmation and complete conditions will
demonstrate that falsification is not necessary for
recategorization to occur.
The second measure examines how quickly the groups
can recategorize. There are three different scenarios that
could occur for speed of categorization that will answer the
question regarding what type of feedback appears to be the
most effective for increasing speed of categorization. The
first scenario would have complete learning faster than
confirmatory. This would demonstrate that having both
confirmation and falsification could result in faster learning
compared to confirmation without falsification. That is,
falsification is beneficial for increasing the speed of
categorical change compared to not having the ability to
directly falsify the misconception.
The second scenario would be that no difference exists
between complete and confirmatory only conditions. This
would suggest that the presence or absence of falsification
has no effect on categorical change so long as confirmatory
feedback is available.
The third scenario would show that speed of learning is
faster for confirmatory compared to complete. This type of
outcome would demonstrate that falsification might not be
necessary for categorical change, but that it might hinder
categorical change as evidenced by the complete condition
underperforming compared to the confirmatory condition.
Method
Participants
One hundred twenty introductory psychology students
participated in the study for course credit. Random
assignment yielded 66 participants in the complete condition
and 54 participants in the confirmatory condition.
Design
The study was a between-participants design with two
conditions (Complete and Confirmatory).
Materials
The materials consisted of 128 fictional bacteria images
including some that were incomplete, i.e., some features
were deleted (see Figure 1). The bacteria have six different
parts that have different binary attributes resulting in 64
complete variants: Nuclei (grey or black), Headbulbs (three
or none), Ribosomes (bent or straight), Tail Cilia (present or
absent), Cell Membrane (singular or double), and
Cytoplasm (white or grey).

3240

Figure 1. Example bacterium with parts labeled.
Additionally, some images were incomplete, that is, some
images would not show the nuclei and some would not
show the tail (see Figure 2). The images were presented on a
computer
screen
via
E-Prime
software;
see
(www.pstnet.com/products/E-Prime/default/).

nucleus, but is shown to be oxygen resistant the learner
should logically conclude that another part of the bacteria is
responsible for oxygen resistance.
Condition 2: Incomplete Stimuli. This condition
contained no stimuli that could be used to directly falsify the
misconception. Specifically, bacteria images containing the
dark nuclei with straight ribosomes were not shown for any
trial. However, there were stimuli that did not show the
nuclei, resulting in an inability of the learner to directly
falsify the initial category. Each training block was balanced
to include in randomized order six images that did not
display the misconception, six images that fit the target
category, two images that fit neither category, and two
images that fit both the misconception and the target
categories. The purpose of the latter was to make the
learning situation somewhat more challenging by
introducing a small amount of noise into the information the
participants received.
Procedure

Figure 2. Bacteria with and without nuclei shown.
Procedure
Phase 1: Misconception Learning. Participants first
learned to categorize whether an alien bacteria was oxygen
resistant based on feedback that supported the
misconception feature (i.e., black nuclei) over the course of
five training blocks of 16 trials each. Each training block
was balanced to include in randomized order six images that
contained the misconception, six images that contained the
target, two images that contained neither, and two images
that contained both the misconception and the target. After
five training blocks, unbeknownst to the participants the
feature that determines oxygen resistance changed to bent
ribosomes (i.e., the target).
Phase 2: Target Learning. Participants had five target
training blocks of 16 randomized trials to learn that bent
ribosomes determined oxygen resistance. The target training
had two different experimental conditions.
Condition 1: Complete Stimuli. This condition consisted
of stimuli that were similar to what participants had already
used for classification. Each training block was balanced to
include in randomized order six images that contained the
misconception, six images that contained the target, two
images that contained neither, and two images that
contained both the misconception and the target. All parts of
the bacteria were visible on the screen allowing participants
to falsify their prior categorization in favor of a new
categorization supported by the computers feedback. For
example, in phase 1, the participant learned that black nuclei
are responsible for oxygen resistance. In phase 2, the
participant was then confronted with an image containing
black nuclei with feedback stating that the bacteria was not
oxygen resistant. This feedback should allow the learner to
negate the prior conception. Moreover, when the learner is
confronted with an image that does not have a black

Participants were seated in separate cubicles. Each
participant was instructed to first participate in a training
session, which consisted of a series of PowerPoint slides
outlining how one can sort a variety of objects into different
categories. The training session ended with participants
categorizing stick figures based on their features. When
participants finished with the initial training activity, they
were instructed to participate in the more challenging
bacteria paradigm.
Participants read the instructions for the task on the
computer screen and asked questions if needed. Participants
were given a script stating that alien bacteria was recently
discovered on a distant planet and that scientists needed to
determine whether there were oxygen resistant variants of
the bacteria. Participants were then asked to rate how
important each feature was in determining oxygen resistance
on a 7-point Likert scale from 1 (Not at all) to 7
(Extremely). After rating the features, participants went
through a prompt that described the importance of
determining which bacteria were oxygen resistant. Each
participant was tasked with determining whether the
pictured bacterium was oxygen resistant. Participants
indicated their response via the keyboard. The following
responses were acceptable: y= yes, n=no, d= don’t know.
Participants would then receive immediate feedback from
the computer either stating that the bacterium was or was
not oxygen resistant. Participants were instructed to make as
few errors as possible.
After completing all trials, participants were again asked
how motivated they were to perform the task well and to
rate the importance of different features in determining
oxygen resistance on the same 7-point Likert scale as
before. The participants keyed in an open-ended response
about which features they thought determined oxygen
resistance. They then went to the next screen which asked
whether oxygen resistance was always determined the same
way. Finally, participants answered demographic questions.

3241

Results
Thirty-eight participants in the complete condition and 36
participants in the incomplete condition met the criterion for
inclusion in analyses (i.e., correctly classifying 14 of 16
alien bacteria in any of the initial five training blocks). The
inclusion criterion was chosen as a way to insure that we
tested participants who were successful in learning the
misconception. We wanted to examine whether falsification
is necessary for adopting a new method of categorization for
the participants who succeeded in learning the initial
misconception feature, not whether falsification is necessary
to learn the target category from scratch.
Learning Misconception
Our first analysis determined whether random assignment
was effective at producing equivalent groups. In order to
determine whether participants might differ in their ability
to learn the misconception, we examined their performance
on the first five blocks via a repeated measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) with Greenhouse-Geisser correction
found a main effect for blocks, that is, regardless of
condition, participants improved in performance from
blocks 1 thru 5, F(2.32, 166.84) = 66.76, p < .001, η2partial =
.653. There was no main effect of condition, F < 1, η2partial =
.008 nor did groups differ at rate of learning, F(2.32,
166.84) = 1.09, ns., η2partial = .307. These results suggest that
the groups were equivalent in their ability to learn the
misconception.
Learning the Target
Our next step was to assess whether the confirmatory
condition learned the target in blocks 6 through 10.
Performance of 14 out of 16 or greater on any of the blocks
6 through 10 was rated as successful learning of the target;
we found that 29 of 36 (80.55%) participants correctly
learned the target category. Whereas, if participants
maintained the misconception for all trials they would have
resulted in 0 of 36 participants demonstrating that they
learned the target.
Using a chi-squared goodness-of-fit test we measured
overall target acquisition (i.e., in general did learning occur
yes or no) against a more stringent probability (i.e., chance
at 50%). Specifically, the results revealed that the
confirmatory condition’s target acquisition was better than
chance, χ2 (36) = 13.44, p < .001. Similar results were found
for the complete condition where 29 of 38 (76.31%)
participants learned the target, χ2 (36) = 9.00, p < .01.
Differences between Groups for Target Learning
We examined whether conditions differed in target
acquisition via a chi-squared test-of-independence that
showed that the groups did not differ in target acquisition, χ2
(36) = 2.90, p = .09. This suggests that removing the ability
to directly falsify the misconception does not hinder a
learner’s ability to adopt a new method of categorization.
Additionally, we examined potential differences in
learning rate based on condition following the switch. That

is, we wanted see whether one group learned faster than the
other. A repeated measure ANOVA with GreenhouseGeisser correction was used to determine whether there
would be a difference in performance following the switch
from the misconception to the target for blocks 6 through
10. The analysis revealed a main effect for blocks showing
that participants improved with training, F(2.646, 190.477)
= 75.01, p < .001, η2partial = .671, and a main effect for
condition showing that the confirmatory condition
performed better than the direct condition, F(1, 72) = 7.60,
p < .01, η2partial = .096. The interaction was significant, rate
of learning was faster for the confirmatory condition than
the complete condition, F(2.646, 190.477) = 5.21, p < .01,
η2partial = .146. These results suggest that the confirmatory
condition may result in faster learning of a new conception
(see Table 1).
Table 1: The means and (standard deviations) for
percentage correct for blocks 6-10.

Complete

Confirmatory

Block
6

Block
7

Block
8

Block
9

Block
10

40.63

64.64

72.86

81.58

86.06

(16.61)

(27.43)

(28.11)

(24.49)

(19.89)

63.72

77.78

83.51

88.54

88.02

(16.89)

(19.33)

(20.27)

(16.06)

(20.51)

Overview of Response Type by Condition
In Figure 3, responses that are misconception consistent
(MCR) or target consistent (TCR) separated by condition
are shown by training block. MCRs were responding no on
target bacteria and TCRs were responding yes on target
bacteria. These response types are independent from each
other because of the don’t know response option. The figure
shows how response tendencies changed when the feedback
was altered to support the target within and between
conditions.
100
90
80
Complete
70
(MCR)
Confirmatory
60
(MCR)
50
Complete
40
(TCR)
Confirmatory
30
(TCR)
20
10
0
B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10
Figure 3. Percentage consistent with response type by
condition.
Discussion of Experiment 1
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that the incomplete,
confirmatory feedback only condition might initially speed

3242

up learning of a new conception in comparison to the
complete condition. We investigated whether participants
would adopt a new conception after the switch and whether
rate of learning would vary based on condition. We found
that the participants in both conditions adopted the new
conception. However, participants in the complete condition
learned at a slower rate than those in the confirmatory
condition. We propose that this difference was due to the
need for participants in the complete condition to make
sense of conflicting information. The sense making
absorbed cognitive resources that otherwise would have
been available for learning the target category, slowing
down the re-categorization process.
Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we attempted to replicate the findings of
Experiment 1 with the addition of two learning aids.
Learning aids were included in an effort to reduce the
number of participants that are eliminated from analysis for
failing to learn the misconception. The first learning aid was
included in the prompt that participants read before
engaging in the categorization process. The learning aid
suggested that parts within the cell body may be influential
in determining oxygen resistance (This statement is true as
both misconception and target features are within the cell
body). We assumed that the inclusion of this statement
might focus search for what promotes oxygen resistance to
the interior of the bacteria. The second learning aid was a
handout that showed an image of the bacteria with parts
labeled (see figure 1) as well as a list of the possible variants
of each feature. This was meant to serve as a working
memory aid.
Finally, the handout included a statement that “some of
the images of the bacteria that you will see may be
INCOMPLETE, that is, all bacteria have the 6 parts
described, but some parts may not be visible.” This aspect
of the handout was included in an effort to refute claims that
participants may be viewing bacteria that do not show the
dark nuclei as being bacteria without nuclei, which could
result in a different interpretation of the stimuli by the
participants.
Method
Participants
Sixty-one introductory psychology students participated in
the study for course credit. Random assignment yielded 30
participants in the complete condition and 31 participants in
the confirmatory condition.

for inclusion in analyses (i.e., correctly classifying 14 of 16
alien bacteria in any of the first five blocks).
Learning Misconception
Our first analysis sought to determine whether participants
might differ in their ability to learn the misconception via a
repeated-measures ANOVA where we examined percentage
correct per block for the first five blocks. We found a main
effect for blocks, that is, regardless of condition, participants
improved in performance from blocks 1 thru 5, F(4, 160) =
55.60, p < .001, η2partial = .582. There was no main effect of
condition, F(1, 40) = 1.69, p = .201, η2partial = .041 nor did
groups differ at rate of learning, F(4, 160) = 1.19, p = .319,
η2partial = .029. These results suggest that the groups were
equivalent in ability to learn the misconception.
Learning the Target
Our next step was to assess whether the confirmatory
condition learned the target in blocks 6 through 10.
Performance of 14 out of 16 or greater on any of the blocks
6 through 10 was rated as successful learning of the target.
We found that 15 of 21 (71.43%) participants correctly
learned the target category. Using a chi-squared goodnessof-fit test the results revealed that the confirmatory
condition’s target acquisition was better than chance, χ2 (21)
= 3.86, p = .05. Alternatively, results for the complete
condition where 14 of 21 (66.67%) participants learned the
target, their target acquisition was not better than chance, χ2
(21) = 2.33, p = .127.
Differences between Groups for Target Learning
We examined whether conditions differed in learning the
target via a chi-squared test-of-independence that showed
that the groups did not differ in learning the target, χ2 (42) =
.11, p = .739. This replicates the finding from experiment 1
that the ability to directly falsify a misconception is not
necessary for learning the new conception.
Given the relatively small sample size for Experiment 2
and the likelihood of differences occurring in earlier blocks
we opted to conduct a series of t-tests on target learning
blocks 6 through 10 instead of a repeated measure ANOVA,
which might fail to differentiate the effect. The results of the
t-tests revealed that participants in the confirmation
condition performed better than the complete condition for
block 6, t (40) = 4.56, p < .001 and marginally better on
block 7 for a one-tailed t-test, t (40) = 1.67, p = .051. There
were no differences between the groups for blocks 8, 9, and
10, t < 1 (see Table 2).
Table 2: The means and (standard deviations) for percentage
correct for blocks 6-10.

Design & Procedure
The same procedure as in Experiment 1 was used in
Experiment 2, with the addition of the two learning aids
(i.e., the hint in the prompt and the handout).

Block
6
Complete

Results
Twenty-one participants in the complete condition and 21
participants in the confirmatory condition met the criterion

Confirmatory

3243

Block
7

Block
8

Block
9

Block
10

44.94

68.75

78.87

80.06

83.93

(20.31)

(30.94)

(29.01)

(28.55)

(26.34)

68.75

82.14

78.87

85.42

85.12

(12.66)

(19.89)

(16.11)

(19.8)

(23.67)

Discussion
In the present study, we examined whether participants
randomly assigned to receive one of two types of stimuli
differed in their ability to falsify an initially acquired
category. The present findings provide modest support that
there may be instances in which falsification is not only
unnecessary for overriding a prior conception, but might
actually be harmful. In both Experiments 1 and 2 we found
that participants who could not directly falsify the
misconception adopted the target conception in fewer trials
compared to those participants who could falsify the
misconception directly.
If replicated, our demonstrating that falsification is not
necessary for categorical change could have multiple
implications. For instance, theories of conceptual change
that posit the necessity of dissatisfaction might themselves
need revision. In addition, instruction in the classroom for
scientific topics known to require knowledge revision has
found that direct refutation is not necessarily effective at
promoting change (Vosniadou, 1994; Vosniadou &
Verschaffel, 2004), but perhaps novel development of
another ontological structure could without refutation be
developed and then integrated into the learning
environment. Further investigation would be required in
order to determine the most effective ways to improve
conceptual change processing amongst students.
The present work should be viewed in consideration to
its experimental controls, which might limit external
validity. Specifically, the use of novel stimuli may not
promote the same types of recategorical processes as stimuli
that hold some greater individual meaning. Additionally, the
population used in the study (university students) cannot be
expected to adequately represent all types of learners.
Furthermore, the learning processes observed in this
experiment were of short duration. In many situations that
require non-monotonic cognitive change, a direct verbal
statement of the target concept is available but it was not
part of our experimental procedure. Finally, we point out
that conceptual change in real life usually involves a system
of interrelated concepts rather than a single concept.
Future research might explore how different types of
stimuli might influence recategorical change. Moreover,
studies that mimic a classroom environment might also offer
insights into what processes might bring about conceptual
change. Additionally, studies that are able to use multiple
daily training sessions and then attempt to recategorize
might help in the understanding of temporal exposure and
its influences on recategorization.
References
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Human category
learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 149-178.
Butler, D. L., & Winne, P. H. (1995). Feedback and selfregulated learning: A theoretical synthesis. Review of
Educational Research, 65, 245-281.
Chi, M. T. H. (2005). Common sense conceptions of emergent
processes: Why some misconceptions are robust.

Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 161–199.
Chi, M. T. H. (2008). Three types of conceptual change: belief
revision, mental model transformation, and
categorical shift. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), International
handbook of research on conceptual change (pp. 61–
82). New York: Routledge.
Chi, M. T. H., & Brem, S. K. (2009). Contrasting Ohlsson’s
Resubsumption Theory with Chi’s Categorical Shift
Theory. Educational Psychologist, 44, 58-63.
Chi, M. T. H., & Ohlsson, S. (2005 ). Complex declarative
learning. In K. J. Holyoak, & R. G. Morrison, (Eds.),
The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning
(pp. 371–399). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Cosejo, D. G., Oesterreich, J., & Ohlsson, S. (2009). Recategorization: Restructuring in categorization In
N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 31th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Elio, R. & Pelletier, F. J. (1997). Belief change as propositional
update. Cognitive Science, 21, 419-460.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (2012, May 14).
Reconstructing Constructivism: Causal Models,
Bayesian Learning Mechanisms, and the Theory
Theory. Psychological Bulletin. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1037/a0028044
Ohlsson, S. (2011). Deep learning: How the mind overrides
experience. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Ohlsson, S. (2009). Resubsumption: A possible mechanism for
conceptual change and belief revision. Educational
Psychologist, 44, 20– 40.
Özdemir, G., & Clark, D. B. (2007). An overview of
conceptual change theories. Eurasia Journal of
Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 3,
351-361.
Slotta, J. D. & Chi, M. T. H. (2006). Helping students
understand challenging topics in science through
ontology training. Cognition and Instruction, 24, 261289.
Strike, K.A., & Posner, G.J. (1982). Conceptual change and
science teaching. European Journal of Science
Education, 4, 231-240.
Strike, K.A., & Posner, G.J. (1992). A revisionist theory of
conceptual change. In R. Duschl & R. Hamilton
(eds.), Philosophy of science, cognitive psychology,
and educational theory and practice (pp. 147-176).
Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Vosniadou, S. (1994). Capturing and modeling the process of
conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 4, 4569.
Vosniadou, S. & Verschaffel, L. (2004). Extending the
conceptual change approach to mathematics learning
and teaching. Learning and Instruction, 14, 445-451.

3244

