UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal determinism in toddlers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xk1w1dg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Muentener, Paul
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal determinism in toddlers
Paul Muentener (pmuenten@mit.edu) & Laura Schulz
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Abstract
Prior research has shown that children hold a belief in causal
determinism - the belief that all events are caused – by 4
years of age. In this study we investigate the developmental
origins of this belief. We showed toddlers (24 months) a
spontaneous or explained novel physical outcome (a toy that
lit up either spontaneously or upon contact from an
experimenter) and then showed them an additional candidate
cause (pressing a button) while obscuring the outcome. We
asked whether toddlers inferred that the two components (the
button and the outcome) were causally linked. We found that
toddlers represented the candidate cause as the cause of the
novel outcome only when the event spontaneously occurred
(Experiments 1-2), and that children spontaneously searched
for plausible causes of unexplained outcomes (Experiment 3).
These results suggest that toddlers, like older children,
believe physical events have causes, and that this belief
supports exploration and discovery.
Keywords: causal reasoning;
causality; prediction; intervention.

determinism;

physical

Researchers have suggested that children’s sophisticated
causal inference abilities are at the core of theory
development and the many conceptual changes that occur
throughout early childhood (Carey, 1985, 2009; Gopnik &
Meltzoff, 1997; Gopink & Wellman, in press, Schulz,
2012). By preschool, children engage in causal exploration,
use conditional probabilities to determine the causal
structure of events, and can design appropriate causal
interventions (e.g., Bullock, Gelman, & Baillargeon, 1982;
Gopnik & Sobel, 2000; Gopnik et al., 2004; Kushnir &
Gopnik, 2007; Shultz, 1982).
What drives children’s search for causal structure in the
world? Although some events in the world involve visible
interventions (e.g., human action) and visible outcomes
(e.g., objects that move or change state), many events
involve unobserved or even unobservable causal
mechanisms (e.g., viruses cause disease). Thus, a challenge
for theories of conceptual development is to explain how
children go beyond the evidence they see.
One possibility is that children are causal determinists. In
its most basic form, causal determinism is the belief that all
events have causes.
If an event appears to occur
spontaneously (e.g., a light turns on) adults will typically
infer the presence of an unobserved generative cause (e.g., a
person activating a hidden switch). A belief in causal
determinism could help guide children’s search for
unobserved variables.
Prior research suggests that by the age of five, children
are determinists about physical events. In classic research
on causal reasoning, Bullock, Gelman, & Baillargeon
(1982) showed that 5-year-olds denied that that events could

occur spontaneously. When asked to explain a novel,
apparently spontaneous jack-in-the-box event, no child
suggested that the event occurred on its own. Rather, all
children referred to hidden variables (e.g, wires, remote
controls, or “invisible batteries”). More recently, Schulz &
Somerville (2005) found that four and five-year-old children
also posited hidden causal variables when outcomes
occurred probabilistically.
If a belief in causal determinism is integral to human
causal learning and exploration, it might be in place very
early in development. Note however, that it is not obvious
that the assumption of determinism is necessary either for
accurate prediction or effective action. In principle, it might
be possible to learn statistical relationships between actions
and outcomes (e.g., Blaisdell, Sawa, Leising, & Waldmann,
2006) and even to innovate causally effective tools (Emery
& Clayton, 2004) without assuming that the world is
saturated with causality (though see Gershman, Blei, & Niv,
2010 for evidence suggesting that inferring latent variables
may be integral to causal reasoning broadly). If the
assumption of determinism is a relatively late development,
children might come to believe that all events have causes
only after they have been instructed in unobservable causes
like gravity and germs.
Here, we explore the developmental origins of causal
determinism by asking whether 18- to 30-month-old
children believe that physical events have causes. We show
toddlers an event (a light turning on) that either appears to
occur spontaneously or that appears to be caused by the
experimenter’s preceding intentional action. We then
introduce a novel button as a plausible candidate cause for
the event (but never show the toddlers any predictive
relationship between the button and the light). If toddlers
believe that all physical events have causes, then they
should ignore the button when the experimenter’s
intentional action potentially explains the event but
reference the button when the event is otherwise
unexplained. We test the prediction that toddlers selectively
infer causes for unexplained events by investigating
toddlers’ predictive looks (Experiment 1), their
interventions (Experiment 2), and their exploratory behavior
(Experiment 3).

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants Thirty two toddlers (mean: 24 months, range –
18 - 30 months) were recruited at a Children’s Museum. An
additional 10 toddlers were recruited but not included in the
final sample due to: inability to complete the session (n = 4),
parental interference (n = 4), or experimenter error (n = 2).

3122

Toddlers were assigned to either the Spontaneous condition
or the Explained condition (n = 16/condition). There were
no age differences between the conditions (p = ns).
Materials The light box was constructed from a black box
(6 in x 6 in x 6 in) with a small blue lamp (2 in diameter)
emerging from the front panel which was controlled
surreptitiously by the experimenter. An orange button box
was connected to the black box by a long orange rod (15 in).
A black screen served as an occluder throughout the
procedure. An additional black screen was placed behind
the black box to obscure the experimenter’s surreptitious
activation of the blue lamp.
Procedure Figure 1 presents a schematic depiction of the
procedure from Experiments 1-3. Upon entering the testing
space, all children saw the button box connected to the light
box. The experimenter directed the child’s attention to all
components of the novel toy (the button box, the connected
rod, and the light box) without labeling the specific items
(e.g., “Look at this”) (see Figure 1, top panel). The button
was then occluded from the child’s view with the black
screen. In the Spontaneous condition, toddlers saw the light
box light up and flash blue (4 flashes, approximately 1 s
total) apparently spontaneously. In the Explained condition,
the experimenter touched the rim of the light and then light
box lit up and flashed blue.
In both conditions the experimenter then moved the
occluder to reveal the button box and occlude the light box.
The experimenter then pushed the button for 1 s.
During the test trial, the experimenter removed the
occluder from in front of the light box so that all
components were visible to the child. The experimenter
pressed the button but the light box did not light up and
flash blue. We coded toddlers’ first look in the 2-second
window following the button press.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 displays the results from Experiments 1-3.
Toddlers in Experiment 1 were significantly more likely to
look to the box in the Spontaneous condition (68.75 %,
11/16 toddlers) than in the Explained condition (25.00 %,
4/16 toddlers; Fisher’s exact test, p < .05) (Figure 2, left
panel). That is, toddlers inferred a predictive relationship
between a novel event and a candidate cause, but only when
the event had no other candidate explanation.
These results are consistent with the possibility that 2year-olds believe that physical events have causes. When
they saw a novel event that appeared to occur spontaneously
and a plausible candidate cause (a button press), toddlers
made a predictive look from the candidate cause to the
novel event even though they had never seen a predictive
relationship between the button press and the light.
By
contrast, when the novel event could be explained by the
experimenter’s action, the toddlers did not make a predictive
look from the candidate cause to the light.

Figure 1: Procedure for Experiments 1-3.
However, not all predictive relationships are causal
relationships. Predictive looking cannot establish that the
toddlers in Experiment 1 inferred that the button press was
the actual cause of the light activating. Also, in Experiment
1 the experimenter touched the light box in the Explained
condition but not in the Spontaneous condition; arguably the
experimenter’s attention to the light box in the Explained
condition drew the children’s attention away from the
button. In Experiment 2, we matched the experimenter’s
contact with the light box between conditions and we
introduce a stronger test of children’s belief in causal
determinism: we looked at whether toddlers would
selectively intervene on the button. If children believe in
causal determinism for physical events, then when asked to
turn on the light they should push the button more in the
Spontaneous condition than the Explained condition.

Experiment 2
Participants Thirty two toddlers (mean: 24 months, range –
18 - 30 months) were recruited at a Children’s Museum.
Seven additional toddlers were recruited but not included in
the final sample due parental interference (n = 3) and failure
to intervene (n = 4). Children were assigned to either the

3123

*

*

*

Figure 2: Results of Experiments 1-3.
Spontaneous or Explained condition (n = 16/condition).
There were no age differences between conditions (p > .05).
Materials The same materials used in Experiment 1 were
used in Experiment 2.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1
with the following exception (see Figure 1, middle panel).
The experimenter touched the light box in both conditions:
in the Spontaneous condition he touched the light box
immediately after the light turned on (so that it looked like a
response to, rather than potential cause of, the light
activating); in the Explained condition, he touched the light
box immediately before (as in Experiment 1).
During the test event, the experimenter did not push the
button. Instead, he asked the child to “make the light turn
on.” We coded whether the child first touched the button or
the light box within a 30-second window following the
prompt.

Results and Discussion
Toddlers were more likely to intervene on the button in
the Spontaneous condition (81.25 %, 13/16 toddlers) than in
the Explained condition (37.50 %, 6/16 toddlers; Fisher’s
Exact test, p < .05)) (see Figure 2, middle panel). In
contrast, toddlers were more likely to initially intervene on
the light in the Explained condition (62.5 %, 10/16 toddlers)
than in the Spontaneous condition (18.75 %, 3/16 toddlers;
Fisher’s Exact test, p < .05)). Toddlers seemed to infer a
causal relationship between the button and the light only
when the light did not already have an apparent cause.
The data from Experiment 2 provide stronger evidence
that toddlers believe in causal determinism for physical
events. Using interventions as a measure of causal
knowledge, toddlers selectively accept candidate causal
mechanisms for outcomes only when the event appears to
occur spontaneously.
Note that the experimenter contacted both the button and
the light in both the Spontaneous condition and the
Explained condition. The only difference between the

conditions was whether the experimenter’s action on the
light could be represented as a cause of the lights flashing;
in the Explained condition it could, but in the Spontaneous
condition it could not. Thus, the children’s tendency to
imitate the experimenter’s action was influenced by the
children’s causal attributions.
Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that children’s belief in
causal determinism affects their search for unobserved
causes of physical events. However, neither of these
experiments provides a direct test of children’s causal
exploration. In the prior experiments, toddlers were given a
potential causal mechanism (a button) and a relevant action
on that mechanism (pressing the button). We do not know
whether toddlers in the Spontaneous condition (1) inferred
the presence of an external cause and actively searched for it
or (2) whether they linked the two subevents of the
spontaneous light flash and the button press only after the
experimenter directed the child’s attention towards the
button by acting on it. If a belief in causal determinism
guides children’s causal exploration, then children might
search for a candidate cause even if the experimenter does
not direct the children’s attention towards it.
This prediction requires a caveat however. Whether a
learner actually engages in search depends on many factors,
including the learner’s prior knowledge, the size of the
search space, and exploration/exploitation trade-offs relating
the cost and benefit of exploration to the cost and benefit of
other actions the learner might take (see e.g., Gittens, 1979).
Thus a belief in determinism does not mean that learners
will always search for unobserved causes whenever they see
unexplained events. Even as adults, we see events every
day that we cannot explain; we accept that these events have
causes but we rarely bother to seek out the causes ourselves.
Nonetheless, if toddlers actively search for plausible
candidate causes when events appear to occur
spontaneously, then they should be more likely to explore a
well-constrained, plausible search space (e.g., the button
itself) in the Spontaneous condition than the Explained
condition, even if they never observe an intervention on the
button. We test this prediction in Experiment 3.

3124

Experiment 3
Participants Thirty two toddlers (mean: 23 months, range –
18 - 30 months) were recruited at a Children’s Museum.
Thirteen additional toddlers were recruited but not included
in the final sample due to an inability to complete the
session (n = 1), parental interference (n = 4), and failure to
intervene (n = 8). Children were assigned to either the
Spontaneous or Explained condition (n = 16/condition).
There were no age differences between conditions (p > .05).
Materials The same materials used in Experiment 1 were
used in Experiment 3.
Procedure The procedure was similar to Experiment 1
except that the toddler did not see the button until the test
event (see Figure 1, bottom panel). After the toddler viewed
the novel event occur either spontaneously (Spontaneous
condition) or as a result of the Experimenter’s contact
(Explained condition), the Experimenter removed the screen
from in front of the button, and then told the child it was
his/her turn to play. She did not make any reference to the
button and did not explicitly request that the child turn on
the light.
We coded whether children intervened on the button
within the following 30-second window.

Results and Discussion
Toddlers were more likely to intervene on the button in
the Spontaneous condition (81.25 %, 13/16 toddlers) than in
the Explained condition (37.50 %, 6/16 toddlers; Fisher’s
Exact test, p < .05) (see Figure 2, right panel). Even though
children had not seen the experimenter act on a plausible
candidate mechanism, children selectively explored the
candidate mechanism when the novel event seemed to occur
spontaneously.

General Discussion
The current study suggests that toddlers believe that
physical effects have causes. When they saw a novel
physical event, they predicted relationships between,
intervened on, and explored plausible candidate causes only
when the event appears to occur spontaneously. While prior
research had shown that four and five-year-olds believe in
causal determinism, the current study suggests that the
assumption of determinism is present much earlier in
development, at least by two years of age.
One possibility is that toddlers’ performance in the
Spontaneous condition was not driven by a belief in causal
determinism, but instead by a prior belief that buttons cause
events to happen in the world. That is, toddlers may have
made a predictive look towards the light in Experiment 1
because they expected the button press to make something
happen rather than because they were looking for a cause of
the light. Some evidence that this is not the case comes from
the fact that children do not look to the light following the
button press when the light’s activation can be explained by

another cause. Additionally however, we are currently
running a control condition in which toddlers see the button
press but never see the light activate. If toddlers look
expectantly to the other object on the stage simply because
they believe buttons make things happen, they should look
in this condition as well. However, preliminary data
suggest that toddlers do not make predictive looks following
an intervention on the button if they do not have an event to
explain.
In the current study, we restricted our investigation of
causal determinism to the domain of physical artifacts.
Toddlers may assume that events involving artifacts (like a
box lighting up) have causes without extending this
assumption more broadly. We do not know to what extent
children are determinists about naturally occurring physical
events. Nor do we know to what extent either adults or
children believe in causal determinism for psychological
events (e.g., assuming that behaviors like crying, laughing,
and thinking always have causes that fully account for their
outcomes). The range of contexts under which children
believe in causal determinism is an area for future inquiry.
The current research also leaves open the kind of
constraints on children’s hypothesis space for candidate
causes. In this study we provided children with a very
plausible, familiar candidate cause: a button. Arguably, as
discussed above, children’s search for causal structure may
rely heavily on the presence of known plausible candidate
causes. Alternatively, a belief in causal determinism could
guide children’s exploration and discovery of genuinely
novel causal mechanisms over development. Further work is
necessary to know whether toddlers might accept and
explore a wider array of candidate causes to account for
otherwise unexplained events.
Here, we investigated the simplest form of a belief in
causal determinism – that all events have causes. However,
a belief in causal determinism can also entail the assumption
that causes produce their outcomes deterministically. If
events occur probabilistically, a determinist can assume
either that a generative cause is sometimes missing or that
an inhibitory cause is sometimes present. In related research
in our laboratory, we find that toddlers also posit
unobserved causes to explain stochastically occurring
events. When the event occurs deterministically, they do
not make this inference (Wu, Muentener, & Schulz, 2013;
this conference).
Thus a belief in causal determinism may help drive causal
learning and exploration starting in early childhood and
throughout development. If we assume that all events have
causes, then all events are candidates for discovery and
exploration, and we can engage in the boundless inquiry that
characterizes human cognition.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an NSF Faculty Early Career
Development Award, a John Templeton Foundation Award,
and James S. McDonnell Collaborative Interdisciplinary
Grant on Causal Reasoning to L.S.

3125

References
Blaisdell, A. P., Sawa, K., Leising, K. J., & Waldmann, M.
R. (2006). Causal reasoning in rats. Science, 311, 1020–
1022.
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The
development of causal reasoning. In W. J. Friedman
(Ed.), The developmental psychology of time (pp. 209254). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Emery, N., & Clayton, N. (2004). The mentality of crows:
Convergent evolution of intelligence in corvids and apes.
Science, 306, 1903–1907
Gershman, S., Blei, D., & Niv, Y. (2010). Context, learning,
and extinction, Psychological Review, 117, 197-209.
Gittens, J. (1979). Bandit processes and dynamic allocation
indices. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological). 148-177.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L., Kushnir, T.,
& Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in
children: Causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological
Review, 111, 1-31.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, thoughts and
theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., & Schulz, L. (2007). Causal learning. Oxford
University Press.
Gopnik, A., & Sobel, D. M. (2000). Detecting blickets: How
young children use information about novel causal
powers in categorization and induction. Child
Development, 71(5), 1205-1222.
Gopnik, A. & Wellman, H. (in press). Reconstructing
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin.
Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2007). Conditional probability
versus spatial contiguity in causal learning: Preschoolers
use new contingency evidence to overcome prior spatial
assumptions. Developmental Psychology, 44, 186-196.
Schulz, L. (2012). The origins of inquiry: inductive
inference and exploration in early childhood. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 16, 382-389.
Schulz, L., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism in children's inferences about
unobserved causes. Child Development, 77(2), 427-442.
Shultz, T.R. (1982). Rules of causal attribution.
Monographs of the Society for Research in 0Child
Development, 47(1), 1-51.
Wu, Y., Muentener, P., & Schulz, L. (2013). The invisible
hand: Toddlers infer hidden agents when events occur
probabilistically.
Annual meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.

3126

