UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Changing minds by tracking eyes: Dynamical systems, gaze and moral decisions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5df2157x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Parnamets, Philip
Johansson, Petter
Balkenius, Christian
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Changing minds by tracking eyes:
Dynamical systems, gaze and moral decisions
Philip Pärnamets (philip.parnamets@lucs.lu.se)
Petter Johansson (petter.johansson@lucs.lu.se)
Christian Balkenius (christian.balkenius@lucs.lu.se)
Lars Hall (lars.hall@lucs.lu.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University, Kungshuset, Lundagård, 222 22, Lund, Sweden

Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA 95344, USA

Daniel C. Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)
Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK
where they are in their decision trajectory, an influence can
be exerted of what is decided

Abstract
Decision making is a dynamic process. Alternatives compete
over time, and this competition plays out in sensorimotor
processes. This is true not just for perceptual decisions or
simple categorisation tasks, but also for moral decisions,
which are the outcome of a complex interplay of intuition,
emotion and reasoning. In this experiment, we first establish a
descriptive and causal link between gaze and moral
judgement. We then use eye movements to track the time
course of participants’ moral decisions and show that by
interrupting their decision process based on their gaze
position, we are able to influence what they decide. We
interpret this as evidence for a dynamical systems view of
decision making and argue that our results provide new
insights into how judgements are reached and constructed in
our embodied minds.

Process of moral judgements

Keywords: Decision making; morality; dynamic systems;
eye tracking

Imagine a jury, evenly split over a verdict concerning a
murder. One jury member is yet to make her decision,
which will decide the fate of the accused. She weighs up her
choice, looking between the faces of those who argued for
and against conviction, glancing at the evidence and police
reports on the table. The foreman clears her throat: the jury
must take a vote now.
The jury member’s decision could be analysed in terms of
the evidence that is presented and how it is framed, and
many experiments have investigated such factors. But here
we are interested in one particular, often overlooked aspect:
the precise moment of choice, in this case when the foreman
cleared her throat. We claim that the precise timing of
events like these may have a causal influence over a
decision. To make our case, we adopt a perspective viewing
decision-making as a fundamentally dynamic process. In the
decision process, two, or more, options compete over time
until one option reaches a threshold or the process is
interrupted and the system is forced to reach a conclusion.
Secondly, we present evidence that eye movements can
reveal something of this process. Where the jury member
looked, moment-by-moment showed what option she was
considering. Our novel claim is that by manipulating when
someone is forced to make a decision, and, hence, knowing

Recent research in moral psychology emphasizes how
contextual factors influence processes underlying moral
judgements, factors such as emotional state (Wheatley &
Haidt, 2005), political preferences (Graham, Haidt & Nosek,
2009) and causal structure of the moral problem (Cushman,
Young & Hauser, 2006). In particular the interplay between
intuitions, emotions and reasoning has been of central
concern.
In two of the most influential models in this tradition,
Haidt’s Social Intuitionist Model (Haidt, 2001) and
Greene’s Dual Process Model (Greene et al. 2008), moral
cognition is viewed as being comprised of a number of
modules each dedicated towards processing specific forms
of information. These modules then discretely combine their
output to produce a moral judgement, however, the
computational properties of the system are typically not
spelled out nor how strict the modular metaphor is to be
interpreted.
Taking a cue from dynamical systems modelling of
cognition we propose an alternative to stage-based accounts.
We view the processes of making moral judgements as a
stochastic system of graded, probabilistic representations, in
which a judgement can be understood as a temporary
settling of the system around an attractor basin in a decision
space (McKinstry, Dale & Spivey, 2008; Spivey, 2007). In
this study, we exploit a proposed coupling between
cognition and gaze behavior to show the dynamic nature of
moral judgements.

Dynamic and embodied minds
Minds can be understood and modelled as complex dynamic
systems. The discrete symbol and motor output that
characterises language and action according to standard
models can be generated by graded, probabilistic processes
on a continuous timescale, extending beyond the discrete
partitions that our everyday practices impose on our
understanding of ourselves (Spivey, 2007; Van Orden,

1115

Holden & Turvey, 2005). There is evidence for the neural
plausibility stemming from studies measuring and
influencing saccades and saccadic programming in real time
(Gold & Shadlen, 2000) as well as the large scale
probabilistic nature of neural populations (Pouget, Dayan &
Zemel, 2003).
A key element of this dynamic view of mind is the tight
coupling between sensorimotor outputs and cognitive
processing in general – an embodied view of cognition. This
is evidenced, for example, during linguistic processing
where persons glance towards phonological competitors
while viewing an array of objects, by for example looking
towards a candle when hearing ‘candy’ (Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhardt & Sedivy, 1995) and when two people
are engaged in a conversation with each other (Richardson,
Dale & Tomlinson, 2009). Eye movements have been
shown to closely follow cognition during spatial indexing
tasks in adults (Hoover & Richardson, 2008) and infants as
young as 6 months old (Richardson & Kirkham, 2004).
Similarly, mouse movements will show curvature towards
distracting alternatives indicating competition in
categorisation tasks, for example when classifying whales as
being fish or mammals, or, analogously with the eye
movement result above, when processing linguistic inputs
(Freeman, Dale & Farmer, 2011).
Graded representations have also been found in more
advanced reasoning tasks. In one study, participants were
asked to judge the truth of a number of propositions that
were selected to represent various steps of veridicality. For
the propositions with intermediate truth values mouse
movements would veer longer between answers thus
tracking the more arduous cognitive task of assigning a truth
value in these trials (McKinstry et al., 2008).

Gaze preference and choice
The link between gaze and decision making has also been
investigated by a number of studies investigating preference
formation and decisions. In one study participants were
asked to choose which of two faces they found more
attractive. Their eye movements exhibited a bias towards the
about to be chosen alternative, a finding dubbed the gaze
cascade effect (Shimojo et al. 2003). The increasing
likelihood to gaze towards a preferred alternative has also
been demonstrated for participants considering difficult
moral dilemmas (Pärnamets, 2008), indicating that gaze
could contribute to moral judgements as well.
In addition, the experiment by Shimojo et al. (2003)
demonstrated a possibility to bias preference judgements by
actively directing gaze towards one face for longer periods
of exposure than the alternative. Similar methods have been
utilised to bias consumer decisions for candy bars (Armel,
Beaumel & Rangel, 2008). In all these experiments,
however, different information is being presented to
participants by artificially directing their gaze towards
different alternatives.

By contrast, we propose in our experiments that choice
can be influenced by manipulating only the timing of the
decision and not the stimuli the participant attends to.

Hypothesis
We investigated whether the coupling between eye
movements and cognitive processes could be leveraged to
influence the discrete end-state of the dynamic process.
We hypothesised, as suggested by pilot experiments from
our lab (Richardson, Spivey & Hoover, 2009), that the
direction of participants’ gaze could be an index of which
attractor basin in their decision space they are gravitating
towards. Using this information we would be able to
collapse their decision function and bias their judgement to
the currently favoured alternative, even if that alternative
might not have been the option they would have preferred,
had the decision process been allowed to take its noninterrupted course.

Experiments
We devised a series of experiments that attempted to bias
participants’ decisions by monitoring their gaze. The first
experiment, comprised of two studies (1a and 1b), was
designed with a view of establishing an upper bound for our
expected effect as well as exploring the link between gaze,
as an index of thought, and judgement necessary for our
paradigm to work. The second experiment replicates
findings for face preference and consumer decisions by
manipulating direction and duration of gaze and allows us to
establish a causal link between gaze and choice for moral
judgements.
The third experiment is our main study which
demonstrates the hypothesised effect; influencing decisions
solely on the basis of timing. Experiment 4 addresses a
possible objection to our procedure and replicates our main
finding.

Equipment and materials
Eye tracking was performed using an SMI RED 250 eye
tracker running at 250 Hz on a 19” screen with a resolution
of 1680*1050 pixels. Stimuli were presented using
PsychoPhysics Toolbox (Kleiner, Brainard & Pelli, 2007)
running on MatLab 2010b (The MathWorks, Natick, MA.).
Gaze was sampled by the MatLab script with 10ms
intervals. Calibration was performed on each subject at the
start of the experiment using 5 points followed by 4
validation points. Calibrations with error exceeding 1˚
visual angle in more than one case were rerun. Average
error was less than 0.5˚.
There were a total of 98 items that participants were asked
to listen to and make judgements about. Of these, 63 were
moral items and 35 were factual items. The factual items
were used previously in our pilot studies (Richardson et al.,
2009) and were all propositions that have an average 50%
truth value, meaning that a large sample of persons were
found equally likely to judge the propositions as being true

1116

or false. An example proposition would be “Is coffee bad
for your health?” with the alternatives “Yes” and “No”.
The moral items were derived from Moral Foundations
Theory (MFT, Graham et al., 2009) and propositions were
designed to fit with each of the five categories found in
MFT. In addition a few propositions were of a meta-ethical
character. An example item is “Murder is sometimes
justifiable” with the alternatives “Sometimes justifiable”
and “Never justifiable”. The alternatives were such that it
would be informative to view both for the participant.

Participants indicated during debrief that they
occasionally would fail to understand an item and in those
cases typically indicated very low confidence following that
trial. Trials with confidence <1.5 of 7 were removed for that
reason.

Experiment 1a

General Procedure
Participants were asked to sit in front of a computer screen
wearing a pair of headphones. They were instructed that
during each trial they would hear a sentence stating either a
moral or a factual proposition. Two alternatives would then
be shown on the screen, one on the left-hand side of the
screen and the other on the right-hand. Their task was to use
their judgement to select the alternative that they thought
was right in relation to the sentence they heard.
Participants indicated their selection by clicking the right
or left mouse button, where the buttons corresponded to the
alternatives presented on either the right or left side of the
screen. The alternatives were visible for a maximum of
3000ms, or until the experimental ‘trigger’ went off. This
trigger, based on their eye movements, varied between
experiments as explained below. The participants then saw a
prompt asking them to “Choose now!” Participants were
instructed to respond quickly once the prompt was shown
on the screen. After each trial, a 1-7 continuous confidence
scale was also presented.
Participants were told that the alternatives would be
visible for a random and short amount of time each trial and
were asked to view both alternatives. Unbeknownst to the
participants the timing of each trial was dependent on their
eye movements which were being concurrently recorded.
The experimental trigger determining the length of each trial
was based on the input from the eye tracker during each
trial. It was sent to go off as soon one of the alternatives had
accumulated at least 750ms of dwell time and the other
alternative had accumulated at least 250ms of dwell time.
These criteria ensured that the trigger would not go off until
both alternatives had been seen by the participant. The exact
conditions governing the trigger varied between the
experiments and are detailed below.
If participants did not set off the trigger then the trial
would time out after 3000ms, and the participants would
then be asked to make a choice. Trials timed out either
because the participants failed to look at both alternatives,
or because the eye-tracker momentarily lost track of the
participants’ gaze and so failed to capture when the
participants shifted their focus between the two choice
options. In both cases, there is no way for us using this
paradigm to interrupt a decision process where participants
are drawn between two competing alternatives. All such
time-out trials were removed from further analysis.

Procedure In this first experiment we wanted to establish
that the coupling between eye movements and cognition
would be present even for our moral items. We did not
attempt to bias participants’ decisions at this point. We
simply wanted to show that there is a relationship between
the distribution of gaze across two alternatives, and which
alternative is eventually chosen. This also allows us to
establish an upper bound for the effect size of our later
attempts at influencing decisions.
In each trial of this experiment the first 300ms of viewing
time were not counted towards the trigger, giving
participants some extra time to orient themselves during
each trial. From 300ms onwards, we kept track of how long
the participant looked at each alternative. As soon as one
alternative was viewed for at least 750ms and the other for
250ms, the trigger was set off. We termed the alternative
that had been looked at the longest the target. A success was
counted if that alternative was chosen, otherwise a failure.
Fifteen persons (11 female) participated in this
experiment with a mean age of 20.80 (SD=2.04).
Participants were recruited through both the public and
student-based subject pools at University College London.
Results and Discussion For the moral items 603 trials
(67.67%) were successful (p<0.0001, Binomial test). For
the factual items 280 trials (65.57%) were successful
(p<0.0001, Binomial test) (see figure 1).
This version demonstrates the plausibility of using gaze as
an index of mental trajectories and using this information to
collapse decision space towards an alternative under
consideration. We used a 300ms wait time in order to follow
the procedure of our pilot work (Richardson et al. 2009).
But these early eye movements could presumably also
contribute to the decision vector. We therefore ran a second
version of the experiment without the 300ms wait time to
investigate this.

Experiment 1b
Procedure This Experiment was identical to 1a above, apart
from we did not use a 300ms wait time before eye
movements to both alternatives were measured. Twenty
persons (10 female) were recruited through both the public
and student-based subject pools at University College
London. Participants had a mean age of 27.20 (SD=8.07).
Results and discussion For the moral items, 716 trials
(60.02%) were successful (p<0.0001, Binomial test). For
the factual items 385 trials (68.14%) were successful
(p<0.0001, Binomial test) (see figure 1).

1117

From Experiments 1a and 1b we conclude that eye
movements are closely linked to the decision making
process. If we actively interrupt participants during their
deliberation, they are more likely to choose the alternative
they have looked at for longer, even for complex moral
judgements. We cannot yet claim the causal connexion
between the timing of our interruption and the content of the
judgement, of course. However, these experiments allow us
to establish an upper bound for an expected effect size for
the later experiments in which we attempt to bias their
decisions in a predetermined manner.

Experiment 2
In experiment 2 we wanted to establish the causal connexion
between gaze and choice for the judgements which we were
interested in. We adopted the methods used by, for example,
Shimojo et al. (2003), where the combination of gaze and
exposure, but not exposure alone, had been shown to
influence choice. We constructed an experiment where we
would be directing participants’ gaze towards alternatives so
that they would be more exposed to the target alternative
compared to the non-target.
Procedure. The procedure in Experiment 2 differs
significantly from the general procedure of the other
experiments reported here.
Once participants had heard the item, they were presented
with one alternative at a time with each presentation lasting
400ms. One alternative was always shown on the right-hand
side and the other on the left-hand side. The different
alternatives appeared pseudo-randomly, such that the target
alternative was given a 3:1 exposure weighting. Total
combined viewing time for both the alternatives was
3200ms. Target and non-target alternatives were presented
in random order. Choice was indicated after the presentation
sequence had completed, as in Experiment 1. Nineteen
persons (13 female, mean age 22.36, SD=3.82) participated
in Experiment 2. Participants were recruited through both
the public and student-based subject pools at University
College London.
Results and discussion For the moral items 600 (53.29%)
trials were successful (p<0.05, Binomial test), while 287
(54.99%) trials were successful for the factual items
(p<0.05, Binomial test) (see figure 1).
We conclude that there is a causal connexion between
gaze and choice. In addition, we demonstrate the possibility
to bias moral and factual judgements with the help of
directed gaze and exposure effects, and this on the relatively
small time scales that our paradigm is operating on. Typical
trials in the literature using this method usually last around
twice as long as ours.
Additionally, to our knowledge, this is the first empirical
demonstration of this effect for moral judgements, and as
such, it is a remarkable finding in itself.

Experiment 3
Our goal in this experiment was to exert an influence over
the decisions that participants made by manipulating
nothing but the timing of their decisions. On each trial, we
randomly determined which alternative we would try to bias
the participant towards. Unlike in previous experiments that
have biased decisions by changing stimuli or directing gaze,
including our Experiment 2, our participants looked freely at
the alternatives in front of them. We simply tracked the time
course of their eye movements during the decision process,
and prompted the participants to decide when we judged
that their gaze suggested they were at a particular point in
their decision space that favoured the option we were trying
to influence them to choose.
Procedure Experiment 3 was identical to experiment 1b in
all respects except that here the experiment program would,
for each trial, randomly designate one alternative as the
target. The trigger would only go off if that target alternative
had accumulated at least 750ms of dwell time and the other,
non-target, alternative had accumulated at least 250ms of
dwell time.
Twenty persons (14 female, mean age 29.60, SD=13.14)
participated in experiment 3. Participants were recruited
through both the public and student-based subject pools at
University College London.
Results and discussion For the moral items 609 (58.22%)
trials were successful (p<0.0001, Binomial test). For the
factual items 282 (56.51%) of trials were successful
(p<0.005, Binomial test) (see figure 1).
This finding demonstrates that we are able to influence
participants’ judgements in both moral and factual decisions
by tracking their gaze alone. We merely asked them to
respond at a given point in time when their eye movements
reveal them being in a position in their decision space that
indicates them gravitating towards a given alternative. We
claim that this finding supports our view of the dynamic
nature of judgements, where judgements can be understood
as trajectories in decision space travelling between
alternatives conceived of as attractor basins in that space.
We also wish to highlight the difference between this
experiment, where participants are using their gaze actively
and are unconstrained in the environment, and Experiment 2
where participants, while moving their eyes, are passive
recipients of information. Given this difference and the fact
that our paradigm allows varying degrees of relative
exposure to the alternatives, in virtue of how the trigger is
set up, we argue that our finding in Experiment 3 represents
a novel connexion between gaze and choice.

Experiment 4
One possible objection to our claims is that perhaps
participants have already made their decisions well before
the trigger is set off. It is conceivable that participants gaze
towards the target for longer than 750ms, settle on that
alternative, and then simply avert their gaze towards the

1118

other alternative out of boredom, which sets off the trigger.
Participants then choose the designated target, and the trial
is counted as a success. But, the objection goes, if they were
allowed to indicate their choice as soon as they’d made it,
they would have clicked much earlier in the trial.
Experiment 4 was designed to meet this objection by
removing the constraint that participants are unable to
respond before the prompt screen.
Also, in addition to confidence ratings two extra followup questions were asked of participants after each trial. One
concerned asked if they had been able to hear the items and
see the alternatives properly. The second concerned asked
how important the issue raised by the item was to them,
which pertained primarily to the moral items. The two
additions were made to meet to further objections to
experiment 2, namely that participants would only be biased
towards our target on items they felt were unimportant or
where they failed to fully understand the item or alternative.
These were also set in terms of 1-7 continuous scale.

successfully biased and those that were not. For moral
items, there was no difference in comprehension between
successful trials (M=6.57) and unsuccessful trials (M=6.50)
(t(809.223) = 1.67, p=0.09); and no difference in perceived
importance on successful trials (M=4.98) and unsuccessful
trials (M=4.92) (t(847.692) = 0.57, p=0.57). Similarly, for
factual items there was no difference in comprehension
between successful trials (M=6.55) and unsuccessful trials
(M=6.52) (t(262.72) = 0.261, p=0.79); and no differences in
importance ratings either (M=3.53, successful, M=3.35,
unsuccessful, t(268.412)=0.92, p=0.36).
We find in this experiment that there are trials where
participants make up their minds before our manipulation is
triggered. But these cases do not explain our findings, since
when they are excluded from the analysis, our biasing effect
remains. Experiment 4 still demonstrates judgements
malleable to influence depending solely on the timing of
judgement based on measuring gaze indexed thought
trajectories.

Procedure The trigger was set up to work as in experiment
2. In addition, time participants were instructed that they
could also indicate their choice when they had made up their
minds, clicking the mouse in the same way as they would
during the ‘Choose now!’ screen.
21 persons (17 female, mean age 21.81, SD=5.38)
participated in experiment 3. Participants were recruited
through both the public and student-based subject pools at
University College London.

General Discussion

Results and discussion For the moral items 240 (21.27%)
trials were such that the participant responded before the
experimental trigger was activated. The corresponding
number for the factual trials was 264 (45.28%). Since these
are cases where the trigger has not been activated, these
trials were not analysed further.
Of the remaining trials 496 (55.86%) were successful
(p<0.001, Binomial test) for the moral items, and for the
factual items 189 (59.24%) trials were successful (p<0.005,
Binomial test) (see figure 1). Analysing the various ratings
participants made after their decision, we found that there
were no significant difference between trials that were

We have argued that decision making is a dynamic
system exhibiting a tight coupling between eye-movements
and judgement. We have demonstrated a causal link
between gaze and choice using a paradigm utilising
exposure and directed gaze. We then, following the logic of
dynamical systems, have shown that we are able to
influence participants’ moral and factual judgements using
gaze only as an index of thought, and by manipulating
nothing but the timing of the decisions. The results from
Experiment 4 suggest that our effects are no mere artefacts
of the experimental procedure.
A surprising aspect of our results is the demonstration of
the malleability of moral judgments on very small
timescales across the wide spectrum of moral domains
which our stimuli encompass. This malleability is present
even when we manipulate only the timing of decisions,
rather than by adding information to the situation, as has
typically been the case in the literature. We emphasise that
while we interpret our findings in the light of a dynamical
systems perspective on mind, the effects on moral
judgements are of significant interest by themselves for
understanding our moral mind.
One valid concern about our findings is the relatively
small effects sizes. This is not too surprising, however, due
to the fact that gaze and decision making processes, while
linked, cannot be not rigidly yoked together. For one thing,
eye movements have various biological constraints and are
necessarily discrete, whereas thought processes could be
continuous and graded; for another, one can chose between
options while fixating a single point. Given the partial though pervasive (Spivey, Richardson & Dale, 2009) - link
between eye movements and cognition, it is not surprising
that gaze is an imperfect indicator of decision processes, and
our bias effects are the size that they are. Indeed, we would
argue that it is remarkable that they exist at all.

Figure 1: Results from the experiments for all items.
95% confidence intervals are shown.

1119

A significantly higher effect size would be surprising for
other reasons as well. One reason is that this would jar with
our capacity to, at times, be moral agents. Recall, we are not
making a claim about a possible lack of moral agency in our
participants, only a claim about morality’s dynamic nature.
In a sense the size of our effect says something very real
about the strength of our participants’ moral systems. It
opens up avenues for a more detailed exploration of
individuals’ and groups’ moral landscapes, as well as
understanding the complex interplay between cognition,
sensorimotor systems and the environment.
In future work we hope to expand the range of moral
decisions under examination, and develop computational
models of the process. The class of judgements we have
used here are first person judgements about one’s personal
moral values. These are judgements which are known to be
open to manipulation (Hall, Johansson & Strandberg, 2012).
In further research we plan to extend our results to third
person judgements and concrete moral action. Eventually,
we hope to model the dynamics of moral decision marking.
Drawing on our current findings, we aim to develop a model
that exhibits the same drift towards attractor states when
interrupted as we found in our participants and compare this
to alternative accounts such as drift-diffusion and
accumulator models. But from the results we have presented
here, we hope the case has been made that that much can be
learned about our moral selves by focusing on the deep
integration between cognitive and perceptual functions and
how this integration plays out in time.

Acknowledgments
This research was made possible with the support of
Stiftelsen Erik och Gurli Hultengrens fond för filosofi vid
Lunds universitet and Makarna Ingeniör Lars Henrik
Fornanders fond to P.P. We thank Abigail Hodder for
lending her voice to recordings of the items used in these
experiments.

References
Armel, K.C., Beaumel, A. & Rangel, A. (2008) Biasing
simple choice by manipulating relative visual attention.
Judgment and Decision Making. 3(5), 296-403.
Cushman, F.,Young, L. & Hauser, M. (2006) The role of
conscious reasoning and intuition in moral judgment.
Psychological Science, 17(12), 1082-1089.
Freeman, J.B., Dale, R. & Farmer, T.A. (2011) Hand in
motion reveals mind in motion. Frontiers in Psychology.
2, 59.
Gold, J.I. & Shadlen, M.N. (2000) Representation of a
perceptual decision in developing occulomotor
commands. Nature. 404, 390-394.
Graham, J., Haidt, J. & Nosek, B.A. (2009) Liberals and
conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations.
Personality Processes and Individual Differences. 96(5),
1029-1046.
Greene, J.D., Morelli, S.A., Lowenberg, K., Nystrom, L.E.
& Cohen, J.D. (2008) Cognitive load selectively interferes

with utilitarian moral judgment. Cognition. 107, 11441154.
Haidt, J. (2001) The emotional dog and its rational tail.
Psychological Review. 108(4), 814-834.
Hall, L., Johansson, P. & Strandberg, T. (2012) Lifting the
veil of morality: Choice blindness and attitude reversals
on a self-transforming survey. PLOS One. 7(9), e45457
Hoover, M. A. & Richardson, D. C. (2008). When Facts Go
Down the Rabbit Hole: Contrasting Features and
Objecthood as Indexes to Memory. Cognition, 108(2),
533-42
Kleiner, M., Brainard, D. & Pelli, D. (2007) What is new in
Psychtoolbox-3? Perception 36 ECVP Abstract
Supplement.
McKinstry, C., Dale, R. & Spivey, M.J. (2008) Action
dynamics reveal parallel competition in decision making.
Psychological Science. 19(1), 22-24.
Pouget, A., Dayan, P. & Zemel, R.S. (2003) Inference and
computation with population codes. Annual Review of
Neuroscience. 26, 381-400.
Pärnamets, P. (2008) Perceptual components in moral
decision making. Unpublished master’s thesis. Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.
Richardson, D.C., Dale, R. & Tomlinson Jr, J.M. (2009)
Conversation, gaze coordination and beliefs about visual
context. Cognitive Science, 33, 1468-1482.
Richardson, D.C & Kirkham, N.Z (2004) Multimodal
events and moving locations: Eye movements of adults
and 6-months-olds reveal dynamic spatial indexing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(1), 4662.
Richardson, D.C, Spivey, M.J., & Hoover, M.A. (2009)
How to influence choice by monitoring gaze. In N.A.
Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M.J., Eberhardt, K.M.
& Sedivy, J.C. (1995) Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science.
268(5217), 1632-1634.
Shimojo, S., Simion, C., Shimojo, E. & Scheier, C. (2003).
Gaze bias both reflects and influences preferences. Nature
Neuroscience, 6(12), 1317-1322.
Spivey, M.J. (2007). The continuity of mind. New York,
Oxford University Press.
Spivey, M.J, Richardson, D.C, & Dale, R. (2009). The
movement of eye and hand as a window into language and
cognition. In E. Morsella, J. A. Bargh, & P. M. Gollwitzer
(Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Human Action (pp. 225–249).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Van Orden, G.C., Holden, J.G. & Turvey, M.T. (2005)
Human cognition and 1/f scaling. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General. 134(1), 117-123.
Wheatley, T. & Haidt, J. (2005) Hypnotic disgust makes
moral judgements more severe. Psychological Science,
16(10), 780-784.

1120

