UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Channels of multimodal communication: Relative contributions to discourse
understanding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/65b134r8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kibrik, Andrej
Molchanova, Natalia

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Channels of multimodal communication:
Relative contributions to discourse understanding
Andrej A. Kibrik (aakibrik@gmail.com)
Institute of Linguistics of the Russian Academy of Sciences and Lomonosov Moscow State University
B. Kislovskij per. 1, Institute of Linguistics RAN, Moscow 125009 Russia

Natalia B. Molchanova (natascha.molchanova@gmail.com)
BearingPoint
B. Ordynka 40-4, Moscow 119017 Russia
Keywords:
discourse;
understanding; multimodality

communication

channels;

1. Introduction: Communication channels
The mainstream view of linguistic form, characteristic of
modern linguistics, can be formulated as follows: language
consists of hierarchically organized segmental units, such as
phonemes, morphemes, words, phrases, and sentences.
Mainstream linguistics thus equates linguistic form with
verbal form, that is, the segmental vocal material. However,
as we all know, apart from sound, there are other channels
(or components) of communication, in the first place
through vision. The visual channel is what is sometimes
named with the cover term body language, including
gesture, mimic, gaze, posture, etc. (see e.g. McNeill, 1992;
Kendon, 1994; Goldin-Meadow, 1999; Krejdlin, 2002;
Butovskaja, 2004; Andersen, 2007; Burgoon et al., 2011).
Furthermore, the vocal material is not exhausted by verbal
elements. There is also prosody, that is, non-verbal (= nonsegmental) aspects to sound, including intonation, tempo,
pausing, loudness, discourse accents, tonal registers, etc.
(see e.g. Cruttenden, 1986; Kodzasov, 2009).
An unbiased view should probably be the following: all of
these components must be taken into account in a realistic
model of communication. For example, imagine that you are
staying in a hotel room with thin walls and can hear people
next door talking. You cannot hear words (the verbal
component) but you can hear prosody, and you get
something about the conversation, for example you may
know that the people are quarreling. On the other hand,
prosody-free talk, as sometimes heard from TV
simultaneous interpreters on the Euronews channel, is
unnatural and hinders comprehension. In this study we
address the question of the relative contribution of the
various communication channels or components to the
overall comprehension of spoken discourse.

The other extreme is represented by the view common in
applied psychology that words matter less than prosody and
especially than body language. It is very often that the
following figures are quoted, going back to Mehrabian
(1971): body language conveys 55% of information,
prosody conveys 38% of information, and the verbal
component only 7% of information1, see e.g.
http://jobsearch.about.com/od/interviewsnetworking/a/nonv
erbalcomm.htm. According to this view, “words may be
what men use when all else fails” (Krejdlin, 2002: 6).
Most likely, the truth lies between these two extremes. All
of the communication channels must be valuable and none
can be negligible. This kind of balanced approach is
characteristic of the modern multimodal paradigm (see e.g.
Granström et al. eds., 2002; Norris, 2004; Ventola et al. eds.,
2004; Bengio & Bourlard eds., 2005; Royce & Bowcher,
2007; Jewitt ed., 2011). According to Kress (2002), “A
multimodal approach assumes that the message is ‘spread
across’ all the modes of communication. If this is so, then
each mode is a partial bearer of the overall meaning of the
message.” To use a quotation from the computational
domain, “within biology, experimental psychology, and
cognitive neuroscience, a separate rapidly growing literature
has clarified that multisensory perception and integration
cannot be predicted by studying the senses in isolation”
(Cohen & Oviatt, 2006). Kibrik (2010) described the
research program of multimodal linguistics, taking into
account all of the communication channels in an integrated
approach.
Taking up the challenge of Mehrabian (1971), in this
study we try to numerically estimate the contribution of
each communication channel into the overall process of
message understanding. (Cf. two early psychological studies
Walker, 1977 and Hollandsworth et al., 1979, arriving at
rather opposite conclusions, and also Cutica & Bucciarelli,
2006.)

2. Views on the importance of various
communication channels
The traditional approach of mainstream linguistics has
been to consider the verbal channel so central that prosody
and the visual channel have often been downgraded as
“paralinguistics”. Many contemporary textbooks in
linguistics barely mention prosody and do not mention
gesture and body language at all (see e.g. Hall, 2005).

1
In fact, Mehrabian originally investigated just the contributions
of the channels to a listener’s attitude towards a message in
emotional settings, but his figures have often been misinterpreted
as accounting for any kind of communication, see e.g.
http://www.speakingaboutpresenting.com/presentationmyths/mehrabian-nonverbal-communication-research/.

2704

3. Experimental design
The experimental design, first developed by Andrej Kibrik
in 2006 at the Deparment of Theoretical and Applied
Linguistics, Philological Faculty, Moscow State University
(see Kibrik & Èl’bert, 2008, Kibrik, 2010), consists of
several elements. For the purposes of this study, we
differentiate between three communication channels, or
components, including two vocal channels, the verbal and
the prosodic ones, and the visual channel comprising all
elements of body language; see Figure 1.
Discourse
Vocal channels

used. The experimental excerpt ran for 3 minutes and 20
seconds, and it was preceded by a 8 minutes context
excerpt, starting from the beginning of a series. The
experimental excerpt fully consisted of a conversation, to
ensure that we are testing the understanding of discourse
rather than of the film in general.
The two vocal channels were separated from each other
through the following procedures. The verbal channel was
presented in the written mode, by means of temporally
aligned running subtitles. The prosodic channel was
obtained from the original sound by superimposing a filter
creating the “behind a wall” effect. Figure 2 illustrates a
snapshot from the experimental type “visual plus verbal”, in
other words, video plus running subtitles.

Visual channel

Verbal channel
Prosodic channel
Figure 1: Three communication channels.
If we take a sample of natural discourse, we can isolate
three communication channels. For example, if we have a
recording of communication, a video without sound is
equivalent to the visual channel alone. We also need to
isolate the verbal channel and the prosodic channels;
specific technical ways of how that can be made possible
are explained in sections 4 and 5 below. Assuming that the
three channels have been isolated, we can produce eight
(2³=8) variants of the sample discourse and present them to
separate groups of experimental participants. These eight
variants include three in which only one channel is
represented, three in which two channels are represented,
one with the three channels (the original material), and the
null variant in which nothing has been shown to
participants. We will thus need eight groups of participants,
each presented with one of the eight kinds of experimental
material.
The null variant of the experimental discourse and the
corresponding group is necessary in order to evaluate which
part of the overall content can be inferred on the basis of
background knowledge and common sense.
At the next stage the degree of the participants’
understanding of the discourse can be assessed with the help
of a questionnaire, and such assessment may be used as an
estimate of a communication channel’s contribution to the
overall discourse understanding.

4. Experiment A: movie-based material
The first line of studies in this paradigm was implemented
in a series of experiments by Ekaterina Èl’bert, particularly
in her diploma thesis (2007), and further reinterpreted and
refined in Kibrik and Èl’bert (2008). In this line of studies
the decision was made to use an excerpt of a movie as
experimental discourse. Specifically, the Russian TV serial
“Tajny sledstvija” (“Mysteries of the investigation”) was

Figure 2: Frame from the experimental material “visual
plus verbal”.
99 participants took part in the study, divided into eight
groups, each group comprising 10 to 17 persons. All eight
groups watched the identical context excerpt. As for the
experimental excerpt, each of the eight groups had access to
different material. The null group did not see anything apart
from the context excerpt, three groups only had access to
one communication channel of the experimental excerpt
(either verbal or prosodic or visual), the other three groups
to two communication channels (verbal+prosodic = original
sound; verbal+visual = video and subtitles, see Figure 2;
prosodic+visual = video and filtered sound), and the eighth
group watched the original version of the experimental
excerpt.
The context and the experimental excerpts were shown to
the whole group of participants on a large screen. Each
participant was instructed to attend the context and the
experimental excerpt and then answer a set of questions
concerned with the experimental excerpt alone. The
questionnaire was constructed in accordance with the
received principles of test tasks (Panchenko, 2000). There
were 23 multiple-choice questions in the questionnaire; a
participant was supposed to choose only one answer out of
four listed variants. Here is an example of a question, along
with the offered answers (translated from the Russian
original):

2705

What Tamara Stepanovna offers Masha before the
beginning of the conversation:
a. to take off her coat
b. to have a cup of tea
c. to have a seat
d. to have a drink
One of the available answers (in this particular case, c)
was correct, two were plausible but wrong (a, b) and one
implausible (d); the latter was aimed at filtering out
incompetent participants.

Results of Experiment A
Percentage of correct answers was used as a way to assess a
participant’s degree of discourse understanding. The
summarized results are shown in a diagram in Figure 3.
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Null
Verbal
Prosodic
Visual
Verbal+prosodic
Verbal+visual
Visual+prosodic
Original

Figure 3: Degrees of discourse understanding in
Experiment A.
We see from the second, third, and fourth columns in
Figure 3 that each individual communication channel is
substantially informative: The verbal channel is leading in
this respect (72.4% correct answers), but the two other
(prosodic: 51.5%, visual: 61.7%) also significantly (MannWhitney test, p<0.05) prevail over the null condition
(leftmost column, 38.3%). The hierarchy of the individual
channels turns out verbal>visual>prosodic (significant
according to Kruskal–Wallis test (H (2, 69) = 24.2,
p<0.01)). In spite of the prevalence of the verbal channel,
the difference in the contributions of individual channels is
not dramatic, and second, the degree of understanding in the
“verbal alone” condition is significantly (Mann-Whitney
test, p<0.05) lower than in the original material condition
(three channels in conjunction, the rightmost column in
Figure 3, 87.4%).
Another conclusion from the results of Experiment A
concerns the comparison of the three groups that had access
to two communication channels; see columns fifth to
seventh from the left. There is a very noticeable (but not
reaching the level of statistical significance) dip in the
condition “visual+prosodic” (51.6%), compared to two
other pairwise combinations (verbal+prosodic: 70.7%;
verbal+visual: 77.8%). Apparently, that dip means that
language users have difficulties integrating information
from the visual and prosodic channels, in the absence of

verbal material. In a natural setting, this condition can be
compared to observing communication via a glass that is
penetrable for prosody but blocks the verbal material. Most
likely, the dip in the “visual+prosodic” condition is due to
the unusual character of such situations in real life, as well
as to the participants’ inability to integrate information from
the visual and prosodic channels in the absence of verbal
material.

5. Experiment B: conversation-based material
At the following stage of the project, we modified and/or
improved a number of the methodological decisions made in
Experiment A, including the kind of stimulus material, the
technical methods of isolating the prosodic channel and the
verbal channel, the questionnaire, and the interviewing
procedure. The below description of Experiment B is
organized as follows. Each of the mentioned methodological
decisions made in Experiment A is assessed, and a
modification/improvement realized in Experiment B is
presented.
Several problems of the movie-based stimulus material,
used in Experiment A, were detected, including the
following. First, the plot of the movie in certain instances
facilitated guessing by the experiment participants. Second,
it was not possible to exclude the familiarity of the movie to
some of the participants. Third, the quasi-natural behavior
of the actors could affect the results. Fourth, all speakers
were of the same gender (women) which made it difficult
for the participants to distinguish between voices, especially
in the “prosodic alone” condition.
The solution realized in Experiment B was to employ a
recording of natural dialogue between two speakers. In
order to make the dialogue structured and predictable, a
guessing game “Little garages” was recorded. One of the
speakers, a woman, was laying a number of toothpicks on
the table and was asking the guesser, a man: “How many
little garages?” The guesser was trying to figure out how to
provide a correct answer, which was difficult (because the
intended amount of little garages was in fact the number of
the the first speaker’s fingers kept on the table at the
moment). The guessing process lasted for 19 minutes, out of
which the stimulus material of 5 minutes and 55 seconds
was produced. The stimulus material consisted of a dialogue
between the two speakers, culminating in the guesser’s
ultimate success. A frame from the guessing game recording
appears in Figure 4.
The acoustic filter used in Experiment A produced the
material in the “prosodic alone” condition that was
excessively noisy. The solution used in Experiment B was
to radically decrease the signal at all frequencies except for
the speaker’s average F0 frequency. This led to a more
satisfactory “behind the wall” effect.

2706

Figure 4: Frame from the recording of the guessing game.
The main problem associated with the “verbal alone”
condition in Experiment A was that the subtitles operated in
the visual, rather than the vocal, mode. This had created a
substantial deviation from the situation of spoken discourse,
also leading to the undesired interaction and/or competition
between the written verbal material and the visually
perceived video material. In addition, some participants
experienced difficulties in following the subtitles appearing
and disappearing at the same pace as spoken words in the
original material. The solution introduced in Experiment B
was to produce an artificial spoken prosody-free signal.
Both speakers participating in the recording were requested
to individually pronounce each word that occurred in their
conversation. All thus elicited words were then glued
together in the right order, thus providing prosody-free
discourse, devoid of intonation, reduction, differences in
tempo, etc.
As far as the questionnaire is concerned, the imperfection
of Experiment A is seen through the insufficient gap
between the results of the null group and the original
material group: 38.3% vs. 87.4%. These numbers indicate
that the participants were able to reconstruct the correct
answer quite often and, on the other hand, even the full
original material did not provide reliable access to a correct
answer. In order to improve the questionnaire, a testing
stage was introduced in Experiment B, in which trivial
questions were identified (high null group results), as well
as unfortunate questions (low original material group
results). Trivial and unfortunate questions were filtered out,
and the number of questions was reduced from 30 to 17.
The improved results in the two contrastive groups turned
out 24.7% and 91.2% of correct answers, see below.
The interviewing procedure was improved in Experiment
B. In Experiment A the participants were of various and
uncontrolled age and life experience. The presence of
multiple participants in the room could have led to
undesirable and uncontrolled interference. Finally, the need
for a large room, loud speakers, and a big screen is an
unnecessary technical complication to the procedure. In
Experiment B the participants were controlled for age,

geographical origin, and social status: only students of
Moscow origin were recruited, which provided a
homogeneous sample. They were also balanced in terms of
gender. The experiment was implemented in a remote
fashion: the stimulus material was posted on youtube.com,
and the questionnaire at Googledocs. The guidelines closely
directed the participants’ sequence of actions, from one
experimental part to another and from one group of
questions to another, so there are reasons to believe that the
procedures were very similar in all participants. All
participants worked in comparable, independent, and
comfortable conditions, and there was no need for technical
excessiveness such as a big screen and loud speakers. 92
participants altogether took part in the experiment, out of
which 20 were employed at the testing stage and 72 at the
main stage (from 10 to 15 in each experimental group).

Results of Experiment B
The quantitative results of Experiment B are shown in
Figure 5.
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Null
Verbal
Prosodic
Visual
Verbal+prosodic
Verbal+visual
Visual+prosodic
Original

Figure 5: Degrees of discourse understanding in
Experiment B.
The main findings of Experiment B are similar to those
obtained in Experiment A. All three communication
channels, taken in isolation (columns two to four from the
left) are substantially and comparably informative: they lead
to 58.8%, 45.6%, and 48.8% of correct answers, compare
that to the 24.7% in the null group. The hierarchy of
informativeness is again verbal>visual>prosodic. The
conditions with two channels available (columns five to
seven from the left) demonstrate the following results:
73.5%, 88.2%, and 52.4%. Compared to Experiment A, we
here get a much cleaner picture as concerns the better
participants’ performance in the two channels conditions as
contrasted with the one channel conditions. Finally, we see
again a dramatic dip in the “visual+prosodic” condition: the
second last column counting from the left.

6. Discussion
The main conclusion of Experiment B is the following: in
spite of the substantial differences in the methodology from
Experiment A, the results are remarkably similar. With
minor differences the overall picture in Figures 3 and 5 is

2707

very similar. This makes us believe that our conclusions
about the relative contributions of various communication
channels to the overall discourse understanding are fairly
robust.
Now, the picture in Figure 5 is cleaner and crisper in two
respects: the more obvious advantage of the two channel
conditions over the one channel conditions and the better
contrast between the null group and the original material
group.
In order to provide a response to Mehrabian’s (1971)
famous (or infamous) numbers, the following method can be
applied. Suppose the three communication channels are
independent (this is a strong assumption, but it is necessary
for calculating the relative contributions of the channels).
We can sum up all percentages in the one-channel
conditions and then normalize them to 100%. Let us
perform this operation on the results of both experiments,
looking at the numbers in columns two to four from the left
in Figures 3 and 5 (percentages are rounded to 1 per cent).
The outcome of this procedure is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Normalized
communication channels.
Summed percentages
Normalized Verbal
contributions Prosodic
Visual

contributions

Experiment A
72+52+62=186
72%:1.86≈39%
52%:1.86≈28%
62%:1.86≈33%

of

the

three

Experiment B
59+46+49=154
59%:1.54≈38%
46%:1.54≈30%
49%:1.54≈32%

Once again, we see the striking similarity in the results of
the two experiments: the numerically evaluated
contributions of the three channels never differ from each
other by more than 2%. So the contributions of the channels
are stable irrespective of the specifics of methodology.
Also, the gender differences between the participants
were explored in Experiment B. Two particularly interesting
results were obtained for the conditions “verbal alone” and
“visual+prosodic”; they are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Performance of men and women in two
conditions in Experiment B (percentages of correct answers
indicated)
Condition
Men
Women
Advantage
Verbal alone
59.1
69.9
Women: +10.7
Visual+prosodic 66.1
51.6
Men: +14.5
As is clear from Table 2, in the condition “verbal alone”
the women have demonstrated a striking advantage,
providing correct answers much more frequently than the
men. In contrast, the men demonstrated a strong advantage
in the condition “visual+prosodic” that, as was discussed
above, corresponds to an unusual situation and generally
creates a difficulty in comparison with other two-channel
conditions. These results conform to certain generalizations
about gender intelligence, such as the women’s better
performance in verbal tasks and men’s better performance
in novel situations (see e.g. Bendas, 2006).

7. Conclusions
This study is the first linguistically-informed demonstration
of the importance of several communication channels for
understanding natural discourse. The following conclusions
can be drawn from the reported study.
First, all communication channels are highly significant in
encoding content and understanding of discourse. Therefore,
the attitude common in mainstream linguistics, according to
which linguistic communication is performed mostly by the
verbal component, whereas other channels are negligible, is
incorrect.
Second, among the communication channels the verbal
channel is the leading one. Therefore, the viewpoint popular
in applied psychology, according to which the contribution
of the verbal component is negligible, is erroneous as well.
Third, the specific normalized contributions of the verbal,
prosodic, and visual channels are in the vicinity of 38%,
30%, and 32%, respectively.
Fourth, participants have difficulties integrating the
information from the visual and prosodic channels, in the
absence of the verbal channel. This suggests that in normal
communication the verbal channel plays the role of an
anchor to which the information from other channels is
attached.
Fifth, men and women perform differently in the
conditions of isolated communication channels, women
having advantage in the “verbal alone” condition and men
having advantage in the novel and unusual
“visual+prosodic” condition.
As was pointed out in section 5, many questions from the
original questionnaire were filtered out for certain
substantial reasons, which has reduced the number of
questions from 30 to 17. In combination with the large
number of conditions (eight), this has led to the fact that the
quantitative tendencies observed in Experiment B do not
quite reach the level of statistical significance. In April 2013
we collected additional data, bringing the number of
subjects in each group to at least fifteen (total=132). We
expect that, when the statistical analysis is completed, full
significance of the results will be attained, as well as a
formal comparison of the results of the two experiments.
A number of methodological issues remain for further
research. In particular, we would like to pinpoint two of
those. First, we are planning to experiment with monologic
discourse addressed to public audience, such as
presentations of travel agents in front of a group of people.
This would complement the already attained results from
our studies of dialogic communication. Second, we will
keep working on refining the methods allowing to isolate
the verbal channel. Both of the so far employed methods
have their shortcomings, the subtitles switching from the
auditory to the visual modality and the prosody-free talk
being the unnatural kind of input. We will keep searching
for additional methods helping to present the “verbal alone”
condition in a more ecologically valid way.
A major problem in the studies of human communication
and discourse is associated with the fact that different

2708

disciplinary
traditions
and
paradigms
address
communication from different angles, not consulting each
other’s results. Linguists usually only pay attention to the
verbal component, while non-verbal communication is
mostly explored by social psychologists. In this study we
propose an approach that is hopefully relevant for each of
the fields studying human communication and bridging the
gap between them.
We would like to conclude with a quotation from Ron
Scollon (2006): “Any use of language is inescapably
multimodal”.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Olga Fedorova, Anna Laurinavičiute, and
Andriy Myachykov who provided useful and important
input during the preparation of this paper. The study was
conducted with financial support from grant #11-04-00153
of the Russian Foundation for the Humanities.

References
Andersen, P. (2007). Nonverbal Communication: Forms and
Functions. Long Grove: Waveland Press.
Bendas, T. V. (2006). Gendernaja psixologija [Gender
psychology]. Saint-Petersburg: Piter.
Bengio, S., & Bourlard, H. (Eds.) (2005). Machine learning
for multimodal interaction. Berlin: Springer.
Burgoon, J. K., Guerrero, L. K., & Floyd, K. (2011).
Nonverbal communication. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Butovskaja, M. L. (2004). Jazyk tela: priroda i kul’tura
[Body language: nature and culture]. Moscow: Nauchnyj
mir.
Cohen, P. R., & Oviatt, S. L. (2006). Multimodal interaction
with computers. In K. Brown (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
language and linguistics, 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier.
Cruttenden, A. (1986). Intonation. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Cutica, I., & Bucciarelli, M. (2006). Why gestures matter in
learning from a discourse. In B. M. Velichkovsky, T. V.
Chernigovskaya, Yu. I. Alexandrov, & D. N. Akhapkin
(Eds.), The Second Biennial Conference on Cognitive
Science. Vol. 1. Saint-Petersburg: Saint-Petersburg State
University, Philological Faculty, 40-41.
Èl’bert, E. M. (2007). Vklad verbal’nogo, prosodicheskogo i
vizual’nogo kanalov v ponimanie ustnogo diskursa
[Contribution of the verbal, prosodic, and visual channels
in the understanding of spoken discourse]. Diploma
thesis. Moscow State University.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (1999). The role of gesture in
communication and thinking. Trends in Cognitive Science,
3, 419-429.
Granström, B., House, D., & Karlsson, I. (Eds.) (2002).
Multimodality in Language and Speech Systems. Norwell:
Kluwer.
Hall, C. J. (2005). An Introduction to Language and
Linguistics: Breaking the Language Spell. London:
Continuum.

Hollandsworth, J. G. Jr., Kazelskis, R., Stevens, J. & Dressel,
M. E. (1979). Relative contributions of verbal, articulative,
and nonverbal communication to employment decisions in
the job interview setting. Personnel Psychology, 32, Issue
2, 359-367.
Jewitt, C. (Ed.) (2011). The Routledge Handbook of
Multimodal Analysis. London: Routledge.
Kendon, A. (1994). Do gestures communicate? A review.
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 27, 175200.
Kibrik, A. A., & Èl’bert, E. M. (2008). Understanding
spoken discourse: the contribution of three information
channels. In Yu.I.Alexandrov et al. (Eds.), Materials of
the 3rd International Conference on Cognitive Science,
82-84. Moscow: IP RAN.
Kibrik, A. A. (2010). Multimodal’naja lingvistika
[Multimodal linguistics]. In Yu. I. Alexandrov & V. D.
Solovyev (Eds.), Kognitivnye issledovanija, issue 4.
Moscow: IP RAN.
Kodzasov, S. V. (2009). Issledovanija v oblasti russkoj
prosodii [Studies in the field of Russian prosody].
Moscow: Jazyki slavjanskix kul’tur.
Krejdlin, G. E. (2002). Neverbal’naja semiotika [Nonverbal semiotics]. Moscow: NLO.
Kress, G. (2002). The multimodal landscape of
communication. Medien Journal, 4, 4-19.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: what gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mehrabian, A. (1971). Silent messages. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth Publishing Company.
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A
methodological framework. London: Routledge.
Panchenko, A. A. (2000). Razrabotka testov [Developing
tests]. Khabarovsk.
Royce, T. D., & Bowcher, W. L. (2007). New directions in
the analysis of multimodal discourse. Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Scollon, R. (2006). Multimodality and the language of
politics. In K. Brown (Ed.), Encyclopedia of language
and linguistics, 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier.
Ventola E., Charles, C., & Kaltenbacher, M. (Eds.) (2004).
Perspectives on multimodality. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Walker, M. B. (1977). The relative importance of verbal and
nonverbal cues in the expression of confidence. Australian
Journal of Psychology, 29, Issue 1, 45-57.

2709

