UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Externalism meets Bounded Rationality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bc985z0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Arnau, Eric
Ayala, Saray
Sturm, Thomas

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Externalism meets Bounded Rationality
Eric Arnau (eric.arnau@gmail.com)
Department of Philosophy, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Edifici B, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain

Saray Ayala (sarayayala@gmail.com)
Department of Humanities: Philosophy, Language and Literature
University Carlos III, Madrid 126, 28903 Getafe, Spain

Thomas Sturm (tsturm@mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de)
Department of Philosophy, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Edifici B, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain

Typically, proponents of externalist accounts of cognition
have sought for empirical support from research in lower
cognition, mostly memory (Clark and Chalmers 1989,
Sutton et. al. 2010), and perception (Wilson 2010). But
seldom the literature has addresses the realm of higher
cognition. Here we want to explore the benefits that CE
could offer to empirical research on human reasoning, and
whether such research can vindicate CE.

Abstract
When proponents of cognitive externalism (CE) have turned to
empirical studies in cognitive science to put the framework to
use, they have typically referred to perception, memory or motor
coordination. Not much has been said about reasoning. One
promising avenue to explore here is the theory of bounded
rationality (BR). In this paper, we try to clarify the potential
relationship between these two programs. We start by discussing
Andy Clark’s interpretation of BR, which we find unconvincing
in several respects. Next, we take a closer look at CE in order
defend a version of it that stands against mainstream internalism
without committing itself to constitutional claims about the
mind. We then turn to analyze BR from the CE perspective.
Finally, we argue that internalism about cognition cannot explain
important aspects of the BR program.

Bounded Rationality

Keywords: extended cognition; bounded rationality; heuristics.

Introduction
By Cognitive externalism (CE) we refer to the framework
that accommodates the initially differentiated challenges to
the internalist picture of cognition, developed under the flag
of extended cognition and distributed cognition. CE departs
from the original proposal introduced by Clark and
Chalmers (1998) in which what determines the cognitive
status of an extended process is its functional parity with an
intracranial cognitive process. The core of this shift is the
complementarity of internal and external elements (Menary
2007, Sutton 2010, Wilson and Clark 2009). The argument
for extended cognition turns on the way different inner and
outer components co-operate so as to yield an integrated
system capable of supporting intelligent behavior.
One consequence of this revised CE is a broadening of the
span of the putative cases considered, as it points our
attention to the many ways in which “the computational
power and expertise is spread across a heterogeneous
assembly of brains, bodies, artifacts, and other external
structures” (Clark 1998, p. 77). Once parity is not required,
we can tackle any manipulation of structures or elements
that is integrated –e.g. measurement instruments,
information storage devices, representational systems, etc.

A promising avenue to explore is the interplay between
CE and the program of Bounded Rationality (BR) as it is
developed by Gerd Gigerenzer and colleagues into the Fast
and Frugal Heuristics theory. The core research question of
BR is: “How do people make judgments and decisions in
everyday life, when time and information is limited and the
future uncertain?” (Gigerenzer 2008, p. 5).
From here, the program unfolds in three dimensions: (1)
The core descriptive tenet is that people typically rely on
fast and frugal heuristics. There are strategies, conscious or
unconscious, that search for minimal information and
exploit evolved capacities and environmental structures
(Gigerenzer and Brighton, 2009). (2) The core normative
tenet is that such reliance on heuristics is at least oftentimes
desirable. Heuristics work remarkably well; as good as –or
even better than– optimizing strategies. They are not merely
second-best options for “wanna-be optimizers”. (3) The core
prescriptive tenet is that the BR picture of reasoning affords
prescriptive guidance, opening a space in which to enhance
reasoning by intervening on the environment rather than in
the inner processing.
There is a strong prima facie affinity between BR and CE.
In the BR literature one can find many claims that echo the
externalist tenets. We find claims such as that “the heuristic
lets the environment do much of the work” (Gigerenzer and
Hutchinson 2005, p. 101), or that “in the ecological view,
thinking does not happen simply in the mind, but in
interaction between the mind and its environment”
(Gigerenzer 2008, p. 17, emphasis added). Somewhat
surprisingly, BR has attracted only one discussion within

1768

the externalist camp, by Andy Clark. In the next section we
turn to his discussion of BR.

Clark on Bounded Rationality
Clark (2001, 2003) addresses the relation between CE and
BR guided by his own defense of CE, but also by his
favoring of a “naturalistic” or “mechanical” account of
rationality, i.e. one that is merely descriptive. Clark claims
that there are two ways to develop a “naturalistic” or
“mechanical” account of rationality based on a noninternalist approach in cognitive science. First, a “biological
cognitive incrementalism” (BCI), according to which “fullscale human rationality is reached, rather directly, by some
series of tweaks to basic biological modes of adaptive
response” (2001, p. 121). Defenders of BCI view reasoning
or rationality as continuous to more “basic” processes, such
as perceptual responses to one‟s environment, that do not
require the manipulation of symbols. A second option
assumes that rationality is at best indirectly based upon
processes of BCI and, instead, strongly based upon
“symbiotic relationships with knowledge-rich artifacts and
technologies” (2001, p. 122). Not surprisingly, Clark favors
the latter view, since it obviously comes down to his version
of CE. His argument accordingly should have two sides, one
being directed against BCI, the other in favor of CE.
In Clark‟s view (2001, p. 126), BCI can be characterized
by three core assumptions: (1) the thesis of organismenvironment interaction, or anti-representationalism; (2) the
modularity thesis (heuristics, short-cuts which are locally
rather than globally active); (3) the thesis of distributed
cognition. He illustrates these assumptions with research on
the wing-flapping of houseflies and phonotaxis in robot
crickets (ibid., pp. 126-129). All behave successfully in their
environments using extremely simple means. This “breeds
skepticism” that “symbols, internal representations and the
like play little role even in advanced human problemsolving” (ibid., p. 129). However, as Clark rightly points
out, the anti-representationalism entailed by this view must
not be taken too far, since typical instances of reasoning,
such as drawing an inference or making a choice, are all
“representation-hungry” activities (ibid.). Clark does not
claim that BR requires that assumption, but he does think
that BR is committed to assumptions 2 and 3. Simple
heuristics, after all, are supposed to make us smart because
of their joint exploitation of evolved capacities and the
structure of (the information in) the environment. To that
extent, BR seems to be a naturalistic account of rationality
that also subscribes to BCI.
Let us assume for the moment that the program of BR is
indeed to be understood as endorsing (2) and (3). What,
then, is Clark‟s objection to these contentions? His claim is
that BR, thus understood, still does not grasp what we
understand as full-scale human rationality (Clark 2001, p.
131). As he also says, “In much of this recent work,
traditional conceptions of thought, reason and action are not
so much reworked as by-passed entirely.” (ibid., p. 126).
But what is missing? Elsewhere he declares: “Rational
behavior is, in some sense, behavior that is guided by, or

sensitive to, reasons. Intuitively, this seems to involve some
capacity to step back, and assess the options; to foresee the
consequences, and to act accordingly.” (Clark 2003, p. 314)
But this is surely only a necessary condition, and it is surely
not denied by Gigerenzer‟s program. Although he
emphasizes that we should often rely on such heuristics, he
does in no way think they are to be used blindly. Any
reasoner must ask himself or herself, Am I in an
environment where this heuristic works? If not, can I use
another heuristic, and which one? That obviously involves
the ability to step back, assess the options, and so on. We
should also note in this context that Gigerenzer has
explicitly distanced himself from characterizing heuristics in
terms of the modularity thesis: While they are short-cuts that
are tuned to specific domains, heuristics need not be viewed
as implastic as, say, perceptual processes (see e.g.
Gigerenzer 2007, p. 43f.).
Now, what about the argument in favor of Clark‟s own
position, viz. that rationality can better be understood by his
extended mind thesis? Clark (2001, pp. 132ff.) points to the
frequent close coupling of reasoning processes with
artificial aids and scaffolds. But he actually expresses his
thesis in two different ways: (1) We do understand
rationality only if we see it as a capacity “tuned and applied
to the very special domain of external and/or artificial
cognitive aids” (2001, p. 131). (2) “human thought and
reason is sculpted, enhanced, and ultimately transformed”
by technology (ibid.). Certainly it is one thing to view
rationality as a capacity tuned to work with certain external
technologies, and quite another thing that to say that this
capacity is (partly) constituted by technology. If our faculty
of reason is fitted towards such aids, it should exist
beforehand. Conversely, if it is “sculpted and transformed”
by those technologies, it probably does not exist beforehand.
Claims (1) and (2) do not easily go together, at least not
without much further ado.
Perhaps here there is a mixing of rationality as a faculty
and rational processes. That reasoning processes are
causally related to such technological aids, or even
constituted by them, does not show that rationality as a
faculty is constituted by these interactions. Indeed, it cannot:
What constitutes any mental faculty is commonly
understood to be expressed in terms of laws that guide the
behavior of the capacity –in the case of rationality, the usual
suspects include rules of logic, probability theory and
heuristics. To explain the constitution of a faculty by the
constitution of certain processes is simply a category
mistake.
Against this, Clark might bring up his view that reasoning
involves feedback loops between the potential for
refinement through reflection on its own basis (Clark 2001,
p. 134). Fair enough. When someone gives us a reason for a
belief or a decision, it is common to ask back “Why?”,
requesting the thinker‟s grounds and principles. But these
may always be questioned too, of course. Moreover, using
technological aids or developing new notations (in
mathematics or logic, say) has been an essential part of
these feedback loops. This has led to the repeated

1769

renovation of the laws of proper reasoning. Assuming that
the faculty of reason is constituted by some fixed laws is
therefore problematic. If rationality possesses no immutable
nature, it may seem that the distinction between the faculty
and processes of reasoning cannot be used to undermine
Clark‟s position. By truly engaging in such processes, we
are caught in those feedback loops, and create the faculty
anew, with no end in sight.
The problem with this rejoinder is that it is inconsistent
with Clark‟s focus on a purely descriptive, “mechanical”
account of rationality. Insofar as we ask for better modes
and principles of reasoning, we engage in genuinely
normative issues. BR doesn‟t face this problem because,
pace Clark‟s reading, it does not commit to such a purely
descriptive account. In contrast, one of the most interesting
features of BR is that it constitutes a new attempt for
bridging Is and Ought, at least for certain domains of human
reasoning (Gigerenzer and Sturm 2012). This bridging is, in
part, possible because BR does not subscribe to BCI in the
way Clark thinks it does.
To sum up: While Clark thinks there is some good in the
BR approach, he also thinks it is too much committed to
BCI. This is largely a misunderstanding of the program.
Clark‟s alternative position is expressed by claims that tend
to be inconsistent. Now, before getting back to its relation
with BR, let‟s take a closer look at CE.

Cognition Embedded, Scaffolded or Extended?
The cognitive externalist wants us to treat cases of
complementary integration of internal and external
resources as a whole, and not to frame cognition as the
working of an organic system that is just causally embedded
in external resources. One thing that critics object is that
whatever the explanatory benefits of CE are, you can get the
same from internalism, so it wins, if only for parsimony
concerns. To address this charge, we need to spell out the
precise statement of what CE proposes for the putative cases
in which environmental resources are involved in cognitive
processes. There are three basic options:
(a) Embedded cognition takes the domain of
complementarity-motivated putative cases of external
cognition as showing the ways in which cognition is
causally embedded in features of the environment that
surround and supplement real cognition, which remains still
located within the organism. Ontologically speaking, it is a
claim of mere causal dependence. On the methodological
side, the claim is that cognitive sciences should be mostly
concerned in studying processes that take place within the
organism, and not outside (Sutton et. al. 2010).
(b) Scaffolded cognition is the idea is that (at least some
of) our cognitive capacities both depend on and have been
transformed by our manipulations of environmental
resources. The claim here is not about mere causal
dependence but about integrative coupling between internal
and external elements. Accordingly, cognitive science
should study these processes as they appear distributed
across organism and environment, instead of isolating the
internal (Sterelny 2010).

(c) Extended cognition claims that sometimes cognitive
processes and systems are literally extended, having regions
of the environment as proper parts located outside the
organism. In other words, sometimes manipulated elements
and structures of the environment, material or otherwise,
constitute part of the cognitive system. This claim of
constitution is held hand in hand with the urge for a
revisionary attitude in the cognitive sciences towards the
study of such extended processes without isolating its
biological parts.
These views can be considered as stretches in a
continuum, each best covering a different range of putative
cases (Sterelny 2010, Sutton 2010). Adjudicating between
the three options might be more a matter of degree and
preponderance than a „winner-takes-it-all‟ situation. This is
so because the range of cognitive phenomena that motivates
CE is heterogeneous. Among other dimensions of variation
(Sterelny 2010, Wilson and Clark 2009) we can distinguish
between (a) Individual artifacts, such as notebooks or
sensory substitution devices, that given certain conditions
might call for a genuine extended cognition reading à la
Clark; (b) Collective resources, in which the external
cognitive resources are embedded in a collective activity
which involves several coordinated individual agents, as in
Hutchins‟ (1995) case study of the distributed processes that
enable ship navigation; and (c) public resources, like
symbolic representational systems.
The relationship between agents and public resources is
best seen as a process of cognitive niche construction in
which humans sculpt their environment so that it affords
novel cognitive possibilities (Sterelny 2010). The real issue,
then, is not the current synchronic location of the elements
that constitute the cognitive system, but the integration
between internal and environmental resources. Thus,
“resources can be extended in the relevant explanatory sense
even when they are not literally external” (Sutton et. al.
2010, p. 535). It is the manipulation of such resources and
the transformative effect they have on the individual
cognitive profile that provides the explanatory cornerstone.
The common internalist strategy is to conflate embedded
with scaffolded cognition and contrast them both with
extended cognition. They stress the difference between
claims of dependence and claims of constitution. By
insisting that the putative examples of scaffolded cognition
involve a claim of dependence, they see them as grist on the
internalist‟s mill.
The way to resist this move is to highlight that, beyond
ontological qualms, the idea of scaffolded cognition moves
cognitive science in practice in the same line as that of
extended cognition (Sutton et. al. 2010). Despite the
skepticism that the ontological claims of extended cognition
can bring about, when it comes to the explanatory tasks of
empirical research, we take the most significant divide to be
that between embedded cognition on one side and
scaffolded and extended cognition on the other. That is the
choice between cognitive internalism and cognitive
externalism. In the next section we will address BR from the
perspective here sketched.

1770

Unpacking Bounded Rationality
BR tells us that simple heuristics make us smart by
exploiting the environment. But, what does that mean? In
order to further assess BR, we need to unpack its vague
appeals to the environment.

The Execution of Reasoning
Let us focus first on the role that the physical environment
has in reasoning. Some of the heuristics discussed by the
proponents of BR require for their execution that agents are
in current sensorimotor interaction with the relevant
physical environment, although it is doubtful that they
would qualify, within the broad realm of problem solving,
as instances of genuine reasoning. A model example of this
kind of heuristics is the gaze heuristic that people use to
catch a flying ball: Fix your gaze on the ball, start running,
and adjust your running speed so that the angle of gaze
remains constant. “A player who relies on the gaze heuristic
can ignore all causal variables necessary to compute the
trajectory of the ball (…) the player will end up where the
ball comes down without computing the exact spot”
(Gigerenzer and Brighton 2009, p. 110).
The execution of these heuristics requires that agents are
in current physical contact with the relevant environment.
The agent relies on the manipulation of the environment to
solve the problem. The baseball player alters the relative
position of the ball in the egocentric space. This subset of
heuristics, although not distinctively characterized in the BR
literature, is best seen as epistemic actions. By acting on the
environment itself, agents dispense with the need of
otherwise required complex internal representations. As
they alter the physical and informational structure of the
environment, these processes take the agent closer to the
solution; thus they are part of the agent‟s processing of the
problem (Menary 2010).
However, just as much of human reasoning, many of the
heuristics analyzed by the BR program do operate
decoupled from the environment. What role does the
environment play in those cases? Consider a much
discussed cognitive task: estimating the relative size of two
cities. Two suitable strategies provide a good illustration of
the paradigmatic kind of heuristic that BR puts forth.
The first is the Recognition Heuristic: if one of the
options is recognized and the others are not, infer that the
recognized alternative has the higher value on the target
criterion. That is, if we recognize one of the cities, we ought
to infer that it is the larger. Research suggests this is indeed
what people usually do (Todd and Gigerenzer 2007).
The second is Take the Best (TTB); “To infer which of
two alternatives has the higher value (a) search through cues
in order of validity, (b) stop search as soon as a cue
discriminates, and (c) choose the alternative this cue favors”
(Todd and Gigerenzer 2007, p. 168). That is, we consider
the available cues (airports, tourism, industry, universities,
etc.) sequentially, in order according to the degree to which
they correlate with the population size, stop at the first cue
that discriminates and infer that the city favored by that cue

is the largest. There is ample empirical evidence from
behavioral studies that precise models of such heuristics
better predict the subjects behavior in different task settings
than optimizing models (Gigerenzer and Brighton 2009).
These heuristics typically operate upon internal
representations. Construed as algorithmic process models,
all that the algorithm requires is supplied by either the
contents of our memory (i.e. cues) or by effects produced by
their recall (i.e. perceived recognition). Thus, here the
environment does not play any direct role in the execution
of reasoning. So, apart from those peripheral cases of
epistemic action, the bulk of BR‟s account of the execution
of reasoning can be accommodated by internalism.

The Assessment of reasoning
Defenders of BR do not merely claim that our reasoning
often relies on heuristics; they also argue that this is
frequently for the better. One of the major findings of BR is
that often, for a given environment, fast and frugal heuristics
outperform more costly strategies in terms of accuracy
(Gigerenzer and Brighton 2009). Hence the claim that
heuristics are rational; only that their rationality is
ecological. Ecological rationality defines the rationality of
heuristics by the match between internal processing and the
environment. But what is meant by environment, here?
First, there are always some constraints on the strategy
being applicable. In the case of the recognition heuristic,
one of the items must be recognized while the others are
not. If this obtains, there are further features of the
environment that will determine the performance of the
heuristic. Plainly, the recognition heuristic will perform well
if and only if the target criterion correlates with the
recognition of the item. This is called recognition validity,
and it constitutes the relevant structure of the environment
for the performance of the heuristic.
The necessary condition for the applicability of TTB is
that we have different available cues and we can rank them
in order of validity. Then, the main structural properties of
the environment that determine its performance are that (i)
the more correlated the available cues are, the less it pays to
take them all into account (and accordingly, TTB performs
as good as or better than optimizing strategies that demand
taking all cues into account); (ii) the more the cue validities
vary, the more it pays to use a strategy like TTB; and (iii)
the smaller the learning sample, the better lexicographic
strategies like TTB pay.
What is relevant and needs to be specified in order to
evaluate reasoning strategies is the structure of the available
information as defined by properties like cue redundancy,
variability of cue validities, or size of learning samples. That
is the environment that most heuristics exploit.
Reasoning performance is determined by the match
between strategies and informational features of the
environment that determine the strategy‟s relative success.
Thus, the locus of ecological rationality is not only the
internally processed algorithm, but the internal-algorithmin-specific-environment complex. In this sense, the

1771

environment does play a normative role in reasoning
according to the BR program.
At this point, the internalist might object, “Fine, agents
implement reasoning algorithms that operate upon stored
information, and then it turns out that the performance of
these algorithms is dependent upon how things are in the
world. So what? This doesn‟t necessitate CE. There is no
close internal-environmental resource integration here.”
However, this is not the whole story. Some of the features
of the environment that play a normative role are not simply
encountered out there. They are the product of the agent‟s
ongoing coupling with the environment. Consider the role
of uncertainty. As Gigerenzer has argued: “the degree of
uncertainty reflects the environment (ontic uncertainty) as
well as the mind's limited understanding (epistemic
uncertainty); hence, the degree of uncertainty is located in
the system mind-environment … redundancy and variability
of cues depend both on what is in the physical environment
and on humans who select certain cues and not others,
which can result in more or less redundant cues. Physicians,
for instance, tend to look at redundant cues, but they could
choose to analyze independent cues and thus in part create
their environment” (Gigerenzer and Sturm 2012, p. 257).
A narrowly internalistic interpretation of BR takes
heuristics as one-shot games. But in order to understand
how rationality emerges from the use of such strategies, it is
of much importance to consider the way in which the
agents‟ behavior shapes the environment that shape the
performance of their available reasoning strategies.
Complementarily, the relative performance of a heuristic
does affect its actual occurrence, albeit in an unexplained
way. Part of the selection of a strategy operates upon
internal representations, as memory constrains which
heuristics can be applied. A second factor driving the
selection of strategies is reinforcement by feedback. Still,
beyond memory constrains and in absence of reinforcement,
there is evidence that people rely on heuristics when they
face those environments in which doing so pays off and not
otherwise –i.e. relying on TTB when the validity of the
available cues varies highly but not otherwise (Gigerenzer
and Brighton 2009). This suggests that people are sensitive
to the structure of the environment that determines the
performance of heuristics.
The internalist can account for part of this story. It can
explain how the heuristic strategy that the agent happens to
apply is derived from a given structure of mental
representations. It can also evaluate the performance of a
strategy given a particular environment. It can even make
inventories of heuristic-environment successful pairings.
But, when it comes to deeper issues, such as why and how
the agent chooses right and correctly applies a heuristic, or
how and why certain environments have come to afford
simple strategies, or how we have come to have such
proficient heuristic tools, internalism seems to fall short. It
faces the threat of falling into the “just happens” stance.
The emergence of normativity that results from the
interaction between agent and environment is hardly the
result of (only) internal computations. Whatever a much

needed further investigation into these frontiers of
theorizing delivers, we contend that, at least for the large
domain of uncertain reasoning, it is highly plausible that
normativity is due to the ongoing process of back-and-forth
manipulation (of the environment) and transformation (by
the environment) that CE aims to unravel.

The Enhancement of Reasoning
Next to the descriptive and the normative, BR also has a
prescriptive dimension. Insofar as reasoning performance
has to be assessed by the match between internal processing
and environment (for some limits, see Sturm 2012), a dual
perspective opens with regard to the enhancement of
reasoning: we can either change what goes on within our
heads, or change the environment. The development of both
these prescriptive stances highlights a different point of
connection between BR and CE.
A good example of the first line of prescription is fast and
frugal decision trees for medical diagnoses. These are
sequential trees designed for a very specific situation, like
deciding whether a patient in the ER requires immediate
attention facing a heart attack. They work as enacted
protocols that the physicians must blindly follow.
Interestingly, fast and frugal trees do not directly modify
doctor‟s internal capacity of processing. From the doctor‟s
point of view, they are an environmental resource, a cultural
artifact they engage with in repeatable cognitive practices. It
is part of the setting of the ER, upon which coordination
between doctors is optimized. And indeed it has a
transformative effect in doctor‟s cognitive behavior –i.e.
leading their attention to certain cues while ignoring others.
The second path for reasoning enhancement that BR
pursues is typically illustrated by drawing attention to the
alarming lack of competence of physicians to assess risk
probabilities (Gigerenzer 2008). Several studies show that
when given information in percentages, physicians often
perform poorly. They could be further instructed not to
neglect base rates. But, as Gigerenzer puts it, “in the
ecological view, thinking does not happen simply in the
mind, but in interaction between the mind and its
environment. This opens up a second and more efficient
way to solve the problem: to change the environment”
(2008, p. 17). The proposed prescription is to provide
information in natural non-normalized frequencies (that is,
in terms of “n out of every 1,000 people have disease x. Of
these n people, m will have a positive test, etc.”).
Interestingly, “the relevant part of the environment is the
representation of the information, because the representation
does part of the Bayesian computation” (Gigerenzer 2008,
p. 18). The object of manipulation of these change-theenvironment proposals is neither the material environment
that plays a role in the execution of heuristics nor the
information-structural properties of the environment that
play a pervasive role in assessing the performance of
heuristics. Instead, they point to symbolic and
representational resources, which are thereby assumed to
play a computational role. That is, cognitive practices
carried upon the manipulation of symbolic structures. This

1772

still squares perfectly with the work done by Menary
(2010), Sterelny (2010) and Sutton (2010) on cognitive
scaffolding, and the engagement with representational tools.

Conclusion
Although Clark‟s characterization of BR is misguided, it is
still true that BR‟s account of reasoning does not fit much
with the old-school notion of extended cognition. Its
processes and mechanisms do not involve agents in stable
and durable couplings with technological resources they
trust. But, pace Clark, this does not mean BR is a dead end
for CE, since CE needs not be bounded to those cases in
which the environmental resources constitute a proper part
of cognition. BR‟s environmentalism does not consist in any
ontological claim about the location and boundaries of the
mind. It is a claim about explanatory variables and about
normative criteria for understanding and improving human
rationality. As such, it is best accommodated by the notion
of scaffolded cognition.
From this moderate take on CE, we have shed light on the
appeals to the environment made throughout the BR
literature. We distinguished the role played by the physical
environment in online heuristics qua epistemic actions,
where we find instances of reasoning carried upon processes
that functionally span through certain physical elements of
the environment. But we also acknowledged that the
execution of heuristics is typically decoupled from the real,
mind-independent environment, and the account offered
here by BR still fits with what a traditional internalist
account would claim. Then we focused on the normative
role played by the informational structure of the
environment in determining heuristic performance, and on
the role played by symbolic representations in the
enhancement of reasoning performance. We believe that this
conceptual clarification is quite a beneficial outcome of the
whole debate for the development of the BR program.
Beyond that, we also pointed to some blind spots of
internalism. The internalist can accommodate the actual
processing of the heuristic, but it can hardly sustain the
picture of rationality that emerges from the use of heuristics.
Its narrow scope leaves important parts of the story on the
dark, such as the emergence of the so-called “informational
environment” and the co-enhancement process between
agents and environments by which we can explain why we
use the strategies we use and why is it that these happen to
succeed beyond luck.
Those issues require further research that should be
focused on the ongoing dynamic of interaction between
agents and environments, and we contend that a moderate,
scaffold externalism is the most fertile framework for this.
In turn, we take these considerations to vindicate our take on
CE, which acknowledges and incorporates the heterogeneity
of cognitive engagements with the environment, and needs
not be too much drawn by ontological claims, but rather to
prove its explanatory value for cognitive science.

References
Brighton, H., & Todd, P. (2009). Situating Rationality. In
M. Aydede & P. Robbins (Eds.), Handbook of Situated
Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, A. (1998). Being there: Putting Brain, Body and
World together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2001). Reasons, Robots, and the Extended Mind.
Mind and Language, 16, 121–145.
Clark, A. (2003). Artificial intelligence and the many faces
of reason. In S. Stich & T. Warfield (Eds.), The Blackwell
guide to philosophy of mind. Oxford: Blackwell.
Clark, A. (2010). Memento's revenge: The extended mind
extended. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended mind.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Clark, A. & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58, 7-19.
Gigerenzer, G. (2007). Gut Feelings: The intelligence of the
unconscious. London: Viking.
Gigerenzer, G. (2008). Rationality for Mortals. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G. & Brighton, H. (2009). Homo Heuristicus:
Why Biased Minds Make Better Inferences. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 1, 107–143.
Gigerenzer, G. & Sturm, T. (2010). How (far) can
rationality be naturalized? Synthese, 187, 243–268.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Hutchinson, J. & Gigerenzer, G. (2005). Simple heuristics
and rules of thumb. Behavioral Processes, 69, 97–124.
Menary, R. (2007). Cognitive integration: Mind and
cognition unbounded. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Menary, R. (2010). Dimensions of mind. Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Science, 9, 561–578.
Sterelny, K. (2010). Minds: extended or scaffolded.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Science, 9, 465–481.
Sutton, J. (2010). Exograms and interdisciplinary: history,
the extended mind and the civilizing process. In R.
Menary (Ed.), The extended mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sutton, J., Harris, C., Keil, P. & Barnier, A. (2010). The
psychology of memory, extended cognition and socially
distributed remembering. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Science, 9, 521–560.
Todd, P. & Gigerenzer, G. (2007). Environments that make
us smart. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
16, 167–171.
Wilson, R. (2010). Meaning making and the mind of the
externalist. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended mind.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wilson, R. & Clark, A. (2009). How to Situate Cognition:
Letting Nature Take its Course. In M. Aydede & P.
Robbins (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Situated
Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1773

