UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive load does not decrease pronoun use when speaker’s and addressee’s
perspectives are dissociated

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mj3d35m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vogels, Jorrig
Krahmer, Emiel
Maes, Alfons

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive load does not decrease pronoun use when speaker’s and addressee’s
perspectives are dissociated
Jorrig Vogels (j.vogels@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Alfons Maes (maes@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, PO Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg, the Netherlands
Abstract
It has been suggested that a referent’s accessibility is affected
by the degree to which it is in the speaker’s attention.
Assuming that less accessible referents are less likely to be
pronominalized, this predicts that speakers under cognitive
load use more elaborate referring expressions. However,
speakers under load may also have difficulty taking into
account their addressee’s perspective, which may either lead
to more use of the speaker’s own discourse model or to more
economic expressions. To tease these effects apart, we
conducted a story completion experiment in which cognitive
load was manipulated by the presence or absence of a
secondary task for the speaker. In addition, we dissociated the
speaker’s and the addressee’s perspectives. Our results do not
provide evidence for the hypothesis that cognitive load
reduces the accessibility of referents in the speaker’s own
discourse model, suggesting that speaker attention does not
determine accessibility.
Keywords:
cognitive
load;
accessibility; perspective taking

referring

expressions;

Introduction
When speakers refer to something, they have to choose a
certain type of referring expression, such as a definite
description (e.g. the girl) or a pronoun (e.g. she).
Traditionally, the speaker’s choice of a referring expression
has been assumed to be tailored for the addressee (e.g. Ariel,
1990; Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 1993). According to
this view, speakers make assumptions about the cognitive
status of the referent in the mind of the addressee. An
important factor in determining this status is the salience of
the referent in the discourse. For example, if the referent
was the topic of the preceding sentence, it can be assumed
to be highly accessible in the addressee’s discourse model,
and therefore it does not need an elaborate description to be
reactivated. Because the addressee knows that the speaker
would have used a more elaborate expression if she had a
less activated referent in mind, the use of an attenuated
expression, such as a pronoun, aids the addressee’s
interpretation.
However, studies that have manipulated speakers’
attention resources suggest that the activation of mental
representations in the speaker’s own memory is also
important for the choice of referring expression. For
example, Arnold and Griffin (2007) and Fukumura, Van
Gompel, and Pickering (2010) varied the number of possible

referents in the discourse, and found that speakers used
fewer pronouns when a referential competitor was present,
even though the referent was salient in the discourse (i.e.
topical). In addition, speakers have been found to choose
fewer attenuated expressions for salient referents when they
are distracted by another task (Rosa & Arnold, 2011). These
findings suggest that the choice of referring expression is
affected by the degree to which the referent is in the
speaker’s attention: referent accessibility, and hence
pronoun use, decreases when the speaker has to spread
attentional resources over multiple possible referents or
multiple tasks.
If restrictions on speakers’ attention resources influence
the accessibility of referents in their own memory, speakers
experiencing an increased cognitive load should be more
likely to use elaborate expressions such as full noun phrases.
However, increased cognitive load may also affect the
degree to which speakers are able to take into account the
perspective of the addressee (e.g. Epley, Keysar, Van
Boven, & Gilovich, 2004; Horton & Keysar, 1996). For
example, Horton and Keysar (1996) showed that when
under time pressure, speakers were not taking into account
the addressee’s perspective in choosing whether or not to
include an adjective in their referring expressions. Thus,
cognitive load may make the choice of referring expression
more egocentric. On the one hand, this could mean that this
choice is based more on the speaker’s own discourse model
(e.g. Fukumura & Van Gompel, 2012). That is, when
speakers are under load, they might be less able to calculate
whether the referent is accessible for the addressee or not.
Because in many cases speaker and addressee have access to
the same discourse information, it is generally difficult to
distinguish between a referring expression that is tailored
for the addressee and a referring expression that is based on
the speaker’s own model of the discourse when all discourse
information is shared. For example, a referent that is highly
accessible in the addressee’s discourse model is often also
highly accessible in the speaker’s discourse model. When
the speaker’s and the addressee’s perspectives differ,
however, speakers under load might be inclined to use
pronouns when the referent is salient in their own discourse
model but not salient in the addressee’s discourse model.
Conversely, they might be inclined to use full noun phrases
when the referent is not salient in their own discourse model
but salient in the addressee’s discourse model.

3681

On the other hand, speakers under load may fail to take
into account any information about discourse salience, and
resort to using more pronouns in general, because these are
short, have little semantic content, and are hence easy to
produce (Almor, 1999; Burzio, 1998). For example, studies
on children and elderly people have found that having
limited working memory capacity increases the use of
pronouns in contexts in which the referent is not salient for
the addressee (e.g. references following a topic shift;
Hendriks, Englert, Wubs, & Hoeks, 2008; Wubs, Hendriks,
Hoeks, & Koster, 2009; see also Almor et al., 1999).
To tease these possible effects of cognitive load apart, the
linguistic salience of the referent should be varied, because
the effect of cognitive load might be different for salient and
non-salient referents. In addition, to determine whether
cognitive load affects the speaker’s discourse model or the
speaker’s assumptions about the addressee’s discourse
model, the speaker’s and addressee’s perspectives should be
dissociated. Therefore, we conducted a story completion
experiment in which we manipulated perspective, referent
salience and cognitive load. Perspective was manipulated by
presenting one of the sentences of the story only to the
speaker, over headphones (cf. Fukumura and Van Gompel,
2012). The referent was considered linguistically salient for
the speaker when it was mentioned in this privileged
sentence, and not salient when it was only mentioned in the
introductory sentence. Since the addressee did not hear the
privileged sentence, referent salience was reversed for the
addressee. Cognitive load was manipulated by giving the
speaker a second, unrelated (but also verbal) task in the first
or the second half of the experiment.
We hypothesized that if cognitive load lowers the
accessibility of referents in the speaker’s discourse model, it
should decrease pronoun use, irrespective of the referent’s
linguistic salience. If, on the other hand, cognitive load
makes perspective taking more difficult, there should be a
stronger tendency to use the speaker’s own discourse model
in the dual task condition. That is, speakers should be more
likely to use pronouns when the referent is salient in their
own discourse model (and not in their addressee’s), than
when the referent is salient in the addressee’s discourse
model (and not salient in their own). Alternatively, speakers
may tend to use more pronouns in general when under
increased cognitive load.

press), accompanied by two introductory sentences and the
onset of a third sentence. The first picture of a pair always
showed one male and one female person sitting next to each
other. In the second picture, one of these persons performed
an action, such as walking away or getting a glass of water.
This person will be referred to as the target character, as
participants were expected to refer to this character in their
continuations. There were two versions of each picture pair;
one in which it was the male person and one in which it was
the female person that performed the action. An example of
a picture pair is shown in Figure 1.

Methods
Participants
Sixty-four students (47 female; mean age: 20.2 years) from
Tilburg University participated in the experiment for course
credit. Half of them acted as speakers, the others acted as
addressees. All were native speakers of Dutch, the language
of the experiment.

Materials
The experimental items consisted of 16 pairs of
photographs, taken from Vogels, Krahmer, and Maes (in

Figure 1: Example of a stimulus item in two conditions.
Sentence 1 was read aloud by the speaker; sentence 2 was
presented only to the speaker over headphones. Context
sentences are translations of the Dutch originals.
The first sentence introduced both characters with indefinite
noun phrases, either een meisje “a girl” and een jongen “a
boy” or een vrouw “a woman” and een man “a man”. One
was mentioned as the subject, and the other in a

3682

prepositional phrase (e.g. Een meisje zat te discussiëren met
een jongen “A girl was arguing with a boy”). This sentence
was read aloud by the speaker to the addressee. The second
sentence described some emotional or physical state of the
person mentioned in the prepositional phrase (e.g. De
jongen raakte enorm gepikeerd “The boy got really
annoyed”). This sentence was prerecorded by a female
native speaker of Dutch, and only heard by the speaker over
headphones. The onset of the third sentence was always
Vervolgens... “Subsequently...”, serving as a cue for the
speaker to complete the story.
In addition, 20 picture pairs served as fillers. These
differed from the experimental items in that some showed
either two male or two female characters or only one
character. In the accompanying sentences, some characters
were given labels such as een verkoopster “a saleswoman”
or een Duitser “a German”, and sometimes the same
character was the subject of both introductory sentences. An
additional 4 items were included as practice items.

Procedure
The experiment took place in an experimental room. Two
participants were randomly assigned to the role of speaker
and addressee. The participant taking the role of speaker
was seated at one end of a table, behind a laptop connected
to a serial response box, and was wearing headphones. The
participant taking the role of addressee was seated at the
other end of the table, and was given a booklet containing
all different picture pairs and an answer sheet. The
experiment was run on the laptop using E-Prime 2.0, and
was only visible to the speaker. The speaker’s task was to
complete the stories depicted by the picture pairs for the
addressee. In one half of the experiment, the speaker
received a secondary task (cognitive load condition), while
there was no secondary task in the other half (no cognitive
load). In the no cognitive load condition, each trial started
with the item number presented on the screen, accompanied
by a 500 ms beep, followed by a cross-hair. Then, the first
picture of a pair appeared on the left side of the screen.
After 3 s the first introductory sentence appeared below the
picture in a red font. The speaker read this sentence aloud to
the addressee. After 5 s the second sentence was presented
to the speaker over the headphones. Next, while the first
picture remained visible, the second picture appeared
automatically on the right side of the screen, together with
the onset of the third sentence, which also appeared below
the picture in a red font. The target character in the second
picture was either the subject of the first introductory
sentence, and therefore linguistically salient for the
addressee (addressee-salient condition), or the subject of the
second sentence, which was only presented to the speaker
(speaker-salient condition). At this time, recording started,
and the speaker completed the sentence based on the event
shown in the picture, by saying it aloud to the addressee.
After 6 s, recording stopped and the pictures and sentences
disappeared. The addressee’s task was to select the correct
picture pair out of three options from the booklet and mark

the correct answer on the sheet. The addressee gave the
speaker a hint when the next trial could be started.
In the cognitive load condition, the appearance of the first
picture was preceded by the words BAL “ball” or DAL
“valley” (Goudbeek & Krahmer, 2011), which was
presented in the middle of the screen for 1 s. The same
happened at the end of the trial, followed by the question
Was dit woord hetzelfde als het vorige woord? (Ja/Nee)
“Was this word the same as the previous word? (Yes/No)”.
The speaker then pressed either the green/Yes or the red/No
button on the response box. They did not receive feedback
on their answers.
The participants received instructions both orally and in
written form. Speakers were explicitly told that the sentence
presented over headphones could not be heard by their
addressee, but that they had to pay attention to it
nonetheless, since they would be asked about these
sentences after the experiment as an attention check (which
was indeed the case). They were also encouraged to pay
attention to the dual task by way of a prize offer for the
participant with the fewest errors. To keep the speaker
aware of the addressee’s needs, the addressee was allowed
to ask the speaker clarification questions if anything
remained unclear, but only after the speaker had finished the
story.
The experiment was divided into two blocks, of which
one contained the dual task and the other did not,
counterbalanced for order. Each block was preceded by two
practice items. The experimenter was only present during
the instructions and the practice trials. The experiment took
about 25 minutes.

Data coding
From all speakers’ continuations of the third sentence, we
selected the first subject reference, which was expected to
refer to the target character. Any further references (e.g. in
another follow-up clause) were ignored. We excluded 33
cases in which the first subject did not refer to the target
referent, 7 plural references, 3 indefinite references, 1 case
in which the sentence presented over the headphones was
repeated literally, and 1 missing case. In addition, there
were 2 cases in which the referring expression was repaired.
However, because the repair was of the same type in both
cases (e.g. ‘the man... uh the boy’), we kept these cases. In
total, we excluded 45 trials (8.8%). The remaining 467
subject references were coded for the type of referring
expression: either full noun phrase or pronoun.

Design and statistical analyses
Crossing the two factors Referent salience and Cognitive
load resulted in a 2 (speaker-salient, addressee-salient) x 2
(cognitive load, no cognitive load) within-participants
design. Participants were assigned to one of four lists, each
of which contained one version of a given item. The items
were presented in a pseudo-random order, with at least one
filler item between two consecutive experimental items.

3683

We performed a logit mixed model analysis on the log
odds for a pronoun (Jaeger, 2008). Referent salience and
Cognitive load were included as fixed factors, and
participants and items as random factors. The fixed factors
were centered to reduce collinearity. Starting with a full
random effect structure, we excluded random slopes that did
not significantly contribute to the model fit. Only the final
model will be reported.

varied substantively in the way their pronoun use was
affected by the context sentences and the dual task. The
contribution of the random slope for cognitive load to the
model fit was only marginally significant (p = .06).
Removing it decreased the effect size of the fixed factors,
but the interaction effect remained significant at the  = .05
level.

Discussion
Results
Upon inquiry, only 6 participants reported that they found
the secondary task difficult. Still, the overall error rate was
9.7%, suggesting that participants might have been
overestimating their performance. Few errors were made in
the attention check following the experiment (1.7%),
suggesting that speakers were attending to the sentences
presented over the headphones.

Figure 2: Proportion of pronoun references to the target
character in the four conditions.
Figure 2 shows the proportion of pronoun references to the
target character by referent salience and cognitive load
condition. We found a main effect of referent salience:
pronouns were more frequent when the referent was salient
only for the speaker (23.6%) than when it was salient only
for the addressee (8.3%),  = -2.26; SE = 0.85; p < .01.
There was also a main effect of cognitive load: more
pronouns were used when speakers performed a dual task
(17.2%) than when they did not (15.7%),  = 1.40; SE =
0.56; p < .05. These effects were qualified by a significant
interaction,  = 2.85; SE = 0.95; p < .01, suggesting that
cognitive load only increased pronoun use in the addresseesalient condition. The model included random intercepts for
participants (s2 = 2.85) and items (s2 = 0.15), as well as bysubject random slopes for referent salience (s2 = 12.06) and
cognitive load (s2 = 3.08). This suggests that participants

Speakers used more pronouns when the referent was salient
for them (but not salient for their addressee) than when it
was not salient for them (but salient for their addressee).
This suggests that speakers chose referring expressions
more according to the referent’s accessibility in their own
discourse model than according to assumptions about the
referent’s accessibility in their addressee’s discourse model.
This is in line with Fukumura and Van Gompel (2012), who
found that speakers were not taking into account their
addressee’s perspective in choosing referring expressions
when the two perspectives were dissociated.
If cognitive load decreases the accessibility of referents in
the speaker’s own discourse model, as suggested by Arnold
and Griffin (2007), we should have seen fewer pronouns
across the board when speakers performed the dual task.
This is not what we found. Instead, speakers were somewhat
more likely to use pronouns when under load, at least in the
addressee-salient condition. This finding is also not in line
with the hypothesis that cognitive load makes it harder to
calculate the referent’s accessibility in the addressee’s
discourse model. If that were the case, the dual task
condition should have increased the tendency to use the
speaker’s own discourse model. That is, speakers under load
should have been more likely to use pronouns in the
speaker-salient condition, and less likely to use pronouns in
the addressee-salient condition.
Our results seem compatible with the hypothesis that
speakers under load are more likely to use less costly
expressions, such as pronouns (Almor, 1999; Burzio, 1998).
That is, when distracted by a secondary task, speakers have
fewer memory resources available that are needed to infer
that less salient referents should be referred to with more
elaborate expressions. The fact that cognitive load only
increased pronoun use in the addressee-salient condition
may be due to the preference to use pronouns anyway when
the referent is salient for the speaker.
An alternative explanation for the effect of cognitive load
is that speakers are less able to keep track of their own
discourse model when they are under load. This would
cause their use of referring expressions to become less
consistent, i.e. the choice of referring expressions becomes
less tied to the discourse context (Arnold, 2010). This would
explain the finding that the difference between the speakersalient and the addressee-salient condition becomes smaller
under load. In addition, this explanation would not be
incompatible with the finding by Arnold and Griffin (2007),
Fukumura et al. (2010) and Rosa and Arnold (2011) that
cognitive load leads to fewer attenuated expressions, since

3684

these studies investigated only contexts in which referents
were always linguistically salient. Thus, the present study at
least stresses that dissociating the salience of the referent in
the speaker’s and the addressee’s perspective is necessary to
tease the possible effects of cognitive load apart, i.e.
whether it affects the speaker’s representation of the
discourse or the speaker’s assumptions about the
addressee’s representation of the discourse.
Although our results suggest that speakers tend to use
their own discourse model, replicating Fukumura and Van
Gompel’s (2012) findings, it is striking that the overall
proportion of pronouns is quite low. Even in the no
cognitive load, speaker-salient condition, in which one
would expect many pronouns if speakers only took into
account their own discourse model, the percentage of
pronouns out of all referring expressions did not exceed
30%. This relatively low proportion of pronouns might be
due to the manipulation of perspective: Perhaps speakers
were taking into account the addressee’s informational
needs, but not up till the level of calculating the referent’s
cognitive status for the addressee. This kind of detailed
audience design might be cognitively too costly (e.g.
Brennan & Hanna, 2009; Horton & Gerrig, 2005).
Therefore, speakers may just have increased the use of
elaborate expressions to be as clear as possible for the
addressee, as soon as they were aware of the fact that not all
information was shared. Fukumura and Van Gompel (2012)
found evidence for such a minimal, one-bit model of
audience design (e.g. the addressee has heard this or not;
Galati & Brennan, 2010; see also Epley et al., 2004) by
comparing their condition with privileged information for
the speaker to a condition in which all information was
shared. They found more pronouns in the shared condition,
independently of whether the referent was salient or not.
This suggests that speakers use more elaborate expressions
when there is privileged information, even though they
might run the risk of being overly specific.
Still, Fukumura and Van Gompel (2012) found somewhat
higher rates of pronoun use in their privileged, referentsalient condition (Experiment 1: 37%; Experiment 2: 48%)
than we did in our experiment. This difference could be due
to differences in the linguistic materials. Firstly, while the
referent mentioned in the second context sentence (which
was only presented to the speaker) was referred to with a
pronoun in Fukumura and Van Gompel’s experiments, it
was referred to with a full NP in our experiment, in
accordance with the preferred way of referring to an entity
previously mentioned as a direct object in centering theory
(e.g. Brennan, 1995). The tendency to pronominalize the
entity on a subsequent reference may however be stronger
when the referent had already been pronominalized.
Secondly, speakers may be more likely to reuse the most
recent referring expression, which could also have led to
more pronouns in Fukumura and Van Gompel’s
experiments than in ours.
Even though employing a one-bit model of audience
design is probably less cognitively demanding than

calculating the referent’s accessibility for the addressee,
using full NPs to aid the addressee when there is privileged
information might be more difficult under load. Hence, if
speakers in our study were employing such minimal
audience design, our finding that they were more likely to
use pronouns under load could be due to difficulties in
assessing that the addressee might need more specific
information. If this is the case, we would predict that in a
situation in which all discourse information is shared,
cognitive load does not increase pronoun use, since in that
case there is no need to be more specific for the addressee.
One reason why speakers did not make the extra effort to
calculate the accessibility of the referent in the addressee’s
discourse model may be that in the current experiment, as
well as in Fukumura and Van Gompel’s, references were
never ambiguous, since the two characters always had a
different gender. Therefore, not taking into account the
addressee’s perspective would probably not result in
interpretation errors. However, in case not taking into
account the addressee’s perspective would lead to
interpretation errors, speakers may base their choice of
referring expressions on the discourse model of their
addressee (e.g. Fukumura & Van Gompel, 2012; Horton &
Keysar, 1996). In that case, increased cognitive load might
make this perspective taking more difficult, and cause
speakers to fall back on their own discourse model.
In our filler materials, which contained stories with
characters of the same gender, and hence pronouns were
ambiguous, we indeed found more pronouns when the
referent was salient for the addressee but not for the speaker
(33%; n = 51) than when the referent was salient for the
speaker but not for the addressee (13%; n = 56), suggesting
that speakers were taking their addressee’s perspective into
account. However, cognitive load did not seem to cause
speakers to use their own discourse model. Rather, a pattern
similar to that in Figure 2 emerged, with more pronouns
under load for referents that were not salient for the speaker.
This might be an indication that cognitive load as
manipulated here is independent of perspective taking.
Our results suggest that there was quite some individual
variation as to how speakers’ referring expressions were
affected by the dual task. One cause of individual
differences could be the use of strategies for remembering
the words BAL and DAL. Two thirds of all participants
reported to have used some kind of mnemonic (e.g. putting
up one finger for BAL and two for DAL), although these
were not always employed from the beginning. This is a
concern that should be taken up by future studies.
Nevertheless, the general trend of more pronouns under load
in the addressee-salient condition in the present study seems
to hold for all participants.
Finally, an important issue is that cognitive load can be
manipulated in different ways that may affect the choice of
referring expressions differently. For example, it is not clear
whether dual tasks, divided attention to multiple referents,
and restricted working memory capacity all produce the
same kind of cognitive load. In addition, language

3685

production may be affected differently by verbal or visual
secondary tasks (Baddeley and Hitch, 1974; Kellogg et al.,
2007). In the present experiment, the use of a verbal
secondary task may have especially hindered the production
of elaborate linguistic forms. Other manipulations, such as
adding time pressure, possibly interfere more with
activating non-linguistic representations or with perspective
taking. This is an issue that needs further research.
In sum, the present study has shown that speakers use
more pronouns when they experience increased cognitive
load, at least when the referent is not salient for the speaker
(but is salient for the addressee). Whether this is due to a
general preference to produce economic forms, or to
difficulties in keeping track of the accessibility of the
referents in the discourse model should be researched
further. However, we have not found support for the claim
that cognitive load, at least in the form of the dual task used
here, decreases the accessibility of referents in the speaker’s
discourse model. Hence, although accessibility may be
related to attention, it probably does not hold generally that
less attentive speakers use more elaborate referring
expressions.

References
Almor, A. (1999). Noun-phrase anaphora and focus: The
informational load hypothesis. Psychological Review,
106(4), 748-765.
Almor, A., Kempler, D., MacDonald, M. C., Andersen, E.
S., & Tyler, L. K. (1999). Why Do Alzheimer Patients
Have Difficulty with Pronouns? Working Memory,
Semantics, and Reference in Comprehension and
Production in Alzheimer’s Disease. Brain and Language,
67, 202-227.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents.
London: Routledge.
Arnold, J. E., & Griffin, Z. (2007). The effect of additional
characters on choice of referring expression: Everyone
counts. Journal of Memory and Language, 56, 521-536.
Arnold, J. E. (2010). How Speakers Refer: The Role of
Accessibility. Language and Linguistics Compass, 4(4),
187-203.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working Memory. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation (Vol. 8). New York/London: Academic Press.
Brennan, S. E. (1995). Centering Attention in Discourse.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 10(2), 137-167.
Brennan, S. E., & Hanna, J. E. (2009). Partner-Specific
Adaptation in Dialog. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1,
274–291.
Burzio, L. (1998). Anaphora and Soft Constraints. In P. B.
D. Fox, P. Hagstrom, M. McGinnis & D. Pesetsky (Eds.),
Is the Best Good Enough?: Optimality and Competition in
Syntax. Boston: MIT.
Epley, N., Keysar, B., Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T.
(2004). Perspective Taking as Egocentric Anchoring and
Adjustment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87(3), 327-339.

Fukumura, K., & Van Gompel, R. (2012). Producing
Pronouns and Definite Noun Phrases: Do Speakers Use
the Addressee’s Discourse Model? Cognitive Science,
36(7), 1289-1311.
Fukumura, K., Van Gompel, R., & Pickering, M. J. (2010).
The use of visual context during the production of
referring expressions. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63(9), 1700-1715.
Galati, A., & Brennan, S. E. (2010). Attenuating
information in spoken communication: For the speaker,
or for the addressee? Journal of Memory and Language,
62(1), 35-51.
Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2011). Referring under load:
Disentangling preference-based and alignment-based
content selection processes in referring expression
generation Proceedings of PRE-Cogsci: Bridging the gap
between computational, empirical and theoretical
approaches to reference. Boston.
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993).
Cognitive status and the form of referring expressions in
discourse. Language, 69, 274-307.
Hendriks, P., Englert, C., Wubs, E., & Hoeks, J. (2008).
Age Differences in Adults’ Use of Referring Expressions.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 17, 443466.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2005). The impact of
memory demands on audience design during language
production. Cognition, 96, 127–142.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434-446.
Kellogg, R. T., Olive, T., & Piolat, A. (2007). Verbal,
visual, and spatial working memory in written language
production. Acta Psychologica, 124, 382–397.
Rosa, E. C., & Arnold, J. E. (2011). The Role of Attention
in Choice of Referring Expression Proceedings of PRECogsci: Bridging the gap between computational,
empirical and theoretical approaches to reference.
Boston.
Vogels, J., Krahmer, E., & Maes, A. (in press). Who is
where referred to how, and why? The influence of visual
saliency on referent accessibility in spoken language
production. Language and Cognitive Processes.
Wubs, E., Hendriks, P., Hoeks, J., & Koster, C. (2009). Tell
me a story! Children's capacity for topic shift Proceedings
of the 3rd Conference on Generative Approaches to
Language Acquisition North America (GALANA 3) (pp.
313-324). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

3686

