UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Science, Aesthetics, and the Development of Taste

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9j45q3q9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
York, William

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Science, Aesthetics, and the Development of Taste
William W. York (wwyork@indiana.edu)
Indiana University
Center for Research on Concepts & Cognition
512 N. Fess Avenue
Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

Abstract
Aesthetics and the arts have garnered more attention within
cognitive science in recent years. Despite this increasing
interest, “scientists of art” often focus on one of two areas: the
formal properties of artworks themselves, or the mental
processes involved in perceiving these works in an isolated,
one-on-one encounter. In this paper, I review some
representative examples of such work before suggesting some
alternative ways that cognitive science might approach
aesthetics and the arts—ways that would complement the
isolationist approaches that have predominated to this point.
In doing so, I draw on the observations and arguments of
various philosophers of art, highlighting some of the socially
and culturally situated factors that are important in shaping
the development of our taste and sensibilities.
Keywords: Aesthetics; Culture; Social Cognition; Art.

Introduction
What can cognitive science tell us about aesthetic
experience? Given the putative aims of cognitive science—
roughly, “to provide a cogent scientific account of how
human beings achieve their most remarkable symbolic
products” (Gardner, 1987, p. 391)—artistic and aesthetic
phenomena fit within the scope of the field. While they have
long been fringe topics within the field, they have been
garnering increasing attention in recent years. This work
ranges from so-called neuroaesthetics (Ramachandran &
Hirstein, 1999), which seeks to uncover the evolved neural
underpinnings of our aesthetic responses, to computational
aesthetics (Hoenig 2005), which employs sophisticated
mathematical tools to analyze the formal properties of
various aesthetic objects. Meanwhile, others have focused
more on the representational and/or computational processes
involved in perceiving and appreciating works of art
Despite this recent interest, there remains a deep-seated
tension between the aims of science, which prizes
generality, laws, and quantification; and the arts, which we
experience qualitatively through encounters with particular
works (songs, paintings, films, etc.). Furthermore, these
experiences take place amid a complex background of
social, cultural, and historical influences. Thus, one could
argue that the goals of science are simply incompatible with
the kind of understanding we seek when it comes to
aesthetics and the arts. Such misgivings have been voiced
by many philosophers (Dickie, 1962; Morgan, 1950;
Wittgenstein, 1967) and even some psychologists (e.g.,
Arnheim, 1991). Others view these misgivings as
stubbornly anti-science, insisting that the problems faced by

“scientists of art” are merely very difficult, not
fundamentally intractable or ill-conceived. If the results of
their efforts have been meager, they argue, it is because of
this difficulty, together with the fact that it’s still early—and
after all, one must start somewhere (cf. Berlyne, 1971;
Birkhoff, 1932; Meyer, 1957; Rigau, Feixas & Spert, 2008).
Instead of trying to resolve this longstanding debate, I
want to focus on the picture of aesthetic experience that has
tended to emerge from cognitive science’s encounters with
the arts. According to this picture, the artwork (or other
aesthetic object) is treated as an isolated stimulus, while the
viewer or listener is treated as a sort of idealized receiver of
the information encoded in the work. With this picture in
mind, researchers typically either focus on (a) the intrinsic
properties of artworks (or other aesthetic objects), as with
much of computational aesthetics; or (b) on the mental
processing involved in perceiving and appreciating art
(Kintsch, 2012; Leder, Belke, Oeberst & Augustin, 2004).
In this paper, I want to look more closely at some of this
research, with the dual aim of showing what we can learn
from it as well as what its limitations are. In keeping with
the theme of the conference (“Cooperative Minds: Social
Interaction and Group Dynamics”), I also want to suggest
some alternative ways of approaching aesthetics and the
arts—ways that would complement the isolationist
approaches that have predominated to this point. In doing
so, I draw on the observations and arguments of various
philosophers of art and aesthetics, highlighting some of the
socially and culturally situated factors that are important in
shaping the development of our taste and sensibilities.
There are three main sections in this paper. The first looks
at research (both recent and not-so-recent) on the
perception, appreciation, and value of visual art; the second
looks at some parallel work on music (in particular, on
musical meaning); and the third focuses on outstanding
questions and possible future directions for research.

Order, Complexity, and Value in Visual Art
The scientific study of aesthetics date back to at least the
1870s and Gustav Fechner (cf. Arnheim 1985). However,
the work of mathematician George Birkhoff’s Aesthetic
Measure (1933) remains an important landmark in this
pursuit. Birkhoff’s quest to formalize beauty yielded a
succinct mathematical equation, M = O/C, where M is the
aesthetic measure (or value) of the stimulus in question, O is
the order, and C is the complexity. This equation was
thought to crystallize Fechner’s notion of “unity in variety”
while providing a “logical tool in order to answer aesthetic

1629

questions by purely mathematical (logical) reasoning” (p.
46). Birkhoff asked, and sought to answer, questions such
as, “Which is the most beautiful of all polygonal forms?”
Birkhoff’s approach was grounded in two key
assumptions. First, it is assumed that the formal properties
of the aesthetic object (e.g., symmetry, equilibrium, number
of components, etc.) can be isolated from its connotative
(i.e., referential or associative) properties. Second, he
believed that the same kinds of methods employed in
simplified domains (e.g., geometric forms) could be applied
to other, more complex domains such as visual art, poetry,
and music. The difference between the two was thought to
be merely one of degree, not of kind.

Optimal Complexity, Pleasure, and Arousal
Birkhoff’s conception of aesthetic measure influenced
subsequent efforts by psychologists (e.g., Eysenck 1942)
and information theorists (e.g., Moles 1966). The latter
would recast Birkhoff’s order and complexity as
redundancy and entropy, respectively. The informational
and psychological approaches were brought together by
Berlyne (1971). Berlyne conceptualized the link between
the two in terms of the Wundt curve (Fig. 1). The idea was
that people prefer stimuli of moderate—but not excessive—
novelty and complexity. The greater the stimulus
complexity, the greater the arousal potential, which in turn
correlated with a more pleasurable aesthetic experience, so
long as the subject was not overwhelmed by the stimulus.
Berlyne acknowledged that “what constituted novelty and
complexity would vary from person to person” (Margulis &
Beatty, 2008, p. 66), but maintained “that his adapted
Wundt curve could apply to both of them; it would simply
shift along the x-axis to reflect the experience level” of the
perceiver (ibid.).

would hope for in a genuinely enlightening account of
musical experience. In order to achieve the latter, it becomes
necessary to reincorporate just those factors—listener
background, experience, personality, mood, et cetera—that
must be subtracted out in order for the information-theoretic
approach to get off the ground. What I want to suggest is
that the factors influencing this “shift along the x-axis” are
where much of the interest lies. (I will return to this point
below.)

From Aesthetic Measure to Computational
Aesthetics
Computational aesthetics (Hoenig, 2005) is the most recent
offspring of Birkhoff’s aesthetic measure and its subsequent
reformulations in terms of information theory. Various
researchers have picked up on these threads, including
Koshelev, Kreinovich, and Yam (1998), who recast
aesthetic measure as a joint function of (a) the length of the
shortest program required to generate a given visual design
and (b) the running time of this program; and Machado and
Cardoso (1998), who recast it as0020the ratio between
image complexity and processing complexity.
More recently, Rigau, Feixas, and Sbert (2008) created
several reformulations of Birkhoff’s aesthetic measure—
most notably, as the ratio between algorithmic reduction of
uncertainty and initial information content, which
correspond, respectively, to order and complexity.
Essentially, this ratio measures “the degree of order created
from a given palette” (2008, p. 131), with the “palette”
construed as “the range of colors selected by the artist with a
given probability distribution” (p. 128). This and other
measures are applied to paintings by Mondrian, Pollock, and
van Gogh, resulting in is a series of rank-orderings that, not
surprisingly, show Mondrian’s works to possess a higher
degree of order than those of the other two painters.
These proposed metrics are intended to “help us …
quantify the aesthetic experience” (p. 124), but it is
questionable what we are to make of them. Are these
formulas being proposed as measures of aesthetic value (in
which case Mondrian trumps van Gogh and Pollock)?
Would these metrics be able to discern the difference
between a genuine Pollock and an imitation, or between a
Mondrian painting and some generic arrangement of
primary-colored geometric forms? Do the authors
themselves draw a distinction between artistic value and
mere pleasantness? It is not quite clear what lessons we are
to take from this work.

Meaning, Information, and Entropy in Music
Figure 1: The Wundt curve. From Margulis and Beatty
(2008); adapted from Berlyne (1971).
Surely, there is some truth to this sort of “Goldilocks
theory” of complexity and optimal arousal. However, there
is also a clear tradeoff between (1) the level of generality
sought in such a theory and (2) the degree of fidelity one

The quest to formalize aesthetic value in the visual arts has
parallels in the attempt to quantify meaning in music. The
work of Leonard Meyer (1957) is a touchstone here. Meyer
linked musical meaning to expectation, uncertainty,
probability, observing that “the rules of musical grammar
and syntax found in textbooks on harmony, counterpoint,
and theory in general” are “almost invariably stated in terms
of probability” (p. 414). Conceived of in this light, the

1630

“meaning” of a musical event—a note, a chord, or a
phrase—is inversely proportional to its probability: low
probability events (such as the sounding of a D♭ in the key
of C) are more surprising and thus more meaningful. Meyer
summarized, “Both meaning and information are thus
related through probability to uncertainty” (p. 416). The
greater the probability, the lower the information, or
entropy.
By operationalizing musical meaning in terms of
information theory, Meyer lent the former a newfound
precision. However, the tradeoff is that this precise
characterization does not intuitively capture what we
typically mean when we talk about “meaning,” whether in
music or in more general terms. “So much for intuitions,”
one might reply—except that Shannon and Weaver
themselves warned against conflating information (in the
information-theoretic sense of the term) with meaning. For
example, Weaver (1949) stressed that “the rather strange
way in which, in this theory, the word ‘information’ is used
… must not be confused at all with meaning” (p. 12). He
added, “It is surprising but true that, from the present
viewpoint, two messages, one heavily loaded with meaning
and the other pure nonsense, can be equivalent as regards
information” (ibid.).
Similar objections were raised by Vermazen (1971) and
Sherburne (1966) in direct response to Meyer. One
objection, later referred to as the “Information Theory
Paradox” (cf. Titchener & Broyles, 1973), holds that if
meaning were tied to uncertainty, then repeated listening to
the same piece would yield less and less “meaning” each
time—which surely runs counter to experience. The second
objection is that the most meaningful music would be that in
which all of the musical events within the piece were
equally likely to occur at any moment.

Cultural Noise and Distance
Meyer anticipated some of the aforementioned objections in
his 1957 paper. In order to circumvent them, he appealed to
the related notions of cultural distance and cultural noise.
Writing during the heyday of serialism, Meyer
acknowledged the general public’s disdain for modern
classical music: “Here ‘noise’ is the result of a time-lag
between the habit responses which the audience actually
possesses and those which the more adventurous composer
envisages for it” (p. 420). He added that “in their zeal to
‘pack’ music full of meaning some contemporary composers
have perhaps so over-loaded the channel capacity of the
audience that one meaning obscures another in the ensuing
overflow” (p. 420). Thus, too much meaning (in the
information-theoretic sense) can essentially render a work
meaningless (in the pre-theoretic sense), at least to lay
audiences.
Cultural noise and distance are also invoked to explain
why audiences struggle to make sense of music from
unfamiliar cultures. In a nutshell, “[T]he more distant a
culture is from our present set of habit responses, the greater
the amount of cultural noise involved in communication” (p.

420). While there is truth to this statement, it overlooks that
(a) the listener always brings something to the table, even if
it is simply a lack of familiarity with the musical style in
question; and (b) there is always some degree of distance
between listener and work. Meyer’s way of factoring out
this distance was to take for granted the notion of an “Ideal
Auditor”—that is, someone who “knows the style of the
piece and the styles of the period and thus has an
experiential basis for the expectations which Meyer’s theory
requires” (Titchener & Broyles 1973, p. 17). But how do we
come to know the style of a piece or the style of a period?
As with the confounding factors that caused Berlyne’s
modified Wundt curve to shift along the x-axis, these factors
are worthy of exploration in their own right.

Meyer Rehabilitated? Huron’s Sweet Anticipation
The most thorough and ambitious attempt to bring Meyer’s
work up to date can be found in Huron (2006). Huron
maintains Meyer’s emphasis on listener expectations—and
the ways in which they are “exploited” by composers—as
the key to a systematic understanding of how music works
on the mind/brain. One could debate the “composer as
manipulator” characterization that emerges throughout this
work, along with the idea that the chief aim of music is to
evoke specific emotions in listeners. However, I will instead
look briefly at Huron’s effort to incorporate cultural context
into an account that is otherwise rooted in evolutionary
psychology, statistical learning, and information theory.
A specific example comes from a study that compared
Balinese and American musicians’ predictions of successive
notes in a melodic line. The melody was composed in a 10tone Balinese scale but was unfamiliar to participants in
each group. Huron and his associates found that while the
Americans performed better than chance, they were
outpaced by their Balinese counterparts in terms of both
predictive accuracy and confidence (as opposed to
uncertainty) in their guesses.
Thus, in contrast to Meyer, Huron does try to account for
“cultural noise,” or at least one aspect of it. However, we
should keep in mind that cultural background plays a more
significant role in musical understanding and experience
than merely imparting a set of statistical expectations for
melodic or harmonic development. For example, what does
it really mean to be an “American musician” (or “American
listener”)? Of course, there are certain melodic, harmonic,
and rhythmic norms that most American (and, more
generally, Western) listeners are accustomed to. However,
underneath the broad umbrella of “Western music,” there is
a vast array of musical subcultures—pop, jazz, punk,
classical, rap, electronic, noise, drone, Tin Pan Alley—most
of which can be further subdivided into sub-subcultures.
Each subculture (or subgenre) has its own norms, its own
aesthetic values. To know a genre (or subgenre, or artist)
extends far beyond possessing a matrix of transition
probabilities of the sort used to model melodic expectation.
Another way to put it is this: Huron’s emphasis on
generalities—transition probability matrices, statistical

1631

learning tendencies, and our (mostly) shared evolutionary
heritage as human beings—lends itself to a study of what is
universal about music cognition (or at least “universal”
within a particular culture). This is fine as far as it goes, but
this sort of account is not going to supplant the kind of
understanding that comes from engaging with particular
works and understanding them in particular contexts—
whether that’s the context of a genre, a historical period, an
individual artist’s work, or whatever else. There is value in
the sort of research documented in Huron’s book. It’s just
that the gains made in understanding the psychology of
expectation through the study of music are likely to far
exceed the gains made in understanding music via the
psychology of expectation.

Sketching an Alternative Approach
In this section, I highlight some important points and
arguments from philosophers of art and aesthetics, with the
goal of suggesting alternative ways for cognitive science to
engage with aesthetics and the art.

Aesthetic sensibility and personal development
Despite David Hume’s (1757) ingenious arguments to the
contrary, the notion of a fixed “standard of taste” is
unrealistic. This is true whether we seek this standard in the
form of a group of ideal critics or judges, as Hume
suggested, or whether we follow the Birkhoffs of the world
in searching for quantifiable measures of aesthetic value.
Regardless, the lack of a fixed or objective standard doesn’t
stop us from seeking to improve our taste and encounter
more rewarding aesthetic experiences. The development of
taste and aesthetic sensibility is an ongoing process. But
how do we know where to look for these more rewarding
experiences as we undertake this process of developing our
taste? Herwitz (2008) offers some useful suggestions,
arguing that “taste is a circular and constructivist enterprise.
We are led by others because they elevate our taste to their
level, and this because we already have taste” (p. 52). Even
so, we are left to ask how we are able to gain an initial
foothold in this process.
One
suggestion
comes
from
neuroaesthetics
(Ramachandran & Hirstein, 1999), which seeks to uncover
the evolutionarily hardwired tendencies that shape our
preferences. Certainly, our preferences and tastes are
constrained by our biological makeup, but they are not
rigidly determined by them. What we know about an
artwork or other aesthetic object affects our appreciation of
it. This seems like a truism, but it poses problems for
nativist accounts of aesthetic preference.
A vivid example comes from Saito (2010), in which the
author discusses the example of a lavishly kept green lawn
in Arizona. Superficially, the lawn might be visually
appealing—the kind of lawn that would make any suburban
homeowner jealous. Yet once we come to understand what
goes into maintaining such a lawn in the middle of the
desert—in particular, the burden it places on the local
environment—it is likely to lose some of its appeal. It might

even be perceived as garish or tacky, in much the same way
that a previously admired painting loses its luster when it
turns out to be a forgery. In other words, we do not just
respond automatically and passively to aesthetic stimuli.
Furthermore, our differential responses to artworks and
other aesthetic objects cannot be simply a matter of
differences in processing fluency (think back to Berlyne’s
modified Wundt curve). How can we better understand the
effects of such background knowledge on our aesthetic
responses? This is another underexplored question for
cognitive science to consider.

Getting Outside the Frame
It is a given that scientific research must make certain
simplifying assumptions in order to get off the ground. This
is especially true when the subject matter is as complex as
human aesthetic and artistic experience. That said, many of
the assumptions taken for granted by Birkhoff, Berlyne, and
their followers have been (indirectly) called into question by
the work of philosophers of art, on issues ranging from
originality and forgery (Dutton, 1979) to the very distinction
between works of art and “mere real things” (Danto, 1992).
A unifying thread among these arguments is that neither
artistic value nor even an object’s status as an artwork can
be predicated on mere appearances—that is, by an exclusive
concern with what lies “inside the frame.” Here we find a
basic difference between works of art and psychological
stimuli such as Birkhoff’s geometric forms. The latter are
designed to be context-invariant, perceived and experienced
in isolation; the former are not and, in fact, cannot be if they
are to be genuinely understood and appreciated. As
philosopher Garry Hagberg (2011) recently put it, “Art that
we see or hear or read is to a large part constituted by
relational interconnections.” These connections involve not
just other works of art, but the art world itself (Danto,
1992), as well as the broader culture in which art works (and
worlds) exist.
Take the case of Mondrian, who has long been a favorite
of aesthetic formalists, since his work might initially appear
to consist of nothing but pure form. Even here, though, there
is more to the story. Kieran (2005) describes a visit to a
Mondrian exhibit in which the artist’s work was presented
in chronological order, allowing for an understanding of the
way his style and approach evolved over the years, become
increasingly abstract but always “trying to get at the
underlying structure of the naturalistic world of
appearances” (p. 38). Kieran adds that “unless one is
concerned with what Mondrian was striving to capture and
express in his artistic development, one will fail to
understand and properly appreciate his art” (p. 40). Danto
(1992), in his discussion of the work of avant-garde sculptor
Eva Hesse, makes a similar point about the role of arthistorical (or “art world”) context in criticism.

Expertise and the “Feeling for the Rules”
In addition to knowledge about artworks, aesthetic
appreciation also draws on less explicit, more tacit forms of

1632

knowledge. This tacit knowledge can be likened to the kind
of know-how that Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1988) emphasize in
their five-stage model of skill acquisition, the last stage of
which is expertise. It makes sense to think of the
development of aesthetic sensibility within a given field or
genre as tracing a similar arc of development.
In discussing Huron’s research on melodic expectation, I
suggested that there is more to learning a style of music
than, say, internalizing a frequency distribution matrix. But I
also raised the question of how we come to know a novel
genre or style of music in the first place. Yes, listening is
important, but trying to grasp a foreign style of music can be
as bewildering as trying to learn a new language without so
much as a dictionary. Wittgenstein (1967) offers some
illuminating, if occasionally cryptic, hints on this process.
As he argues, coming to know a style amounts to
developing a “feeling for the rules”—rules that are largely
social and cultural in character. This feeling for the rules,
when fully “internalized,” constitutes a kind of expertise.
Novitz (2004) helpfully elaborates on Wittgenstein’s terse
remarks that “to have a ‘feeling for the rules’ that are
embodied or instantiated in a work or a category of art is to
understand the role that they play within the ‘culture of a
period.’ It is to understand their cultural or their social
significance” (p. 61). Developing this feeling for the rules
goes hand in hand with overcoming the barriers Meyer
spoke of in his discussion of cultural noise and cultural
distance.
But why should we bother trying to overcome such
barriers? One kind of argument suggests that we should try
because doing so is intrinsically valuable. As Cooper (2010)
puts it, “[A]ppreciation of new beauty is educative, for it
requires initiation into traditions, practices and cultural
contexts that allow for beauty of a certain kind to become
visible” (pp. 63–64). He adds, “[T]his appreciation is an
achievement or acquirement that, typically, calls for effort,
imagination, and intelligence. Finally, the appreciation is,
typically, edifying or improving” (p. 64). In other words,
aesthetic appreciation—especially when it comes to “new
beauty”—is not an automatic, facile accomplishment, but is
often the product of much cognitive “work.”
If, as Cooper suggests, this sort of achievement is
intrinsically valuable, it seems that it is worth trying to
understanding it better. What kinds of imagination and
intelligence are involved? Why are some people more open
to pursuing such experiences than others? What kinds of
barriers—social, cultural, biological, or otherwise—prevent
those others from pursuing the kind of “initiation” Cooper
describes? At this point, there are more questions than
answers, but I believe they are worthwhile questions for us
to ask, even if doing so is bound to raise further difficult
questions about the scope and methods of cognitive science.

Conclusion
The drive to bring aesthetics and the arts under the umbrella
of cognitive science is understandable. They are important
aspects of our (mental) lives, so to simply ignore them

would be to limit the scope of the field to a perhaps
depressing extent. On the other hand, it is still unclear how
best to go about studying them. However, as I have
emphasized in this paper, there are limits to what can be
understood via many of the tried-and-true methods of the
past. Artworks differ from garden-variety psychological
stimuli in important ways, such that many of the
“complicating,” noise-like factors—social, cultural, and
otherwise—that have traditionally been removed from the
equation are actually quite important, and possibly even
essential to accurately understanding the phenomena in
question.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to the Center for Research on Concepts and
Cognition for funding and support. Additional thanks to
Hamid Ekbia, Michel Chaouli, Matthew Kieran, Anna
Ichino, and Peter Lamarque for helpful comments on related
work.

References
Arnheim, R. (1985). The other Gustav Theodor Fechner. In
S. Koch & D. Leary (Eds.), A Century of Psychology as
Science. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Arnheim, R. (1991). But is it science? In To the Rescue of
Art. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.
Berlyne, D. (1971). Aesthetics and Psychobiology. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Birkhoff, G. (1933). Aesthetic Measure. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Univ. Press.
Cooper, D. (2010). Edification and the experience of beauty.
In W. Keping, (Ed.), Diversity and Universality in
Aesthetics: International Yearbook of Aesthetics, Vol. 14.
Beijing.
Danto, A. (1992). Beyond the Brillo Box. Berkeley: Univ. of
California Press.
Dickie, G. (1962). Is psychology relevant to aesthetics?
Philosophical Review, 71(3), 285–302.
Dreyfus, H. L, & Dreyfus, S. E. (1988). Mind over Machine.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Dutton, D. (1979). Artistic crimes. British Journal of
Aesthetics, 19, 302–341.
Gardner, H. (1987). The Mind's New Science. New York:
Basic Books.
Hagberg, G. (2011). Wittgenstein, music, cultural context.
London Aesthetics Forum (public lecture). Accessed from
http://www.londonaestheticsforum.org/?p=1000
Herwitz, D. (2008). Aesthetics. London: Continuum.
Hoenig, F. (2005). Defining computational aesthetics.
Computational Aesthetics 2005: Eurographics Workshop
on Computational Aesthetics in Graphics, Visualization,
and Imaging. Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland: Eurographics.
Hume, D. (1757). Of the standard of taste. In Selected
Essays (1993). Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Huron, D. (2006). Sweet Anticipation. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Kieran, M. (2005). Revealing Art. London: Routledge.

1633

Kintsch, W. (2012). Musings about beauty. Cognitive
Science, 36(4), 635–654.
Koshelev, M., Kreinovich, V., & Yam, Y. (1998). Towards
the use of aesthetics in decision making: Kolmogorov
complexity formalizes Birkhoff’s idea. Bulletin of the
European Association for Theoretical Computer Science.
Leder, H., Belke, B., Oeberst, A., & Augustin, D. (2004). A
model of aesthetic appreciation and aesthetic judgments.
British Journal of Psychology, 95, 489–508.
Machado, P., & Cardoso, A. (1998). Computing aesthetics.
Proceedings of XIVth Brazilian Symposium on Artificial
Intelligence. Springer-Verlag.
Margulis, E. H. & Beatty, A. P. (2008). Musical style,
psychoaesthetics, and prospects for entropy as an analytic
tool. Computer Music Journal, 32(4), 64–78.
Meyer, L. B. (1957). Meaning in music and information
theory. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 15(4),
412–424.
Moles, A. (1966). Information Theory and Esthetic
Perception. Urbana: Univ. of Illinois Press.
Morgan, D. N. (1950). Psychology and art: a summary and
critique. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 9(2),
81–96.
Novitz, D. (2004). Rules, creativity and pictures:
Wittgenstein's lectures on aesthetics. In P. Lewis, (Ed.),
Wittgenstein, aesthetics, and philosophy. Burlington,
Vermont: Ashgate.
Ramachandran, V.S., & Hirstein, W. (1999). The science of
art. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6, 15–51.
Rigau, J., Feixas, M., & Sbert, M. (2008). Informational
aesthetics measures. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 28(2), 24–34.
Saito, Y. (2010). Everyday Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford
Univ. Press.
Sherburne, D. W. (1966). Meaning and music. Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 24(4), 579–583.
Titchener, J. M. & Broyles, M. E. (1973). Meyer, meaning,
and music. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 32(1),
17–25.
Vermazen, B. (1971). Information theory and musical value.
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 29(3), 367–370.
Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematics of communication.
Scientific American, 181(1), 11–15.
Wittgenstein, L. (1967). Lectures and Conversations on
Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief. Oxford:
Blackwell.

1634

