UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communication Leads to the Emergence of Sub-optimal Category Structures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/48r0m7pt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Silvey, Catriona
Kirbey, Simon
Smith, Kenny

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Communication Leads to the Emergence of Sub-optimal Category Structures
Catriona Silvey (C.A.Silvey@sms.ed.ac.uk), Simon Kirby, Kenny Smith
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit, School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, Dugald Stewart Building,
3 Charles Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AD, UK
Abstract
Words divide the world into labeled categories. Languages
vary in the categories they label, sometimes to the point of
making cross-cutting divisions of the same space. Previous
work suggests two opposing hypotheses about how communication contributes to category emergence: 1) these spaces
lack an objective shared similarity structure, and communication dynamically creates one of a number of optimally shareable category structures; 2) the category structures resulting
from communication are not necessarily optimal, but diverge
from a shared similarity space in language-specific ways. We
had participants categorize images drawn from a continuous
space in two conditions: a) non-communicative, by similarity,
b) communicative, dynamically creating categories when playing a partnered communication game. The memory demands
of communication lead to reliance on salient images and early
conventions, resulting in non-optimal category structures compared to non-communicative participants. This supports the
hypothesis that communication leads to categories that diverge
non-optimally from a shared similarity space.
Keywords: communication; category structure; category
emergence; language evolution

Introduction
Words divide the world into labeled categories. Languages
vary in the categories they label, with some languages making coarser, finer, or even cross-cutting distinctions relative
to how other languages carve up the same space (Bowerman
& Choi, 2001; Malt, Sloman, & Gennari, 2003). Work is
ongoing to quantify and classify this variation (Majid, Jordan, & Dunn, in progress). The mechanism by which a set
of labeled categories emerges in a given language is however
unclear. One hypothesis is that at least for some domains
(e.g. spatial relations, containers), there is no one perceptually obvious way to divide the space into categories: there are
several potential ways an individual observer could draw category boundaries (Bowerman, 2000). Some researchers have
built on this idea to suggest that the process of communication
itself structures a previously unstructured space, making categories that are optimally shareable between communicators
(Freyd, 1983; Markman & Makin, 1998; Steels & Belpaeme,
2005; Voiklis & Corter, 2012). However, cross-linguistic
work by Barbara Malt and colleagues on similarity perception
versus labeling shows that, while the labeled categories of different languages do indeed diverge from each other, speakers
of different languages still perceive the similarities between
the objects in comparable ways (Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi,
& Wang, 1999). This suggests that the categorization systems of different languages can in fact superimpose a range
of divergent structures on a space that has a shared underlying similarity structure. These two accounts suggest radically
different roles for communication in the emergence of categories.

The current experiment contributes to this debate by investigating how humans categorize a set of images designed to have unclear category boundaries. The participants categorize the images in one of two conditions: a noncommunicative condition, where solo participants divide the
images into categories according to similarity, and a communicative condition, where pairs of participants play a communication game with the images. The results shed light on
the effect of communication on category structure, suggesting that the categories created by communication can and do
diverge from a relatively shared similarity space, even in a
stimulus set designed to have ambiguous boundaries.

Method
Participants were assigned to two conditions. In the noncommunicative condition, participants divided a continuous
space of images into labeled categories on the basis of similarity. In the communicative condition, pairs of participants
played a communication game using the same continuous
space of images. Participants in this condition produced labeled categories via the words they used to communicate each
target image in the last two rounds of the experiment. The category systems the participants produced in the two conditions
were then compared.

Stimuli
The set of images used in the experiment is shown in Figure
1. The four corner images were generated using PsychoPy
software (Peirce, 2007). For each image, a random number
generator assigned x and y positions for the five vertices, and
the resulting shape was drawn. Morphs between these images were then generated by shifting the vertices towards each
of the corners, according to a weight defined by inverse Euclidean distance (Matthews, 2009), to create a total set of 25
images. The ‘objective’ Euclidean distance between the images in the space may of course not correspond to perceptual
similarity (see, e.g., Smith & Heise, 1992); however, in pilot experiments, participants showed variation in where they
drew the category boundaries, making these stimuli suitable
for the current study.

Labels
To control for any effects on participants’ categorizations
arising purely from the use of labels (Lupyan, Rakison, &
McClelland, 2007), words to label the categories were provided in both the non-communicative and communicative
conditions. Lists of 25 CVCV nonsense words were generated by combining consonants and vowels randomly selected

1312

Figure 1: The stimuli used in the study (lines thickened for
clarity).
from the whole alphabet (e.g., zipi, gisa, wada). Since we
expected that participants would use known crossmodal associations between attributes of words and attributes of the
images in assigning category labels (e.g. voiceless stops and
spikiness, Nielsen & Rendall, 2011), we assigned the same
wordlist to a yoked triple of two non-communicative participants and one communicative pair, so that in the analyses, any
peculiar effects of a particular wordlist would apply equally
across the conditions.

Participants
Participants were 42 students at the University of Edinburgh
(30 female, median age 23). 20 took part in the noncommunicative condition. The non-communicative experiment took 15 minutes. Participants were paid £2. 22 participants (randomly assigned into 11 pairs) took part in the communicative condition. The communicative experiment took
an hour. Participants were paid £7, and each member of the
pair with the highest communication score was awarded a £10
Amazon voucher. One pair failed to complete the experiment
within an hour and so was excluded from analyses.

Communicative Condition Participants communicated
via computer terminals in separate cubicles. In a communication trial, one participant was assigned as the sender and one
as the receiver. The sender was presented with a randomized
onscreen array of all 25 images, one of which was selected
with a red box to indicate it was the target. The sender was
also presented with one initial word. The sender could reveal
a new word at any stage, up to 25 words. Any words they had
revealed on a previous trial remained visible on their screen
for all subsequent trials. The participant was instructed to
choose a word that would help the receiver pick out the target
from the array of images.
Once the sender had picked a word, the receiver was presented with a randomized onscreen array of all 25 images and
the word the sender had chosen. The receiver was instructed
to select the image the sender had wanted to communicate.
Once the receiver selected an image, both participants
were presented with a feedback screen. The feedback screen
showed the word the sender had used, the target image, the
image the receiver had selected, the score for the trial, and the
running score for the whole experiment. The score for each
trial was calculated on the basis of the inverse Euclidean distance between the target and the image the receiver selected,
from a minimum of 1 up to a maximum of 15 (for correctly
picking the target).
After each communication trial the sender and the receiver
swapped roles. The experiment consisted of 100 communication trials divided into 4 rounds. Each round featured the
25 images as targets in a randomized order. The randomized
lists were balanced such that each participant was the sender
for every target image once in the first half of the experiment,
and once in the second half.
The first two rounds of the experiment were not incorporated into the categorization analysis, as it was expected that
at this stage a system would still be emerging. Participants’
categories were therefore taken from the last two rounds of
the experiment. Success scores were taken from the whole
experiment.

Dependent Variables
Number of Categories The number of categories each participant produced was recorded.

Procedure
Non-Communicative Condition Participants were presented with a randomized onscreen array of all 25 images and
a set of words to label categories. To avoid cueing the participants to produce a particular number of categories, only one
word was initially shown on screen: participants could reveal new words at any time, and were told that a) they could
use as few or as many words as they wanted, and b) they did
not have to use all the words they had revealed. Participants
could reveal a new word at any stage, up to 25 words. They
were instructed to label similar images with the same word
and different images with different words.

Variation in Category Size To achieve a measure of variation in category size that took the number of categories into
account (since more categories would generally contain fewer
images each), the number of images in each category was divided by the expected number of images in each category, if
images were distributed equally. For example, if a participant
had 5 categories, an equal distribution would be to place 5
images in each category: if one of their categories in fact had
10 images, this would produce a value for that category of
10/5 = 2. The range of these values was then taken as a measure of variation in category size adjusted for the number of
categories (with a minimum value of 0 in the case of perfectly
balanced categories).

1313

Category Alignment Two measures were taken to compare participants’ categories and quantify their alignment.
The first, the Rand index (Rand, 1971), consists of a pairwise comparison of whether participants tended to place images in the same category or different categories. The calculation produces a value bounded from 0 to 1, where 1 is
perfect alignment. The second, V-Measure (Rosenberg &
Hirschberg, 2007), is based on variation of information between the groupings, normalized to compensate for differences in number of categories. This measure also ranges from
0 to 1 where 1 is perfect alignment. Two further measures,
the Variation of Information measure on which V-Measure is
based (Meilă, 2003) and an adjusted version of Cramer’s phi
(Wills & Mclaren, 1998) were considered, but were found to
produce incongruent results when applied to groupings with
divergent numbers of categories. Since the variable of interest
was participants’ categories rather than the words they used,
the alignment measures were taken irrespective of whether
participants used the same words: i.e., if two participants put
the same set of images in a labeled category but used different
labels, they would count as fully aligned for this category.

Hypotheses
For the non-communicative participants, there is no particular
incentive to divide the images into more or fewer categories
(beyond the minimal assumption that, in being asked to sort
the images, the participants are unlikely to place them all in
one category). This condition therefore functions as a baseline for assessing the variability of the participants’ categorization of the images without communication. The expectation is that with no strong motivation to behave in any particular way, participants’ categorization performance will vary.
For the communicative participants, the pressures on their
emergent categorization systems are more complex. The only
way to attain a perfect communication score with this stimulus space and scoring system is to have a unique label for
each image, i.e. 25 words in total, with 25 corresponding categories containing one image each. However, participants’
memory constraints will likely prevent this from happening
in the experiment. More generally, then, for a given number of words, the optimal strategy is to apply each word to
an equal number of images in the space, in a contiguous region (Gärdenfors, 2000). Participants who converge on a system like this would maximize their possible score across all
rounds of communication. Figure 2A shows an example of
this kind of optimal system. When the sender uses a word
corresponding to one of the categories, the receiver can adopt
the strategy of picking a central member of the category, thus
ensuring their response is a maximum of 1.4 Euclidean distance units (or one diagonal step) from the target. Figure 2B
shows, by contrast, a non-optimal system with the same number of categories. This system is non-optimal for two reasons.
1) The number of images in each category is less balanced
(one category contains only two images, while another contains ten). This means that when the sender uses the word for
the bigger category, the probability of the receiver selecting

Figure 2: A) An example of a category system optimally
structured for communicative success. B) A non-optimal system with the same number of categories.
an image close to the target is lower. 2) The images belonging to some categories are spread across different regions of
the space and do not form contiguous regions. This raises
the probability of a receiver selecting an image some distance
away from the target, even if she shares this set of categories
with the sender. It is worth noting that the spaces we categorize in the real world may not have this kind of smooth
continuous structure, and so the regular contiguous regions of
Figure 2A may be more difficult to achieve. However, in the
context of this experiment, if communication does give rise
to optimally structured categories, this is the kind of system
we would expect to see emerging.

Results
A linear trend ANOVA found that communicative success increased over the 4 rounds of the experiment, F(1, 9) = 18.66,
p = .002 (Figure 3). Participants’ overall success was significantly above chance, t(9) = 4.21, p = .002.
Participants in the communicative condition used significantly more labeled categories (M = 9.95, SD = 3.98) than
participants in the non-communicative condition (M = 6,
SD = 1.37), Mann-Whitney U = 60, z = −3.54, p < .001.
Communicative participants also showed significantly more
variance in how many labeled categories they used, Levene’s
test (1,36) = 16.47, p < .001. Pairs who communicated together, however, showed no significant difference in the number of categories they used, t(18) = −0.38, p = .7, showing
that this effect came from differences between, rather than
within, communicative pairs. Thus, even though the noncommunicative participants had less motivation to converge
on a particular number of labeled categories, they were more
consistent in the number they produced than the communicative participants.
Participants in the communicative condition also varied
significantly more in the size of their categories, when number of categories was taken into account (category size variation as described in Methods M = 1.54, SD = 0.35, compared
to non-communicative participants, M = 1.17, SD = 0.4).
That is, images were more unevenly distributed across categories in the communicative condition, t(38) = 3.13, p <
.005. Surprisingly for the communication-as-alignment hypothesis, communicative pairs’ groupings did not align sig-

1314

Mean communicative success

320

300
●
●

280

●

Figure 4: A) A typical non-communicative participant’s categories. B) A typical communicative participant’s categories.

260
●

1

2

3

4

Round

Figure 3: Average communicative success over rounds in the
experiment. Dotted line shows chance. Error bars show 95%
confidence intervals.
nificantly more than non-communicative participants’ (bylanguage analysis: paired-samples t-test 0.47 < t(9) < 0.63,
p > .5, by-subjects analysis: independent t-test −0.42 <
t(18) < 0.63, p > .4). Neither did communicative success
correlate significantly with either of the alignment measures,
r < .51, p > .14.
To test the hypothesis that communicative participants
within a pair were more aligned than communicative participants who were not paired with each other, an analysis
was run comparing the alignment scores for the true pairs
with alignment scores for shuffled pairs (participant 2 paired
with participant 3, etc.). A similar analysis was run for
the non-communicative pairs, comparing alignment of those
who shared the same wordlist with those who had different
wordlists. Non-communicative participants displayed equivalent levels of alignment whether or not they used the same
wordlist, t(9) < 0.8, p > .58. For communicative participants, one of the alignment measures (Rand index) tended
towards being significantly higher for participants who communicated in a pair than participants who did not, t(9) = 1.88,
p = .093, suggesting that communicative participants were
marginally more aligned within-pair than between-pair in
terms of which pairs of images they categorized together. For
the second alignment measure, V-Measure, no significant difference was found, t(9) = 1.22, p > .25.

Discussion
The results are somewhat surprising for the hypothesis that
communication creates optimal structure in previously variably structured spaces. Communicative participants produced
categorizations that were generally non-optimal for maximizing communicative success, as defined in Hypotheses
above. This is not merely a property of how humans perceive this particular space, as shown by the contrast with the
non-communicative condition, where participants’ categories

were generally more balanced in size, carving up the space in
a way that would actually be more optimal by this definition.
Figure 4 shows a typical example of A) a non-communicative
participant’s categories and B) a communicative participant’s
categories. It is notable that several categories in B are also
non-optimal in that they cover non-contiguous regions of the
space (e.g. red and yellow categories). The heatmaps in Figures 5 and 6 show more generally how communicative participants’ categories were more dispersed (Figure 6) compared
to non-communicative participants, who tend to clump more
around certain pairings or groups to form their categories
(darker regions in Figure 5).
Why did communicative participants divide up the space so
differently from non-communicative participants? As mentioned in Hypotheses above, the communicative task exerts a
considerable memory demand on participants: although they
are presented with the full image space on each trial, they
still have to remember which word applies to which image
or group of images over the course of the experiment. This
exerts a pressure to create a system that is optimized not just
for communicative success, but also for learnability.
Aids to learnability in this experiment might include particularly salient words, images, and pairings between them,
or felicitous early successes that lead to the forming of conventions. These conventions, once established, may then
prove too valuable to shift in favor of more optimally structured categories. Both of these aids to learnability (salient
images/words and early successes) are mentioned by participants in the post-experiment questionnaire. Typically, when
asked to draw the images they remember, participants could
draw from memory two to five salient images and their associated words, but were unclear on other regions of the space.
Thus the memory demands of the task, and the fact that participants have to establish a system from scratch, make the
salience of individual images and early established conventions important factors determining the shape of each participant’s final categorization system.
The possibility that different images in the set had differing
salience is also supported by the success heatmaps in Figure
7. The heatmap in Figure 7A shows which target images led
to higher success scores for participants. The pattern here
is at odds with Figure 7B, which shows the relative expected

1315

Figure 5: Heatmap visualizing how often non-communicative
participants placed pairs of images in the same category.
Darker areas indicate pairs more often categorized together.

Figure 6: Heatmap visualizing how often communicative participants placed pairs of images in the same category. Darker
areas indicate pairs more often categorized together.

chance levels of success for each image: images in the middle
have more low-ED neighbors, so the probability of a higher
score goes up when they are the target. The fact that panels A
and B differ shows that participants’ success with particular
images is boosted by some other factor.
Panel C shows a heatmap of this boost – darker images are
those whose overall communicative success rate is highest
compared to what the chance-based map in panel B would
predict. The likely explanation is that these images have
higher salience for participants, making them act as Schelling
points between sender and receiver. The striking finding
that communicative success is not correlated with overall
alignment could therefore be explained by participants
consolidating success on a few images, leaving other areas
of the space more sparsely covered.
While Figure 7 suggests that the salience of particular images may be shared across all pairs, early conventions are

more likely to vary between pairs due to the randomized presentation of targets. This could explain the tendency towards
higher pairwise (Rand index) alignment within pairs than between pairs, as reported in the Results. Despite the low levels
of alignment overall, communicative pairs’ language-specific
early conventions may bring them more into agreement on
how they categorize specific small groups of images.
As mentioned above, the pressures on the participants in
the two conditions were substantially different: participants
in the non-communicative condition interacted with the stimuli more briefly and without memory constraints, as well
as lacking the pressure to create more categories imposed
by the communicative task. Future work could investigate
how participants divide up the space non-communicatively
under the same time and memory constraints as the communicative participants, thus disentangling the effects of these
constraints from the effects of communication. The noncommunicative condition in this study still serves as a useful

Figure 7: Heatmaps showing which target images produced higher per-round success scores. Darker images produced higher
scores. A) Map of overall success per image in the experiment. B) Map of expected chance success rates per image. C)
Difference between maps A and B. Darker images are those whose success rates are boosted highest beyond expected.

1316

baseline, however, for participants’ perceptually based divisions of the space.
The outcome of this study – that communication does
not necessarily optimize category structures, but can create uneven and suboptimal structures compared to noncommunicators’ division of the same space – is reflected in
our experience of real language, where words vary widely in
whether they specify small regions of semantic space or broad
undifferentiated regions. The existence of the latter kind of
word does not necessarily mean the users of the language do
not perceive the differences between sub-parts of the region
it covers: only that, for reasons of salience, or constraints imposed by the history and development of conventions in the
language, these internal differences lack category labels. An
important additional pressure in real language, not modeled
in this study, is that different regions of semantic space may
also have different functional importance, motivating coarser
or finer-grained distinctions in different regions. However,
these results show that even in the absence of functional reasons for uneven division of a space, communication can lead
to the establishment of categories that may not align with noncommunicative similarity perception.

Conclusion
Communication is not a simple process of mapping words
onto pre-shared perceptual categories. Even if communicating partners agree on the underlying structure of the space
they are talking about, the categories that emerge from communication can diverge in surprising ways, both from the
underlying similarity space and from the category structure
that would be most optimal for communicative success. Constraints on learning, salience effects, and the impact of early
conventions on a language’s development all contribute to
shaping an emergent system of labeled categories.

Acknowledgments
CS is supported by an AHRC PhD studentship. Thanks to
Christos Christodoulopoulos for help with alignment measures and with networking for the communication experiment, and to Mark Atkinson and Andrea Ravignani for help
with piloting.

References
Bowerman, M. (2000). Where do children’s word meanings
come from? Rethinking the role of cognition in early semantic development. In L. Nucci, G. Saxe, & E. Turiel
(Eds.), Culture, thought and development (pp. 199–230).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bowerman, M., & Choi, S. (2001). Shaping meanings for
language: Universal and language-specific in the acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In M. Bowerman &
S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual development (pp. 475–511). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Freyd, J. (1983). Shareability: The social psychology of
epistemology. Cognitive Science, 7(3), 191–210.

Gärdenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual spaces: The geometry of
thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007).
Language is not just for talking: Redundant labels facilitate learning of novel categories. Psychological Science,
18(12), 1077–83.
Majid, A., Jordan, F., & Dunn, M. (in progress). Evolution
of semantic systems. http://www.mpi.nl/departments/otherresearch/research-consortia/eoss. (Online; accessed 22
April 2013)
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40(2), 230–262.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., & Gennari, S. P. (2003). Universality and language specificity in object naming. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49(1), 20–42.
Markman, A. B., & Makin, V. S. (1998). Referential communication and category acquisition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127(4), 331–54.
Matthews, C. (2009). The emergence of categorization: Language transmission in an iterated learning model using a
continuous meaning space. Unpublished master’s thesis,
University of Edinburgh.
Meilă, M. (2003). Comparing clusterings by the variation of information. In B. Schölkopf & M. K. Warmuth
(Eds.), Learning theory and kernel machines (pp. 173–
187). Berlin: Springer–Verlag.
Nielsen, A., & Rendall, D. (2011). The sound of round:
Evaluating the sound-symbolic role of consonants in the
classic Takete-Maluma phenomenon. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65(2), 115–24.
Peirce, J. W. (2007). PsychoPy–psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162(1), 8–13.
Rand, W. M. (1971). Objective criteria for the evaluation
of clustering methods. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 66(336), 846–850.
Rosenberg, A., & Hirschberg, J. (2007). V-measure: A conditional entropy-based external cluster evaluation measure.
In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL) (pp.
410–420).
Smith, L. B., & Heise, D. (1992). Perceptual similarity and
conceptual structure. In B. Burns (Ed.), Percepts, concepts
and categories (pp. 233–272). Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.
Steels, L., & Belpaeme, T. (2005). Coordinating perceptually
grounded categories through language: A case study for
colour. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 469–529.
Voiklis, J., & Corter, J. E. (2012). Conventional wisdom: Negotiating conventions of reference enhances category learning. Cognitive Science, 36(4), 607–634.
Wills, A. J., & Mclaren, I. P. L. (1998). Perceptual learning
and free classification. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51B(3), 235–270.

1317

