UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communicative Intentions in the Mind/Brain

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80n3v1d0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bara, Bruno
Charter, Nick
Tomasello, Michael
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Symposium
Communicative Intentions in the Mind/Brain
Bruno G. Bara (bruno.bara@unito.it)
Center for Cognitive Science
University of Turin, Italy

Nick Chater ( Nick.Chater@wbs.ac.uk)
Warwick Business School,
University of Warwick, UK

Michael Tomasello (tomasello@eva.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology
Leipzig, Germany

Rosemary Varley (rosemary.varley@ucl.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences
University College London
London, UK

Keywords: communication; evolutionary psychology;
neuropsychology; neuroscience.
The nature of intentions is a perpetual locus of
interest for investigators of the human mind. Both
occidental and oriental philosophical traditions treat
intentions as the root of behavior; and many possible
classifications have been offered in order to try to
systematize the different types of intention. Moreover,
recognition of intentions in others appears to be central
to child development, and necessary for becoming a
competent member of the society (Tomasello, 2008).
Recent work in the social neurosciences has focused,
in particular, on social intentions, which may underpin
the human predisposition toward joint, collaborative
behavior. Communicative intentions are particularly
central, yet have a puzzling recursive form (Bara,
2010). That is, given an actor’s intention to convey a
particular informational content, C, the actor must
choose an act A, so that the partner will infer the
actor’s intention to communicate C. Yet the partner’s
inference itself depends on reconstructing that the actor
would have chosen A, in order that the partner to infer
the actor’s intention to convey C (Grice, 1975).
The symposium on communicative intentions offers
an analysis from a wide range of perspectives on these
issues: evolution and development (Tomasello: Max
Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in
Leipzig, Germany), psychology and game theory
(Chater: Warwick Business School, United Kingdom),
neuropsychology (Varley: Division of Psychology and
Language Science, University College London, United
Kingdom), cognitive neuroscience (Bara: Center for
Cognitive Science, Turin, Italy).

Michael Tomasello: Communicating
without Conventions
The evolutionary and developmental approach will
provide a comparison between the gestural
communication of human children and their nearest
primate relatives, the great apes. This comparison
reveals some of the cognitive and social-cognitive
skills necessary for the human way of communicating
that are present developmentally, and were probably
present evolutionarily, before the emergence of
conventional linguistic communication.

Nick Chater: Virtual Bargaining as a
Micro-Foundation for Communication and
Joint Action
The psychological and game-theoretic approach
outlines how a new theory of strategic social
interaction, which extends the standard game theory of
economics, can provide a rational theory of joint
action; and how communication can be viewed as a
special case of joint action, where both actor and
partner must jointly infer the same content, C, given a
mutually observed communicative act, A.

65

language and gestures. Journal
Neuroscience, 23, 2415-2431.

Rosemary Varley: Communication
without a Functioning Language System

of

Cognitive

Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation: The
William James Lectures, II. In P. Cole, & J.L. Morgan
(Eds.), Sintax and semantics 3: Speech acts. New
York: Academic Press.

Insights from neuropsychology and in particular, the
relationship between language and communicative
intentions, will be explored by examining the impact of
severe aphasic language impairment on signaling
communicative intentions and decoding the intentions
of others. The evidence from acquired aphasia
indicates considerable autonomy between language and
communicative intentions in the established cognitive
system (Willems, Benn, Hagoort, Toni & Varley,
2011).

Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of
communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

human

Willems, RM., Benn, Y., Hagoort, P., Toni, I., &
Varley, RA. (2011). Communication without a
functioning language system. Neuropsychologia, 49,
3130-3135.

Bruno Bara: The Intentionality Neural
Network
The neuroscientific approach will describe a model
of a dynamic intentionality network consisting of four
brain regions, i.e. the right and left temporo-parietal
junctions, the precuneus, and the anterior paracingulate
cortex (Ciaramidaro et al., 2007). This model is based
on a novel theoretical distinction among varieties of
intention, which differ by the nature of an individual’s
pursued goal (private or social) and by the social
interaction’s temporal dimension (present or future).
The intentionality network, which is independent from
modality of expression, either linguistic or gestural
(Enrici, Adenzato, Cappa, Bara & Tettamanti, 2011),
shows different activation patterns in relation to the
nature of the intentions. The theoretical model of
intention proposed contributes to enlarge our
knowledge on the neurobiological bases of intention
processing, in both healthy people and in people with
impairments to the neurocognitive system that
underlies intention recognition (Bara, Ciaramidaro,
Walter & Adenzato, 2011).

The symposium is limited to 4 participants, in order to
allow 20 minutes of final discussion among the
participants and with the public.

References
Bara, B.G. (2010). Cognitive pragmatics: The mental
processes of communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Bara, B.G., Ciaramidaro, A., Walter, H., Adenzato, M.
(2011). Intentional minds: A philosophical analysis of
intention tested through fMRI experiments involving
people with schizophrenia, people with autism, and
healthy individuals. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
5:7, 1-11.
Ciaramidaro, A., Adenzato, M., Enrici, I., Erk, S., Pia,
L., Bara, B.G., Walter, H. (2007). The intentional
network: How the brain reads varieties of intentions.
Neuropsychologia, 45, 3105-3113.
Enrici, I., Adenzato, M., Cappa, S., Bara, B.G.,
Tettamanti, M. (2011). Intention processing in
communication: A common brain network for

66

