UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Models of Human Behavior in Wartime Negotiations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qj1m65n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Pynadath, David
Wang, Ning
Marsella, Stacy

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Models of Human Behavior in Wartime Negotiations
David V. Pynadath (pynadath@usc.edu), USC Institute for Creative Technologies
Ning Wang (ningwang@curiouslab.com), Curious Lab LLC
Stacy C. Marsella (marsella@ict.usc.edu), USC Institute for Creative Technologies
Abstract
Political scientists are increasingly turning to game-theoretic
models to understand and predict the behavior of national
leaders in wartime scenarios, where two sides have the options of seeking resolution at either the bargaining table or on
the battlefield. While the theoretical analyses of these models is suggestive of their ability to capture these scenarios,
it is not clear to what degree human behavior conforms to
such equilibrium-based expectations. We present the results
of a study that placed people within two of these game models, playing against an intelligent agent. We consider several
testable hypotheses drawn from the theoretical analyses and
evaluate the degree to which the observed human decisionmaking conforms to those hypotheses.
Keywords: Decision making; game theory; intelligent agents

Introduction
Political scientists are increasingly turning to computational
models to understand and predict nations’ wartime behavior (Fearon, 1995). Many such models combine both military and political processes, where battlefield decisions occur within the context of an overall negotiation over a contentious resource (Filson & Werner, 2002; Smith & Stam,
2004). Game-theoretic models of these processes seek to capture possible outcomes on the battlefield and at the bargaining
table (Powell, 2001, 2004; Slantchev, 2003). These models
hypothesize equilibrium strategies that correspond to the behaviors of nations in real-world scenarios.
While the theoretical analyses of such game-theoretic models is suggestive of their representational power, it remains
an open question as to how well they capture actual human
behavior in wartime negotiation. These models focus on
equilibrium behavior, where both sides optimize their outcomes in response to the others’ behaviors. The computational challenges of such optimization often require the equilibrium analyses to make simplifying assumptions (e.g., to
reduce uncertainty about the opponent). However, people are
not constrained to adopt these same assumptions when making their decisions, so it is possible that human behavior in
the face of this uncertainty may greatly deviate from the predictions generated by such theoretical models.
On the other hand, these computational models easily lend
themselves to an experimental setting, where we can pit a human player against an intelligent agent playing according to
the model of interest. In other words, we can place human
players within the game hypothesized by a model and have
them negotiate with an agent. We can then observe human
behavior and quantify the degree to which that behavior conforms to the expectations generated by the model.

This paper presents a human subject study where we implemented games corresponding to two wartime negotiation
models from the literature (Powell, 2004; Slantchev, 2003).
We present behavior hypotheses extracted from the theoretical analyses of these models. We analyze the observed human
behavior to see that it generally satisfies these hypotheses.
However, there are also interesting deviations from these theoretical expectations that suggest possible extensions to the
models to better capture human decision-making.

Wartime Negotiation Models
A number of formal models in the literature represent war as a
costly process embedded within a negotiation game. In these
models, two sides are in a dispute over a desirable resource,
such as territory claimed by both sides. The game begins with
some initial split of the territory. The game progresses round
by round, with each round consisting of one side proposing
a split of the territory, the other side responding to that proposal, and a possible battle. The game ends with a final split
achieved by either an agreement on the proposed split or a
decisive military victory by one side on the battlefield.
To facilitate a game-theoretic analysis, these models make
simplifying assumptions regarding military outcomes. In particular, the probabilities associated with the battlefield are
fixed, so that one side’s probability of winning does not
change during the course of the game, regardless of previous
military outcomes. The costs of a single battle are also fixed
throughout the course of the game. In our study, we present
these costs to the human players in terms of troops lost.
A critical property of these models is uncertainty about the
likelihood of battlefield outcomes. If both sides had complete information about their probability of winning battles,
they could do an exact cost-benefit analysis and immediately
agree upon an acceptable territorial split. The models we consider instead have incomplete information, where one side is
ignorant of the probability of battlefield outcomes. As the
war progresses, this side will gain information by observing
battle and bargaining outcomes, re-evaluate its prospects, and
make different decisions on offers and battles. This asymmetry lends itself to our human subject study, as we can give
the agent complete information about the game probabilities,
but hide that information from the human player. Our experiments will then allow us to study how people update their
beliefs based on the information that is revealed in the game.
We chose two models (Powell, 2004; Slantchev, 2003) for
this investigation, based on their impact on the field and their
appropriateness for a human-agent game interaction.

1175

Powell Model

War state: A single battle does not directly end the war, but
affects the military position variable. Collapse occurs only
if military position hits its maximum or minimum value.

The Powell model proceeds as follows (Powell, 2001, 2004):
1. Player 1 makes an offer of x% of the territory.

Counteroffers: Both sides alternate in making offers.

2. Player 2 decides to accept, reject, or go to war.
(a) If acceptance, Player 2 gets x% of the territory, Player 1 gets
(100 − x)%, and the game is over.
(b) If war, both sides incur the battle costs. Player 1 collapses with
probability p1 and Player 2 collapses with probability p2 .
i. If only Player 1 collapses, Player 2 gets all of the territory,
and the game is over.
ii. If only Player 2 collapses, Player 1 gets all of the territory,
and the game is over.
iii. Otherwise, return to Step 1.
(c) If rejection, Player 1 decides whether or not to go to war.
i. If war, a battle occurs exactly as in Step 2b.
ii. If not, return to Step 1.

The following properties distinguish this model from the
Slantchev model (described in the next subsection):
Battle: Attacking is a choice (if an offer is rejected).
War state: In each battle, there is a fixed probability that you
win (lose) the overall war and gain (lose) all of the territory.
Counteroffers: There are no offers made by Player 2.
Player 1, the offering side, does not know the probabilities
of collapse (p1 and p2 ), but Player 2 does know these probabilities. Thus, Player 1 is uncertain about the two sides’ relative military strength and, consequently, the feasible agreements. The equilibrium behavior can be described as screening, where Player 1 will make a series of increasingly attractive offers, expecting weaker opponents to accept early in the
process, thus screening them out before making the higher offers necessary to appease stronger opponents (Powell, 2004).

Slantchev Model
The Slantchev model includes an additional variable, military
position (in {0, 1, 2, . . . , N}), that represents the relative gains
made by the two sides in the war so far (Slantchev, 2003).
The game under this model proceeds as follows:
1. The initiating player makes an offer of x% of the territory.
2. The responding player decides to accept or reject the offer.
(a) If acceptance, the responding player gets x% of the territory,
the initiating player gets (100 − x)%, and the game is over.
(b) If rejection, continue to Step 3.
3. Battle occurs, and both sides incur the fixed costs. Player 1 wins
the battle with probability p, Player 2 with probability 1 − p.
(a) If Player 1 wins, military position increases by 1. If it reaches
N, then Player 1 receives all the territory and the game is over.
(b) If Player 2 wins, military position decreases by 1. If it reaches
0, then Player 2 receives all the territory and the game is over.
4. Return to Step 1 with initiating and responding players reversed.

This model deviates from Powell’s as follows:
Battle: There is a battle every round.

Like the Powell model, Player 1 does not know the battle
probability (p), but Player 2 does, so the equilibrium behavior again exhibits some screening. However, the Slantchev
model provides Player 1 with the additional information
source of Player 2’s counteroffers. Furthermore, the military
position provides another variable for the sides to consider, in
that their offering behavior will change depending on which
side is in a stronger position in the overall war.

PsychSim Agents
We implemented both the Powell and Slantchev games within
PsychSim, a multiagent framework for social simulation
(Marsella, Pynadath, & Read, 2004; Pynadath & Marsella,
2005). PsychSim agents have their own goals, private beliefs,
and mental models about other agents. They generate their
beliefs and behaviors by solving partially observable Markov
decision problems (POMDPs) (Kaelbling, Littman, & Cassandra, 1998), whose quantitative transition probabilities and
reward functions are a natural fit for the game-theoretic dynamics of our chosen models of wartime negotiation.
PsychSim agents have a theory of mind that allows them
to recursively model other agents (e.g., their beliefs, rewards,
etc.), form expectations about their behavior, and choose optimal actions as a best response. With sufficient computation,
the PsychSim agent’s optimal action corresponds to the equilibrium strategy. However, we can also limit the agent’s horizon when computing expected values and the depth of recursion in modeling others. By doing so, the agent can quickly
compute approximate best-response actions even when a human opponent deviates from the equilibrium.
The behavior of the PsychSim agents in both the Powell and Slantchev models roughly corresponds to the informed side’s equilibrium strategy. For example, when starting with less territory in the Powell model, the PsychSim
agent chooses war until its opponent makes an offer that exceeds its threshold of acceptability, computed as a function
of the probability of military collapse. Under the Slantchev
model, the agent also rejects any offer below a threshold, but
that threshold changes based on the current military position.
In particular, if the military position favors the agent’s side,
the threshold is higher than it would be otherwise. The counteroffers made by the agent are similarly lower when the military position is in its favor than they would be otherwise.
While both Powell and Slantchev focused on the case
where the uninformed side also started as the satisfied side,
we can also model the case where the uninformed side starts
as the dissatisfied side. We change the initial distribution of
territory from having the human player start with 72% of the
territory as the satisfied side, to having the human player start
with only 28%. The PsychSim agent computes its policy of

1176

behavior using the same algorithm in both cases, although
the resulting strategy is slightly different. Under Powell, the
agent playing the satisfied side (with 72% of the territory)
will no longer attack when receiving an unacceptable offer.
Instead, it will simply reject the offer, hoping to avoid a battle that will risk collapse and loss of all its territory. Under
Slantchev, the agent’s thresholds as the satisfied side will be
universally higher than those as the dissatisfied side.

settlements instead. The possibility of collapse in a single
battle under the Powell model should make total victory much
more common. We would thus expect that negotiated settlements (as opposed to total victories) to be less common under
the Powell model than under Slantchev.
War avoidance Both models provide incentives for sides to
sacrifice territory to avoid a costly battle. We would expect
players who expressed a more positive attitude toward war
(ATW) to exhibit more of a willingness to engage in war and
give up less territory in the final settlement.

Wartime Negotiation Study
We used these agents in a study of how people make decisions in wartime negotiation games. The subjects played each
model twice: once as the satisfied side (starting with 72% of
the territory) and once as the dissatisfied side (starting with
28%), leading to four experimental conditions: Powell72,
Powell28, Slantchev72, and Slantchev28. For each condition,
the subject played as Player 1 against a PsychSim agent until
the two sides agreed on a split or one side achieved a military victory. If neither occurred within 15 rounds, the game
terminated with the sides staying at the initial division of territory. In the two Powell conditions, both sides have the same
probability of collapse (p1 = p2 = 0.1). In the two Slantchev
conditions, we use the same probability of winning for Player
1 (p = 0.3) and the same initial military position, with Player
1 slightly closer to losing the war (3 on a range from 0 to 10).

Hypotheses
The Powell and Slantchev models yield hypotheses about behavior that we might see in our human subject data:
Screening Behavior The uninformed side tries to find the
minimal offer that is acceptable to its opponent. It does so by
progressively increasing its offer until its opponent accepts,
gradually screening out weaker opponents who are willing
to accept lower offers. We expect to see players make these
increasing offers under both Powell and Slantchev models.
Principle of Convergence Warfare ceases to be useful
when there is no information to gain, at which point the sides
can both agree on a settlement. Given the static battle probability and the lack of signaling moves in the Powell model, the
potential information gain should be exhausted sooner than in
the Slantchev model. As a result, we would expect settlement
to be reached sooner under the Powell model, where the only
information gain is through rejected offers.

Military Asymmetry If the uninformed side is also at a
military disadvantage (as is the case for our human players),
then we expect it to overestimate its probability of winning
the war, thus making lower offers than it would make in the
complete-information case. Therefore, we would expect to
see lower offers when the players receive less information
about their relative military strength (i.e., under Powell) than
when they receive more (i.e., under Slantchev).
Battle outcomes A battle in the Slantchev model will make
the victor more optimistic and more willing to delay agreement. We would thus expect players to make lower offers
after winning a battle than they would after losing a battle.
Starting Territory Our four experimental conditions could
engender different reference points (Neale & Bazerman,
1991) when people play as the satisfied or dissatisfied sides
(starting with 72% or 28% of the territory, respectively). We
hypothesize that satisfied sides will make fewer concessions,
as the endowment effect makes players less willing to give
up territory already owned (Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler,
1991). Thus, we expect a player to offer less when starting with more territory than when starting with less territory.
Similarly, we expect the dissatisfied side will end up with less
territory, because any territory gain, however small, would be
more likely considered as satisfactory. Furthermore, because
the satisfied side has more to lose through a military outcome,
we expect that the difference between initial and final territorial splits will be more favorable for the dissatisfied sides.

Study Population

Information Asymmetry Because of the screening behavior, Slantchev claimed, “as war progresses, the outcome becomes less advantageous for the worse informed party.” We
thus expect settlements that take more rounds to be less favorable to the human players. Furthermore, we expect this
trend to be more pronounced under Powell, where the players
receive less information than they do under Slantchev.
Total victory Total military victory (i.e., one side winning
all of the territory on the battlefield) is rare, as war typically
reveals information quickly enough for both sides to reach

We recruited 240 participants, of an average age of 35, via
Amazon Mechanical Turk. 51% of the participants were female, and 49% were male. 65% of the participants were from
the United States, 29% from India, and 6% from other countries. Regarding the participants’ highest level of education,
12% of the participants had some high school or high school
diploma, 63% had some college or college degree, and 25%
had some graduate school or graduate degree. 13% of the
participants used a computer for 1-4 hours a day, 43% for 5-8
hours a day, and 44% for more than 8 hours a day.

Procedure
After being assigned an anonymous ID, each participant read
an information sheet about the study and then filled out a
background survey. Next, the participant played the negotia-

1177

tion game four times, each time against a different agent from
one of the conditions. The order of the four agents the player
negotiated with was randomized. During the negotiation, the
participant filled out an in-game survey. Following each negotiation game, the participant filled out an opinion survey.
We designed the study to be completed within an hour, and
the average duration of the study was 32 minutes.

Measures
Background Survey The background survey asked about
the participant’s age, gender, nationality, education, computer
experience, Attitude Towards War (Dupuis & Cohn, 2006),
Social Orientation (Van Lange, De Bruin, Otten, & Joireman,
1997) and attitude towards Inappropriate Negotiation (SINS,
from (Robinson, Lewicki, & Donahue, 2000)).
Opinion Survey The opinion survey contained questions
regarding the participant’s goals during the game, and questions from the Subjective Value Index (SVI) survey on opinions about oneself, the negotiation outcome, the process and
the opponent (Curhan, Elfenbein, & Xu, 2006).
In-Game Survey The in-game survey asked participants to
predict the opponent’s responses. For example, after making
an offer in the Powell game, participants said whether they
expected their opponent to accept the offer, reject it or attack.
Game Logs The game logs captured the participant’s actions, the PsychSim agent’s actions and the world states (e.g.
number of troops, military position, and territory).

Results
We had 240 participants in the study. Each participant played
four different games, one under each condition. Data from
incomplete games were discarded. In the end, we had 238
games in the Powell72 condition and 239 games in the Powell28, Slantchev72 and Slantchev28 conditions.

Hypothesis: Screening Behavior
This hypothesis states that the participants’ behavior is most
likely to be screening, by making incrementally higher offers
to find out the lowest offer that satisfies the opponent. We analyzed the dynamics of the participants’ offers to see whether
they increased, decreased, or stayed the same from one round
to the next. The results of Figure 1 show that, by and large,
the human players exhibit screening behavior (i.e., more increases than the alternatives).

Hypothesis: Principle of Convergence
The hypothesis states that under the Powell model, settlement should be reached sooner, compared to the Slantchev
model. We compared the number of rounds it took for both
sides to reach an agreement under these two models, excluding games that ended with one side winning the war (instead
of reaching an agreement). Results show that, contrary to the
hypothesis, it took participants significantly more rounds to
reach an agreement when interacting with the Powell model

Figure 1: Distribution over participants’ offer dynamics.
than when interacting with the Slantchev model (p < .0001,
MeanPowell =3.13, MeanSlantchev =1.95).

Hypothesis: Information Asymmetry
This hypothesis predicted that settlements taking more rounds
to reach agreement would be less favorable toward the human
player, with the effect being more pronounced in the Powell
model. Excluding games with no agreement, we analyzed the
correlation between the territory participants ended up with
and the total number of rounds needed to reach the settlement. In general, there is a weak yet significant negative
correlation between the territory participants got in the settlement and the number of rounds needed to reach that settlement (r = −.1965, p < .0001), providing evidence in favor of
this hypothesis. The correlation is of medium strength both
in the Slantchev (r = −.2372, p < .0001) and Powell games
(r = −.2309, p = .0004), failing to demonstrate the hypothesized difference between the two models.

Hypothesis: Total Victory
Under this hypothesis, we expect that negotiated settlements
to be less common under Powell than under Slantchev because of the possibility of immediate collapse in the former.
The data bore out this hypothesis, as fewer games in the Powell model ended in a settlement than in the Slantchev model
(p < .0001, MeanPowell =48.0%, MeanSlantchev =60.8%). It is
also interesting to observe that settlements were much rarer
when the player started with 28% territory than when starting
with 72% (p < .0001, Mean28 =42.77%, Mean72 =66.25%).

Hypothesis: War Avoidance
We hypothesized that players who are more pro-war would be
less willing to give up territory, and more willing to go to war.
We measured the participants’ attitudes towards war (ATW)
in the background survey, where higher ATW scores indicate
more of a pro-war attitude, and lower ones indicate an antiwar attitude. We did not find significant correlations between
ATW and the average offers participants made (r = −.0172,
p = .5950). We also did not find a correlation between ATW
and the number of rounds played in the game (r = .0220, p =
.4979). Battles were not a choice in the Slantchev model. In
the Powell72 condition, the human player never initiated an
attack, because the agent would always do so first. Therefore,
we analyzed the correlation between ATW and the number
of player-initiated attacks in only the Powell28 condition and

1178

Figure 3: Participant offers in response to opponent actions.
cantly less territory than when starting with 72% (p < .0001,
Mean28 =22.31, Mean72 =45.55).

Figure 2: Change of offers made after battle outcomes.
found a marginally significant weak correlation (r = .1107,
p = .0877). Thus, there was only the slightest of evidence in
favor of his hypothesis.

Hypothesis: Military Asymmetry
This hypothesis states that in the Powell model, where
less information is revealed to the players, the players
will make lower offers than they would under Slantchev.
However, when interacting with the Powell model, participants made slightly higher offers than when they interacted
with the Slantchev model (p < .0001, MeanPowell =36.26,
MeanSlantchev =33.29), exactly the opposite of our hypothesis.

Hypothesis: Battle Outcomes
We expect players to make lower offers after winning a battle
than they would after losing. We ignore the Powell model,
which gives players no information about battle outcomes
(beyond game-ending collapses). Under Slantchev, players
lost 68% of the battles and won only 32%. When players
won a battle, the offers they made next were significantly
lower than when they lost (p = .0441, MeanWon =31.70,
MeanLost =35.88), thus bearing out the hypothesis.

Hypothesis: Starting Territory
Initial Offer We compared the offers that participants made
at the beginning of the negotiation. Participants made significantly higher offers when starting with 28% territory compared to 72% (p < .0001, Mean28 =34.20, Mean72 =27.95).
Average Offer We compared the average offers the participants made during the negotiation. When starting with 28%
territory, participants made significantly higher offers than
with 72% (p < .0001, Mean28 =38.84, Mean72 =30.71).
End Territory We compared the percentage of territory
the participant had when the game ended. When starting with 28% territory, participants ended up with signifi-

Net Territory Gain Beyond the impact on absolute territory, we also hypothesized that the starting territory would
affect the relative gain/loss in territory from the beginning to
the end of the game. When starting with 28% territory, participants lost significantly less territory than when they starting with 72% territory (p < .0001, Mean28 =-5.69, Mean72 =26.45). Thus, the observed behavior conformed to all of our
expectations about the effect of the initial division of territory.

Offers In Reaction to Opponent Actions
We also compared the participants’ offers under both models
in reaction to their opponent’s actions. In the Powell model,
when not accepting the participant’s offer, the opponent chose
to either simply reject the offer or to attack the participant. In
the Slantchev model, attacking was not a choice, but the opponent did make counteroffers when not accepting the participant’s offer. The differences were significant when interacting with the Powell model (p < .0001) and Slantchev model
(p < .0001). The results of Figure 3 show that attacking the
participants prompted lower offers, while less aggressive actions (e.g. rejecting without attacking, or making a counteroffer) typically resulted in higher offers.

Discussion
As we can see from the previous section, much of the observed behavior conformed to the expectations generated by
the theoretical analyses of the Powell and Slantchev models.
The information asymmetry that is critical to both models had
the expected impact on the human players, as they clearly
exhibited the hypothesized screening behavior. Furthermore,
we also observed direct evidence of the claim that “as war
progresses, the outcome becomes less advantageous for the
worse informed party” (Slantchev, 2003). Our agent-based
experimental setup also allowed us to try a variation of the
game on the starting territory, and the data provided strong
evidence for our hypotheses regarding that variation.
However, there were also some interesting deviations from
our hypothesized behavior. Slantchev’s Principle of Convergence hypothesized that warfare ceases to be useful when
there is no information to gain. Our derived hypothesis

1179

viewed the Powell game as more information-poor than the
Slantchev one, leading us to expect that settlements would be
reached sooner in the former. However, our data showed the
opposite trend. We can at least partly attribute this deviation
to people assessing the information gains differently than was
prescribed in the two models’ equilibrium analysis. Under the
Powell model, players may try to gather more observations of
their opponents’ behavior, because they do not realize that the
agent’s threshold of acceptance does not change. Conversely,
under the Slantchev model, the players may feel overly certain in their beliefs upon observing only a few (or even only
one) counteroffers from their opponent.
We also saw little evidence to support our War Avoidance
hypothesis. We did not find any link between a participant’s
attitude towards war and the offers they made, the duration
of the war, nor the number of attacks. It is likely that some
participants did not carry their attitudes toward war over into
this abstract game setting. However, we also need to further
differentiate within the ATW scale about why people are antiwar and what types of war they are against.
The deviation from the military asymmetry hypothesis is
harder to explain. From the very beginning of a Slantchev
game, the players can observe that their military position puts
them closer to losing the war than winning the war. As the
game progresses, they can potentially observe that the battle probability is not in their favor. We would thus expect
players to be more pessimistic about their chances under the
Slantchev model and, thus, to make higher offers to quickly
appease their opponents. However, players made higher offers in the Powell model, where there was no feedback about
the war outcomes, nor the other side’s valuations.
Therefore, we need a more fine-grained analysis of when
players in Slantchev made the unexpectedly low offers. For
example, the data supported our Battle Outcomes hypothesis, where players made lower offers after winning a battle.
By isolating such cases, we may see that the general military
asymmetry hypothesis holds, but we can also understand the
in-game contingencies that would override the general trend.
Furthermore, despite the general conformity over all of
the data, not every player’s behavior conformed to our hypotheses. We must therefore analyze the data to identify
the more fine-grained contingencies and the individual differences among our participants. Such an analysis would give
us a better understanding of how the participants viewed, for
example, the potential information received in the game, their
possible military outcomes, etc. This analysis will also guide
future studies by suggesting further instrumentation that is
needed to gather the required in-game data.
With these additional analyses and data, we can build upon
the field’s game-theoretic models to develop higher-fidelity
models of human behavior in such wartime negotiation scenarios. Ideally, these models will help bridge the gap between
the theoretical computational frameworks and the decisionmaking we see in the real world. By doing so, they will provide an invaluable computational tool for political scientists

to explore a richer set of contingencies and individual differences and hopefully provide better predictions and explanations of behavior in wartime negotiation.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering Command (RDECOM). The content does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of
the Government. No official endorsement should be inferred.

References
Curhan, J. R., Elfenbein, H. A., & Xu, H. (2006). What do
people value when they negotiate? Mapping the domain of
subjective value in negotiation. J. of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 493–512.
Dupuis, E. C., & Cohn, E. S. (2006). A new scale to measure
war attitudes: Construction and predictors. J. of Psychological Arts and Sciences, 3(1), 6–15.
Fearon, J. D. (1995). Rationalist explanations for war. International Organization, 49, 379-414.
Filson, D., & Werner, S. (2002). A bargaining model of war
and peace: Anticipating the onset, duration, and outcome
of war. American J. of Political Science, 46, 819-838.
Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L., & Cassandra, A. R. (1998).
Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101, 99-134.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1991).
Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss aversion, and status quo bias. The J. of Economic Perspectives, 5(1), 193206.
Marsella, S. C., Pynadath, D. V., & Read, S. J. (2004). PsychSim: Agent-based modeling of social interactions and
influence. In ICCM (p. 243-248).
Neale, M. A., & Bazerman, M. H. (1991). Cognition and
rationality in negotiation. Free Press.
Powell, R. (2001). Bargaining while fighting. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Powell, R. (2004). Bargaining and learning while fighting.
American J. of Political Science, 48(2), 344–361.
Pynadath, D. V., & Marsella, S. C. (2005). PsychSim: Modeling theory of mind with decision-theoretic agents. In IJCAI
(p. 1181-1186).
Robinson, R. J., Lewicki, R. J., & Donahue, E. M. (2000).
Extending and testing a five factor model of ethical and
unethical bargaining tactics: Introducing the SINS scale. J.
of Organizational Behavior, 21, 649–664.
Slantchev, B. L. (2003). The principle of convergence in
wartime negotiations. American Political Science Review,
97, 621–632.
Smith, A., & Stam, A. C. (2004). Bargaining and the nature
of war. The J. of Conflict Resolution, 48(6), 783-813.
Van Lange, P. A. M., De Bruin, E. M. N., Otten, W., & Joireman, J. A. (1997). Development of prosocial, individualistic, and competitive orientations: Theory and preliminary
evidence. J. of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(4),
733–746.

1180

