UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comprehending with the body: Action compatibility in sign language?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/12t095zb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Perniss, Pamela
Vinson, David
Fox, Neil
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comprehending with the body: Action compatibility in sign language?
Pamela Perniss (p.perniss@ucl.ac.uk), David Vinson (d.vinson@ucl.ac.uk),
Neil Fox (neil.fox@ucl.ac.uk), Gabriella Vigliocco (g.vigliocco@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, 26 Bedford Way, WC1H 0AP London, UK
Abstract
Previous studies show that reading sentences about actions
leads to specific motor activity associated with actually
performing those actions. We investigate how sign language
input may modulate motor activation, using British Sign
Language (BSL) materials, some of which explicitly encode
direction of motion, vs. written English, where motion is only
implied. We find no evidence of action simulation in BSL
comprehension, but replicate effects of action simulation in
comprehension of written English. The results suggest that the
perception of motor articulation in the language input
interferes with mental simulation involving the motor system.
Keywords: embodiment; sign language; motor system;
action-compatibility effect

Introduction
There is now a body of evidence for an embodied view of
language, according to which language comprehension is
based in our bodily experience of the world and involves the
same systems necessary for bodily experience. The
grounding of language in perception and action has been
evidenced in a wide range of behavioral and neuroscientific
studies (e.g. Barsalou, Barbey, Simmons & Wilson, 2003;
Barsalou, 2008; Beauchamp & Martin, 2007; Gallese &
Lakoff, 2005; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Glenberg &
Gallese, 2012; Zwaan & Kaschak, 2008). For example,
Stanfield and Zwaan (2001) have shown that sentence
comprehension involves the activation of specific imagery
related to the perceptual and action properties of an event.
Participants were faster to verify that a pictured object (e.g.
nail) appeared in a preceding sentence when the orientation
of the object (e.g. horizontal vs. vertical) in the picture
matched that implied in the sentence (e.g. John hammered
the nail into the wall). Neuroscientific studies have likewise
pointed to specific involvement of motor areas in
understanding language related to action. For example, as
found by Tettamanti, Buccino, Saccuman, Gallese et al.
(2005) in an fMRI study, reading sentences describing
actions using specific body parts (e.g. I bite the apple, I kick
the ball) activates the area in the motor cortex related to
physical use of that body part (e.g. mouth for bite, foot for
kick) (see also Hauk, Johnsrude & Pulvermüller, 2004).
The Action-Sentence Compatibility Effect (ACE), first
demonstrated by Glenberg and Kaschak (2002), provides
further compelling evidence that we involve our sensorimotor system in language comprehension by mentally
simulating the actions and events encoded in language. In
the Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) study, participants were
presented visually with written sentences that implied either
motion toward (Andy delivered the pizza to you) or away

from (You delivered the pizza to Andy) the body.
Participants were asked to judge sentence sensibility by
responding with a button press that required movement of
the arm either toward or away from the body – i.e. in a
direction congruent or incongruent with the direction of
motion implied by the sentence. Participants were faster to
respond to sentences when the implied motion was
congruent with the response direction. This was true of
sentences implying transfer in both the concrete and abstract
domains (e.g. You communicated the message to Adam). In
a related study, Borreggine and Kaschak (2006) provided
evidence for the ACE when the same English sentences
were presented to participants auditorily, unfolding in real
time. The Action-Sentence Compatibility Effect suggests
that sentence comprehension involves a dynamic mental
simulation of the event, in this case, a motor simulation of
performing the described action.
As the evidence supporting sensori-motor system
involvement in language comprehension accumulates, we
must also address the question of how this embodiment
comes about. How does language come to be grounded in
our bodily experience and what are the mechanisms by
which language processing engages the sensori-motor
system (cf. Perniss, Thompson & Vigliocco, 2010)?
Moreover, there is much debate about how embodiment
effects may be modulated by context (cf. Willems &
Casasanto, 2011), and how effects may be constrained by
different properties of language.
In this context, the strong role of action/motor simulation
in sentence comprehension demonstrated by the ACE effect
raises an interesting question with respect to the modality of
language presentation. Neither the written visual nor the
spoken audial presentation of sentences involves the
physical use of the motor system. This situation is very
different, however, in the case of sign languages. In sign
languages, the natural languages of deaf people, meaning is
encoded through movement of the hands and arms through
the space on and in front of the body. The visual medium of
sign language moreover affords a high degree of iconicity,
or resemblance between linguistic form and meaning. This
potential is exploited particularly for encoding sensorimotor information, such that meanings related to action and
motion are expressed in highly iconic linguistic forms.
Thus, many sign language verbs encoding transfer of the
type studied by Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) explicitly
realize directionality of motion in the event through a
corresponding movement of the hands through space (i.e.
toward or away from the body).
To date, embodiment effects have been studied looking at
spoken/written language. Extending the investigation of

1133

embodiment to language expressed in the visual modality,
where the same motor articulators that perform nonlinguistic actions are used to encode actions linguistically, is
an important step to understanding the nature of
embodiment, and the conditions under which embodiment
effects come about. The simulation effects observed in
action sentence comprehension may well be modulated or
constrained by inherent properties of language, particularly
related to language modality and the potential for iconic
representation. To address this question, we ask here how
the iconic and motor properties of visual language may
affect action simulation in sign language sentence
comprehension?
One possible outcome is that we find an effect of action
simulation in sentence comprehension consistent with what
has been shown for English. The perception of motor action
in language, where the linguistic (i.e. phonological)
expression of action verbs is realized through directional
motion, could boost the involvement of motor simulation in
sentence comprehension. In this case, participants should be
faster to respond in a direction corresponding to the event
(and its realization in sign language), compared to when the
response direction is incongruent with the event. It is also
possible, however, that we observe an effect in the opposite
direction, as the interpretation of the signed sentences may
involve mentally taking the perspective of the signer
producing them, as we discuss below.
An alternative outcome is that motor simulation of the
encoded event in comprehension may be reduced or
eliminated by the involvement of the motor system in the
articulation of the action. Because viewing sign language
means viewing physical movement of the same articulators
necessary for the action simulation (here, arms and hands),
the simulation itself may be blocked or even unnecessary.
Thus, a contrasting prediction is that viewing sentences
presented in a sign language would not yield an ACE effect.
To test these contrasting predictions, we investigate ACE
effects in deaf users of British Sign Language (BSL).

Experiment 1
We sought to replicate the Glenberg and Kaschak (2002)
study using close translations of the original English
sentences into BSL. All of the experimental sentences in
this study implied directional motion, with equal numbers of
sentences referring to motion toward the body and motion
away from the body. Within these, half referred to concrete
transfer events (as in You delivered the pizza to Andy) and
half to abstract transfer events (as in You communicated the
message to Adam).
The BSL sentences not only preserved the specific events
described by the English sentences but also their 2nd/3rd
person reference structure. In BSL, as in other sign
languages, person reference is achieved by directing signs at
locations in space associated with the entities being talked
about. Second person (you) is associated with a location
directly opposite the signer, the canonical location of an

addressee.1 Third person (he/she/it) is associated with a
location to the right or left of the signer. The body of the
signer, specifically a location at the center of the signer’s
chest, is associated with first person (I). Points to the
appropriate locations indicate the arguments, e.g. subject
and object, of a verb. In addition, verb signs themselves –
so-called directional predicates – can indicate arguments by
physically moving between the locations associated with the
arguments.2
This is illustrated in the BSL example sentence shown in
Figure 1, which corresponds to English James awarded the
degree to you. In the example, 3rd person reference to James
is achieved in stills 2-3 of the figure, consisting of a sign for
the letter ‘J’ (for James), in still 2, followed by a pointing
sign to a 3rd person location to the right of the signer’s body,
in still 3. The predicate in the final still conveys the meaning
he awards to you by moving from the 3rd person location
associated with James to the 2nd person location – outward
from and opposite the signer’s body – associated with the
participant/addressee viewing the sentence. Thus, in the
BSL version of James awarded the degree to you,
participants see the predicate move toward them, in the
same way as the actual event would involve movement
toward them. In the experiment, participants perceived
directional verbs like award-to moving either toward or
away from them, congruent with the direction of the event.

DEGREE

JAMES-he

he-AWARD-TO-you

Figure 1: Glossed example of BSL sentence. (English
translation: James awarded the degree to you.) The sentence
includes a directional verb that moves from 3rd to 2nd person.
The perceived motion in viewing the sentence is thus toward
the participant’s/addressee’s body.
Not all predicates in BSL are directional, however, in this
way. Translation of the set of verbs that appears in the
original Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) study ignores a
crucial contrast between directional vs. non-directional verb
types in BSL. In non-directional predicates, the form of the
verbs is the same regardless of the direction of the event
(e.g. in the verb write, the hands represent writing at a
location in front of the body regardless of who is writing to
whom). Only directional predicates encode the direction of
the event by moving between the locations associated with
their arguments. (See the schematizations of verb types and
direction used across experiments provided in Figure 2.)
In actual discourse, 2nd person reference is achieved by
pointing to the physical location of the addressee.
2
This is a highly simplified description (for a more in-depth
treatment see Sandler & Lillo-Martin 2006), but is adequate for the
present purposes.

1134

1

A second set of sentences was designed to address this
issue. This set encoded semantically similar events from
those of Glenberg and Kaschak (2002), but using different
verbs, in order to manipulate the number of directional vs.
non-directional verbs that appeared in the sentences. This is
important because the ACE effect hinges on the simulation
of directional motion, and may be influenced here by the
congruence of perceived phonological motion with the
motion entailed by the event itself.

Figure 2. Schematization of verb types, person reference,
and direction used across Experiments 1 and 2.

Method
Participants 16 deaf adult signers of BSL were recruited
from the greater London area. BSL age of acquisition
ranged from 0-13 years (mean 3.13; with 9 native signers
who acquired BSL from birth). Participant age ranged
between 19-59 years (mean age 34.69). All participants had
normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials For Experiment 1a, the original English
sentences (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002) were translated into
BSL by a native deaf BSL signer, and proficient BSLEnglish bilingual. BSL sentences were videotaped and
edited into single sentence clips. All sentences depicted
transfer from 2nd to 3rd or from 3rd to 2nd person,
corresponding with direction of motion toward or away
from the body, respectively (see Figure 1). 20 abstract and
20 concrete events were included, with two sentences
depicting each event (one toward the body, one away). 40
nonsense sentences were also filmed, again closely
resembling those used by Glenberg and Kaschak (2002).
Different test lists were created so that each participant saw
only one sentence referring to a given event, with equal
numbers of abstract/concrete, toward/away sentences.
Sentences were randomly ordered for each participant.
For Experiment 1b, we constructed BSL sentences around
events involving 16 directional verbs and 13 non-directional
verbs.3 For each verb we created four sentences, two
sensible sentences (one toward the body, one away from the
3

We focused on selecting BSL verbs that clearly encoded
motion of transfer semantics of the kind needed for the ACE, and
did not control for other factors like sentence length. The challenge
of finding enough non-directional BSL verbs, in particular, meant
that we were not able to achieve an exact balance between the verb
types and required use of the same verbs in sensible and nonsense
versions of the sentences.

body) and two nonsense sentences (one toward, one away).
Each participant saw all four sentences involving a given
verb, with materials divided into four blocks so that each
verb occurred only once per block and so that conditions
were approximately balanced within each block. Order of
blocks and order of trials within a block were randomly
ordered for each participant. In both experiments, we treated
nonsense sentences as fillers, only analyzing the effects of
implied directional motion in sentences depicting real
events.
Procedure Participants sat directly opposite a computer
screen with a response box oriented sagittally in front of
them, and were told they would see BSL sentences
addressed to them. Participants were prompted to press and
hold the middle of three buttons on the response box upon
the appearance of a fixation cross in the middle of the
screen. Upon pressing the button, a video clip of a BSL
sentence began to play, and continued to play as long as the
middle button was held down. Participants judged the
sensibility of the sentence by moving their finger to press a
button either away from or toward their body from the
middle button (i.e. to the near or far button on the response
box). Participants were told to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible. We measured the time it took for
participants to release the central button, thus tapping into
the motor planning necessary to make their responses (see
Borreggine & Kaschak, 2006). Participants came for two
sessions, which differed only in the direction of the response
for sensible sentences (toward vs. away from the body),
with the order of response per session counterbalanced
across participants. Experiments 1a and 1b were carried out
separately in each session, again with the order
counterbalanced across participants.

Results
We analyzed only responses for sensible sentences,
excluding errors and using button release latencies as the
dependent measure. We analyzed Experiment 1a using 2×2
ANOVA (sentence direction × response congruence). The
main effect of sentence direction was not significant;
F(1,15)=3.260, p=.091: a tendency for faster responses for
transfer toward the body. Neither the main effect of
response congruence and interaction were significant (F<1).
For Experiment 1b we conducted 2×2×2 ANOVA also
including the factor of verb type (directional vs. nondirectional). There was a main effect of sentence direction
(F(1,15)=6.772, p=.020, η2partial=0.311); the sentences
moving toward the body were faster than those moving
away from the body. There was also a main effect of verb
type (F(1,15)=124.933, p<.0001, η2partial=0.891); sentences
with non-directional verbs were much faster than sentences
with directional verbs (2091 vs. 2271 msec respectively),
likely due to differences in sentence durations (e.g.
directional verbs may take longer on average to execute than
non-directional verbs). There was also an interaction
between verb type and sentence direction (F(1,15)=10.442,

1135

p=.006, η2partial= 0.410), again presumably related to
differences in verb durations. Crucially, the main effect of
congruence was not significant (F<1), nor were any of the
interactions involving congruence (congruence × direction
F(1,15)=1.453, p=.247; congruence × verb type, F<1; 3way interaction F(1,15)= 3.702, p=.074). See Figure 3.
We found no ACE effect: there was no main effect of
response congruence, nor any interactions involving it.4
2400

2400

2300

Experiment	  1b
Congruent

Correct	  RT	  (msec)

Correct	  RT	  (msec)

Experiment	  1a
2500

2300
2200
2100
2000
Away
Toward
Sentence	  Direction

Incongruent

2200
2100
2000

1900
Away

Toward
Sentence	  Direction

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 1a (left: BSL replication of
Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002) and 1b (right: BSL 2nd/3rd
person comparing directional/non-directional verbs). We
report correct button release times to sensible sentences as a
function of sentence direction (Away (from) or Toward the
body) and whether the response direction is congruent or
incongruent with the directional event being described.
Error bars reflect standard error of the mean (by subjects).

Discussion
In Experiments 1a and 1b we did not find an ACE effect;
responses were not faster when the sentence implied an
event moving in the same direction as the hand action
required to make a sensibility decision. Furthermore, in
Experiment 1b there was no difference in response times
between when the direction of motion entailed by the action
was encoded phonologically (directional verbs) vs. when it
was not (non-directional verb). This implies that the lack of
action simulation – and thus lack of motor system
involvement – may be related to perceiving sign language,
which is produced by means of motor movement of the
same articulators involved in the actual action event.
However, it may be the case that ACE requires that the
direction of the button press converge with the direction of
the event. In the 2nd/3rd person transfer used in Experiments
1a and 1b, the BSL directional verbs move diagonally,
offset approximately 45° from the center of the producer's
body and offset approximately 45° from the participant's
direction of response (see Figure 2). If sentence
compatibility effects require close directional convergence
between the sentence judgment response and the simulated
event, this discrepancy could reduce or eliminate ACE
effects. Finally, if the lack of an effect in Experiments 1a
and 1b is due to the use of sign language in the task, we
should be able to observe an ACE effect in the same

participants when they are reading English sentences.
Obtaining an ACE effect using English is especially
important in the face of the null effects we have reported
here, showing that our procedure is sound and our
participant number large enough to find evidence for ACE,
if it were there.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2a assesses whether the lack of convergence
between the direction of motion encoded in the event and
the response direction modulates simulation effects. We use
BSL sentences that imply transfer between 1st/2nd person,
thereby maximizing the overlap in directionality. Sentences
that encode transfer between 1st/2nd person (e.g. I awarded
the degree to you) involve phonological movement between
the signer’s body (1st person) and a location opposite the
signer’s body (2nd person). Thus, directional verbs move
along the central axis, straight toward or away from the
body. This modification of person reference in verbs creates
complete directional convergence with the direction of
button press response and with the direction of motion
entailed by the actual action event. We otherwise used
exactly the same materials and procedures as in Experiment
1b, where directional vs. non-directional verbs are
compared.
Experiment 2b assesses whether the lack of an effect in
Experiment 1 is indeed specific to the use of sign language.
The same (BSL-English bilingual) participants who took
part in Experiment 2a, also carried out the original
experiment by Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) with visual
presentation of written English sentences.

Method
Participants A new group of 16 deaf adult BSL-English
bilinguals5 were recruited from the greater London area.
BSL age of acquisition ranged from 0-11 years (mean 3.85;
with 7 native signers who acquired BSL from birth). English
age of acquisition ranged from 0-5 years (mean 2.19). Ages
ranged between 18-59 years (mean age 30.75). All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials BSL materials for Experiment 2a were the same
as for Experiment 1b, but all sentences depicted transfer
from 1st to 2nd or from 2nd to 1st person. For the written
English experiment, we used the original set of sentences
from Glenberg and Kaschak (2002). List creation, task
order etc. were the same as in Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1.
For English sentences (Experiment 2b), participants saw the
written English sentence appear in the middle of the screen.

4

The marginal three-way interaction in Experiment 1b arises
due to a tendency for congruent trials to be particularly slower than
incongruent trials, only in non-directional verbs encoding events
moving away from the body. As a result, this provides no evidence
compatible with the ACE effect previously reported for English.

5
Note that the signers recruited for Experiment 1 were also
BSL-English bilinguals, a status which holds true of most users of
sign language, as they must also be able to communicate in the
spoken/written language of the surrounding hearing community.

1136

General Discussion

Results
As in Experiment 1 we analyzed only the responses for
sensible sentences, excluding error trials and using button
release latencies as our dependent measures. We analyzed
Experiment 2a using 2×2×2 ANOVA also including the
factor of verb type (sentence direction × response
congruence × verb type). None of the main effects reached
significance (congruence F<1; direction F(1,15)=2.299,
p=.150; verb type F(1,15)=2.681, p=.122), nor did any of
the interactions (congruence × verb type, F(1,15)=1.246;
p=.282; three-way interaction F(1,15)=3.082, p=.100l; all
other F<1). As in Experiments 1a and 1b we found no ACE
effect in BSL.6
We analyzed Experiment 2b using 2×2 ANOVA. Here we
found a main effect of congruence (F(1,15)=10.888, p=.005,
η2partial= 0.421): an ACE effect in written English. There was
a marginal main effect of sentence direction (F(1,15)=4.353,
p=.054) and no interaction (F<1). See Figure 4.
2000

Experiment	  2a

1600

Congruent
Incongruent

1500
Correct	  RT(msec)

1900

Correct	  RT(msec)

Experiment	  2b

1800
1700
1600

1400
1300
1200
1100

1500
Away

Toward
Sentence	  Direction

Away
Toward
Sentence	  Direction

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 2a (left: BSL 1st/2nd person
comparing directional/non-directional verbs) and 2b (right:
English replication of Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002 with BSL
signers). We report correct button release times to sensible
sentences as a function of sentence direction (Away (from)
or Toward the body) and whether the response direction is
congruent or incongruent with the directional event being
described. Error bars reflect standard error of the mean (by
subjects).

Discussion
As in Experiment 1a and 1b, we find no ACE effect in
Experiment 2a: responses to BSL sentences are no faster
when the direction of response is congruent with the event
depicted by a sentence. But we find reliable ACE effects in
English (Experiment 2b), replicating the original Glenberg
and Kaschak (2002) study with exactly the same
participants as in Experiment 2a. Finding an ACE effect in
English vs. no such effect in BSL, in the same population,
suggests that action simulation is involved in language
comprehension when visually perceiving written language,
but not when perceiving signed language.

6
Because Experiments 1a and 2a used the same pool of items,
varying only in whether the events were 1st/2nd person (Exp. 1a)
2nd/3rd person (Exp. 2a) we also conducted an analysis combining
both experiments (N=32) with Experiment as an additional factor.
The main effect of congruence was not significant in this analysis
(F<1) nor any other interactions involving congruence (all F<1).

We assessed whether the same effects of action simulation
observed during comprehension of English directional
sentences can be observed in the comprehension of BSL
directional sentences. The ACE effect has been argued to
demonstrate that sentence comprehension relies on
simulation of the actions encoded in the sentences.
Specifically, the ACE effect shows that sentence
comprehension is facilitated when the action implied by a
sentence is directionally congruent with the action required
to judge sentence sensibility.
Operating in the visual-spatial modality, sign language
necessarily involves motor movement and utilizes the high
potential for action iconicity that the medium affords. These
properties of sign language led us to propose two possible
outcomes regarding the role of action simulation in sign
language comprehension: the action simulation is either
boosted or blocked.
We found no evidence for an ACE effect in BSL sentence
comprehension across three experiments (1a, 1b, 2a). The
results thus suggest that viewing sign language does not
engage the motor system in comprehension in the way that
has been found for written and spoken presentation of
English sentences. These results do not come about because
of lack of power: we observed an ACE effect with the same
participants when presented with English written sentences.
This finding also indicates that it is not knowing a sign
language per se that modulates the use of action simulation
in sentence comprehension (i.e. in a second language).
The results further suggest that it is not the iconicity
between the direction of motion of the action signs and the
actual actions that blocks the involvement of action
simulation in comprehension, as there was no difference
found between directional vs. non-directional verbs.
Why then do we fail to see an ACE effect in BSL? A first
possibility is that the lack of involvement of the motor
system in comprehension may be related to perceiving the
physical engagement of the motor articulators. This
engagement would block the system from engaging in
sentence simulation. It is also possible that the involvement
of our sensori-motor systems in language comprehension
depends on the format in which language is presented. The
ACE effect has been found previously, and replicated here,
only for language presented in a unichannel format – the
written or the spoken word. These unichannel formats are
not directly evocative of the events encoded in the
sentences, they have no explicit visual correspondence to
the events being described. They are impoverished in this
sense compared to the rich, depictive event representations
provided by the visual modality of signed language. Thus, it
may be that an “impoverished” unichannel language
representation relies on action simulation in comprehension,
while a richer, multichannel language presentation – particularly involving depictive, iconic representation – does not.
The action may not need to be “filled in” or simulated in the
context of a rich, depictive representation of the event.

1137

We cannot rule out, however, that the iconic properties of
sign language action predicates play a role in affecting the
involvement of the motor system. Even the non-directional
verbs, which do not overtly encode the direction of motion
of the action, were often iconic of the action in some way
(e.g. BSL pour which resembles pouring a liquid, but does
not vary in its direction depending on who is doing the
pouring). Such iconic properties may engage the same
effectors in simulation, perhaps with other aspects of the
event such as hand configuration and orientation being more
salient than generic aspects of directional motion. Our
results also do not rule out the possibility that the perception
of motor movement at all, and particularly non-iconic
movement, may block the involvement of the motor system
in comprehension.
Finally, there are a number of further modality-related
differences between English and BSL that might have
played a role in our study. First, the temporal unfolding of
the event is different. Secondly, word order differences may
play a role. While the English sentences follow a rigid
Subject-Verb-Object order, the BSL sentences typically had
the verb in final position (a word order common to many
sign languages). Future research on ACE effects in spoken
languages with verb-final word order, e.g. Japanese or
Turkish, would be illuminating in this regard.
Another issue that bears further investigation relates to
perspective-taking in sign language comprehension.
Specifically, though participants were informed that they
would see BSL sentences addressed to them, sentence
comprehension may have involved mentally taking the
signer’s perspective. If participants mapped their own body
onto that of the sign model producing the sentences,
mentally imitating the sign model’s motor production, this
would create a conflict between the congruence between
sentence direction and response direction. However, if this
were the case, it is likely that we would have seen an ACE
effect in the opposite direction. As no effect whatsoever was
observed in the BSL versions of the experiments, we do not
assume this to have played a role.
Thus, our research suggests that the involvement of action
simulation in language comprehension is dependent on the
format and modality of language presentation. This is
important to our understanding of the conditions under
which and the degree to which language comprehension
involves simulation. The idea that the use of action
simulation may be contextually dependent is in line with
previous observations that contextual variables (e.g. abstract
vs. concrete contexts) modulate effects of embodiment in
terms of differential activation of sensori-motor
representation in language processing (Mahon &
Carramazza, 2007; Willems & Casasanto, 2011 for a
review). Context dependency of the degree to which
embodiment (i.e. the involvement of sensori-motor systems)
is evident in language comprehension demonstrates a
fundamental flexibility, rather than rigidity, of the
architecture of language processing.

Acknowledgments
Supported by UK Economic and Social Research Council
grants RES-062-23-2012 to Gabriella Vigliocco and RES620-28-6002 to the Deafness, Cognition and Language
Research Centre (DCAL).

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Barsalou, L. W., Simmons, W. K., Barbey, A. K., &
Wilson, C. D. (2003). Grounding conceptual knowledge
in modality-specific systems. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 7, 287-317.
Beauchamp, M. S., & Martin, A. (2007). Grounding object
concepts in perception and action: evidence from fMRI
studies of tools. Cortex, 43, 461-468.
Borreggine, K. L., & Kaschak, M. P. (2006). The ActionSentence Compatibility Effect: It’s All in the Timing.
Cognitive Science, 30, 1097-1112.
Gallese, V. & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain’s concepts: The
role of the sensory-motor system in conceptual
knowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22, 455-479.
Glenberg, A.M., & Kaschak, M.P. (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychon. Bulletin & Review, 9, 558-565.
Glenberg A. M., & Gallese, V. (2012). Action-based
language:
a
theory
of
language
acquisition,
comprehension, and production. Cortex 48(7), 905-22.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in human
motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301-307.
Mahon, B. Z. & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at the
embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal for
grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology –
Paris, 102, 59-70.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R. L., & Vigliocco, G. (2010).
Iconicity as a general property of language: evidence from
spoken and signed languages. Frontiers in Psychology, 1,
doi 10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00227.
Sandler, W. & Lillo-Martin, D. (2006). Sign Language and
Linguistic Universals. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153-156.
Tettamanti, M., Buccino, G., Saccuman, M. C., Gallese, V.,
Danna, M., Scifo, P., et al. (2005). Listening to actionrelated sentences activates fronto-parietal motor circuits.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 273-281.
Willems, R. M. & Casasanto, D. (2011). Flexibility in
embodied language understanding. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2, doi 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00116.
Zwaan, R. A. & Kaschak, M. P. (2008). Language in the
brain, body, and world. In M. Robbins & M. Aydede
(Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1138

