UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contextual inferences over speakers' pragmatic intentions: Preschoolers' comprehension of
contrastive prosody

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0g77z5t8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Kurumada, Chigusa

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contextual inferences over speakers’ pragmatic intentions:
Preschoolers’ comprehension of contrastive prosody
Chigusa Kurumada
kurumada@stanford.edu
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University
Abstract

Speaker
intention

We investigate pre-schoolers’ ability in drawing pragmatic inferences based on prosodic information. Previous work has
found that young children are generally oblivious to intonational meaning of utterances. In particular, the ability to comprehend contrastive prosody develops late during language acquisition (after the age of 6). In three experiments, we show
that preschoolers can engage in prosody-based pragmatic inferences if the context provides supports for them. Furthermore, we find that preschoolers’ interpretation of prosody involves complex counter-factual reasoning (‘what the speaker
would have said if she had intended another meaning’). The
picture emerging from our studies contrasts with previous
work: Through rich contextual inferences, four-year olds are
able to bootstrap their interpretation of prosodic information,
and achieve adult like performance in intonation interpretation.
Keywords: Prosody, language acquisition, contrastive accent,
Principle of Contrast, rational inference

Intention to
express meaning
m1

Intention to
express meaning
m2

Inference
Linguistic
signal

signal s1

signal s2

Figure 1: A schematic representation of a pragmatic model
of intention-signal mapping

In the model illustrated in Figure 1, a speaker’s intention
(to express meaning m1) generates a particular linguistic signal (signal s1); If the speaker had meant to express meaning
m2, she would have generated a different signal (signal s2).
A word learner’s job is to work backwards from the observed
signal to infer the speaker’s intention (as indicated with arrows) while updating her belief about the signal-intention
mappings, including any associations newly introduced.
The current study extends this idea to a new domain:
Young children’s interpretation of contrastive prosody. Just
as words are associated with speaker intentions, different
prosodic representations are probabilistically mapped onto
intentions that had generated them (Figure 2). Compared to
words, however, prosodic signals are continuous and variable,
which can make the mapping puzzle much harder to solve.
Furthermore, the intentions that prosodic representations encode are often very abstract (e.g., contrastiveness) and are
not always disambiguated in an observable context. In other
words, signal-intention mappings for prosody include much
more uncertainty (indicated by the thinner arrows in Figure
2) for listeners to overcome. The current study suggests that,
despite this additional complexity, the rational inferences attested in word-learning provide leverage in young children’s
discovery of pragmatic functions of contrastive prosody as
well.
Prosodic information is known to encode structural
boundaries and phrasing but also speakers’ intentions
(Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg, 1990; Ladd, 2008; Büring,
2003). Much attention has been paid to how listeners interpret
context-relevant contrast based on a low-high-low (an L+H*)
pitch accent. (e.g., KATIE (L+H*) did not win a truck (but
LAURA did); Ito & Speer, 2008). Previous work has generally agreed that inferences based on an L+H* accent present
great difficulty to preschoolers, and even young school children fail to achieve adult-like performance in experimental
settings (e.g., Solan, 1980; Cruttenden, 1985; Wells, Peppe,

Introduction
In learning new words, young children can make use of
pragmatic inference to bootstrap their knowledge about new
word-object mapping. For example, in a situation where an
adult utters “Give me the TOMA (nonce word)” 1 when a familiar object (e.g., a spoon) and an unfamiliar object (e.g., a
whisk) are present in a visual field, a child as young as two
years of age is likely to reach for the whisk. This is considered to be based on a cognitive bias for a unique objectlabel mapping (e.g., Markman and Wachtel (1988)) or the inference that the mother should have used the familiar word
(spoon) if she had intended to refer to it (e.g., Clark (1990)).
Such pragmatic dispositions provide immense leverage in
word learning because there is inherent uncertainty associated with mappings between speakers’ intentions, linguistic
signals, and their referents (Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum,
2009). One way to systematically solve this puzzle is to estimate the probability assigned to a possible intention-signal
mapping relative to other possible mappings warranted by
the same context. For instance, the probability of the signal “Give me the TOMA” expressing the speaker’s intention
of picking out the non-spoon object is estimated in proportion
to probabilities of (1) the signal being generated by the intention of picking out a spoon; and (2) other signals (including
[a spoon]) being generated by the intention of picking out the
target (non-spoon) object.
1 Hereafter: double-quotation marks are used for quoting speech,
with phonetic and prosodic specification. Capital letters represent
prosodic emphasis. Square brackets ([ ]) are used for example words
or sentences abstracted away from acoustic detail, e.g., [It is raining
outside] can be said as, “It’s RAINING outside!”, “It IS raining outside!”, et cetera.)

852

Speaker
intention

Intention to
express meaning
X

Linguistic
signal

Prosodic signal A

trastive prosody provided in an experimental setting (Experiment 1). However, the difficulty is alleviated when the
prosodic input is preceded by a question that highlights what
the alternative would be (Experiment 2). This suggests that
preschoolers have prosodic representations while exhibiting
difficulty in evoking a context-relevant alternative. Furthermore, children can use their knowledge about a construction
(It’s an X) that is more familiar to them to bootstrap their
knowledge about contrastive inference (It LOOKS like a zebra...). These data together suggest that preschoolers use
contextual information and pragmatic inferences to achieve
adult-like performance in understanding contrastive prosody.

Intention to
express meaning
Y

Prosodic signal B

Figure 2:
A schematic representation of a model for
intention-signal mapping in prosodic interpretation

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, a game-like task was used to elicit
preschoolers’ interpretations of the two prosodic contours:
Noun-focus and Verb-focus prosody. This was done to replicate the past studies’ finding that young children fail to derive
contrastive inference based on the prosodic information.

Figure 3: Waveforms (top) and pitch contours (bottom) of
the utterance “It looks like a zebra”. The affirmative interpretation It is a zebra is typically conveyed by the pattern on
the left, while the negative interpretation It is not a zebra is
conveyed by the pattern on the right.

Methods
Participants 12 children acquiring English as their first
language (6 girls, 6 boys; mean age 4;1, age range 3;2 - 4;8)
were recruited and tested at a local nursery school in Stanford,
California. For a comparison, 20 adults were also tested in the
same paradigm using Amazon Mechanical Turk. The adult
participants were all self-reported native speakers of American English residing in the United States.

& Goulandris, 2004; Sekerina & Trueswell, 2012). Since
even young infants can use prosodic information for finding
word boundaries or affective communication (Cutler & Swinney, 1987), the difficulty is not usually attributed to their sensitivity to prosodic information per se, but to limited cognitive
resources and memory span (Speer & Ito, 2009). The current
study shows a supportive discourse context allows children to
comprehend contrastive prosody earlier than previously reported.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that acquisition of contrastive prosody is supported by the same pragmatic inference
underlying the word-intention mappings described above.
That is, upon receiving a signal, the listener works backward
to inferentially identify the intention most likely to generate
the particular signal observed. Crucially, a learner can bootstrap her knowledge about a new signal-intention mapping
based on other mappings warranted in the same context.
In the three experiments reported below, 4-year-olds and
adults were asked to interpret an English construction “It
looks like an X”, which can evoke different pragmatic meanings depending on its prosodic realization. A canonical accent placement (as illustrated in Figure 3, left panel, henceforth noun-focus prosody) typically elicits an affirmative interpretation (e.g. It looks like a zebra and I think it is one).
When the verb “looks” is lengthened and emphasized with a
contrastive accent (L+H*) and the utterance ends with a LH% boundary tone (Figure 3, right, verb-focus prosody), it
can trigger a negative interpretation (e.g. It LOOKS like a zebra but its actually not one; see also Dennison & Schafer,
2010).
The results show that, replicating the previous studies,
preschoolers do not show adult-like understanding of con-

Stimuli Sixteen high-frequency animal names were embedded in the sentence frame [It looks like an X] (e.g., It
looks like a zebra). Half of the items were produced with
Noun-focus prosody (e.g., “It looks like a ZEBRA!”) and
the other half were produced with Verb-focus prosody (e.g.,
“It LOOKS like a zebra”). The pronunciation patterns were
counter-balanced between two lists: items pronounced with
Noun-focus prosody in List 1 were produced with Verb-focus
prosody in List 2 (and vice versa).
Sixteen more animal terms were chosen to form pairs in
which the animals resembled each other in visual features
(e.g., a zebra and an okapi, Figure 4). In each pair, the target
animal named in the input sentence (“it looks like a zebra”)
was the more common of the two and was more familiar to
the children being tested. Hereafter, the target named in a
sentence (e.g., a zebra) is referred to as the “mentioned” animal and the paired animal (e.g., an okapi) is referred to as the
“unmentioned” animal. The two animals in each pair served
as likely referents for one or the other of the two prosodic
contours used in the task (e.g., a zebra for “It looks like a
ZEBRA!” and an okapi for “It LOOKS like a zebra”)
Procedure The experimenter began by introducing a puppet and telling the child that they would play a guessing game
together. The game had two parts. The first part was a picturenaming phase, in which the child saw seven pictures on a
computer screen and labeled them one by one. This was done
to ensure that the names of the objects were familiar to the

853

(a) a sample picture
for a guessing phase

(b) choice options based on a sentence:
It looks like a zebra

Figure 4: Experimental setup: Participants heard the puppet’s clue while looking at a picture like (a) and were subsequently asked to guess which of the two pictures (as in (b))
was hidden behind the barrier.

Figure 5: Proportions of the mentioned animal chosen in Experiment 1 (children and adults) and Experiment 2 (children).
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

child. In the second part, the test phase, the child and the
puppet took part in seven trials (two practice and five critical)
of a two-alternative forced-choice task. In each trial, the child
and puppet were presented with a picture partially occluded
by a gray barrier (Figure 4a). The puppet was then allowed to
peek behind the barrier and give the child a clue about what
he saw. The puppet’s clue took the form of the “it looks like
X” construction, pronounced with either Noun-focus prosody
or Verb-focus prosody. All the puppet’s speech was vocalized
during the task by an experimenter who was a native speaker
of American English. Following the puppet’s clue, the child
was presented with two pictures - the mentioned and unmentioned (Figure 4-b) - and asked to point which animal was
hidden by the barrier. When the child pointed to a picture,
she got feedback about which animal was the target referent.
After completing seven trials, the child named five more animals and participated in five more guessing game.

zebra or not?) While this reasoning comes naturally to adult
listeners, young children might need more contextual support
for establishing these assumptions that are plugged into the
interpretation of contrastive prosody. To test this prediction,
in Experiment 2, additional discourse-contextual information
was provided to ensure that the children have better access to
the contextual alternatives.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, effects of an explicit guess-question are examined. The puppet asks the child to make a guess about
the hidden animal, which establishes a question that needs
to be answered (e.g., Is the hidden animal a zebra or not?)
If this manipulation has a positive effect on the child’s understanding of contrastive prosody, it would mean that the
comprehension difficulty observed in Experiment 1 is at least
partially attributed to their difficulty in detecting contextual
alternatives.

Results and Discussion
Figure 5 shows the proportion of mentioned animals chosen
by the children and adult participants (e.g., choosing a zebra
when the input sentence was [it looks like a zebra]). Adults
responded to the stimuli in the expected ways: they reliably
picked a mentioned animal based on the Noun-focus prosody
(e.g., “It looks like a ZEBRA”) and an unmentioned animal
based on the Verb-focus prosody (e.g., “It LOOKS like a zebra...”).
However, the four-year-olds did not differentiate the two
patterns (χ2 (1) = 1.36, p > .24). Overall, they showed a
weak bias towards the picking an unmentioned animal (60%
of all the responses), which might be due to their preference
for a new, and often funnier looking, animal. Thus, replicating the previous findings, four-year-olds did not seem to make
the contrastive inference based on the prosodic contour.
What makes the comprehension of contrastive prosody difficult for young children? Recall the model presented in Figure 2. In order to correctly interpret the prosodic contours,
a listener needs to be aware that they are mapped onto two
distinct speaker intentions. In particular, it is critical to understand that the two prosodic patterns signal two intentions
(answers) relevant to a question at hand (e.g., Is the animal a

Methods
Participants 12 children (7 girls, 5 boys; mean age 4;2, age
range 3;6 - 4;6) were recruited and tested at the same nursery
school as in Experiment 1.
Stimuli The stimuli were identical to those of Experiment
1.
Procedure The procedure was almost identical to that of
Experiment 1 except that the puppet first pointed to the partially occluded picture and provided a guess-question: “What
do you think is hiding behind the wall?” When the child did
not give an answer, or the child’s answer was unrelated to
the trial item, the puppet followed up by saying, “I’m gonna
guess it’s an X (e.g., a zebra). But let me take a peek and
give you a clue.” This was done to provide an additional cue
to ground the current “question under discussion” (Roberts,
2004), namely, whether the identity of the hidden animal was
an X or not an X.

854

Results and Discussion

mapping supports children’s inferences about a less-familiar
signal and its pragmatic meaning. A few novel features were
added to Experiment 3. First, pre-recorded speech was used
for the input to rigorously control the input children received.
Also, physically manipulable props (a picture card, a cardboard box) replaced the computer screen for the stimuli presentation.

A mixed logit regression analysis with the full two (Nounfocus vs Verb-focus prosody) by two (Experiment 1 vs. Experiment 2) design was employed to predict children’s likelihood of choosing a mentioned animal for each stimulus sentence (e.g., choosing a zebra when the input sentence was “it
looks like a zebra”). The model reported here has a full factorial random effect structure justified by the data, which contains random by-subject and -item slopes. All the predictors
were sum-coded and there was no sign of collinearity. The
original model contained the item order as a fixed effect, but
it was removed from the analysis that follows based on a null
effect in model comparison.
Overall, children showed a marginal but non-significant
preference for choosing the mentioned animal when they
heard the Noun-focus prosody (β = .62, p < .07). Importantly, children were overall more likely to choose the mentioned animal in Experiment 2, where an explicit guessquestion was present (β = 1.43, p < .003) (Figure 5). There
was also a significant interaction term between the prosodic
input and the conditions (β = 2.41, p < .001), such that children were more likely to choose a mentioned animal based
on the Noun-focus prosody in Experiment 2. That is, the explicit guess-question about a target animal facilitated their
comprehension of the pragmatic interpretations of the two
prosodic patterns. An additional analysis revealed that there
was also an effect of age: older children tended to choose
mentioned animals across conditions and input patterns significantly more often (β = .08, p < .04).
How did the contextual support lead to adult-like judgement patterns? Two follow-up analyses were conducted to
test if the presence and the types of guesses could predict
children’s choice behaviours. In Experiment 2, children were
willing to make guesses 79% of the time, 53% of which included an animal mentioned in the input sentences. Consequently, the target animal was introduced to the discourse by
the child 42% of the time, and by the puppet 58% of the time
(e.g., “I’m gonna guess it’s an X”). The children’s responses
to the puppet’s guess-question were coded as binary predictors: (1) whether the child offered an animal name or not; and
(2) whether the child made a correct guess. These predictors
were included in two different models of children’s choice
of a mentioned animal in the Experiment 2. However, neither of these predictors was significant (p > .8 and p > .7 respectively). This suggests that the facilitative effect observed
in Experiment 2 cannot be reduced to children’s expectation
about a particular animal. Whether or not the child guessed
correctly at the outset, the explicit introduction of the animal
name provided support for their prosodic interpretations.

Methods
Participants 36 children acquiring English as their first
language (24 girls, 12 boys; mean age 4;6, age range 3;8-5;2)
were recruited and tested. They were randomly assigned to
one of the three conditions described in Table 1. 60 adults
were also tested on-line, using Amazon Mechanical Turk.
3 adult participants were excluded from the data because
their participation time was two standard deviation below the
mean.
Stimuli 16 high-frequency animal names were embedded
in two sentence frames: [It looks like an X] and [It is an X].
Tokens of [It looks like an X] with Noun-focus and Verbfocus prosody, as well as tokens of [It is an X], were recorded
by a female native speaker of American English for use in the
presentation of each trial.
Procedure Participants took part in a two-alternative forced
choice task similar to Experiments 1 and 2. It consisted of a
total of 16 trials (two practice trials and 14 critical trials). As
in Experiment 1, the child participant was first introduced to a
puppet. A mini portable speaker was attached to the puppet in
order to play the audio stimuli. The child first participated in a
picture-naming task, in which they labeled eight animals oneby-one. Then child and puppet took part in a guessing game
where first they were presented with a box and told that it
contained many different pictures of animals. Then the puppet was allowed to peek inside the box and give the child a
clue. Next, each child was presented with two pictures (e.g.,
a zebra and an okapi) and prompted to indicate which of the
two pictures was hidden in the box. Then the experimenter
took a picture card from the box and showed the child which
animal the puppet had actually “seen”. After the first eight
trials, the child was given eight more pictures of animals to
name, and participated in eight more test trials.
Manipulation Children are put into one of the three conditions: Prosory-only, Form-only, and Combined conditions. In
the Prosody-Only condition, as in Experiment 1, the puppet
used either a Noun-focus or Verb-focus contour with [It looks
like an X] to give a hint and a warning respectively. Hence
the Prosody-only condition is expected to replicate the results
from Experiment 1. In the Form-Only condition, the puppet
said [It’s an X!] as a hint when the target animal was an X
(e.g., “It’s a ZEBRA” when the target picture depicted a zebra), compared to the puppet saying [It looks like an X] also
with a focus on the final noun, as a warning when the picture
was not an X (e.g., “It looks like a ZEBRA” when the target

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 tests a hypothesis based on the model of backward inferencing in prosodic comprehension. A structurally
simpler, semantically less ambiguous, sentence “It’s an X”
was added to test if the presence of a familiar signal-intention

855

Table 1: The between-subject manipulation of Experiment 3. The shaded cells indicate sentence patterns used for the warning
function (identifying the hidden animal as not being the mentioned animal)
Prosody-only X
It’s an X
Noun-focus prosody
Verb-focus prosody

“It looks like a ZEBRA”
“It LOOKS like a zebra...”

Form-only
“It’s a ZEBRA”
“It looks like a ZEBRA”

Combined
“It’s a ZEBRA”
“It LOOKS like a zebra...”

picture depicted an okapi). Notice that this manipulation is
done based on the assumption that the Noun-focus prosody
is in principle semantically ambiguous and it can be interpreted as it is an X or It is not an X depending on a speaker’s
preference and a context (Kurumada, Brown, & Tanenhaus,
2012). It is hypothesized that children can better distinguish
the pragmatic intentions based on these formal cues due to
their reliance on lexically encoded information over prosodically encoded information in online processing (Snedeker &
Trueswell, 2003).
Finally, in the Combined condition, the puppet used [It’s
an X] for a hint with Noun-focus prosody, and Verb-focus
prosody (e.g., “It LOOKS like an X”) for a warning. Recall
the word-learning situation with a spoon and a whisk. Presence of a familiar association (the word “spoon” and an intention to pick out a familiar object) results in higher confidence
in a novel mapping compared to a situation in which there is
no such familiar association. Experiment 3 tests if children
can discover pragmatic meaning of contrastive prosody via
a similar pragmatic inference: In the Combined condition,
compared to the Prosody-Only condition, “It LOOKS like an
x” becomes a more likely candidate for conveying the [it is
not an X] meaning because speaker should otherwise have
said “It’s an X” if she had meant that.

Figure 6: Proportions of an mentioned animal chosen by 4year-olds in Experiment 3. Error bars represent standard error
of the mean.

Results and Discussion
All responses from the 14 critical trials were included in the
analysis, as shown in Figure 6 for the children’s response patterns. In the Prosody-only condition, which replicated Experiment 1, children’s responses did not deviate from chance,
and their judgments for each of the two prosodic patterns (“It
looks like an X” and “It LOOKS like an X”) did not differ significantly. In the Form-only condition, children showed more
sensitivity to the contrast intended by the speaker (p. < .3):
They showed more diverged responses for the two types of
sentences intended for a hint and a warning presumably due
to their confidence in the interpretation of “It’s an X”.
In the Combined condition, the children showed nearly
categorical and opposing responses for the two types of
prompts, reliably choosing the mentioned animal when they
heard “It’s an X” and the unmentioned one when they heard
“It LOOKS like an X”. The most interesting comparison can
be made between the responses for the Verb-focus prosody
in the Prosody-only and the Combined conditions. They are
acoustically identical and yet interpreted differently depending on the other sentence type used for a hint function. The
difference between the Form-only and the Combined condi-

Figure 7: Proportions of an mentioned animal chosen by
adults in Experiment 3

tion suggests that children were indeed aware of the pragmatic function of the contrastive prosody used in the Verbfocus prosody.
Figure 7 illustrates adults’ responses in the three conditions. The most significant difference between the children’s
and adults’ responses can be found in the Prosody-only condition. While children’s responses for both of the prosodic
patterns are at chance, adult listeners were almost categorically choosing a mentioned and an mentioned animals based
on the Noun-focus and the Verb-focus contours respectively.
The judgments were less categorical in the Form-only condition, which suggests that the children’s and adults’ response
patterns were similar to each other in the Form-only condition
as well as in the Combined condition.

856

General Discussion

References
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the
unsaid: the role of scalar alternatives in childrens pragmatic inference. Cognition, 118(1), 84–93.
Büring, D. (2003). On d-trees, beans, and b-accents. Linguistics & Philosophy, 26(5), 511-545.
Clark, E. V. (1990). On the pragmatics of contrast. Journal
of Child Language, 17(02), 417–431.
Cruttenden, A. (1985). Intonation comprehension in tenyear-olds. Journal of Child Language, 12, 643–661.
Cutler, A., & Swinney, D. A. (1987). Prosody and the development of comprehension. Journal of Child Language,
14(01), 145-167.
Dennison, H. Y., & Schafer, A. J. (2010). Online construction
of implicature through contrastive prosody. In Speech
prosody 2010 conference.
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009).
Using speakers referential intentions to model early
cross-situational word learning. Psychological Science,
20(5), 578–585.
Ito, K., & Speer, S. R. (2008). Anticipatory effects of intonation: Eye movements during instructed visual search.
Journal of Memory and Language, 58(2), 541–573.
Kurumada, C., Brown, M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2012).
Prosody and pragmatic inference: It looks like speech
adaptation. In Proceedings of the 34th annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Ladd, D. R. (2008). Intonational phonology (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use of
mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20(2), 121–157.
Pierrehumbert, J., & Hirschberg, J. (1990). The meaning of
intonational contours in the interpretation of discourse.
Intentions in Communication, 271 – 311.
Roberts, C. (2004). Discourse context in dynamic interpretation. In L. Horn & G. Ward (Eds.), Handbook of
contemporary pragmatic theory (pp. 197–220). Blackwell.
Sekerina, I. A., & Trueswell, J. C. (2012). Interactive processing of contrastive expressions by russian children.
First Language, 32(1-2), 63-87.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. (2003). Memory and language
using prosody to avoid ambiguity : Effects of speaker
awareness and referential context. Journal of Memory
and Language, 48(1), 103–130.
Solan, L. (1980). Contrastive stress and children’s interpretation of pronouns. J Speech Hear Res, 23(3), 688-698.
Speer, S. R., & Ito, K. (2009). Prosody in first language
acquisition acquiring intonation as a tool to organize
information in conversation. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 3(1), 90–110.
Wells, B., Peppe, S., & Goulandris, N. (2004). Intonation
development from five to thirteen. Journal of Child
Language, 31(04), 749-778.

The results of the three experiments indicate that discourse
contexts provide strong support for preschoolers’ comprehension of contrastive prosody. In particular, Experiment 2 confirmed that an explicit question in a preceding context helped
children to be tuned into the prosodic differences. This was
considered to be because the question made it easier for them
to derive two distinct speaker intentions (i.e., It is an X and It
is not an X). This is in line with previous findings in which
preschoolers’ difficulty in computing scalar implicature was
alleviated by an explicit depiction of contextual alternatives
(Barner, Brooks, & Bale, 2011).
Experiment 3 provided evidence that children engage in
a rather complex probabilistic inferences when interpreting
contrastive prosody: they interpret prosodic contours conditionally, depending on what other speech signals are used by
the same speaker. When the speaker uses a more familiar, and
semantically less ambiguous, sentence (i.e., It’s an X), they
can effectively infer that the prosodic prominence on LOOKS
signals a distinct speaker intention (i.e., It is not an X).
Previous studies have viewed the interpretation of contrastive prosody as part of children’s domain-specific knowledge about mappings between specific patterns of acoustic
signals (i.e., L+H*) and pragmatic meanings. However, that
approach cannot explain how hearing other forms (e.g., “It’s
an X”) in the same context affects children’s understanding
of contrastive prosody. The current results suggest that children are trying to solve a bigger inference problem, where
they cope with uncertainty regarding different speech signals,
and estimate the likelihood with which prosodic signals are
mapped onto different meanings.
These results highlight the possibility that such contextual
inferences allow children to process pragmatic interpretations
of prosody even before they acquire fully-fledged understanding of the prosody-pragmatics interface. As we saw in Experiment 1 and 3, four-year-olds do not yet exhibit adult-like
knowledge about contrastive prosody. In other words, they
do not reliably call to mind a contrast set based solely on
prosodic minimal pairs (e.g., It looks like an X vs. It LOOKS
like an x) and make an inference about a speaker’s intentions.
Nevertheless, with more contextual and linguistic information, they engage in inferences that result in adult-like responses. The role of such contextually-supported inferences
has been discussed almost exclusively in word-learning while
its full implications for language acquisition remain to be understood. The current results suggest that a similar model
can explain pre-schoolers’ intonational interpretation. A contrastive meaning of prosody LOOKS unattainable for those
young children, but it is not in a context.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Sarah Bibyk, Meredith Brown, Marisa Casillas,
Eve V. Clark, Christine Gunlogson, T. Florian Jaeger, Molly
Lewis, and Michael K. Tanenhaus for valuable discussion.

857

