UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coordinate-free Thinking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78j5p3bz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Leo, Joop

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Coordinate-free Thinking
Joop Leo (joop.leo@phil.uu.nl)
Department of Philosophy, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80126
3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands
Abstract

the objects of a complex neither come in a certain order, nor
are objects assigned to positions. Instead, a relation consist of
a network of the complexes interrelated by substitutions. We
may illustrate this as follows.

Thinking outside the box is a nice metaphor, but we are so used
to putting things in boxes that it may seem essential to our
way of thinking. This idea is enforced by the standard view
of relations that says that relata always come in a certain order. There is, however, an alternative view on relations, the
antipositionalist view, according to which the constituents of
the complexes of a relation neither come in a certain order, nor
do they occupy positions. Instead, a relation is conceived as a
network of interrelated complexes. We show that this view facilitates a coordinate-free way of thinking and that it may thus
have a heuristic value.
Keywords: Antipositionalism; relational complex; relation;
substitution.

Introduction
Consider the following state ‘out there’:

According to the standard view on relations, we have two
distinct complexes here: the cat’s being on top of the mat
and the mat’s being under the cat. So, in the first complex
the cat comes first and in the second complex the mat comes
first. However, in the state itself, there is no such order. This
makes the standard view weak.
A better view on relations is the positionalist view. According to this view, each relation comes with a number of
positions to which objects can be assigned. The state above
can be expressed in a neutral way by assigning the cat to the
position Top and the mat to the position Bottom. But for symmetric relations like the adjacency relation, we would get two
indistinguishable complexes for a single state.1 This makes
also this view objectionable.
Kit Fine developed a radically different view on relations,
the so-called antipositionalist view (Fine, 2000). In this view,
1 To

see this, suppose that the adjacency relation has two positions Next and Nixt. Now let object a occupy the position Next and
object b the position Nixt. Then switching the positions of the objects would yield another complex for the same state.

If we substitute in the complex of the cat on the mat a dog
for the cat and a table for the mat, we get the complex of the
dog on the table. Furthermore, substituting in the last complex a caterpillar for the dog and a mushroom for the table
gives the same result as substituting in the original complex
the caterpillar for the cat and the mushroom for the mat.
Since the antipositionalist view rejects order and positions
as fundamental, it is in fact a coordinate-free view on relations.
A detailed comparison of mathematical models for the different views on relations provide strong support for the claim
that antipositionalism is the superior view on relations (Leo,
2008, 2010, 2013b). Nevertheless, the view does not seem to
be in line with our ordinary way of thinking and of expressing
ourselves. Our natural languages are linear and in many languages we exploit the linear order to our advantage to express
factual situations concisely. We say, for example, “the cat is
on the mat” and we know that by mentioning the cat first that
he or she is on top. We may, however, be misled into thinking
that the order is essential for the underlying relation.
This misconception is reinforced by standard logic, which
also imposes an order that is not present in the represented
states ‘out there’ in reality. In fact, standard logic functions
like a distorting mirror. It does not faithfully represent reality.
However, of an impeccable logic we expect that it can represent reality in a very pure and natural way. Only, such a logic
does not yet exist.
In this paper a sketch will be given of a new logic of relations that matches well with a coordinate-free way of thinking. Furthermore some ideas will be given for utilization of
the new logic.

A coordinate-free view of the world
Suppose you had to make clear that a block a is on top of
another block b, but that you were not allowed to use expressions in which the order a and b are mentioned is relevant for

2855

the meaning, and also that you are not allowed to use positions like Top and Bottom. In other words, you would have to
give a coordinate-free account of the state.
Then what you could do is point at a situation where a is indeed on top of b. Now there is a big chance that someone else
will not directly know what kind of relationship you mean
between a and b. It might, for example, be thought that you
wanted to express that a and b are close to each other. But it
would help if you would point at a lot of other situations and
in case there is a vertical placement between two objects you
would say “This is another state of the same relation that can
be obtained from the original state by substituting this object
for a and that object for b,” and for dissimilar situations you
would say “This state is not of the same relation.”
The relation could in this way be grasped without using
a specific order for the objects and also without using positions. In this setting, we understand the relation by explicitly
using the notion of substitution. A very interesting question
is how much of the world we could understand in terms of
substitutions.
I consider substitution as a primitive kind of operation. We
have, for example, a clear understanding of what it means to
substitute Romeo for Adam in Adam’s loving Eve. What is
less clear, however, is how important the notion of substitution is for our understanding of the world.
When you think about Adam’s loving Eve and of Romeo’s
loving Juliet, you probably do not think explicitly in terms of
substitutions. Rather, you think in terms of the love relation
applied in a certain way to the persons involved. This is in line
with the standard view and the positionalist view on relations,
which considers a relation as something with ‘holes’ in which
things can be put.
As I argued before, the standard view and the positionalist
view on relations are wrong.2 But this does not mean that the
views are also harmful. In Leo (2010), an explicit justification
was given for using positional representations. Moreover, positional representations are very practical.
Nevertheless, realizing that on a fundamental level there
are no positions in relations is a liberating thought. It opens
the door to explore new ways of learning and of looking at
the world.
Because substitution may be an essential ingredient for any
truly intelligent system, the insights are likely also relevant
for the field of artificial intelligence. One of the challenges
will be to investigate whether and how a general notion of
substitution can be implemented in artificial systems.

to a minimum, some basic knowledge of predicate logic will
be assumed.
Let us start with the love relation. In predicate logic this
relation is represented by a binary predicate symbol, say L,
and the state of Adam’s loving Eve is represented by a formula like L(a, e). The order of the arguments a and e play a
role for the interpretation. But it makes no sense to say that in
the state itself Adam comes first. The key question is: How
can we get rid of the order?

Developing a logic of relations

This might look as something that is trivially true, but this is
not the case since we do not assume that all terms have an
interpretation. It is similar to what we have in natural languages with non-referring terms like ‘Vulcan’, ‘ether’, ‘Santa
Claus’, and ‘5 loves Eve’, and in arithmetic with terms like
‘ 10 ’. The way equations are interpreted in our logic guarantees that if t = t 0 , then both t and t 0 have an interpretation. In
other words, for an equality assertion to be true, the existence
of the interpretation of the terms is required.

The motivation for developing a logic of relations is that we
like to have a formal framework that captures the essence of
‘real’ relations. In this section, a short description is given
of a new logic in which we can reason about relations in a
coordinate-free way. Although the technical details are kept
2 Views based on thematic roles are also objectionable; they cannot handle certain cyclic relations. (cf. Fine (2000, p. 17, note 10)).

The main idea
As in predicate logic, the new logic also has terms and formulas, where the terms represent entities in the world (or in
our domain of discourse) and the formulas represent assertions about these entities. For example, a term may represent
Adam and a formula may represent the assertion that Adam
loves Eve.
To prevent problems with the order, we will in our
new logic not accept terms F(x1 , . . . , xn ) and formulas
P(x1 , . . . , xn ) for any n ≥ 2. At the same time we do not want
to loose anything of the expressive power of predicate logic.
Fortunately this is possible.
The main idea for a new logic of relations is to use terms
to represent not only individuals, but also all kinds of complex entities ‘out there’ and to build formulas from the terms
only with equality and normal logical connectives and quantifiers. So, we will get rid of predicates altogether—with the
exception of equality.
The terms may, for example, not only represent persons
like Adam and Eve, but also complexes like Adam’s loving
Eve and they may even represent substitutions like the one
from Adam’s loving Eve to Romeo’s loving Juliet. Formally,
for these entities the terms might look like:
a, e, Lae , s
In addition, we have terms like src(s), representing the source
of the substitution s, i.e. the complex of Adam’s loving Eve,
tgt(s), representing its target, i.e. Romeo’s loving Juliet, and
s(r), representing the substitution of Adam by Romeo in the
original complex.
As we said, the formulas represent assertions about the
terms. To express in a formula that Adam loves Eve we could
say
Lae = Lae

2856

Constituents axiom
For any complex, all substitutions are defined for the same
objects:

Because we need existence assertions so often, we abbreviate the formula above as
E! Lae
Now if we would like to express that Eve loves Adam as
well, then this might require a much larger formula involving src, tgt, =, logical connectives and quantifiers. For this
reason, it is convenient to introduce abbreviations like:

∀x ∀s (x in src(s) → E! s(x))
Extensionality of substitutions axiom
A substitution is uniquely determined by what objects are
substituted for the constituents of a complex:

E! Lae [a 7→ e, e 7→ a]

∀s, s0 (src(s) = src(s0 ) ∧ ∀u (s(u) ' s0 (u)) → s = s0 )

Here Lae [a 7→ e, e 7→ a] stands for the result of substituting e
for a and a for e in the complex Lae .
What I presented here is only an example. It is just to give
an impression of the logic of relations. In Leo (2013a) a more
detailed and formal description of the syntax and semantics of
the logic is given.

Identity of substitutions axiom
Substituting for each object of a complex the same object
results in the same complex:
∀x (x is a complex → ∃s (src(s) = x ∧ tgt(s) = x ∧
∀u (u in x → s(u) = u))

Axiomatization
For the logic of relations, a rather straightforward axiomatization can be given. Here, we do not give the more general
axioms, but only axioms that say something specific about
complexes and substitutions.

Composition of substitutions axiom
Substitutions can be composed like partial functions:
∀s, s0 (tgt(s) = src(s0 ) → ∃s00 (src(s00 ) = src(s) ∧
tgt(s00 ) = tgt(s0 ) ∧ ∀u (s00 (u) ' s0 (s(u)))))

The logic has two constants:
src, tgt

Furthermore, to make deductions we use modus ponens as
our single rule of inference:

The constants will be interpreted as partial functions that
give the source and the target of a substitution.

from ϕ and ϕ → ψ, infer ψ

For convenience, we give a few definitions:
E! t :

t =t

t ' t0 :

E! t ∨ E! t 0 → t = t 0

With these axioms and this rule of inference we have a
powerful system to reason about all kinds of relational structures in a natural way.

t is a complex :

∃s (t = src(s))

Advantages of the logic of relations

t in t 0 :

∃s (src(s) = t 0 ∧ E! s(t))

The first formula, E! t, says that (the interpretation of) the
term t is defined. The formula t ' t 0 expresses weak equality
between the terms t and t 0 , i.e. if either t or t 0 is defined,
then so is the other and their contents are the same. The
formula ‘t is a complex’ is true if and only if t is the source
of a substitution. And the last formula, t in t 0 , expresses that
t is an object that belongs to t 0 , which is the case if t 0 is the
source of a substitution for which s(t) is defined.
The axioms are as follows :
Source and target axioms
Any substitution has a source and a target:
∀s (E! src(s) ↔ E! tgt(s))
The target of a substitution is a complex as well:
∀s (E! tgt(s) → tgt(s) is a complex)

With this design of the new logic we get the same expressive
power as that of first-order predicate logic. In addition, it has
some significant advantages compared to predicate logic:
1. We got rid of the artificial order of the arguments of a relation. The logic allows us to express relations in a neutral
way. This applies not only to everyday relations like the
love relation, but to mathematical relations as well. We
speak of the less-than relation and the greater-than relation, but it would be more natural and correct to say that
there is just a single strict ordering relation. In the logic
of relations this single relation can be formulated in a convincing way.
2. The logic of relations seems conceptually simpler than
predicate logic. The formulas only make use of terms, logical connectives, quantifiers and equality. Predicate symbols do not occur at all—except equality. I consider this
a significant advantage. The logic allows us to talk in a
purely ‘logical’ way about the things that are ‘out there’.

2857

3. Substitution—the basic operation of the new logic—is a
very intuitive notion. In my view it is more elementary
than assuming that arguments of a relation come in a specific order or that relations have fixed positions to which
arguments can be assigned.
4. In the logic of relations, certain complex properties of objects can be expressed very concisely. For example, that
objects a and b have exactly the same relations can be expressed as
∀x (x is a complex → E! x[a 7→ b, b 7→ a])
In predicate logic we need in some cases an infinite number
of formulas for this.
5. In principle, the logic of relations allow complexes to have
any number of objects, including infinitely many. This is
not the case for normal predicate logic.
What might seem a disadvantage of the logic of relations is
that the formulas can be relatively long. However, using abbreviations like t[u1 7→ v1 , . . . , un 7→ vn ] may solve this problem. We might even go a step further and let certain formulas
look exactly like formulas of ordinary predicate logic, for example by writing L(x, y) for E! Lae [a 7→ x, e 7→ y].
In conclusion, the logic of relations has the potential to represent reality more adequately than predicate logic.

Learning relations
The new logic of relations may influence the way we look at
the world. But how do we normally ‘learn’ relations? Is it by
substitution, by abstraction, by positional representations or
via processes with a completely different logic? And what is
the role of language in learning relations?
A psychological investigation of the way we learn relations
would be extremely useful. It might, however, not be easy to
develop experiments to determine how we learn all kinds of
relations. It will require experts in cognitive psychology to
design appropriate tests and experiments.
And there are also more questions to be asked, for example, how small children and animals learn relations. Answers
to these questions might deepen our insight in fundamental
aspects of the way we understand and represent the world. In
addition, they might suggest new learning programs.
Some theoretical research has been done in this field. For
example, in Tomlinson and Love (2006) a model of relational
learning has been developed. But as far as I know, the role
that the notion of substitution may play in learning relations
has never been explicitly considered. A more explicit investigation could fit in nicely with the research field of the way
we reason. Interesting research in this more general field has
been done in Johnson-Laird (1983); Evans, Newstead, and
Byrne (1993); Gentner and Smith (2012). In particular, work
on analogical reasoning seems to be most relevant.
A related question is what is the best way for artificial intelligence systems to learn relations. There is encouraging re-

search with respect to developing algorithms for learning relations (Richards & Mooney, 1992; Heyer, Läuter, Quasthoff,
Wittig, & Wolff, 2001; Katrenko & Adriaans, 2007). In some
cases the goal is to build systems that ‘discover’ relations,
and in other cases to find instances for which a given relation
holds.
As we saw, the basic operation of the new logic is substitution. If we will be able to implement a general notion of
substitution in an AI system, then it might perhaps be possible for such a system to learn a variety of relations by feeding
it large sets of samples. As a result we might get sophisticated
systems that are able to discover all kinds of subtle regularities in the world.

Impact of a coordinate-free view
The introduction of a coordinate system in the 17th century
by René Descartes marked a major step forward for mathematics and physics. The idea is quite simple: to each point in
the plane a pair of numbers is assigned. This made it possible
to describe geometric shapes by algebraic equations. However, in the twentieth century coordinate-free treatments of
certain geometric topics turned out to be simpler and more
elegant. In particular this is the case for vector analysis and
differential geometry.
The choice of a particular coordinate system often turns
out to be irrelevant. In physics, this may have an underlying
reason; around 1910, Albert Einstein introduced the principle of general covariance, according to which the basic laws
of physics remain invariant under changes in frames of reference. From this, one should not immediately conclude that a
completely coordinate-free formulation of the laws is always
possible. It would also be misleading to call the coordinates
used in physics artefacts.
For relations the situation is different. According to the
antipositionalist view—the superior view on relations—a relation has on a fundamental level no positions and no order
for the relata. The view is genuinely coordinate-free. We do
not have the problem of having to deal with irrelevant details
like choosing an order, since such details are simply lacking.
This observation may not immediately have an effect on
how we perceive the world around us. However, I expect an
impact in the longer term:
1. Becoming more acquainted with the new logic of relations
may make us more familiar with the idea that relations
around us are indeed networks of interrelated complexes.
This may help us to ‘discover’ new relations and instances
of relations in an easier way.
2. An interesting application of the new logic presented in
this paper will be the development of a philosophically
driven alternative for set theory—the standard foundation
of mathematics. There is a substantial need for this, since
we do not live in a world of sets, but in a world of things
with relations between them. Although almost everything

2858

can be coded in set theory, the coding is in some cases quite
artificial.3

Leo, J. (2013b). Relational complexes. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 42, 357–390.
Richards, B., & Mooney, R. (1992). Learning relations by
pathfinding. In Proceedings of the tenth national conference on artificial intelligence (pp. 50–55). San Jose, CA.
Tomlinson, M., & Love, B. (2006). Learning abstract relations through analogy to concrete exemplars. In Proceedings of the cognitive science society (pp. 2269–2274). Vancouver, Canada.

3. The new logic may be useful for developing a new programming language in which complexes and substitutions
play a central role. Programs written in such complexoriented programming languages may have a simpler internal structure. This would be of great interest.
4. Finally, I can imagine that some day an effect of this research may be found in websites, shops, airports, and
cities: innovations in the design of such places may be
inspired by what is for us the most logical way to relate
things.
It will be obvious that to accomplish the goals mentioned
above, more innovative and interdisciplinary research needs
to be done—in particular by computer scientists, linguists,
logicians, philosophers, and psychologists. But the results so
far are promising.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a VENI grant from the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). I
thank Niels van Miltenburg, Vincent van Oostrom, and Albert
Visser for their comments on the paper.

References
Evans, J., Newstead, S., & Byrne, R. (1993). Human reasoning: The psychology of deduction. Hove: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Ltd.
Fine, K. (2000). Neutral relations. The Philosophical Review,
109, 1–33.
Gentner, D., & Smith, L. (2012). Analogical reasoning. In
V. S. Ramachandran (Ed.), Encyclopedia of human behavior (2nd ed.) (pp. 130–136). Oxford: Elsevier.
Heyer, G., Läuter, M., Quasthoff, U., Wittig, T., & Wolff, C.
(2001). Learning relations using collocations. In Proceedings of the ijcai workshop on ontology learning.
Johnson-Laird, P. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Katrenko, S., & Adriaans, P. (2007). Learning relations
from biomedical corpora using dependency tree levels. In
K. Tuyls (Ed.), Lecture notes in computer science (pp. 61–
80). Berlin: Springer.
Leo, J. (2008). Modeling relations. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 37, 353–385.
Leo, J. (2010). The logical structure of relations. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Philosophy, Utrecht University.
Leo, J. (2013a). A logic of natural relations (Logic Group
Preprint Series No. 307). Utrecht: Department of Philosophy, Utrecht University.
3 An ordered pair ha, bi, for example, may be coded in set theory
as the set {{a}, {a, b}}.

2859

