UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dancing With Myself: The effect of majority group size on perceptions of majority and
minority robot group members

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tw6r4sk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Admoni, Henny
Hayes, Bradley
Feil-Seifer, David
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dancing With Myself: The effect of majority group size on perceptions of majority
and minority robot group members
Henny Admoni, Bradley Hayes, David Feil-Seifer, Daniel Ullman, and Brian Scassellati
Department of Computer Science, Yale University
51 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT USA
Abstract
While social psychology has identified characteristics of intergroup dynamics, few studies have looked into the perceptions of robot group dynamics. In this experiment, we separate robots into majority and minority groups based solely
on their behavior in a simple dance routine. We attempt to
understand how people’s perceptions of robots within those
groups change based on group size and features of behavior.
Participants viewed the robot dances and rated one robot from
each group on a variety of characteristics. We find that being from the minority versus majority group has a significant
impact on perceptions of a robot’s creativity, interestingness,
anti-sociality, dancing ability, and how much of a team player
it is. At the same time, individual behaviors (leading the dance,
following the dance, or performing an entirely unique dance)
have no statistical effect on participants’ ratings of robot characteristics. From these results, we conclude that group size has
a larger effect than behavior on subjective evaluations of robots
in majority and minority groups.
Keywords: Group dynamics; majority group; minority group;
intergroup relations; robotics; human-robot interaction

Introduction
The tendency to categorize people into established groups is
an automatic social behavior, and influences much of how we
perceive the world. Psychologists have studied the dynamics of intergroup relations, particularly when the group sizes
are unequal, for many decades (Tajfel, 2010). Among many
other findings, the literature reveals that minority groups—
those with fewer members—are susceptible to being influenced by a unanimous majority group (Asch, 1956), even
when the majority’s assertions are incorrect on a point of fact.
Furthermore, people are biased toward perceiving their own
group (an in-group) with more positive characteristics than a
group of “others” (an out-group) (Tajfel, 1974).
In this paper, we pursue a systematic, empirical analysis
of how simple manipulations of group dynamics can affect
the perception of group members’ personal qualities, some of
which are not directly related to the behaviors being demonstrated. To accomplish this, we analyze peoples’ judgments
of a group of simple robotic agents in terms of characteristics such as interestingness, creativity, and sociality. We vary
the agents’ behaviors in systematic ways to tease apart which
elements of their behavior affect these character judgments.
In particular, we compare peoples’ perceptions of a majority
group robot—one member of a group of robots all exhibiting
nearly identical behaviors—to their perceptions of a minority
group robot—a single robot exhibiting a distinct set of behaviors different from the majority group.
In the last century, Michotte investigated the appearance
of animacy by systematically varying the behavior of simple

moving shapes (Michotte, 1963). The current investigation
is inspired by this and, in some sense, continues Michotte’s
work by investigating the characteristics of groups of agents
by systematically varying the behavior of the group. Through
this work, we hope to contribute a greater understanding of
social attributions and the dynamics of groups.
Another benefit of this work is a greater understanding of
the perception of robot groups. As technology improves,
groups of humans are being joined by increasingly agentic
technologies such as medicine-delivery robots in hospitals
and package-retrieval robots in warehouses. Research in the
field of human-robot interaction (HRI) has begun to examine
intergroup relations in terms of including or excluding robots
from human in-groups. Studies have shown that people respond more favorably to robots in their in-group than one in
an out-group (Eyssel & Kuchenbrandt, 2011; Kim, Kwak,
& Kim, 2010; Kuchenbrandt, Eyssel, Bobinger, & Neufeld,
2011; Wang, Rau, Evers, Robinson, & Hinds, 2009). However, much of this research investigates a single robot interacting with one or more humans. This paradigm is historically reasonable, because social robots have been typically
designed for and deployed in single-robot environments. As
robots become less expensive and more socially accepted,
however, groups of robots may become more common. In
these cases, understanding the dynamics of robot groups will
be important for robot designers and users.
Few studies have explored intergroup dynamics for groups
comprised exclusively of robots. Most importantly, little research exists that addresses the perception of groups of robots
that are distinguished solely based on the behavior of the
group members. We are interested in how the behavioral categorization of robots into majority and minority groups affects
perceptions of group members’ characteristics.
In this paper, we describe an experiment that attempts to
identify the effect of majority group size on people’s characterizations of majority group and minority group robots. We
use a basic robot behavior—a simple dance—as the distinguishing feature between groups. In our experimental manipulation, we vary both majority group size (one, three, or
seven robots in the majority group versus a single-robot minority group) and the type of dance performed by the minority group robot (same as or different from the majority group
dance). We ask participants to rate the robots on a number
of characteristics both related to and unrelated to dancing, in
an attempt to understand how groups distinguished only by
behavior are perceived. Our hypotheses are:
H1 The minority group robot will be rated more highly in in-

1708

dividualistic characteristics (such as “creative” and “antisocial”) than a majority group robot. Because its behavior will set it apart from the majority group, we expect the
single minority robot to appear more independent than the
group of similiarly-behaving majority group robots. We
expect to see these characterizations with both positive and
negative connotations.
H2 As the majority group size increases, the differences between minority and majority group members will increase.
Research has demonstrated a positive correlation between
group size and conformity (Tanford & Penrod, 1984). Although participants in this study are not conforming themselves, they are making a character judgment about the
conformity (and conversely, the individuality) of the minority group agent, so we expect this trend to hold.
H3 Dance type will affect how the minority robot is perceived
relative to the majority. For instance, a dance in which
the minority robot performs the motions one second before
the majority group robots will lead to perceptions of the
minority robot as the leader.

Related Work
In this paper, we ask participants to make judgments of majority and minority group members from an outside perspective;
the participant is not a member of either group. In contrast,
in-group and out-group studies typically involve the participant being a member of one of the groups. Though we are
analyzing majority versus minority groups in this paper, we
are still influenced by research about in-group and out-group
dynamics, and we briefly summarize the literature here.
Intergroup relations among human groups have been studied for over four decades, and there is a well-established body
of literature describing the effects of in- and out-group membership on perception and behavior of people (e.g., (Tajfel,
1982; Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher, & Wetherell, 1987;
Brewer & Brown, 1998)). People exhibit positive responses
to conformity with in-group norms, and they tend to be protective of the in-group stereotype (Castano, Paladino, Coull,
& Yzerbyt, 2002; Christensen, Rothgerber, Wood, & Matz,
2004). People also tend to view an out-group as having
less variety than their in-group (Boldry, Gaertner, & Quinn,
2007). Similarly, members of a group of size one tend to
be stereotyped by their distinguishing characteristic, such as
gender (Wolman & Frank, 1975).
Studies of group pressure between minority and majority
groups have found that both groups can be swayed by the
other, but that minority groups are particularly susceptible
to being overridden by majority opinion (Asch, 1956). The
amount of influence exerted by either a majority or a minority group is mostly affected by the size of the competing
groups, and is less affected by the task or group characteristics (Tanford & Penrod, 1984).
While human groups have been studied extensively, less research exists on peoples’ perceptions of robot groups. Studies have shown that robots perceived as in-group members

appear more compelling, familiar, reliable, and anthropomorphic (Kim et al., 2010; Kuchenbrandt et al., 2011; Wang
et al., 2009). Participants report more positive interactions
with an in-group robot than an out-group robot, even when
that grouping was established only implicitly by changing
the robot’s name and country of origin (Eyssel & Kuchenbrandt, 2011). Participants exhibit greater perception of secondary emotions to in-group virtual agents (Besmann & Rios,
2012). Responses to in-group membership may depend on
culture: one study found that Chinese participants (i.e., from
a more collectivist culture) were more comfortable with a
robot than US participants (i.e., from a more individualistic
culture) when that robot was presented as a strong in-group
member (Evers, Maldonado, Brodecki, & Hinds, 2008).

Experiment Design
We used survey responses to videos of groups of dancing
robots to investigate how in-group size and out-group behavior affected perceptions of group members. Surveys were
completed using an interactive web page provided by SocialSci, an online social science research utility. Respondents were recruited from the SocialSci survey pool, a vetted collection of survey takers similar to Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Respondents were rewarded for their time with
SocialSci credits which can be exchanged for gift cards and
other rewards (SocialSci, 2012).
In all, 89 respondents were recruited. All survey respondents were over 18 years of age, with a mean age of 29 years
(SD 10 years). About half (54%) of the respondents were
male. Sixty-two percent of respondents identified themselves
as white, 6% were African-American, 12% Hispanic, 10%
Asian, 2% Pacific Islander, and 6% identified as “Other.”

Stimuli
We employed a 3 × 4 within-respondents design. The two
factors in this design are group size (one majority versus
one minority robot, three majority robots versus one minority
robot, and seven majority robots versus one minority robot)
and dance type (similar, unique, follower, and leader). The
condition with a single majority robot was used as a control.
Participants saw one video from each combination of group
size and dance type for a total of twelve videos. We randomized presentation order of these twelve videos. To add to the
perception of dancing, each video had an audio track containing one of five songs taken from a current top-40 pop music
list. The robots’ dance rates were altered with video processing to match the tempo of the current song. Song presentation
order was also randomized.
Each video clip was 30 seconds long. Videos were created
by stitching together multiple videos of the same robot (for
majority-group members) or a different robot (the minoritygroup member) side-by-side (see Figure 1 for a still image
from one video). The position of the minority-group robot
was randomized across trials. In order to elicit a sense of
realism, small delays were added to some majority-group
members’ videos at random; these delays were 10 frames

1709

(about 160 milliseconds) at maximum, and simply served to
strengthen the illusion that the video presented to participants
showed several individual robots instead of one robot replicated several times.
To test how behavior affects characterizations of majority
and minority group members, we created four distinct dance
types. Figure 2 shows these four conditions. Dance types are
described as a comparison of the minority robot’s dance to
the majority group’s dance, and they can vary across two dimensions. First, the minority robot’s dance can have the same
available dance moves (repertoire) or a disjoint set of dance
moves than the majority group’s dance. Second, the minority
robot’s dance can have the same sequence of dance moves or
a different sequence of dance moves than the majority group’s
dance. In the similar condition, the minority robot’s dance
has the same repertoire but a different sequence of moves. In
the unique condition, the minority robot’s dance has a completely disjoint repertoire. In the follower condition, the minority robot’s dance has the same repertoire and the same sequence of moves, but the minority robot’s sequence is one
second behind that of the majority group members, eliciting the appearance that the minority robot is following the
majority robots and struggling to catch up. Finally, in the
leader condition, the minority robot’s dance again has the
same repertoire and sequence as the majority group’s dance,
but this time it is the minority robot that performs its sequence
ahead of the majority robots by one second, in an attempt to
simulate a single leader that is being followed by the other
robots. These dances were designed to span the range of possible group dynamics, to identify how a robot’s behavior with
respect to other robots affects peoples’ perceptions of it.

Survey
The survey consisted of one page for each of the twelve
videos and a final page to collect demographic information.
Each video page contained a video that was 140 pixels tall
and either 222 pixels wide (in the control, one-versus-one
condition), 444 pixels wide (in the three-versus-one condition), or 888 pixels wide (in the seven-versus-one condition).
Each robot was numbered with an overlay on the video which
did not obstruct a view of the robot’s motions (see Figure 1).
Following the video stimulus, respondents were asked to
rate two of the robots (a random member of the majority
group and the sole minority group member) on nine attributes
using a seven-point scale:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

How well did robot x dance?
How entertaining is robot x?
How likable is robot x?
How lifelike is robot x?
How interesting is robot x?
How much is robot x a team player?
How mindless is robot x?
How creative is robot x?
How anti-social is robot x?

Four survey questions were carefully selected for their
positive and negative connotations of conformity or nonconformity. “Team player” and “mindless” represent positive
and negative conformist words, respectively. Similarly, “creative” and “anti-social” have positive and negative connotations for non-conformity, respectively. Other survey questions address a range of attributes, including those having
to do with the relevant behavior of dancing (“good dancer,”
“entertaining”) and those not specifically related to dancing
(“likable,” “lifelike,” “interesting”).

Results
In order to investigate our three hypotheses, we conducted
within-subjects ANOVAs with group size (one-versus-one,
three-versus-one, or seven-versus-one), dance type (similar,
unique, follower, or leader), group affiliation (majority or minority), and their interactions as fixed factors, participant as
a random factor and each of the nine ratings of the robot as
dependent variables.
Dance type showed no statistically significant effect on ratings between minority and majority robots for any of the
group size conditions, disproving hypothesis H3. Song type
also showed no statistically significant effect, so in our subsequent analysis we combine all trials of a single group size
together, regardless of dance type or song.
Hypothesis H1 predicts that the minority group robot will
be rated more highly than the majority group robot in individualistic characteristics and less highly than the majority group robot in conformist characteristics. The survey attributes dealing with individualism and conformism are: creative, anti-social, mindless, and team player.
For perceptions of how creative the robot was, the majority group robot was rated lower than the minority group robot
(F(1, 2128) = 9.148, p < 0.01). The interaction was also significant (F(2, 2128) = 6.973, p < 0.01). Individual group
comparisons using Tukey HSD confirm significant differences between the minority and majority robots in the threeversus-one and seven-versus-one conditions (Figure 3a).
For perceptions of how anti-social the robot was, the majority group robot was rated lower than the minority group
robot (F(1, 2128) = 26.146, p < 0.001). The interaction was
significant as well (F(2, 2128) = 8.706, p < 0.01). Individual
group comparisons using Tukey HSD confirm significant differences between minority and majority robots in the threeversus-one and seven-versus-one conditions (Figure 3b).
For perceptions of the robot as a team-player, the majority
group robot was rated higher than the minority group robot
(F(1, 2128) = 158.06, p < 0.001). The interaction was significant as well (F(2, 2128) = 39.67, p < 0.001). Individual
group comparisons using Tukey HSD confirm significant differences between minority and majority robots in the threeversus-one and seven-versus-one conditions (Figure 3c).
No statistical differences were found for mindlessness.
Analysis therefore shows significant differences for three of
the four attributes dealing with individualism (creative, anti-

1710

Figure 1: A still image from video of the seven-versus-one group size condition, showing the minority group robot (number 4)
performing a different dance than the seven majority group robots.

Figure 2: A comparison of the four dance types used for the dance manipulation. Each row represents one dance type. The
“available repertoire” column shows a graphical representation of the repertoire for majority and minority groups, where each
shape is a distinct move (e.g., rocking back and forth). The “sample sequence” column shows example dances for each group.
social, and team player), partly confirming H1.
Hypothesis H2 predicts that an increase in group size will
increase the impact of being a minority. There were significant differences between the group size conditions on ratings of the team player attribute, positively correlated with
group size (F(1, 2128) = 14.64, p < 0.001). Individual comparisons with Tukey HSD confirm significant differences in
the minority robot’s ratings between the three-versus-one and
the seven-versus-one conditions. No other differences were
observed across group sizes. Therefore, H2 is only upheld
for the team player attribute.
Analysis of the additional attributes reveals statistical differences between majority and minority robot ratings for interestingness and dance ability as well. For perceptions of
how interesting the robot was, the majority group robot was
rated lower than the minority group robot (F(1, 2128) =
4.128, p < 0.05). The interaction was marginally significant as well (F(2, 2128) = 3.611, p = 0.058). Individual group comparisons using Tukey HSD confirm significant differences between minority and majority robots in
the three-versus-one and seven-versus-one conditions (Figure 3d). For perceptions of how well the robot danced, the
majority group robot was rated higher than the minority group
robot (F(1, 2128) = 30.35, p < 0.01). The interaction was

significant as well (F(2, 2128) = 6.22, p < 0.05). Individual
group comparisons using Tukey HSD confirm significant differences between minority and majority robots in the threeversus-one and seven-versus-one conditions (Figure 3e).
We also found a weak but highly significant correlation between positive and negative conformist words, “team player”
and “mindless” (Pearson’s r = 0.165, p < 0.001), as well
as between the positive and negative non-conformist words,
“creative” and “anti-social” (Pearson’s r = 0.235, p < 0.001).
There were no significant differences in ratings of how
mindless, lifelike, likeable, or entertaining the robots were.
There was also no significant influence of demographic information such as age, gender, or ethnic background.

Discussion
Hypothesis H1 was confirmed in the three-versus-one and
seven-versus-one case for creative, anti-social, and teamplayer attributes. Furthermore, we found statistical differences between majority and minority robots for interestingness and how well the robot danced. In the control case—that
is, in the one-versus-one condition—there was no statistical
difference in ratings for either robot in these five traits, suggesting that the appearance of majority and minority groups
elicited these differences in evaluation.

1711

(a) Creative

(c) Team player

(b) Anti-social

(d) Interesting

(e) Dancing ability

Figure 3: Graphs of participant ratings of minority and majority group robots for each of the group size conditions. The dotted
line indicates an average rating on the seven-point scale. For brevity, we only show ratings that achieved statistically significant
results (.: p < 0.1; *: p < 0.05; **: p < 0.01; ***: p < 0.001; NS: not significant).
We also predicted that majority group size would have an
effect on the magnitude of differences between minority and
majority robots (H2). For the team-player condition, as the
group size increased, the differences between the majority
and minority group robots also increased. Therefore, H2 was
confirmed for one of the attributes. This result is interesting
because it shows that group size can affect the intensity of
“otherness” exhibited by the out-group member. Our finding is in line with other psychology research, which reports
that group size affects the intensity of pressure to conform to
group behavior (Tanford & Penrod, 1984). This result also
suggests that teams are identified not just by coordination of
action but by size of population, because a larger majority
group increased the difference in team-player ratings between
the majority and minority robots. It would be interesting to
identify whether there is an upper bound in majority group
size for this effect. Future work might also analyze minority
group sizes greater than one, to see if the effect of group size
on the intensity of “otherness” is mitigated when the minority
group grows proportionally to the majority group.
The dance types used in this experiment were carefully
designed to account for many possible group interactions:
one group leading another, one group following another, the
groups having completely different behaviors, or the groups
having the same behaviors but in a different pattern. Regardless, we found no significant differences due to dance type,
disproving hypothesis H3. This suggests that it may not mat-

ter what the minority group robot is doing, as long as it is not
doing exactly what the majority robot does. This supports
Asch’s majority effect (Asch, 1956), and is an interesting and
novel finding in multi-robot interactions.
We chose the phrases “team player” and “mindless” as
terms that have positive and negative connotations of conformity, respectively. Similarly, we chose “creative” and “antisocial” for their positive and negative connotations with nonconformity. Results indicate that the out-group robot was
perceived as less conformist (team-player) and more nonconformist (creative, anti-social) overall. When comparing
positive and negative connotations of those categories, we see
weak but highly significant correlations between the two conformist words and between the two non-conformist words.
Thus, if participants saw a robot as conformist, they were
more likely to rate it highly for both positive and negative
conformist words (and similarly with non-conformist words).
In this study, we measured participants’ subjective evaluations, but they were not part of either group. The lack of situatedness of the robots, coupled with the fact that respondents
did not participate in the task, make it unlikely that participants identified with either the majority or minority groups.
Assigning participants to one of the groups might reveal further perceptions relating to group membership, and would allow comparisons to existing research on intergroup dynamics.
This paper investigates a social phenomenon—group
dynamics—using controlled, precise stimuli and quantitative

1712

metrics for evaluation. The general methods presented here,
such as using recorded stimuli to manipulate a single social
behavior within a group, can be useful for exploring many
other social phenomena as well. The use of robots as stimuli further benefits researchers by allowing them to leverage the flexibility, precise control, and repeatability of movements, facial expressions, and other socially relevant behaviors, which may be impractical to achieve with human actors.

Conclusion
Social psychologists have long known that group membership and size affect characterizations of group members, but
there is a dearth of studies on this topic within the field of
human-robot interaction. In this paper, we analyze the dynamics of robot groups: how are members of robot majority and minority groups perceived, and how does this perception change with differences in group size? We created
majority and minority robot groups based on robot behaviors, by having robots perform simple dances which varied
between the two groups in either timing (the minority group
led or followed the majority group) or content (the minority
group performed a different set of behaviors from the majority group). The minority group always contained one robot,
while the majority group size varied from one robot (a control condition) to three robots to seven robots. We found a
significant effect of group size on five characteristics: how
creative, interesting, anti-social, much of a team player, and
good a dancer the robot was. In contrast to this group size
effect, there was no significant influence of behavior on any
character attributions. This research suggests that group size
has a strong effect on the evaluation of robot characteristics.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to anonymous reviewers for helpful comments, and
to Geoffrey Litt, Caroline Jaffe, and Marty Keil for early
exploration of this idea. This material is based upon work
supported by National Science Foundation grants number
1139078 and 1117801, as well as Office of Naval Research
grant number N00014–12–1–0822.

References
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity:
I. A minority of one against a unanimous majority. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 70(9), 1–70.
Besmann, A., & Rios, K. (2012). Pals in power armor: Attribution of human-like emotions to video game characters in
an ingroup/outgroup situation. Cyberpsychology, Behavior,
and Social Networking, 15(8), 441–443.
Boldry, J. G., Gaertner, L., & Quinn, J. (2007). Measuring the
measures: A meta-analytic investigation of the measures of
outgroup homogeneity. Group Processes Intergroup Relations, 10, 157–178.
Brewer, M. B., & Brown, R. J. (1998). Intergroup relations. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.),
The handbook of social psychology (Vol. 1 and 2, pp. 554–
594). New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill.

Castano, E., Paladino, M.-P., Coull, A., & Yzerbyt, V. Y.
(2002). Protecting the in-group stereotype: Ingroup identification and the management of deviant ingroup members.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 365–385.
Christensen, P. N., Rothgerber, H., Wood, W., & Matz, D. C.
(2004, October). Social norms and identity relevance: A
motivational approach to normative behavior. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1295–1309.
Evers, V., Maldonado, H., Brodecki, T., & Hinds, P. (2008).
Relational vs. group self-construal: Untangling the role
of national culture in HRI. In Proceedings of the 3rd
ACM/IEEE international conference on human robot interaction (HRI ’08) (pp. 255–262). New York, NY, USA:
ACM.
Eyssel, F., & Kuchenbrandt, D. (2011). Social categorization
of social robots: Anthropomorphism as a function of robot
group membership. British Journal of Social Psychology.
Kim, Y., Kwak, S. S., & Kim, M.-s. (2010). Effects of intergroup relations on people’s acceptance of robots. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM/IEEE international conference on
human-robot interaction (HRI ’10) (pp. 107–108). Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press.
Kuchenbrandt, D., Eyssel, F., Bobinger, S., & Neufeld, M.
(2011). Minimal group–maximal effect? Evaluation and
anthropomorphization of the humanoid robot NAO. In
B. Mutlu, C. Bartneck, J. Ham, V. Evers, & T. Kanda
(Eds.), Social Robotics (Vol. 7072, pp. 104–113). Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg.
Michotte, A. (1963). The perception of causailty. Oxford,
England: Basic Books.
SocialSci.
(2012, September).
Available from
http://www.socialsci.org/
Tajfel, H. (1974). Social identity and intergroup behaviour.
Social Science Information, 13, 65–93.
Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations.
Annual Review of Psychology, 33, 1–39.
Tajfel, H. (Ed.). (2010). Social identity and intergroup relations. New York, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Tanford, S., & Penrod, S. (1984, March). Social influence
model: A formal integration of research on majority and
minority influence processes. Psychological Bulletin, 95,
189–225.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., &
Wetherell, M. S. (1987). Rediscovering the social group:
A self-categorization theory. Cambridge, MA, USA: Basil
Blackwell.
Wang, L., Rau, P.-L. P., Evers, V., Robinson, B., & Hinds,
P. (2009). Responsiveness to robots: effects of ingroup
orientation & communication style on HRI in China. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE international conference
on human robot interaction (HRI ’09) (pp. 247–248). New
York, NY, USA: ACM.
Wolman, C., & Frank, H. (1975, January). The solo woman in
a professional peer group. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 45, 164–171.

1713

