UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deception as a Social Strategy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/204382h5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gupta, Swati
Laine, Tei
Sakamoto, Kayo

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deception as a Social Strategy
Swati Gupta (guptas@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg), Tei Laine (lainet@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg),
Kayo Sakamoto (sakamotok@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg)
Programme in Computational Social Cognition,
Institute of High Performance Computing,
1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis North, Singapore 138632

Keywords: deception; lying; social interaction; interpersonal
relationships; decision making; goals; computational modeling;
risk taking; incentives; motivation; message design

Why is it important
Most of the research on deception has focused on
deception detection, rather than generation. We believe
there is a need to move in the direction of rectifying this
imbalance, for the reasons mentioned in the abstract above.
This workshop will provide an opportunity for people
interested in deception to focus more on the generation
aspect, and will help in making a stronger case of more
research in this area.

Abstract
Deception can be advantageous to a deceiver when the
truth conflicts with his or her goals - be they personal or
social, selfless or selfish. Thus it is that people regularly use
deception to avoid conflict with others, to avoid punishment
or embarrassment, to fit into a group, to harm, protect or
help others, and for material or non-material benefit to
themselves. While there are many ways in which people can
deceive, for example, by choosing to fabricate rather than to
tell a half-truth, there are always cost-benefit trade-offs,
regardless of the strategy a person chooses. Understanding
why people deceive in everyday life situations, how they do
it, why they choose one strategy over another, and why
sometimes they might choose not to deceive at all, even in
the absence of any serious anticipated cost, will enable us to
build richer models of socially intelligent behavior--models
that could be employed in computational systems designed
to facilitate enterprises such as elder care, tutoring, and
professional training. In this workshop, we aim to address
three basic questions: (1) what factors lead people to
deceive? (2) what makes them decide to deceive one way
rather than another? and (3) how can we model these
factors computationally?

Relevance to CogSci 2013
The goals of this workshop, which focuses on an
emerging and a cross-disciplinary research topic, are
directly linked to the theme of CogSci 2013, which is
"Cooperative Minds: Social Interaction and Group
Dynamics." We treat deception as a social strategy, which
often is used to enhance social interactions and cooperation
within groups.

The Organizers
We are an interdisciplinary team of scientists, with a
background in computer science, cognitive science,
computational linguistics, and psychology. For the past two
years, we have been working on a project on this topic, in
which we have brought together literature from diverse
fields, and have investigated issues related to verbal
deception. We proposed a theory of verbal deception which
demonstrated the interaction between a taxonomy of verbal
deception types, and the communicative goals of deception.
Focusing on the decision making aspect of deception, we
also analyzed factors that determine whether a person would
deceive or not, and found that these factors differ depending
on whether the person is facing potential losses or gains.
Following are our most relevant publications.

What we aim to achieve
We aim to highlight research on how people use
deception as a social strategy, and provide an overview of
how issues related to the questions raised above have been
addressed by various disciplines. Even though there has been
research in several fields including communication studies,
philosophy, linguistics,
psychology, economics, and
neuroscience, on the question of why and how people deceive
one another, there is no comprehensive integration of the
different views and observations found in the literature. The
confirmed speakers represent many of these disciplines, and
this workshop would be a good opportunity to explore
together similar research questions from different disciplinary
perspectives.

Gupta, S., Sakamoto, K., & Ortony, A. (2012).
Telling it like it isn’t: a comprehensive approach to
analyzing verbal deception. In F. Paglieri, L.
Tummolini, R. Falcone & M. Miceli (Eds.), The
goals of cognition: Festschrift for Cristiano
Castelfranchi. London, College Publications.
Sakamoto, K., Laine, T., and Farber, I. (in press).
Deciding whether to deceive: Determinants of the
choice between deceptive and honest communication.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization.

32

Aaron C. Elkins
Intelligent Behaviour Understanding Group,
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
180 Queen’s Gate, London SW7 2AZ, UK
Email: a.elkins@imperial.ac.uk
Phone: (44)2075948195
Fax: (44)2075818024

Expected audience
This is a topic of general interest. We expect it to attract
audience from a variety of disciplines like psychology,
linguistics, philosophy, as well as artificial intelligence,
economics, and neuroscience. People working in
interpersonal / strategic communication, decision making,
unethical behavior, morality, truth, and business ethics,
would find it particularly relevant. It would also be of
interest to people working on real world domains like law,
insurance, tutoring, professional training, and elder care.
Our estimate for the number of people in the audience is
approximately 40.

Swati Gupta
Programme in Computational Social Cognition
Institute of High Performance Computing
1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis North
Singapore 138632
Email: guptas@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
Phone: (65) 64191503

Confirmed Speakers
We are currently awaiting responses from a few more
people, and plan to have around 9-10 speaker slots. Below is
the list of confirmed speakers.

Tei Laine
Programme in Computational Social Cognition
Institute of High Performance Computing
1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis North
Singapore 138632
Email: lainet@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
Phone: (65) 64191305

Steve McCornack
467 Communication Arts and Sciences Building
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
Email: mccornac@msu.edu
Phone: (517) 355-3478
Fax: (517) 432-1192

Kayo Sakamoto
Programme in Computational Social Cognition
Institute of High Performance Computing
1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis North
Singapore 138632
Email: sakamotok@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
Phone: (65) 64191285

Timothy R. Levine
482 Communication Arts and Sciences Building
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
Email: levinet@msu.edu
Phone: (517) 432-1124
Fax: (517) 432-1192

Publicity
Some of the relevant mailing lists that we plan to
advertize on are JDM, SPSP, IU's cogsci list, and Cognitive
Science Student Society. We will utilize the social
networking platform to publicize on the Facebook pages of
relevant organizations like the Cognitive Science Society,
International Communication Association, Association For
Business Communication, and AAAI, to name a few. We
also plan to advertise at the Joint Action Meeting, which is
collocated with CogSci.
We would also like to document the workshop outcomes
in the form of an article or a special issue in the journal of a
related discipline.

Giorgio Ganis
School of Psychology, Cognition Institute
University of Plymouth
Drake Circus, Plymouth, Devon, PL4 8AA, UK
Email: giorgio.ganis@plymouth.ac.uk
Phone: (44)1752584812
Shaul Shalvi
Room 108 Building 98, Psychology Department
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
POB 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel
Email: sshalvi@bgu.ac.il
Phone: (972) 086472049
Shahar Ayal
School of Psychology
Interdisciplinary Center (IDC) Herzliya
P.O.Box 167, Herzliya, 46150, Israel
Email: s.ayal@idc.ac.il
Phone: (972) 99602799

33

