UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dependencies First: Eye Tracking Evidence from Sentence Production in Tagalog

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9z68g7q5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sauppe, Sebastian
Norcliffe, Elisabeth
Konopka, Agnieszka E.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dependencies First: Eye Tracking Evidence from Sentence Production in Tagalog
Sebastian Sauppe (sebastian.sauppe@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525XD Nijmegen, Netherlands;
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Wundtlaan 1, 6525XD Nijmegen, Netherlands

Elisabeth Norcliffe (elisabeth.norcliffe@mpi.nl)
Agnieszka E. Konopka (agnieszka.konopka@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525XD Nijmegen, Netherlands

Robert D. Van Valin, Jr (vanvalin@phil-fak.uni-duesseldorf.de)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525XD Nijmegen, Netherlands;
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany;
University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, 609 Baldy Hall, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA

Stephen C. Levinson (stephen.levinson@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525XD Nijmegen, Netherlands;
Radboud University Nijmegen, Erasmusplein 1, 6525HT Nijmegen, Netherlands
Abstract
We investigated the time course of sentence formulation in
Tagalog, a verb-initial language in which the verb obligatorily
agrees with one of its arguments. Eye-tracked participants described pictures of transitive events. Fixations to the two
characters in the events were compared across sentences differing in agreement marking and post-verbal word order. Fixation patterns show evidence for two temporally dissociated
phases in Tagalog sentence production. The first, driven by
verb agreement, involves early linking of concepts to syntactic functions; the second, driven by word order, involves incremental lexical encoding of these concepts. These results
suggest that even the earliest stages of sentence formulation
may be guided by a language's grammatical structure.
Keywords: eye tracking; sentence production; incrementality; Austronesian; verb-initial word order.

Introduction
In the process of transforming thoughts into speech,
speakers begin with a preverbal message, which must then
be encoded linguistically. In English, this process may proceed in a highly lexically incremental manner: for example,
when describing events like the one shown in Figure 1,
speakers may have encoded as little as the first element (the
syntactic subject, e.g., “the boy”) of the to-be-uttered sentence prior to speech onset (Gleitman, January, Nappa, &
Trueswell, 2007). The encoding of additional event participants (e.g., “the ball”) and the relation between them (e.g.,
“kicking”) may be delayed until after speakers finish encoding the first element. This type of incremental planning is
compatible with English morphosyntax, arguably in part
because full noun phrases do not morphologically mark dependencies with other elements in the sentence. For many
sentence types, speakers therefore do not have to commit to
a particular syntactic structure upon beginning to encode
one of the event participants as the syntactic subject. However, not all languages offer this flexibility: in some languages the first word is overtly marked for a dependency

with word(s) occurring only later in the sentence. In such
cases, is there an effect of dependency marking on early
sentence encoding as speakers begin to map the preverbal
message onto linguistic structure?
One such language that exhibits dependency marking on
the first word of a sentence is the Austronesian language
Tagalog. The predicate is in sentence-initial position and
agrees with one of its arguments. Thus, the grammatical
properties of Tagalog allow us to test whether and how linguistic structure influences the earliest phases of sentence
production; specifically, we test whether the overt dependency marking on the first word in a sentence leads to differences in the time course of sentence formulation in Tagalog
compared to languages with no overt dependency marking
on the first word (such as English).
In the following, we first sketch the relevant grammatical
properties of Tagalog and then report the results of a picture
description experiment in which eye-tracked speakers described pictures of simple transitive events.

Tagalog
Tagalog is spoken by approx. 21.5 million speakers in the
Philippines; it belongs to the Western Malayo-Polynesian
branch of the Austronesian language family. We provide a
brief overview of the morphosyntactic properties that are
relevant for the reported experiment. For more comprehensive descriptions of Tagalog morphosyntax, see Himmelmann (2005), Kroeger (1993), and Schachter and Otanes
(1972).
Basic declarative Tagalog sentences are predicate1-initial,
i.e., predicates are followed by their arguments. One argu1

To circumvent the discussion on lexical categories (noun/verb
distinction) in Tagalog (e.g., Himmelmann, 2008), we will use the
term “predicate” throughout this paper to refer to voice-marked
words and the term “argument” to refer to heads of case-marked
(non-oblique) phrases.

1265

ment phrase in each sentence hosts the case marker ang. The
semantic relation between the ang-marked argument and the
predicate is signaled by affixes on the predicate.
The ang-marked argument will henceforth be referred to
as the privileged syntactic argument (PSA). It is morphosyntactically prominent in being the only argument with
which the predicate agrees in semantic role (see sentences
(1–4)) and also in being the target of many syntactic operations (e.g., Kroeger, 1993)2. Arguments marked by ng do
not exhibit these properties and are therefore referred to as
non-privileged syntactic arguments (NPSA).
(1) s<um>isipa
ng=bola
<AV>kick3,4
NPSA=ball
predicate
undergoer
“The child kicks the ball.”
(2) s<um>isipa
ang=bata
<AV>kick
PSA=child
predicate
actor
“The child kicks the ball.”
(3) s<in>ispa
ng=bata
<UV>kick
NPSA=child
predicate
actor
“The child kicks the ball.”
(4) s<in>isipa
ang=bola
<UV>kick
PSA=ball
predicate
undergoer
“The child kicks the ball.”

ang=bata
PSA=child
actor
ng=bola
NPSA=ball
undergoer
ang=bola
PSA=ball
undergoer

marking (UV)6. NPSAs marked by the case marker ng do
not agree with the predicate. Second, there are no syntactic
constraints on the ordering of arguments for the constructions dealt with in this paper. Sentences (1) and (2) have the
same meaning but they differ in their word order: in (1) the
PSA is sentence-final, whereas it is sentence-medial in (2);
the same holds for (3) and (4), respectively. However, canonically, the PSA is in sentence-final position (as in sentences (1) and (3)). Third, the Tagalog voice system is a socalled “symmetrical voice system” (Foley, 2008): sentences
in which the undergoer is selected as PSA and sentences
with an actor PSA are equally transitive. This contrasts with
languages with asymmetrical voice systems such as English
in which valency-changing operations, such as passivization
which detranstivizes the verb, are required to allow the patient/undergoer argument to be the PSA (syntactic subject in
English). Detransitivization is the key part of the asymmetrical voice system in contrast to Tagalog. Thus, all Tagalog
sentences analyzed in this paper are transitive (exhibiting
one PSA and one NPSA phrase), regardless of the semantic
role of the PSA.

How Do Speakers Plan Sentences in Tagalog?

ng=bata
NPSA=child
actor

The sentences in (1–4) illustrate three properties of Tagalog
grammar that are relevant for this study. First, the predicate
always agrees in semantic role with the PSA in basic sentences. In sentences (1) and (2), the PSA denotes the actor5
of the event so the predicate takes actor voice marking
(AV); in sentences (3) and (4) the PSA denotes the undergoer of the event so the predicate takes undergoer voice
2
In English the syntactic subject is the PSA: it triggers agreement with the verb and it is the target of many syntactic operations
(to the exclusion of the syntactic object). In Tagalog, however, we
refrain from using the term “subject” for the ang-marked argument
phrase in order to underscore the fact that the Tagalog PSA is different from the syntactic subject in an accusatively aligned language (such as English).
3
In this paper, we adhere to the Leipzig Glossing Rules
(http://www.eva.mpg.de/lingua/resources/glossing-rules.php); the
following abbreviations are used: AV = actor voice, NPSA = nonprivileged syntactic argument, PSA = privileged syntactic argument, UV = undergoer voice. The first line of a glossed example
shows the sentence in Tagalog with the relevant morphemes separated, the second line provides a word-by-word translation of the
words and morphemes, the third line shows the word order of the
sentence again in terms of semantic roles, the last line gives an
English translation.
4
For the sake of brevity, we waive glossing aspect-mood morphology because it is irrelevant for the morphosyntactic issues
discussed in this paper.
5
We use Foley and Van Valin's (1984) notions of “actor” and
“undergoer” to refer to semantic relations between predicates and
arguments.

The sentence-initial position of the predicate in a Tagalog
sentence means that speakers must encode enough information about the relationship between the two discourse
entities (“boy” and “ball”) to select a suitable predicate
(“kick”) very early in the formulation process. The predicate's agreement in semantic role with the PSA also means
that very early in the formulation process one discourse entity from the preverbal message has to be selected to be the
PSA and linked to that syntactic function so that appropriate
voice marking for the predicate can be selected. Importantly, speakers can produce the PSA immediately after the
predicate (as in sentences (2) and (4)) or may delay its production until the end of the sentence (as in sentences (1) and
(3)).
To what extent do speakers then have to encode the PSA
at the outset of formulation in sentences like (1–4)? We
tested whether the processing of the overt dependency between the predicate and the PSA is temporally separate from
lexical encoding of the character selected to be the PSA by
comparing the time course of formulation for sentences differing in voice and word order.
Native speakers of Tagalog performed a picture description experiment similar to Griffin and Bock (2000) while
their eye movements and speech were recorded. The pictures showed events with one actor and one undergoer (Figure 1). We compared the distribution of fixations to the actor and the undergoer in these pictures for different sentence
6
More precisely, the predicate in (3) and (4) takes patient voice
marking because the PSA denotes the patient of the action. Predicates may also take series of other voices. Following Himmelmann
(2005), we subsume patient voice and these other voices under the
label “undergoer voice” because they share a couple of semantic
and formal characteristics in contrast to actor voice.

1266

Figure 1: example target stimulus picture (eliciting the
example sentences (1–4))
types. First, we compared sentences differing in voice marking and word order, i.e., the actor voice sentence type in (1)
and the undergoer voice sentence type in (3), to investigate
whether the semantic role of the PSA has an early influence
on sentence planning. Second, comparisons between sentences with different voice marking but the same word order
(such as in (2) vs. (3)) and sentences with the same voice
marking but different word order (such as in (1) vs. (2))
were carried out to investigate whether a possible PSA effect on planning is solely due to the planning of the dependency between the predicate and the PSA (i.e., voice marking) or whether it is also influenced by word order.

Experiment
Method
Participants 53 native speakers of Tagalog (13 male; mean
age = 17.5 years; range = 15–28 years) were recruited at De
La Salle University in Manila and participated for payment.
All participants reported that they spoke Tagalog a total of
at least five hours a day and to at least one of their parents.
Materials and Design Target pictures were 44 cartoon
drawings of transitive events (see Figure 1). They were interspersed among 76 filler pictures of intransitive events,
with at least one filler separating any two target pictures.
Two versions of each target picture were created by mirrorreversing the picture. Pictures were then arranged in four
lists created by randomizing the order of the target and filler
pictures and counterbalancing the two mirror-reversed versions of each target picture.
Equipment The experiment was run with a Tobii T120 eye
tracker (120 Hz sampling frequency) on a Panasonic CF-F9
computer. Participants' responses were recorded with a microphone.
Procedure Each experimental session lasted approx. 40
minutes. Participants first read instructions for the experiment in Tagalog and completed a questionnaire about their
linguistic background. The experimenter (a native speaker
of Tagalog) then explained the procedure and repeated the

instructions: participants were asked to describe the events
shown in the pictures with one sentence that named all event
participants as accurately and as quickly as possible.
Stimuli were presented in two blocks, each block lasting
approx. 10–15 minutes. Calibration was performed before
each block. The experiment began with a practice phase in
which participants saw 11 pictures presented one at a time
and heard a recorded description of each depicted event;
these example sentences had predicate-initial word order
and were mostly PSA-final. After presentation of the example descriptions, participants saw the same pictures again
and were asked to describe them themselves. The experimenter provided feedback after each training picture if participants produced non-predicate-initial structures (e.g., existential constructions) or started speaking very late after
picture onset.
In the experimental phase, each picture trial was preceded
by a display showing a fixation dot at the top of the screen.
Participants were asked to look at the fixation dot and the
experimenter initiated the trial with a mouse click. Participants completed the experiment without further instructions
from the experimenter; however, the experimenter monitored the entire experimental session and repeated the instructions if participants started consistently using nonpredicate-initial structures or dropping arguments.

Results
Picture descriptions Speakers produced 384 sentences with
actor voice marking and predicateAV-undergoerNPSA-actorPSA
word order (as in sentence (1)), 67 sentences with actor
voice marking and predicateAV-actorPSA-undergoerNPSA word
order (as in sentence (2)), 787 sentences with undergoer
voice marking and predicateUV-actorNPSA-undergoerPSA word
order (as in sentence (3)), and 26 sentences with undergoer
voice marking and predicateUV-undergoerPSA-actorNPSA word
order (as in sentence (4)). Analyses were limited to the first
three sentence types.
First Fixations The majority of first fixations7 (58.3%)
across all trials fell on the actor in the event. Contrary to
earlier work on English (e.g., Gleitman et al., 2007), first
fixations did not predict choice of voice or word order (both
z’s<1.4, n.s.).
Time Course of Fixations Consecutive fixations to each
character were aggregated into “runs” of fixations directed
to those characters. The distributions of fixations directed to
the actor and to the undergoer were then compared across
the three most frequent sentence types in this dataset (i.e.,
the sentence types in (1–3)) with quasi-logistic regressions
(Barr, 2008, for details about random effects). We selected
three time windows for analysis (0–600 ms, 600–1600 ms,
and 1600–2600 ms after picture onset). Selection of time
windows was based on three theoretically important distinc7

The Tobii Fixation Filter as implemented in Tobii Studio 2.3
was used to determine fixations.

1267

a)

b)

c)

Figure 2: graphs showing fixation proportions to actor and undergoer characters
over time for three sentence types
tions and to facilitate comparisons across the three sentence
types, as explained below.
In all three sentence types included in the analysis (Figure
2), speakers directed more fixations to the character selected
to be PSA than to the NPSA character in an early time window (0–600 ms). The 0–400 ms time window is argued to
correspond to a period of event apprehension (Griffin &
Bock, 2000), and here we extended this window to 600 ms
based on the distribution of fixations in all three sentence
types in Figure 2. Fixations to the two characters in this time
window were aggregated into 50 ms time bins. Griffin and
Bock (2000) propose that after the initial period of event
apprehension, speakers begin fixating the two characters in
the order of mention in order to retrieve their names; indeed,
the distribution of fixations after 600 ms in this dataset
largely shows that speakers fixated characters in the order of
mention. Thus between 600 ms and speech onset (approx.
1600 ms after picture onset), speakers preferentially fixated
the character that was mentioned immediately after the
predicate (independently of syntactic function – i.e., whether it was the PSA or the NPSA – or semantic role). After
speech onset, speakers then began shifting their gaze to the
second character, and we compared the distribution of fixations to the two characters up to 1 second after speech onset
(i.e., between 1600 and 2600 ms). Fixations were aggregat-

ed into 200 ms time bins for the analysis of the 600–1600
ms and 1600–2600 ms time windows.
Three analyses were performed to compare the distribution of actor-directed fixations in sentences differing in
voice and word order in more detail. All analyses included
time bin and sentence type as predictors. All models included random slopes for the two predictors. In the text, we report only the interactions between these factors from the byparticipant analyses using the full random structure.8 Effects
were considered to be reliable at p<0.05 (most effects were
also reliable according to the more conservative pMCMC
estimates calculated for models without random slopes; in
cases of discrepancy between p values calculated for models
with random slopes and pMCMC values calculated for
models without random slopes, we used the more conservative criterion to indicate significance and provide the corresponding pMCMC value).9
8

By-item analyses showed analogous patterns; the full set of byparticipant and by-item results is available from the first author on
request.
9
Linear mixed models were run in R using the lmer() function
of the lme4 package. pMCMC values were calculated with the
pvals.fnc() function of the languageR package. Figures were created using the ggplot2 package in R.

1268

First, to test whether differences in voice marking and
word order predict differences in early encoding of the PSA
and NPSA characters, we compared actor voice sentences
with predicateAV-undergoerNPSA-actorPSA word order (example (1), Figure 2a) and undergoer voice sentences with predicateUV-actorNPSA-undergoerPSA word order (example (3),
Figure 2c). Between 0 and 600 ms, speakers fixated the actor character more often and more quickly when it was selected to be the PSA (i.e., in the actor voice sentences with
predicateAV-undergoerNPSA-actorPSA word order, Figure 2a)
than when it was not (Figure 2c; sentence type × time bin:
β=-0.92, t=-7.16). After 600 ms, speakers fixated the characters in the order of mention. Between 600 and 1600 ms
they fixated the actor character more often when the actor
argument phrase immediately followed the predicate, i.e., in
the undergoer voice sentences with predicateUV-actorNPSAundergoerPSA word order (Figure 2c), then when it was sentence-final (Figure 2a; sentence type × time bin: β=1.14,
t=49.48). They shifted their gaze to the second character
between 1600 and 2600 ms, and thus fixated the actor character less often when the actor argument phrase was not
sentence-final (Figure 2a; sentence type × time bin: β=-1.70,
t=-73.93). These results suggest early encoding of the PSA
character only for the purposes of selecting the appropriate
agreement marking on the predicate; lexical encoding of the
PSA character occurred either before or after encoding of
the NPSA character, according to word order.
Second, we tested whether differences in voice marking
alone can influence the time course of formulation by comparing sentences with the same word order, i.e., actor voice
sentences with predicateAV-actorPSA-undergoerNPSA word
order (example (2), Figure 2b) and undergoer voice sentences with predicateUV-actorNPSA-undergoerPSA word order (example (3), Figure 2c). Speakers fixated the actor character
more often and more quickly between 0 and 600 ms when it
was selected to be the PSA (Figure 2b) than when it was not
selected to be the PSA, i.e., in the undergoer voice sentences
(Figure 2c; sentence type × time bin: β=-1.76, t=-7.46).
However, there were no differences between the actor voice
and the undergoer voice sentences in the overall likelihood
of speakers to fixate the actor character or direct fixations to
it over time between 600 and 1600 ms (sentence type:
β=0.13, t=4.40, pMCMC=0.65; sentence type × time bin:
β=-0.03, t=-0.56, pMCMC=0.93) and between 1600 and
2600ms after picture onset (sentence type: β=-0.06, t=-1.64,
pMCMC=0.84; sentence type × time bin: β=-0.18, t=-3.09,
pMCMC=0.70) because speakers produced the actor character first and the undergoer character second in both sentence
types. This confirms that differences in the time course of
early sentence formulation reflect encoding of features of
the PSA character relevant only for agreement marking.
Finally, we compared actor voice sentences with predicateAV-undergoerNPSA-actorPSA word order (example (1), Figure 2a) and actor voice sentences with predicateAV-actorPSAundergoerNPSA word order (example (2), Figure 2b) to test
whether word order influences fixations to picture characters when voice marking is kept constant. Comparing fixa-

tions to the actor character between 0 and 600 ms showed
no reliable differences between the actor voice sentences
with predicateAV-undergoerNPSA-actorPSA word order (Figure
2a) and the actor voice sentences with predicateAV-actorPSAundergoerNPSA word order (Figure 2b) in this time window
(sentence type: β=-0.36, t=-3.15, pMCMC=0.23; sentence
type × time bin: β=0.88, t=3.00, pMCMC=0.16). The distribution of fixations to the actor and undergoer characters did,
however, differ after 600 ms because the linear order of
these characters in the two sentence types was different.
Thus in the 600 and 1600 ms time window, speakers fixated
the actor character more often if the actor argument phrase
immediately followed the predicate (predicateAV-actorPSAundergoerNPSA word order) then if it was sentence-final (sentence type × time bin: β=1.13, t=15.79), whereas speakers
fixated the actor character less often between 1600 and 2600
ms if the actor argument phrase directly followed the predicate than if it was sentence-final (sentence type × time bin:
β=-1.75, t=-18.39).
Speech onsets Speech onsets are shown in Figure 2 for each
sentence type. Onsets were somewhat shorter in actor voice
sentences with predicateAV-undergoerNPSA-actorPSA word
order than in actor voice sentences with predicateAVactorPSA-undergoerNPSA word order and undergoer voice
sentences with predicateUV-actorNPSA-undergoerPSA word
order (word order × voice: β=-0.19, t=-1.99,
pMCMC=0.052). More importantly, we note a difference
from results obtained with English speakers (Griffin &
Bock, 2000): here, speech onsets occurred while speakers
were still fixating the character that was mentioned first,
suggesting that they had only fully encoded the predicate
before initiating production, whereas English speakers begin
their sentences only after encoding the first character. The
sentence-initial position of the predicate may have allowed
speakers to begin their sentences before completing the encoding of the first-mentioned character.

Discussion and Conclusion
We interpret the results of this experiment as evidence for
linguistic guidance in the earliest stages of sentence production in Tagalog and for a temporal dissociation of the mapping of message-level concepts to syntactic functions and
the lexical encoding of these concepts.
Linguistic guidance in early sentence production is suggested by differences in fixation patterns in the 0–600 ms
time window across the three sentence types we analyze
here: a depicted character was fixated more often if it was to
become the sentence's PSA than when it was not. Specifically, speakers fixated the actor character more often than the
undergoer character before 600 ms if the actor character was
selected as the PSA, regardless of the position of the actor
argument in the sentence (i.e., this pattern held for both,
actorPSA-medial or actorPSA-final word orders). In contrast,
there was no difference in early fixations directed to the
actor character in actor voice sentences with different word
orders (i.e., in actorPSA-medial or actorPSA-final sentences).

1269

In other words, the results suggest that differences in voice
marking (signaling differing semantic roles of the PSAs) but
not differences in word order have an effect on fixation patterns in the earliest stage of sentence planning.
Early fixations of the PSA character suggest that the PSA
effect is a reflex of linking message-level concepts of discourse entities to prominent syntactic functions. Speakers
select a participant of the depicted event to be the PSA and
encode its semantic role in order to produce an appropriate
voice affix at the predicate. We propose that this process
happens very early during formulation as speakers begin
encoding information about the relationship between the
two characters in the event.
Comparisons of the fixation patterns in the two later time
windows (600–1600 ms and 1600–2600 ms) suggest that the
PSA effect, i.e., the linking of a discourse entity concept to
a prominent syntactic function, and the lexical encoding of
the PSA are temporally dissociated. Whereas speakers are
more likely to fixate the character selected to be the PSA
before 600 ms, fixations to the two characters after 600 ms
are contingent on word order. In the 600–1600 ms time
window, the character that is to be mentioned immediately
after the predicate is fixated more often by speakers than the
character that is to be mentioned sentence-finally. Specifically, in actor voice sentences with predicateAVundergoerNPSA-actorPSA word order, speakers shift their gaze
from the actor character (the PSA) to the undergoer character (the NPSA) after 600 ms, and similarly, in undergoer
voice sentences with predicateUV-actorNPSA-undergoerPSA
word order, the speakers' gaze shifts from the undergoer
character (the PSA) to the actor character (the NPSA) after
600 ms. Finally, in actor voice sentences with predicateAVactorPSA-undergoerNPSA word order speakers continue looking at the actor character (the PSA) because it is to be mentioned directly after the predicate. In the 1600–2600 ms
window, speakers then fixate the character to be mentioned
sentence-finally more often than the other character (i.e., the
actor character in the first mentioned sentence type and the
undergoer character in the two latter types). We interpret
this as incremental encoding of the two character names in
the order of mention that is distinct from the early phase of
linking concepts to syntactic functions (0–600 ms).
The results suggest that there are two observable phases
in the sentence production process in Tagalog: an early
phase of sentence planning that includes the planning of the
dependency relation between the predicate and the PSA
(i.e., the voice marking), which is neither influenced by the
actual semantic role of the PSA nor the word order of the tobe-uttered sentence, and a later phase that involves the incremental lexical encoding of the two arguments of the
predicate.
Importantly, these analyses of the time course of sentence
formulation in Tagalog provide insight into a process that is
not easily observable in a language like English, namely the
linking of conceptual discourse entities to prominent syntactic functions. The rigid subject-initial word order of English
prevents dissociating the linking of concepts to syntactic

functions from planning and encoding of the subject argument; thus our results on Tagalog highlight the need for
controlled studies on typologically diverse languages that
allow dissociations between different processes at the interface of thinking and speaking.
Ultimately, more fine-grained models of early message
and sentence formulation are needed to address the relationship between formulation of a preverbal message and the
mapping of this message onto language, and it is important
for the development of such models to consider languages
with grammatical properties that support investigations of
these phenomena (Jaeger & Norcliffe, 2009).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a PhD fellowship from the
International Max Planck Research School for Language
Sciences to the first author and by the Language & Cognition Department of the MPI for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen. We thank Danilo Dayag for administrative help, Philip
Rentillo and Erwin Roxas for help with conducting the experiment and transcriptions, and Ronald Fischer for technical assistance.

References
Barr, D. J. (2008). Analyzing ‘visual world’ eyetracking
data using multilevel logistic regression. Journal of
Memory and Language, 59, 457–474.
Foley, W. A. (2008). The place of Philippine languages in a
typology of voice systems. In Austin, P. K. &
Musgrave, S. (Eds.), Voice and grammatical
relations in Austronesian languages (22–44). Palo
Alto: CSLI Publications.
Foley, W. A. and Van Valin, R. D. (1984). Functional
syntax and universal grammar. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gleitman, L. R., January, D., Nappa, R., and Trueswell,
J. C. (2007). On the give and take between event
apprehension and utterance formulation. Journal of
Memory and Language, 57, 544–596.
Griffin, Z. M. and Bock, K. (2000). What the eyes say about
speaking. Psychological Science, 11, 274–279.
Himmelmann, N. P. (2005). Tagalog. In Adelaar, A. &
Himmelmann, N. P. (Eds.), The Austronesian
languages of Asia and Madagascar (350–376).
Oxon: Routledge.
Himmelmann, N. P. (2008). Lexical categories and voice in
Tagalog. In Austin, P. K. & Musgrave, S. (Eds.),
Voice and grammatical relations in Austronesian
languages (247–293). Palo Alto: CSLI Publications.
Jaeger, T. F. and Norcliffe, E. J. (2009). The cross-linguistic
study of sentence production. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 3, 866–887.
Kroeger, P. (1993). Phrase structure and grammatical
relations in Tagalog. Palo Alto: CSLI Publications.
Schachter, P. & Otanes, F. T. (1972). Tagalog reference
grammar. Berkeley: University of California Press.

1270

