UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Development of Substitution Bias Sensitivity: Are Adolescents Happy Fools?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sr517ch

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Rossi, Sandrine
Cassotti, Mathieu
Agogue, Marine
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Development of Substitution Bias Sensitivity: Are Adolescents Happy Fools?
Sandrine Rossi (sandrine.rossi@unicaen.fr)
LaPsyDE (CNRS Unit 3521), University of Caen Basse-Normandie, Caen, France

Mathieu Cassotti (mathieu.cassotti@parisdescartes.fr)
LaPsyDE (CNRS Unit 3521), Paris Descartes University, Paris, France

Marine Agogué (marine.agogue@mines-paristech.fr)
Centre de Gestion Scientifique, Mines ParisTech, Paris, France

Wim De Neys (wim.de-neys@parisdescartes.fr)
CNRS, LaPsyDE (CNRS Unit 3521), Paris Descartes University, Paris, France

Abstract
Influential work on human thinking suggests that our
judgment is often biased because we minimize cognitive
effort and intuitively substitute hard questions by easier ones.
Recent work with adults who solved the bat-and-ball
problem, one of the most publicized examples of the
substitution bias, suggests that people realize they are doing
this and notice their mistake. In the present paper we look at
the development of this substitution bias sensitivity. A group
of young adolescents solved standard and isomorphic control
versions of the bat-and-ball problem in which reasoners
experience no intuitive pull to substitute. Adults have been
shown to be less confident in their substituted, erroneous batand-ball answer than in their answer on the control version
that does not give rise to the substitution. However, the
present study established that this critical confidence drop
was less pronounced for young adolescents. This implies that
in contrast with adults, young adolescents do not yet fully
acknowledge the questionable nature of their biased answer
and remain more oblivious to the substitution. That is, young
adolescent reasoners seem to behave more like happy fools
who blindly answer erroneous questions without realizing it.
Keywords: Decision-making; Bias; Development

Introduction
Human reasoners have been characterized as cognitive
misers who show a strong tendency to rely on fast, intuitive
processing rather than on more demanding, deliberate
thinking (Evans, 2008; Kahneman, 2011). Although the fast
and effortless nature of intuitive processing can sometimes
be useful, it can also bias our reasoning. It has been argued
that the key to this bias is a process of so-called attribute
substitution – when people are confronted with a difficult
question they often intuitively answer an easier one instead
(e.g., Kahneman, 2011; Kahneman & Frederick, 2002).
Consider the following example:
A bat and a ball together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1 more
than the ball. How much does the ball cost?

When you try to answer this problem, the intuitive
answer that immediately springs to mind is “10 cents”.

Indeed, about 80% of university students who are asked to
solve the “bat-and-ball” problem give the “10 cents” answer
(e.g., Bourgeois-Gironde & Vanderhenst, 2009). But it is
wrong. Obviously, if the ball were to cost 10 cents, the bat
would cost $1.10 (i.e., $1 more) and then the total cost
would be $1.20, rather than the required $1.10. The correct
response is “5 cents”, of course (i.e., the bat costs $1.05).
The explanation for the widespread “10 cents” bias in terms
of attribute substitution is that people substitute the critical
relational “more than” statement by a simpler absolute
statement. That is, “the bat costs $1 more than the ball” is
read as “the bat costs $1”. Hence, rather than working out
the sum, people naturally parse $1.10, into $1 and 10 cents
which is easier to do. In other words, because of the
substitution people give the correct answer to the wrong
question.
The bat-and-ball problem is considered a paradigmatic
example of people’s cognitive miserliness (e.g., BourgeoisGironde & Vanderhenst, 2009; Kahneman, 2011;
Kahneman & Frederick, 2002; Toplak, West, & Stanovich,
2011). After all, the problem is really not that hard. Clearly,
if people would reflect upon it for even a moment they
would surely realize their error and notice that a 10 cents
ball and a bat that costs a dollar more cannot total to $1.10.
Hence, the problem with attribute substitution seems to be
that people do typically not notice that they are substituting
and do not realize their error (Kahneman & Frederick, 2005;
Thompson, 2009; Toplak et al., 2011). This can sketch a
somewhat bleak picture of human rationality: Not only do
we often fail to reason correctly, much like happy fools, we
do not even seem to realize that we are making a mistake.
However, the fact that decision-makers do not
deliberately reflect upon their response does not necessarily
imply that they are not detecting the substitution process.
That is, although people might not engage in deliberate
processing and might not know what the correct answer is, it
is still possible that they have some minimal substitution
sensitivity and at least notice that their substituted “10
cents” response is not completely warranted (e.g., Alter,
Oppenheimer, Epley, & Eyre, 2007; De Neys, 2012; De

3321

Neys & Bonefon, 2013; Oppenheimer, 2008; Thompson &
Morsanyi, 2012).
De Neys, Rossi, and Houdé (2013) recently tested this
hypothesis. They designed a control version of the bat-andball problem that does not give rise to attribute substitution.
Consider the following example:
A magazine and a banana together cost $2.90. The
magazine costs $2. How much does the banana cost?

People will tend to parse the $2.90 into $2 and 90 cents
just as naturally as they parse $1.10 in the standard version.
However, the control version no longer contains the relative
statement (“$2 more than the banana”) that triggers the
substitution. That is, in the control version De Neys et al.
explicitly presented the easier statement that participants
were supposed to be unconsciously substituting. After
solving each version participants were asked to indicate
their response confidence. De Neys et al., reasoned that if
participants are completely unaware that they are
substituting when solving the standard version, the standard
and control version should be isomorphic and response
confidence should not differ. However, if people are indeed
not completely oblivious to the substitution and have some
minimal awareness of the questionable nature of their
answer, response confidence should be lower after solving
the standard version.
De Neys et al. (2013) observed that biased “10 cents”
reasoners showed a decreased confidence in the correctness
of their answer on the standard bat-and-ball problem. The
authors interpreted this as showing that although reasoners
often fail to deliberately reflect on their answer, they
nevertheless intuitively sense that their response is
questionable and are not oblivious to the substitution (see
De Neys, 2012, for related suggestions). In the present study
we use a developmental approach to validate this claim.
Note that a key processing requisite for detecting an
unwarranted substitution is that one monitors one’s
reasoning for conflict between an intuitively cued
substituted question and the original phrasing (De Neys &
Glumicic, 2008; Kahneman, 2011). Now, developmental
studies in the cognitive control field have established that
such basic error or conflict monitoring abilities increase
spectacularly throughout adolescence (e.g., Davies et al.,
2004; Fitzgerald et al., 2010; Santesso & Segalowitz, 2008).
This has been linked to the late maturation of the Anterior
Cingulate Cortex, the brain structure that is supposed to be
mediating the monitoring process (e.g., Botvinick, Cohen, &
Carter, 2004; De Neys, Vartanian, & Goel, 2008; Santesso
& Segalowitz, 2008). In general, this suggests that younger
reasoners should be less efficient at detecting the biased
nature of their substituted judgments than adults. In other
words, if adults’ decreased confidence in the De Neys et al.
(2013) study indeed results from a successful substitution
monitoring or sensitivity, one can also predict that the
confidence effects should be less pronounced for younger,
adolescent reasoners. More specifically, when younger
reasoners give a biased response on the standard version of

the bat-and-ball problem, they should show a higher
confidence in the correctness of their substituted answer
than adult reasoners. Of course, on the control version that
does not give rise to attribute substitution, any differential
age-related substitution sensitivity, should not affect the
confidence ratings.
To test this hypothesis we presented a group of young
adolescents with the standard and control version of the batand-ball problem and recorded their response confidence.
The performance of this group of adolescents was
contrasted with that of the adults in the original De Neys et
al. (2013) study. At a theoretical level, this will help us to
validate De Neys et al.’s substitution claims. Clearly, from a
developmental point of view, it is also important to start
documenting possible age-related differences in substitution
detection skills in its own right.

Experiment
Method
Participants. A total of 115 adolescents (average age =
14.89 years, SE = .03) participated in the study. All
participants were Grade 9 students in a local middle school
in the Paris region. Performance of these adolescents was
contrasted with the performance of the 248 adult
undergraduates (average age = 22 years, SE = .18) in the
study of De Neys et al. (2013).
Material and Procedure. Material and procedure were
based on the study of De Neys et al. (2013). All participants
were presented with a standard and control version of the
bat-and-ball problem. The problems were translated in
French and adjusted to the European test context (see
Appendix). To minimize surface similarity, we also
modified the superficial item content of the two problems
(i.e., one problem stated that a pencil and eraser together
cost $1.10, the other that a magazine and banana together
cost $2.90). Both problems were printed on separate pages
of a booklet. To make sure that the differential item content
did not affect the findings, the item content and control
status of the problem were completely crossed. For half of
the sample we used the pencil/eraser/$1.10 content in the
standard version and magazine/banana/$2.90 content in the
control version. For the other half of the sample the content
of the two presented problems was switched. Presentation
order of the control and standard version was also
counterbalanced: Approximately half of the participants
solved the control version first, whereas the other half
started with the standard version1. An overview of the
material is presented in the Appendix.
Immediately after participants wrote down their answer
they were asked to indicate how confident they were that
1

Note that when the problem content and presentation order
factors were entered as additional control factors in our main
analyses the reported effects were not affected.

3322

their response was correct by writing down a number
between 0 (totally not sure) and 100% (totally sure). Note
that we only intend to use this measure to contrast people’s
relative confidence difference in the standard and control
versions. Obviously, the confidence ratings will be but a
proxy of people’s phenomenal confidence state. The
response scale is not immune to measurement biases such as
end preferences or social desirability effects (e.g., Berk,
2006). For example, since it might be hard to openly admit
that one has given a response that one is not confident
about, mere social desirability can drive people’s estimates
upwards. This implies that one needs to be cautious when
interpreting absolute confidence levels. However, such
interpretative complications can be sidestepped when
contrasting the relative rating difference in two conditions.
Any general response scale bias should affect the ratings in
both conditions. Consequently, our analyses focus on the
relative confidence contrast and we refrain from making
claims based on the absolute confidence levels.

57.9, p < .0001, η²p = .17. However, the critical finding was
that this effect was indeed less clear for adolescent
reasoners. As Figure 1 (top panel) shows, the Age Group
and Problem Version factor tended to interact, F(1, 285) =
3.78, p < .055, η²p = .01, and there was also a main effect of
the Age Group factor, F(1, 285) = 5.11, p < .025, η²p = .02 .
Follow-up analyses established that in contrast with
biased adolescents, biased adults showed specifically more
doubt in the correctness of their response when solving the
standard bat-and-ball version, F(1, 285) = 5.02, p < .05, η²p
= .02. On the control problem, that did not give rise to
attribute substitution, both age groups’ confidence did not
differ, F(1, 285) = 1.16, p = .28. This establishes that the
critical lower confidence ratings on the standard problem in
the adult group are not confounded by a general age-related
confidence decrease but result from a differential
substitution sensitivity. When adults and adolescents do not
substitute, their confidence does also not differ. Clearly, if
adults would simply show overall more doubt in their
judgments, their confidence ratings on the control problem
should have been lower too.

Results and Discussion
Accuracy. Adolescents’ and adults’ scores on the standard
and control bat-and-ball problem version were entered in a 2
(problem version, within-subjects) x 2 (age group, between
subjects) mixed model ANOVA. As expected, there was a
main effect of the Problem Version factor, F(1, 361) =
1027.74, p < .0001, η²p = .74. In line with previous studies,
overall only 20% (SE = 2.2%) of participants managed to
solve the standard bat-and-ball problem correctly. However,
the control version that did not give rise to substitution was
solved correctly by 99% (SE = .5%) of the participants.
Accuracy did not differ in the two age groups; the Age
Group and Age Group x Problem Version interaction did
not reach significance, both Fs < 1.
Note that incorrect responses on the standard version
were almost exclusively (i.e., 361 out of 363 responses) of
the “10 cents” type suggesting that biased participants were
not simply making a random guess but indeed engaged in
the postulated substitution process 2.
Confidence ratings. Our crucial question concerned
participants’ response confidence. A first analysis focused
on the response confidence of reasoners who substituted and
gave the erroneous “10 cents” response on the standard
version. These participants’ confidence ratings were entered
in a 2 (problem version, within-subjects) x 2 (age group,
between subjects) mixed model ANOVA. Results showed
that there was a main effect of the Problem Version factor.
As De Neys et al. (2013) already established, overall,
people’s confidence in their erroneous “10 cents” response
was lower than the confidence in their control version
answer that did not give rise to the substitution, F(1, 285) =
2

The few incorrectly solved control trials and the “non-10 cents”
incorrectly solved standard trials were discarded for the subsequent
confidence analyses.

Figure 1. Response confidence on standard and control versions of
the bat-and-ball problem for participants who answered the
standard problem incorrectly (“10 cents” biased reasoners, top
panel) and correctly (“5 cents” correct reasoners, bottom panel) in
the two age groups. Error bars are standard errors.

This conclusion is further supported when we focus on
the confidence ratings of those participants who did not
substitute on the standard problem and solved it correctly.
Confidence ratings for these participants were also subjected

3323

to a 2 (problem version, within-subjects) x 2 (age group,
between subjects) mixed model ANOVA. Results are shown
in Figure 1 (bottom panel). As Figure 1 shows, overall the
problem version effect on the confidence ratings (i.e., 93%
standard vs. 97% control) was far less clear for correct than
for biased reasoners, F(1, 68) = 5.02, p < .05, η²p = .02. In
and by itself this is not surprising. Indeed, it makes sense
that people who actively reflected upon their judgment and
resisted the substitution also knew that their response was
likely to be correct. The critical point here is that in this
analysis neither the Problem Version x Age Group
interaction, nor the main effect of Age Group were
significant, both Fs < 1. Hence, here too, adolescents and
adults who did not substitute and reasoned correctly did not
show a differential response confidence. This further
strengthens the claim that the age-related decreased
response confidence on the standard problem that we
observed for biased reasoners results from an increased
substitution bias sensitivity.

General Discussion
The present study indicates that human reasoners become
more sensitive to substitution bias throughout their
development. The previously observed lowered response
confidence after solving the standard bat-and-ball problem,
was less clear for biased adolescents. That is, in contrast
with adults, 15-year old adolescents seem to have a harder
time detecting the erroneous nature of their substituted
judgment. This pattern fits with basic cognitive control
studies that indicate that adolescents’ basic error or conflict
monitoring skills are not fully developed (e.g., Davies et al.,
2004; Fitzgerald et al., 2010; Santesso & Segalowitz, 2008).
With respect to attribute substitution during reasoning this
implies that young adolescents do not yet fully acknowledge
the questionable nature of their biased answer and remain
more oblivious to the substitution. In that sense, adolescents
do seem to behave like happy fools who blindly answer
erroneous questions without realizing it.
We mentioned that our study can have important
implications for the developmental field. Some ten years
ago, Markovits and Barrouillet (2004) noted in a special
developmental issue of the journal Thinking and Reasoning
that although reasoning and decision-making were once one
of the prime research areas for developmental scientists,
interest had faded in more recent years. Markovits and
Barrouillet suggested that one of the reasons for this decline
was the rise of the “Heuristics and Biases” research program
and its demonstration of the widespread bias in human
reasoning. This massive bias seemed to point to a
developmental standstill in human reasoning. That is, if
even the vast majority of educated university students fail to
solve basic reasoning problems, one might easily get the
impression that there doesn’t seem to be a lot of
development going on. At first sight, our developmental
study might have seem to strengthen this conclusion.
Indeed, when looking at the accuracy rates we did not find

any age-related improvement. Adults seemed to perform as
badly as adolescents. However, looking closely at the
substitution detection process and confidence data suggests
that the lack of development is more apparent than real.
Although both adults and adolescents are indeed biased
most of the time, our findings indicate that an important
difference between the age groups is that adults at least
detect that their responses are biased. Consistent with recent
insights in the developmental field (e.g., Brainerd, Reyna, &
Ceci, 2008; Klaczynski, Byrnes, & Jacobs, 2001; Houdé,
2007; Reyna & Farley, 2006; Reyna et al., 2003) this
differential substitution bias awareness argues against the
idea of a developmental standstill in human reasoning.
It is important to clarify some potential misconceptions
and critiques about our work. For example, some critics
might spontaneously argue that since our control bat-andball version is easier than the standard version our findings
with adults are trivial since they simply show that people are
more confident when answering an easy question than when
answering a hard question. It is important to stress that this
critique is begging the question. The crucial question is of
course whether or not people realize that the classic version
is hard. That is, the control version presents the easier
statement that participants are supposed to be unconsciously
substituting. What we want to know is whether or not
people note this substitution. If people do not notice it, then
the two problems should be isomorphic and they should be
considered equally hard. In other words, arguing that adults
notice that the classic problem is harder than the control
problem underscores the point that they are not oblivious to
the substitution.
A related spontaneous critique is that our confidence
findings might result from mere guessing rather than from
substitution sensitivity. In general, if people do not know an
answer to a problem and guess, they presumable realize this
and will also give a low confidence rating. Hence, a critic
might argue that the lower confidence in adult groups does
not necessarily point to substitution sensitivity but merely to
a rather trivial “guessing awareness”. However, this critique
is readily discarded. In the present study more than 99% of
the erroneous bat-and-ball responses were of the “10 cents”
type. This is the response that people should pick if they
engage in the postulated substitution process. Clearly, if
people were biased and less confident because they were
merely guessing, we should have observed much more
random erroneous answers.
In the present study we focused on the bat-and-ball
problem because it is one of the most vetted and
paradigmatic examples of people’s substitution bias (e.g.,
Bourgeois-Gironde & Vanderhenst, 2009; Kahneman, 2011;
Kahneman & Frederick, 2002; Toplak, West, & Stanovich,
2011). However, attribute substitution has also been
proposed as an explanation for people’s judgment errors in
other classic reasoning tasks such as the base-rate neglect or
conjunction fallacy task (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002).
Although it has been argued that these task might be less
suited to test substitution claims (e.g., Bourgeois-Gironde &

3324

Vanderhenst, 2009; see also Pennycook, Fugelsang,
Koehler, 2012; Klauer & Singmann, 2012), one might
nevertheless wonder whether the present findings can be
generalized across these tasks. Some emerging evidence
suggests they might. For example, a recent study showed
that when adult reasoners give a biased response to standard
conjunction or base-rate neglect problems, they also indicate
to be less confident about their response compared to
control problems. Consistent with the present findings, these
effects were not always observed in younger samples (e.g.,
De Neys, Cromheeke, & Osman, 2011; see also De Neys &
Feremans, 2013). This gives us some initial indication of the
generality of the present findings.
With the present paper we hope to have presented a
critical building block to stimulate further research on the
development of substitution sensitivity. Our intial data
suggest that although most adolescents and adults fall trap
to substitution bias, adult reasoners at least detect their bias
and realize that their response is questionable. We believe
that the potentially severe consequences of adolescents’ bias
detection difficulties should become a primary research
focus for developmental and educational scientists.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by a grant
from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-JSH20007-01).

References
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., & Eyre, R.N.
(2007). Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive difficulty
activates analytic reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136, 569-576.
Berk, R. A. (2006). Thirteen strategies to measure college
teaching: a consumer’ s guide to rating scale
Construction, assessement, and decision making for
faculty, administrators, and clinicians. Sterling, VA:
Stylus.
Botvinick, M. M., Cohen, J. D., & Carter, C. S. (2004).
Conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate cortex: An
update. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 539-546.
Bourgeois-Gironde, S., & Vanderhenst, J. B. (2009). How
to open the door to System 2: Debiasing the Bat and Ball
problem. In S. Watanabe, A.P Bloisdell, L. Huber, A.
Young (Eds.), Rational animals, irrational humans (pp.
235-252). Tokyo, Japan: Keio University Press.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Ceci, S. J. (2008).
Developmental reversals in false memory: A review of
data and theory. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 343- 382.
Davies, P. L., Segalowitz, S. J., & Gavin, W. J. (2004).
Development of response-monitoring ERPs in 7-to 25year-olds. Developmental Neuropsychology, 25, 355-376.

De Neys, W. (2012). Bias and conflict: A case for logical
intuitions. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 2838.
De Neys, W., & Bonnefon, J. F. (2013). The whys and
whens of individual differences in individual thinking
biases. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17, 172-178.
De Neys, W., Cromheeke, S., & Osman, M. (2011). Biased
but in doubt: Conflict and decision confidence. PLoS
ONE, e15954. DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0015954
De Neys, W., & Feremans, V. (2013). Development of
heuristic bias detection in elementary school.
Developmental Psychology, 49, 258-69.
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual process theories of reasoning. Cognition, 106, 12481299.
De Neys, W., Moyens, E., & Vansteenwegen, D. (2010).
Feeling we’re biased: autonomic arousal and reasoning
conflict. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience,
10, 208-216.
De Neys, W., Rossi, S., & Houdé, O. (2013). Bats, balls,
and substitution sensitivity: Cognitive misers are no
happy fools. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
De Neys, W., Vartanian, O., & Goel, V. (2008). Smarter
than we think: When our brains detect that we are biased.
Psychological Science, 19, 483-489.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of
reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 255-278.
Evans, J. B. S. T. (2010). Intuition and reasoning: A dual
process perspective. Psychological Inquiry, 21, 313-326.
Fitzgerald, K. D., Perkins, S. C., Angstadt, M., Johnson, T.,
Stern, E. R., Welsh, R. C., et al. (2010). The development
of performance-monitoring function in the posterior
medial frontal cortex. Neuroimage, 49, 3463-3473.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
Pennycook, G., Fugelsang, J. A., & Koehler, D. J. (2012).
Are we good at detecting conflict during reasoning.
Cognition, 124, 101-106.
Houdé, O. (2007). First insights on neuropedagogy of
reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 13, 81-89.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York:
Farrar, Strauss, Giroux.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness
revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. In
T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.),
Heuristics & biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment
(pp. 49-81). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2005). A model of heuristic
judgment. In K. J. Holyoak, & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The
Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning (pp.
267-293). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Klaczynski, P. A., Byrnes, J. B., & Jacobs, J. E. (2001).
Introduction: Special issue on decision making. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 225-236.
Klauer, K. C., & Singmann, H. (2012). Does logic feel
good? Testing for intuitive detection of logicality in

3325

syllogistic reasoning.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition. Advance
online publication. DOI: 10.1037/a0030530.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 12, 237-241.
Markovits, H., & Barrouillet, P. (2004). Why is
understanding the development of reasoning important?.
Thinking and Reasoning, 10, 113-121.
Reyna, V. F., & Farley, F. (2006). Risk and rationality in
adolescent decision making: Implications for theory,
practice, and public policy. Psychological Science in the
Public Interest, 7, 1-44.
Reyna, V. F., Lloyd, F. J., & Brainerd, C. J. (2003).
Memory, development, and rationality: An integrative
theory of judgement and decision-making. In S. Schneider
& J. Shanteau (Eds.), Emerging perspectives on judgment
and decision research (pp. 201-245). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Santesso, D. L., & Segalowitz, S. J. (2008). Developmental
differences in error-related ERPs in middle- to lateadolescent males. Developmental Psychology, 44, 205217.
Stanovich, K. E. (2010). Rationality and the reflective mind.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The
cognitive reflection test as a predictor of performance on
heuristics-and-biases tasks. Memory & Cognition, 39,
1275-1289.
Thompson, V. A. (2009). Dual process theories: A
metacognitive perspective. In J. Evans and K. Frankish
(Eds.), In Two Minds: Dual Processes and Beyond.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Thompson, V. A. & Morsanyi, K. (2012). Analytic thinking:
Do you feel like it? Mind & Society, 11, 93-105.

A magazine and a banana cost 2.90 euro in total. The
magazine costs 2 euro more than the banana. How much
does the banana cost?
_______ cents

Control versions
French
Un crayon et une gomme coûtent 1.10 euro au total. Le
crayon coûte 1 euro. Combien coûte la gomme?
_______ centimes
Un magazine et une banane coûtent 2.90 euros au total. Le
magazine coûte 2 euros. Combien coûte la banane?
_______ centimes

English translation
A pencil and an eraser cost 1.10 euro in total. The pencil
costs 1 euro. How much does the eraser cost?
_______ cents
A magazine and a banana cost 2.90 euro in total. The
magazine costs 2 euro. How much does the banana cost?
_______ cents

Appendix
Standard versions
French
Un crayon et une gomme coûtent 1.10 euro au total. Le
crayon coûte 1 euro de plus que la gomme. Combien coûte
la gomme?
_______ centimes
Un magazine et une banane coûtent 2.90 euros au total. Le
magazine coûte 2 euros de plus que la banane. Combien
coûte la banane?
_______ centimes
English translation
A pencil and an eraser cost 1.10 euro in total. The pencil
costs 1 euro more than the eraser. How much does the eraser
cost?
_______ cents

3326

