UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Diagrammatic Cognition: Discovery and Design

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4jh7k5w1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Bechtel, William

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Diagrammatic Cognition: Discovery and Design
William Bechtel (bechtel@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy and Interdisciplinary Program in Cognitive Science,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0119 USA
Keywords: diagrams, visuospatial representations; external
representations; problem solving; diagrammatic reasoning;
scientific reasoning; cognitive tools; design

the workshop will have presentations from many
disciplines: psychology, philosophy, computer science,
education, design, and more. There will be two kinds of
presentations: i) overview papers (30 minutes) by
established researchers and ii) blitz talks (5 minutes)
presenting specific current research projects. Blitz
presentations have been highly successful in previous
workshops, and are standard and excellent at large computer
science meetings. The blitz presentations will allow broad
participation from the cognitive science community and
stimulate discussion around specific findings.

Introduction
External representations of thought—maps, diagrams,
sketches, and the like—are ancient inventions that serve
thought and communication in numerous ways. A number
of cognitive scientists have investigated roles these
representations play in cognition (see, e.g., Donald, 1991;
Larkin & Simon, 1987; Norman, 1993; Schön, 1983). They
are created and used by school students, by architects and
designers, by mathematicians and scientists, by musicians,
dancers, and artists. People design and use diagrams to
spatialize thought and make it public, to work through ideas
and clarify thinking, to reduce working memory load, to
communicate ideas to others, to promote collaborative work
by providing an external representation that can be pointed
to and animated by gestures and collectively revised.
Considerable research has shown that well-designed
diagrams promote thought, creativity, discovery, and
communication. Diagrams can map abstract thought to
space, allowing spatial reasoning to promote abstract
reasoning.
Just as many diverse groups create and use diagrams,
many diverse groups are actively studying their creation and
use. Educators study ways to design effective diagrams and
ways to educate students to use them. Psychologists study
how diagrams are perceived, comprehended, and created.
Both educators and psychologists study ways to promote the
spatial thinking skills underlying comprehension and
creation of diagrams. Designers study their use in design,
artists their use in art. Historians and philosophers of
science describe case studies of the insightful development
of diagrams by scientists and the insights those diagrams
have provided to others. Philosophers analyze formal
properties of diagrams. Mathematicians explore the
diagrammatic thinking that underlies mathematical thought
and discovery. Computer scientists study ways computers
can understand and process diagrams. Other computer
scientists develop displays that will effectively analyze and
convey Big Data. Journalism schools now teach data
visualization and diagram narratives, as these are
increasingly important in journalism. The proliferation of
digital tools have proliferated the use of diagrams.

Morning Session: Creating and Coordinating
Diagrams
Barbara Tversky, “Creating Diagrams”
Professor Emerita of Psychology at Stanford University and
a Professor of Psychology and Education at Teachers
College, Columbia University, USA
Patrick Healey, “Coordinating Graphical Languages”
Professor for Human Interaction, School of Electronic
Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University
of London, UK
David Kirsh, “Thinking with Illustrations”
Professor of Cognitive Science, University of California,
San Diego, USA
Blitz Talks: Peter Coppin, University of Toronto; James
Corter, Teachers College, Columbia University; Valeria
Giardino, Free University Berlin; Azadeh Jamalian,
Teachers College, Columbia University; Maithilee Kunda,
Georgia Institute of Technology; David Peebles, University
of Huddensfield; Anne Schüler, Knowledge Media Research
Center; and others

Afternoon Session: Diagrams in Science
William Bechtel, “Ways Scientists Reason with Diagrams”
Professor of Philosophy, University of California, San
Diego, USA
Peter Cheng, “Re-discovering diagrams and re-codifying
knowledge in science”
Professor of Cognitive Science, Department of Informatics,
University of Sussex, UK

Goals and Plan of the Workshop

Mary Hegarty, “Cognition and Metacognition in Reasoning
with Diagrams”
Professor of Psychology, University of California, Santa
Barbara, USA

The goal of the workshop is dual: a) to bring together a
diverse set of researchers working on various aspects of
diagrammatic reasoning; b) to bring the issues and research
to a broader audience in Cognitive Science. To these ends,

20

Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind: Three stages
in the evolution of culture and cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Healey, P. G., Swoboda, N., Umata, I., & King, J. (2007).
Graphical language games: Interactional constraints
on representational form. Cognitive Science, 31,
285-309.
Hegarty, M. (2010). Components of spatial intelligence.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances
in Research and Theory, Vol 52, 265-297.
Hegarty, M. (2011). The cognitive science of visual-spatial
displays: Implications for design. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 446-474.
Kirsh, D. (2010). Thinking with external representations. AI
Soc., 25, 441-454.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart: Defending
human attributes in the age of the machine. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.
Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How
professionals think in action. New York: Basic
Books.
Sheredos, B., Burnston, D., Abrahamsen, A., & Bechtel, W.
(in press). Why do biologists use so many diagrams.
Philosophy of Science.
Tversky, B. (2005). Prolegomenon to Scientific
Visualizations Visualization in Science Education.
In J. Gilbert (Ed.), Visualization in Science
Education (pp. 29-42). Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Springer.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizing thought. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 499-535.

Blitz Talks: Trevor Barrett, Univ. of California—Santa
Barbara; Daniel Burnston, Univ. of California—San Diego;
Jeff Nickerson, Stevens Institute of Technology; Benjamin
Sheredos, Univ. of California—San Diego; Andy Stull,
Univ. of California—Santa Barbara; and others

Research Contributions of the Speakers
The presenters of the overview papers have each made
distinctive contributions to cognitive science research on
diagrams. The following are selective highlights.
Tversky (2005, 2011) has emphasized how people design
diagrams by abstracting and schematizing contents, taking
advantage of their spatial properties. She emphasizes how
diagrams overcome limitations of internal information
processing capacities, organize thought, and promote
inference and discovery. Turning the focus to the interindividual
coordination
in
the
production
and
comprehension of visuospatial representations Healey
(Healey, Swoboda, Umata, & King, 2007) investigates the
parallels between talking and drawing as modes of
communication and the factors affecting the evolution of
graphical dialects. Kirsh (2010) has identified a variety of
ways external representations enhance cognitive power,
including by providing a shareable object of thought,
reducing the cognitive cost of inference, and coordinating
thinking.
The afternoon session turns to uses of diagrams in relation
to science. Bechtel has focused on how diagrams function to
represent phenomena to be explained (Bechtel &
Abrahamsen, 2012), guide the search for the parts and
operations
of
mechanisms
(Sheredos,
Burnston,
Abrahamsen, & Bechtel, in press) and direct the
recomposition of mechanisms in computational models and
synthetic organisms. Hegarty (2010, 2011) has employed
experimental techniques to identify the cognitive abilities
that underlie intelligent use of spatial representations and to
address how spatial intelligence facilitates learning by
students in the natural sciences. Cheng (2002, 2011) has
explored how developing appropriate novel diagrammatic
formats can enhance student learning about electric circuits
and probability.

References
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2012). Diagramming
phenomena
for
mechanistic
explanation.
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 102-107). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Cheng, P. C.-H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
principles for complex representational systems.
Cognitive Science, 26, 685-736.
Cheng, P. C.-H. (2011). Probably good diagrams for learning:
Representational epistemic recodification of
probability theory. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3,
475-498.

21

