UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Disambiguating NN combinations with left/right stress

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6778f4fh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hampton, JAmes
Huessen, Daniel
Argel, Zarah
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Disambiguating NN combinations with left/right stress
James A. Hampton (hampton@city.ac.uk),
Daniel Heussen (daniel@heussen.be),
Zarah Argel (zarah_jayne@live.co.uk),
Hasina Kanbi (hasina_k91@hotmail.com)
Department of Psychology, City University London,
Northampton Square, London EC1V OHB, UK

Abstract
An interesting subclass of Noun-noun combinations in
English can take two meanings depending on whether the first
or second word is stressed in speech. A BRICK factory is one
that makes bricks, whereas a brick FACTORY is one made of
brick. An explanation is offered in terms of a bias for nouns
from particular ontological categories to trigger particular
semantic interpretations for a combination, together with the
proposal that the unstressed noun provides the relation to be
used. The explanation is tested in three empirical studies.
Keywords: NN combination, concepts, compounds, meaning,
ambiguity, stress

Introduction
Noun-noun compounds are found in many languages.
They are the result of placing two nouns together in order to
create a compound noun phrase with a new meaning
(Gleitman & Gleitman, 1970; Levi, 1978). The first noun—
the modifier—serves to specialise the meaning of the
second noun—the head. To take the example of cheese
knife, the head noun knife determines the kind of thing
involved—a cheese knife is a knife—while the modifier
cheese specifies that it is designed for use with cheese.1
Looking at noun-noun compounds in English it is possible
to differentiate those that are constructed on the fly to meet
the communicative needs of a given moment from those that
long ago entered the lexicon. A good example of the former
is Downing’s (1977) famous apple-juice seat to indicate the
seat at a table at which the person drinking apple-juice
should sit, whereas examples of the latter are toothpaste or
lunch box. As they enter the lexicon, compounds in English
may be lexicalized as single orthographic words (e.g.,
snowman), or optionally hyphenated (e.g., pigeon-hole),
while others have two-word spellings (e.g., taxi driver).
Lexicalization involves a number of changes in the status of
a phrase. In particular, lexicalized compounds are also more
likely to lack semantic transparency, and hence to appear in
dictionaries. The meaning of such non-transparent phrases
must be acquired through hearing them in context, rather
1

While familiar compounds like cheese knife have a conventional
meaning, given a sufficiently rich context, they can take on an
indefinite number of alternative meanings—such as a knife made
of cheese, or the knife given as a trophy to the prize winning
cheese maker. We are concerned here with the default meaning
that first comes to mind in the absence of such a context.

than being computable from the individual meanings alone.
Examples like beer garden, water glass, or wine lake cannot
be easily understood without appeal to knowledge external
to the meaning of the two individual words.
In addition to the many lexicalized compounds in English,
it is also possible to create new forms which can be readily
understood. People have little trouble understanding new
expressions like camel field, or student gardener, even
though they may not have come across these combinations
before. An explanation for this productivity was suggested
by Gagné and Shoben (1997) in their CARIN model of
Noun-Noun (NN) combinations. Earlier, Levi (1978) had
proposed that the majority of compounds employ one of
about 12 semantic relations, such as USE, LOCATION,
MATERIAL COMPOSITION or CAUSE. Gagné and
Shoben suggested that each noun in a person’s vocabulary
may be associated in memory with the relations that it most
commonly enters into, as either a modifier or a head. Thus
for example mountain as a modifier would normally
indicate a location as in mountain goat, or mountain village.
On the other hand magazine as a head would normally use
an informational “about” relation as in train magazine or
psychology magazine. When the two are put together to
form mountain magazine, a search is instigated to find a
plausible meaning. Since a magazine about mountains
strikes most people as more plausible than a magazine in the
mountains, in this case the head noun ends up dictating the
preferred meaning of the phrase.
In the search for a plausible meaning, two equally
plausible meanings can sometimes arise, each based on one
of the two nouns and their preferred semantic relations, so
that the compound is ambiguous. Kamp and Partee (1995)
cite the example of a brick factory, which can either mean a
factory that makes bricks or a factory that is made of brick.
They also point out that the stress pattern employed when
speaking the phrase can disambiguate its meaning. Thus one
can compare (1) and (2):
(1) a BRICK factory = a factory that makes bricks
(2) a brick FACTORY = a factory made of brick.
The account offered by Kamp and Partee is that the
ambiguity relates to the use of two distinct syntactic forms.
They suggest, following Bloomfield, (1933: 228) and
Chomsky and Halle’s (1968: 15-18) Compound Rule, that
left stress is a general signal in English that the phrase is a
compound, meaning that its semantics will depend on local

2482

context and the argument structure of the head noun. Note
how BEER garden, WATER glass, and WINE lake all take
left stress patterns, indicating this compound structure. On
the other hand, right stress typically indicates a simpler
modifier+head noun phrase. For example a black BIRD is a
bird that is black, in contrast to the left-stressed, lexicalized,
compound BLACKbird, which in British English refers to
the common species of garden bird, Turdus merula.
The meaning of the compound phrase BRICK factory
requires an understanding that the concept of factory takes
an argument of the kind of thing made in it, with the
modifier noun placed into this slot, as in (3).
(3) FACTORY (makes X)
X = {jam, brick, car, clothing,..}
On the other hand brick FACTORY is interpreted by
treating the noun “brick” as a modifier meaning “made of
brick”. This account is not entirely satisfactory, since the
question of when a NN combination is a “true” compound is
hard to make on purely semantic grounds. For example why
should the meaning of “factory” not also have an argument
equivalent to [made of] in which the noun “brick” could be
placed? The occurrence of left stress in compounds is also
not as clear or reliable as one might hope (see Bell & Plag,
2010). While most single orthographic compounds do take
left stress (e.g. SUNflower, TOOTHpaste, ICEcream) other
highly familiar forms written as two-word phrases take right
stress (plum JAM, pumpkin PIE). Nor is it that a given
semantic relation such as MADE OF seen in these last two
examples is consistently right stressed. Thus in British
Received Pronunciation cake (unlike pie) is typically left
stressed (GINGER cake, CHOCOLATE cake). It is unclear
why the ingredients of jams and pies should be syntactically
adjectival while the ingredients of cake should require an
argument structure (a point noted by Lees, 1962: 120).
Given these difficulties, in this paper we will refer to all NN
combinations simply as compounds.
A large corpus-based analysis by Plag (2006) using a
variety of models found the assignment of stress in spoken
English to be largely unpredictable. The best means of
prediction was by using analogy with other similar
compounds (e.g. OIL painting, FINGER painting, ACTION
painting), suggesting a role for similarity-based
generalisation in the assignment of stress (Plag, 2010).
Further work by Plag and colleagues has identified evidence
for a semantic basis, and for families of semantically similar
compounds taking the same stress (Plag et al. 2008). Bell &
Plag (2010) also reported that relative informativeness can
direct stress on to the more informative of the two nouns.
The placement of stress in speech generally is clearly a
very complex phenomenon (for a review see Cutler et al.
1997). There has been relatively little research on prosody
in the psychological literature in relation to the
interpretation of compounds. A study by Lynott and Connell
(2010) manipulated spoken stress for an arbitrary set of
novel NN compounds, and found that dual emphasis
differentially speeded the generation of property
interpretations (e.g. a zebra mussel as a striped mussel).

However they reported no effects of stress on the frequency
with which different interpretations were generated, even
though many of the compounds had more than one
interpretation.
In this paper we focus on one particular use of stress in
the context of the interpretation of compounds. Specifically,
we ask how ambiguous compounds such as brick factory are
disambiguated with the help of stress. Why should left
versus right stress direct interpretation in two different
directions? Our proposal is that stress indicates which of the
two nouns provides the semantic relation for interpretation
of the phrase. In particular we propose that it is the
unstressed noun that determines the relation.
Recall the example of brick factory. The claim is that
brick as a modifier will typically invoke a [MADE OF]
interpretation, as in brick house, brick building, brick wall.
On the other hand factory will invoke a [MAKES] relation,
as in car factory, hat factory or furniture factory. Placing
the stress on the modifier brick thus gives the relation
preferred by the head (a factory that makes bricks), whereas
stressing the head noun factory gives the relation derived
from the modifier (a factory made of brick).
To make the principle operational and testable we needed
some means to be able to generate ambiguous compounds
where the ambiguity depended on two competing relations,
one derived from the modifier and one from the head. Both
interpretations needed to be plausible meanings for the
written phrase (that is, as read in the absence of auditory
stress information). Rather than depend on a frequency
analysis of individual words occurring in either position, as
Gagné and Shoben (1997) proposed, we adopted a
suggestion from Maguire, Wisniewski & Storms (2010)
who proposed, on the basis of a corpus study of semantic
patterns in compounding, that preferred semantic relations
follow from the general ontological category into which a
noun falls, rather than being individual to each noun. Thus
brick is a member of the category of compositional
materials, along with jam, water, cork, plastic etc. All of
these will have a preference as modifiers for a MADE OF
relation. Similarly factory belongs to a category of sources
or origins of objects, from which the relation MAKES will
naturally follow. The idea of interpreting NN compounds by
recourse to a superordinate semantic categorization of nouns
has had much support, particularly in the domain of
automatic processing of natural language (Rosario & Hearst,
2001), although no agreed semantic taxonomy has yet been
developed.
Our strategy in creating a set of ambiguous compounds
for testing was therefore first to find individual examples,
and then to generate further examples using the same
superordinate categories. The results of this process can be
seen in Table 1 which shows the analysis of the compounds
into general categories, together with examples of the
materials used. The classification is necessarily fairly broad
and provisional, but it serves to illustrate the analogies
between, say, an airplane magazine and a church painting,
both of which take either a LOCATION or an ABOUT

2483

relation, and it provides some systematicity to our search for
suitable examples. We predicted that with left stress, the
compounds will have an interpretation of magazine (or
painting) ABOUT an airplane or a church, while with right
stress, the location relation will be dominant, yielding a
magazine or painting LOCATED IN an airplane or church.
To assess the validity of our analysis, we put our
predictions to the test. Experiment 1 and 2 provided
participants with the ambiguous compounds spoken with
either left or right stress, and asked them to write down their
interpretation of the meaning. Experiment 3 provided
participants with the spoken phrases, and then asked them to
judge the plausibility of a given interpretation which could
either match or mismatch the interpretation predicted for the
stress pattern. We predicted that stressing the modifier or
head would influence both the interpretations generated in
Experiment 1 and 2 and the speed and accuracy of
judgments in Experiment 3.

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to test our proposal that
the unstressed word in an ambiguous compound should be
the one from which the semantic relation will be derived.
Hence a chimpanzee DRAWING should be a drawing done
by a chimpanzee (taking the agency from the animate
modifier noun), while a CHIMPANZEE drawing will be a
drawing of a chimpanzee (taking the “information source
about” relation from the head noun).

Method
Participants Twenty-four students at City University
London participated. All were native speakers of English.
Materials Forty ambiguous compounds were recorded
spoken by a female voice in Received Pronunciation British
English. The compounds were selected from a larger sample
through pretesting. Participants in the pre-test read each
compound (i.e., no stress information was given) and wrote
down an interpretation. Items were then selected where just
two alternatives were generated, each by at least 25% of the
participants. For the final selection, on average the more
frequent meaning was generated 57% of the time, and the
less frequent meaning 35% of the time. Each compound was

recorded once with stress on the first word, and once with
stress on the second word. To reduce the likelihood that the
ambiguity of phrases would be noticed, 12 unambiguous
fillers were included, two at the start, and ten more
distributed every three to five trials through the rest of the
experiment. They were familiar phrases like book bag and
oak table.
Procedure Participants were seated in front of a PC, and
wore sound insulating headphones, through which the
speech samples were played. Instructions were displayed on
the screen as follows:
In the present study we are investigating the meaning
of so-called noun-noun phrases, phrases consisting of
two nouns, such as "park bench". We are interested in
your intuitive understanding of these phrases. For each
noun-noun phrase, we would like you to write down its
meaning in the textbox provided. A short description
of the meaning that first comes to mind is sufficient.
For example, when you hear "park bench", the first
thing that might come to mind might be: A bench in a
park.
Once the instructions were understood the trials began. Each
trial began with the playing of the recording of a phrase. A
button on the screen allowed the participant to repeat the
playback if they wished to hear it again. If the replay button
was clicked three times, a window appeared displaying the
phrase (very occasionally people had trouble hearing the
words spoken). Being written, no cue was given as to the
stress pattern. A text box was provided on screen into which
the participant typed their interpretation of the phrase. A
“NEXT” button took them after a short pause to the next
screen and a new recorded phrase.
Design Participants were divided into four groups of 6.
Two groups had 20 compounds with left stress and 20 with
right, while the other two groups had the alternative. In
addition two different random orders were used.

Results
One item was omitted owing to an error in the
programming. The results were based on the remaining 39
items. The interpretations entered by participants to each

Head Category H

Modifier-based
Relation

Head-based
Relation

Examples

Modifier Category M
AGENT/ PATIENT
AGENT/ PATIENT
AGENT/ PATIENT
LOCATION
LOCATION
MATERIAL
MATERIAL
MATERIAL
MATERIAL
INSTRUMENT

AGENT
ACTION/EVENT
INFORMATION SOURCE
AGENT
INFORMATION SOURCE
INSTRUMENT
CONTAINER
INFORMATION SOURCE
MATERIAL
ACTION/EVENT

H who is M
H by/from M
H produced by M
H comes from M
H found in M
H made of M
H made of M
H made of M
H made of M
H done using M

H for M
H for/to M
H about M
H done of M
H about M
H for making M
H contains M
H about M
H for M
H done to M

athlete lawyer, celebrity doctor
company award, dolphin strategy
politician novel, chimpanzee drawing
Iceland painter
airplane magazine, church painting
ceramic oven
clay bucket, wax pot
chocolate book, paper catalogue
juice dye, plant poison
dollar purchase, skateboard damage

Table 1: General categories of noun, and the semantic relations to which they are biased, together with examples of compounds used

2484

phrase were collated into a single table, without any
information about the original stress pattern that they had
heard. The first two authors worked through the table
independently to code the interpretations as either (a) the
meaning derived from the modifier, (b) the meaning derived
from the head, or (c) other or unclassifiable. Initial
agreement between the judges was 90%. Disagreements
were resolved by each judge reconsidering the disputed
interpretations in the knowledge of the other judge’s rating.
Any remaining disagreements were treated as “other”.
(There were 13% of responses that could not be classified.)
The predicted effect of stress was borne out in the data
across 39 items, with more modifier meanings resulting
from right stress (19.8) than from left stress (14.2), and
more head meanings resulting from left stress (18.6) than
from right stress (15.1). Overall, 57% of responses were as
predicted by stress. The effect was highly reliable across
participants, with 21 of 24 following the prediction on
average, and none against it (p<.001, sign test). Across
items the effect was less strong statistically, with 25 of 39
compounds following the prediction and 12 against (p = .01,
sign test).

Experiment 2
The effect in Experiment 1 was relatively small, with
stress inducing a bias in interpretation of 57% versus 43%.
Experiment 2 was a replication in which we tested whether
a new selection of materials and an improved quality of the
sound recordings might show a stronger effect.

phrase either with left or with right stress.
Design and Procedure The design and procedure was
identical to Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Responses were classified as before. The effect size was
considerably increased. For left stress, across the 40 items
there were on average 27.8 head meanings and only 11.3
modifier meanings, while with right stress the means were
reversed with 14.3 head meanings and 24.0 modifier
meanings. The proportion of all responses in line with
prediction increased from 57% in Experiment 1 to 67% in
Experiment 2. Across items, 34 out of 40 (85%) showed the
predicted effect, and only 6 went against the hypothesis.
Across participants, 20 (83%) showed the predicted effect,
and only 3 went against. (Both, p < .001 on a sign test).
Experiment 2 strengthened the evidence for our
hypothesis. With a new selection of items and improved
recording of the stress patterns, the effect size was greatly
increased. The relatively weak consistency across items in
Experiment 1 can probably be attributed to problems in the
original recorded materials. For the set of 15 items used in
both experiments effect size correlated across experiments
at .56 (p < .05). In the first experiment these items had the
same effect size as the remaining items. In Experiment 2
their effect size increased in line with the other new
materials (8.6 for the 15 retained items, and 7.3 for the 25
new items), supporting the effect of the improved audio
recordings.

Experiment 3

Method
Participants Twenty-four students participated for course
credit.
Materials Ambiguous compounds were constructed as in
Experiment 1, with 40 compounds, 25 of which were new to
this study. (The effect size in Experiment 1 for the 15 items
used in both studies was identical to the overall mean effect
size for that study, so these were not retained just on the
basis of their being “good” items in terms of results.) New
recordings were made, under improved recording conditions
using a sound-proof studio and high quality microphone and
recorder. The speaker had a London accent, more familiar to
the student participant pool than was the RP used in
Experiment 1. In addition when creating the recordings, to
help the speaker produce meaningful stress patterns we used
contrastive stress to generate the left versus right stress
patterns. The speaker first read out a sentence such as “It’s
not a CLAY pot it’s a … WAX pot”, while pausing before
the last two words. In a second recording, the speaker read
out the sentence “It’s not a wax CANDLE, it’s a … wax
POT”. All speech except for the final two words of each
sentence was then edited out to leave just the final two word
phrase for use in the experiment. Hence participants in the
experiment proper had no access to the contrastive meaning
used in generating the spoken phrases, but just heard each

If stress assignment directs interpretation in the way we
propose, then it should be easier to judge that a particular
given interpretation is plausible for a spoken compound if
the interpretation being judged is consistent with the stress
pattern used. In Experiment 3, participants heard the same
phrases as in Experiment 1 with either left or right stress.
They were then immediately given a written interpretation,
which was either one of the two plausible meanings, or a
new implausible one. When the interpretation was plausible,
it could either match that predicted from the assigned stress,
or mismatch it (i.e. match the alternative interpretation). We
predicted that trials on which a match occurred should lead
to faster and more accurate responding.
(Because Experiment 3 was conducted before Experiment
2, the materials and recordings were the same as in
Experiment 1).

Method
Participants Initially 60 students at City University London
participated in the study, of which 11 were replaced as they
made more than 50% errors on all trials taken together.
Materials The same 40 spoken word phrases were used as
in Experiment 1. Since the programming error for one item

2485

was not detected in time, only 39 of the phrases could be
used for the analysis. Fillers were included at the start (the
first 5 trials), and throughout the sequence so that not all the
phrases were ambiguous. In addition a set of 40 implausible
meanings for familiar compound nouns was constructed
(e.g., box office “an office about a box”, bus seat “a seat that
is a bus”.)

No main effects were significant. (For filler implausible
trials, mean RT was 2300ms, sd = 771, and the error rate
was 17%.)
While supportive of our hypothesis, the procedure in
Experiment 3 is clearly less sensitive to the effects of
spoken stress, requiring as it does a “sensicality” judgment.
The weak effects may (as in Experiment 1) have reflected
some difficulty that some participants may have had in
clearly perceiving the spoken phrases. The high error rate
may also be owing to this factor. It is also possible that
some participants may have focussed on identifying the
nonsensical meanings, which would allow them to ignore
the spoken stress all together.

Procedure Participants heard the spoken phrase over
headphones, and then after a delay of 2 seconds saw an
interpretation of the phrase on the screen. They had to
decide as quickly as possible whether it was a plausible
meaning or not. The following instructions appeared on the
screen at the start of the experiment:
“In the present study we are investigating the meaning of
so-called noun-noun phrases, phrases consisting of two
nouns, such as "park bench". We are interested in how
long it takes to understand different phrases. You will be
presented with a spoken phrase, and shortly after you will
see a possible meaning on the screen. If you think the
meaning makes sense, then press the ALT GR key (on the
right of the space bar). If it doesn’t make sense as a
meaning for the phrase, then press the ALT key on the left
of the space bar. The first five trials are for practice, so
feel free to ask if you don’t understand what you are
supposed to be doing. After that we would like you to
proceed, making your responses as fast as you can while
not making any errors. The experiment will take 10 to 15
minutes.”

STRESS
Left
Right

MEANING
Resp. Time (ms)
Error (%)
Modifier
Head
Modifier Head
2453
2324
30.5
25.3
(952)
(833)
(18.1)
(17.0)
2353
(943)

2424
(869)

27.7
(16.2)

30.9
(17.7)

Table 2. Mean (SD) for response times and errors for
Experiment 3

General Discussion

Design There were two random orders or presentation and
two assignments of stress to each spoken compound. In
addition the interpretation offered for judgment could be
either the modifier-based or the head-based interpretation.

Results and Discussion
Mean correct reaction times and error rates were
calculated for Matching and Mismatching plausible trials
for each participant and each item. Three RTs of over 10
seconds were removed from the analysis entirely, and
another 18 reaction times of over 3 standard deviations
above the mean for individual participants were truncated.
Table 2 shows the results for RT and Error rates. When the
interpretation to be judged as meaningful was consistent
with the stress assignment, responses were on average
100ms faster and about 10% more accurate. Two 2-way
ANOVA were run for RT and Errors with stress assignment
and interpretation as factors, and with participants and items
as random effects. (The error distribution for error rates was
normal, skew = -0.1, matching the assumptions of
ANOVA.)
Although RT showed the predicted interaction (2338 ms
for matching and 2438 ms for mismatching meanings), it
failed to reach significance (p = .15). However Errors
showed the predicted interaction as significant (26% for
matching and 31% for mismatching trials), with F(1,59) =
6.0, p = .018 by subjects, F(1,38) = 4.3, p = .044 by items.

In these studies we have sought to find evidence for our
explanation of how stress assignment can disambiguate the
interpretation of NN compounds. We showed in
Experiments 1 and 2 that spontaneously generated meanings
were influenced in the predicted direction by stress, and this
result was supported in Experiment 3 with evidence that online processing of a potential meaning of a phrase was
similarly affected by hearing a spoken phrase with the stress
on the left or right word, at least in terms of error rates.
The results were typical of psycholinguistic data, in that
the main effect of interest was (to various degrees) obscured
by other factors and noise in the data. Using a speaker with
a London accent, and a procedure for generating the spoken
phrases that used contrastive stress (“It’s not a CLAY pot
it’s a WAX pot) produced a marked increase in the size of
the predicted effect in the second experiment. It is also very
possible that different speakers are differentially responsive
to the influence of stress. Both Experiments 1 and 2 found a
bimodal distribution across participants. For example in
Experiment 2, 16 participants had effects ranging from 43%
to 65%, but the other 8 participants were in the range 87%
to 100%.
The principle explanation that we offer is that the
unstressed word in an ambiguous NN compound determines
the semantic relation. In light of the role of stress in
directing attention, this principle may at first appear
paradoxical. One might suppose that attention should be
directed towards the noun that is “doing the work”.
However stress in spoken language is also often used to
direct attention to the focus or new information in an
utterance (Bell & Plag, 2010; Bock & Mazzella, 1983;

2486

Clark & Haviland, 1977). The difference between “I phoned
my mother on FRIDAY” and “I phoned my MOTHER on
Friday” is a matter of whether the focus of the utterance is
the date of the call or the person called. In the case of our
proposed principle, a similar analysis can be made. In an
ambiguous compound, one of the nouns provides the
background schema from which the general meaning will be
derived, and the other provides the highlighted information
placed into that schema. Take an example like chimpanzee
drawing. Is the issue a matter of what kinds of things
chimpanzees get up to, or is it about the kinds of things that
get drawn? If the former, then chimpanzee goes unstressed
as the new information is that they do drawings. If the latter,
then drawing is the unstressed background schema, and the
new information is that it is a chimpanzee that is the subject
of the drawing. The two interpretations can be (loosely)
represented thus;
(4) A chimpanzee DRAWING
CHIMPANZEE .. [type of creature {mammal, primate..}]
..
[activities
{swinging
from
trees,
hooting,
DRAWING…}]
(5) A CHIMPANZEE drawing
DRAWING.. [implements needed {pencil, paper …}]
.. [subject {scene, still life, CHIMPANZEE…}]
There may therefore be close parallels between the
different roles that stress can play within discourse
processes and in compound interpretation.
Our result is also consistent with Plag et al.’s (2008)
finding that stress assignment is often constant across
families of similar compounds, based on the similarity of
either head or modifier nouns (see also Plag, 2010).
Semantically similar concepts tend to have similar preferred
relations, and so enter into similar patterns of stress
assignment. For example location modifiers and material
modifiers typically take right stress in unambiguous
compounds, and there are other cases where given semantic
relations are associated with particular stress direction.
However, there must be other factors (such as historical
accident) at work, as the example given in the introduction
of the different stress assignment for pies versus cakes
clearly demonstrates. More recently Bell and Plag (2010)
have reported that stress can also be predicted from the
relative informativeness of the two nouns in a compound,
with the more informative being stressed. Our principle fits
well with this idea. The unstressed noun sets up a
background schema into which the stressed noun is placed
as the new information.
The principle that we have described helps to shed some
light on at least one aspect of the use of stress patterns in
English. It remains to be seen how broadly the principle can
now be applied outside of the realm of ambiguous NN
compounds.

References
Bell, M., & Plag, I. (2010). Informativeness is a determinant
of compound stress in English. Unpublished MS from

DFG-Project website, http://www2.uni-siegen.de/~engspra
/ DFG-Project/Bell-Plag-2010.pdf, viewed March 1, 2011.
Bloomfield, L. (1933). Language. New York: Henry Holt
and Co.
Bock, J. K. & Mazzella, J. R. (1983). Intonational marking
of given and new information: Some consequences for
comprehension. Memory & Cognition, 11, 64-76.
Chomsky, N. & Halle, M. (1968). The sound pattern of
English. New York: Harper and Row.
Clark, H. H. & Haviland, S. E. (1977). Comprehension and
the given-new contract. In R.Freedle (Ed.), Discourse
production and comprehension (pp. 1-40). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & van Donselaar, W. A. (1997).
Prosody in the comprehension of spoken language: A
literature review. Language and Speech, 40, 141-202.
Downing, P. (1977). On the creation and use of English
compound nouns. Language, 53, 810-842.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of Modifier-Noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Gleitman, L. R. & Gleitman, H. (1970). Phrase and
paraphrase. New York: Academic Press.
Kamp, H. & Partee, B. (1995). Prototype theory and
compositionality. Cognition, 57, 129-191.
Lees, R. D. (1963). The grammar of English nominalizations. Bloomington IN: Indiana University Press.
Levi, J. (1978). The syntax and semantics of complex
nominals. New York: Academic Press.
Maguire, P., Wisniewski, E. J., & Storms, G. (2010). A
corpus study of semantic patterns in compounding.
Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory, 6, 49-73.
Plag, I. (2006). The variability of compound stress in
English: structural, semantic and analogical factors.
English Language and Linguistics, 10, 143-172.
Plag, I. (2010). Compound stress assignment by analogy:
The constituent family bias. Zeitschrift für Sprachwissenschaft,29, 243-282.
Plag, I., Kunter, G., Lappe, S., & Braun, M. (2008). The
role of semantics, argument structure, and lexicalization in
compound stress assignment in English. Language, 84,
760-794.
Rosario, B. & Hearst, M. (2001). Classifying the semantic
relations in noun compounds via a domain-specific lexical
hierarchy. In Proceedings of the 2001 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP2001). Pittsburgh, PA.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Thoslima Khanam and Roberta
Pischedda who helped with data collection, Peter Barr for
programming, and Sophie Lind who recorded the spoken
phrases for Experiment 1. Helpful discussion was provided
by Deema Awad, Herbert Clark, Eve Clark, Paul Egré,
Christina Gagné, Kate Maclean, Gregory Murphy, Francois
Recanati, Thomas Spalding and Gert Storms.

2487

