UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Discovering Processing Stages by combining EEG with Hidden Markov Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3746k706

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Borst, Jelmer
Anderson, John

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Discovering Processing Stages by combining EEG with Hidden Markov Models
Jelmer P. Borst (jelmer@cmu.edu)
John R. Anderson (ja+@cmu.edu)
Dept. of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract

with condition. Using this information, and by comparing
EEG signatures between states and experimental conditions,
one can interpret the functional characteristics of the
identified processing stages.
Our approach is based on a similar method that was used
to analyze fMRI data (Anderson & Fincham, in press;
Anderson et al., 2010). For instance, Anderson and Fincham
(in press) applied the method to mathematical problem
solving, and discovered four stages: encoding the problems,
planning a solution strategy, solving the problems, and
entering a response. Although these results were promising,
the temporal resolution of fMRI is severely limited, both by
having scans that typically last one to two seconds and by
the sluggish nature of the hemodynamic response. EEG, on
the other hand, has a millisecond resolution, allowing for
the discovery of processing stages in fast-paced tasks.
We applied the HMM-EEG analysis to an associative
recognition task. During the study phase of this task,
subjects were asked to learn word pairs. In a subsequent test
phase – during which EEG data were collected – subjects
were again presented with word pairs, which could be the
same pairs as they learned previously (targets), rearranged
pairs (re-paired foils), or pairs consisting of novel words
(new foils). Subjects had to decide whether they had seen
the pair during the study phase or not. Successful
discrimination required remembering not only that the
words were studied (item information), but also how the
words were paired during study (associative information).
A conventional EEG analysis and a classifier analysis of
this study were reported elsewhere (Borst et al., submitted).
Currently, we are interested in finding out how many stages
the subjects went through while determining a correct
response.

A new method is demonstrated for identifying processing
stages in a task. Since the 1860s cognitive scientists have used
different methods to identify processing stages, usually based
on reaction time (RT) differences between conditions. To
overcome the limitations of RT-based methods we used
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) to analyze EEG data. The
HMMs indicate for how many stages there is evidence in the
data, and how the durations of these stages vary with
experimental condition. This method was applied to an
associative recognition task in which associative strength and
target/foil type were manipulated. The HMM-EEG method
identified six different processing stages for targets and repaired foils, whereas four similar stages were identified for
new foils. The duration of the third, fifth and sixth stage
varied with associative strength for targets and re-paired foils.
We present an interpretation of the identified stages, and
conclude that the method can provide valuable insight in
human information processing.
Keywords: EEG; HMM, processing stages.

Introduction
One of the main goals of cognitive science is to understand
how humans perform tasks. To this end, scientists have long
tried to identify different processing stages in human
information processing. The first to do this in a systematic
manner was probably Franciscus Donders. Almost 150
years ago, Donders proposed a method to measure the
duration of cognitive stages (1868). By subtracting the RTs
of two tasks that were hypothesized to share all but one
processing stage, the duration of that stage could be
calculated. A strong – and often problematic – assumption
of Donders’ subtractive method is the idea that it is possible
to add an entire stage without changing the duration of other
stages. To test whether different stages exist in the first
place, Sternberg proposed the additive-factor method
(1969). Although Sternberg overcame a limitation of
Donders’ method, the additive-factors method has its own
drawbacks: it can only indicate the minimum number of
stages in a task and it does not yield duration estimates of
the stages. To improve on these inherent problems of RTbased methods and get better insight in stage existence and
duration we propose a new method that uses HMMs (e.g.,
Rabiner, 1989) to analyze EEG data.
The basic idea of our method is to fit HMMs with
different numbers of states to the EEG data (note that we
use ‘processing stages’ and ‘HMM states’ interchangeably
throughout the paper). The optimal number of states can
then be determined by comparing the log-likelihoods of the
fitted HMMs. Subsequently, the durations of the different
states can be inspected, as well as how these durations vary

Methods
Subjects
Twenty individuals from the Carnegie Mellon University
community participated in a single 3-hr session for
monetary compensation (9 males and 11 females, ages
ranging from 18 to 40 years with a mean age of 26 years).
All were right-handed and none reported a history of
neurological impairment.

Design
The experiment consisted of a study phase in which subjects
learned word pairs and a test phase in which they were
tested on these word pairs. In addition to probe type (targets,
re-paired foils, or new foils), we manipulated word length
and associative strength. Words could either be short (4 or 5

221

letters) or long (7 or 8 letters). Associative strength was
manipulated by varying the number of word pairs a
particular word occurred in. This is referred to as
associative fan, and is known to have a strong effect on RT
and accuracy (for a review, see Anderson & Reder, 1999).
Words in our experiment could have a fan of 1 or 2, that is,
they could occur in one or two word pairs. Both words in a
word pair always had the same associative fan. New foils
(foils consisting of words that were not presented in the
study phase) always had an associative fan of 1, they only
appeared in a single word pair. Thus, there were 10
conditions: 2 (Probe: target or re-paired foil) × 2 (Word
Length: short or long) × 2 (Fan: 1 or 2) + short and long
new foils.

target words had elicited a correct response. Subjects
completed a total of three blocks of cued recall.
After the study phase, subjects entered the EEG recording
chamber and completed the test phase. Each trial began with
a centrally presented fixation cross for a duration sampled
from a uniform distribution ranging from 400 to 600 ms.
Following fixation, a probe word pair appeared onscreen
(one word above the other) until the subject responded with
a keypress to indicate whether the probe had been studied
during the training phase. The probe was either a target, repaired foil, or new foil. Targets required “yes” responses
(indicated by pressing the J key with the right index finger)
and foils required “no” responses (indicated by pressing the
K key with the right middle finger). Subjects were
instructed to respond quickly and accurately. Following the
response, accuracy feedback was displayed for 1000 ms,
after which a blank screen appeared for 500 ms before the
next trial began. Subjects completed a total of 13 blocks
with 80 trials per block. All 10 conditions occurred equally
often in random order in each block, resulting in 104 trials
per condition during the test phase. Targets and re-paired
foils were repeated during the test phase (they each
appeared once per block), but each new foil appeared only
once in the entire experiment.

Materials
Word pairs were constructed from a pool of 464 words
selected from the MRC Psycholinguistic Database
(Coltheart, 1981). Half of the words were nouns of 4 or 5
letters and composed the short word list. The other half of
the words were nouns of 7 or 8 letters and composed the
long word list. Word frequency and imageability ratings
were matched between those lists. The 232 words of each
length were divided randomly into two lists – a 24-word
study list and a 208-word new foil list – such that the lists
were matched on word frequency, imageability, and word
length according to t-tests (all ps > .1).
The lists were used to create three sets of probes: targets,
re-paired foils, and new foils. A set of 32 target word pairs
was constructed from the study lists such that there were
eight word pairs for each combination of length (short or
long) and fan (1 or 2). Both words in short pairs were 4 or 5
letters and both words in long pairs were 7 or 8 letters. Each
word in a fan 1 pair appeared only in that pair, whereas each
word in a fan 2 pair appeared in two pairs. A corresponding
set of 32 re-paired foil pairs was constructed in a similar
manner by combining words from different target pairs of
the appropriate length and fan. A set of 208 new foil word
pairs was constructed from the new foil lists such that there
were 104 word pairs for each length (all fan 1). The
randomization of words and their assignment to conditions
were unique for each subject.

EEG recording
Subjects sat in an electromagnetically shielded chamber.
Stimuli appeared on a CRT monitor placed behind radiofrequency shielded glass and set 60 cm from the subjects.
The electroencephalogram was recorded from 32 Ag-AgCl
sintered electrodes (10-20 system). Electrodes were also
placed on the right and left mastoids. The right mastoid
served as the reference electrode, and scalp recordings were
algebraically re-referenced offline to the average of the right
and left mastoids. The vertical electrooculogram (EOG) was
recorded as the potential between electrodes placed above
and below the left eye, and the horizontal EOG was
recorded as the potential between electrodes placed at the
external canthi. The EEG and EOG signals were amplified
by a Neuroscan bioamplification system with a bandpass of
0.1 to 70.0 Hz and were digitized at 250 Hz. Electrode
impedances were kept below 5kΩ.

Procedure

EEG preprocessing

The study phase started with each target word pair presented
onscreen for 5000 ms, followed by a 500-ms blank screen.
Subjects were instructed to read each pair and make an
initial effort to memorize it. Following target presentation,
subjects completed a cued recall task designed to help them
learn the word pairs. On each trial they were presented with
a randomly selected target word and had to recall the
word(s) paired with it (two-word responses were required
for fan 2 words). The self-paced responses were typed and
feedback (in the form of the correct response) was provided
for 2500 ms following errors. If a target word elicited an
error, it was presented again after all other target words had
been presented. A block of trials concluded when all 48

Recording artifacts in the EEG data were removed based on
visual inspection. Following artifact rejection, the data were
decomposed into independent components. Components
associated with eye blinks were visually identified and
projected out of the EEG recordings. A 0.5-30 Hz band-pass
filter was applied to attenuate high-frequency noise. Trials
were extracted from the continuous recording and baselinecorrected using a linear baseline, such that the 200 ms
before stimulus onset and 80-160 ms after the response were
on average 0 (visual inspection showed no condition
difference at this interval after the trial). Incomplete trials
due to artifact rejection were excluded, as well as trials
containing voltages above +75 µV or below -75 µV. In

222

EEG Channels

EEG Data

Voltage

32 electrodes

Tr

all trials

all trials

32 electrodes

...

EEG preprocessing
‘Super-sample’ creation
Principal Component Analysis
Normalization

...

20 principal components k

0

1

20 principal components k

...

Probability of sample j
being in each state, given
component values Fj ,
state signatures Mi , and
gamma distributions Gi

...

Component
values fjk

OZ

0

HMM with 4 states i

200 400 600 800

1

0

200 400 600 800 0
Time (ms) – Samples j

2

200

3

400

600

0

200

4

The HMM-EEG Analysis

0 320 640 960
Duration (ms)

Proportion
0.0 0.5 1.0

0 320 640 960
Duration (ms)

Proportion
0.0 0.5 1.0

Estimated gamma
distributions Gi of
state durations

Proportion
0.0 0.5 1.0

State signatures Mi
consisting of 20 means µik
(back-projected PCA
components shown)
Proportion
0.0 0.5 1.0

State properties

...

CPZ

Trial 3

...

F3

Trial 2

...

Trial 1

...

addition, all incorrect trials and correct
trials with RTs exceeding three
standard deviations (SDs) from the
mean per condition per subject were
removed. For the HMM-EEG analysis
we also removed trials with RTs
longer than 3000 ms. In total, 16.1%
of the trials was excluded.
For efficiency, the EEG data were
down-sampled to 50 Hz. Every four
samples were then combined into a
single ‘super-sample’, by quadrupling
the number of channels. That is, from
four 20-ms samples with 32 channels
we created one 80-ms super-sample
with 128 channels. A super-sample
contained information about the mean
voltage in each channel, as well as
about whether this voltage increased or
decreased over the 80 ms interval.
Next, we normalized each channel to a
mean of 0 and a SD of 1, and applied a
principle component analysis (PCA) to
the 128 channels. The results of the
PCA were again normalized; the first
20 PCA components were used for the
HMM-EEG analysis.

0 320 640 960
Duration (ms)

0 320 640 960
Duration (ms)

Figure 1. Overview of the HMM-EEG analysis. EEG data comes in at the top
and is preprocessed into PCA components. At the bottom a fitted 4-state HMM
The HMM-EEG analysis consists of
is shown, with state signatures and gamma distributions. The center graph shows
two main parts: (1) determining the
the probability of each sample j for each state given this HMM. The connections
optimal number of states and (2)
between sample likelihoods and states are shown for states 1 and 3.
computing the properties of the
identified states. Both parts of the
HMM algorithms can be used to find parameters Mi and
analysis depend on fitting HMMs to the preprocessed EEG
Gi that yield the optimal interpretation of the data given an
data. We will therefore first discuss the structure and
HMM with r states (see Anderson & Fincham, in press, for
parameter estimation procedure that was used for the
a more detailed explanation for the kind of HMMs that are
HMMs. We then explain how these HMMs were used to
used in this paper; Rabiner, 1989; Yu & Kobayashi, 2006).
find the optimal number of states and how we computed the
To calculate the solutions we adapted software that
properties of these states.
minimizes the summed log-likelihood of the HMM over all
trials (Yu & Kobayashi, 2006).
HMM structure and parameter estimation
Figure 1 shows the result of such an optimization
An HMM simulates a system that is at any given time in one
procedure
for a 4-state HMM. Given the optimal state
of a set of distinct states, between which it transitions at
signatures
and gamma distributions, the probability that
certain times (e.g., Rabiner, 1989). In our analysis, each
each
sample
j belongs to a state is depicted in the center of
state represents a processing stage in the task (e.g., encoding
the
figure.
As
expected, the first samples in each of the three
the stimulus, executing a response). A state is associated
trials probably belong to state 1 (blue), the next samples to
with a brain signature Mi that represents the average EEGstate 2 (green), etc. In addition, state 1 is always two
activation pattern during this processing stage, and with a
samples long in the three trials in the figure, matching the
gamma distribution Gi that represents the state’s durations
gamma distribution of this stage. State 3, on the other hand,
over the trials in the experiment. For current purposes, we
is much more variable in duration.
only consider HMMs with a linear structure, that is, state 1
For clarity the explanation above assumes a gamma
always transitions to state 2, state 2 to state 3, etc.
distribution
for each state. In the actual analysis we used
An example of a four-state HMM is shown in Figure 1. At
separate
gamma
distributions for each condition and state,
the top of the figure EEG data is shown for three channels
allowing for different duration estimates per condition.
over three trials of the experiment, at the bottom the HMM
with associated brain signatures and gamma distributions.

223

A

State 1

State 2

State 3

State 4

State 5

models give us the probability for each sample in the data to
be in a certain state (center of Figure 1). This was used to
calculate differences in EEG activation between conditions.

State 6

Target /
Re-paired
Foil

Results

8

New Foil

0

For reasons of brevity we do not report behavioral results
separately. RTs can be inferred from Figure 3. For targets
and re-paired foils, Fan (F(1,19) = 65.42, p < .001), Probe
(F(1,19) = 45.10, p < .001), and the interaction between Fan
and Probe (F(1,19) = 31.40, p < .001) had a significant
effect on RT, as indicated by a repeated measure ANOVA.
In addition, new foils were responded to much faster than
the other probe types, which was expected given that no
associative information has to be retrieved for new foils.

-8 µV

New Foil
Proportion
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Target / Re-paired Foil
Proportion
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

B

0 160 320 480 640 800 960
Duration (ms)

State 1
State 2
State 3
State 4
State 5
State 6

Number of stages

0 160 320 480 640 800 960
Duration (ms)

Because new foils are very different from the other probe
types – no associative information has to be retrieved for
new foils – we decided to run separate analyses for new
foils and targets/re-paired foils. For targets and re-paired
foils a 6-state HMM turned out to be the winner. It was
better for at least 16 subjects than HMMs with fewer states,
and no HMM with more states had a higher log-likelihood
for more than 9 subjects. The new foils also showed
evidence for 6 states: 17 subjects fitted better with a 6-state
HMM than with 4 states. However, the 4-state solution
compares better to the 6-state solution of targets and repaired foils.1 Although there might be more stages in the
data, we can be secure in the assumptions that there are at
least 6 states for targets and re-paired foils and 4 states for
new foils and in whatever conclusions these assumptions
lead to. Thus, we will focus on the 4-state solution for new
foils in this paper.

Figure 2. State signatures and gamma distributions.

Number of states and state properties
Above we explained how an r-state HMM can be
determined that gives an optimal interpretation of the data.
However, what we are really interested in is finding the
optimal number of states to describe the data. A simplistic
approach would be to compare the log-likelihoods of
HMMs with different numbers of states. However, because
HMMs with more states have more parameters to fit the
data, they will typically yield a better fit. What we want to
know is if the extra parameters explain enough extra
variance to be warranted. To this end we applied leave-oneout cross validation (LOOCV).
Our LOOCV method estimated state signatures for n-1
subjects, and calculated the log-likelihood of the nth subject
given these signatures while allowing for different state
durations for the nth subject (to accommodate speed
differences between subjects, unlike Anderson & Fincham,
in press). This process was repeated for all subjects.
The LOOCV procedure was repeated for HMMs with
different numbers of states. To select the best model we
used a sign-test: if a k-state model fitted the data of x out of
n participants better than all (l<k)-state models we choose it
as the winner. The underlying idea is that while a (k+1)state model will fit the data of n-1 subjects better in the
estimation phase than a k-state model, it is at least as likely
to fit the nth subject worse (Anderson & Fincham, in press).
According to a sign-test, a significant increase is reached
when 15 out of 20 subjects improve (p = .04).
After determining the optimal number of states, we
computed the properties of the identified states. First, we
estimated an optimal HMM on the data of all subjects. We
used the state signatures of this model to estimate optimal
gamma distributions for each subject. These gamma
distributions were used to calculate the average state
duration for each subject and condition, which were used in
subsequent ANOVAs to determine which states change in
duration with condition. In addition, the subject-specific

Stage properties
Figure 2 shows the gamma distributions and state signatures
of the 6-state HMM for the targets/re-paired foils and the 4state HMM for the new foils. Interestingly, the first two
states of both solutions seem very similar. Correlations
between the state signatures confirm that stage 1 and stage 2
in both HMMs resemble each other closely: 0.98 and 0.97.
The estimated gamma distributions in Figure 2b are
averaged over conditions and subjects. They show that stage
1 has a very fixed duration, of two samples or 160 ms. The
other stages are more variable. A duration of 0 means that
the state is skipped, which happens most often (in 50% of
the trials) for stage 4 of the targets/re-paired foils. For the
other stages these percentages are under 30%.
Figure 3 shows the state durations in more detail, split out
for conditions. We will only list major effects with p-values
< .01 (repeated measure ANOVAs), as these are used below
to interpret the results.
1
The 6-state solution for new foils effectively splits up two of
the stages into shorter stages. Although this might explain the new
foils in themselves better, our interest is explaining associative
recognition.

224

Fan 1

Target

Fan 2

Short

Fan 1

Re-paired Foil
New Foil

Short

Short
Long

Fan 2

A

Short
Long

A

Long
Long

State 3

State 4

State 5

State 6

Target
>
Re-paired Foil

B

Short

Long Words
>
Short Words

Long
200

400

600
800
Time (ms)

1000

1200

1400

Short Long Short Long Short Long Short Long
Fan 1
Fan 2
Fan 1
Fan 2
Target
Re-paired Foil

6.5
0
-6.5 t

Figure 4. Differences between conditions in states for (A)
targets/repaired foils and (B) new foils. The maps show tvalues for FDR-corrected p-values < .05.

State 1
State 2
State 3
State 4
State 5
State 6

Figure 4A shows that long words resulted in less activity
than short words in state 1 over left prefrontal electrodes,
and in state 6 over central electrodes. Fan 2 items resulted in
more activity than fan 1 items in states 3 and 4 over midline
electrodes, whereas they showed less activity in state 6 over
parietal regions. Finally, targets elicited a little less activity
than re-paired foils in state 3, and more activity in states 5
and 6 over parietal and occipital sites. The largest effect for
new foils was in state 2, where long words resulted in less
activity than short words for frontal electrodes.

50

Duration (ms)
100 150 200 250 300 350 400

State 2

Fan 2
>
Fan1

0

B

State 1
Long Words
>
Short Words

Short

Long

New Foil

Interpretation of the Processing Stages

Figure 3. State durations. A shows how the state durations
add up to form a complete trial, whereas B illustrates the
effect of condition on state duration.

The underlying reason for wanting to identify processing
stages is explaining how tasks are performed. In this section
we will give our interpretation of the processing stages
discovered by the HMM-EEG method.
The first two stages seem to reflect visually perceiving the
two words on the screen. Both stages hardly varied with
condition, and are very similar between targets/re-paired
foils and new foils – implying that the words are not
processed yet in relation to the experimental task. In
addition, there are effects of word length on brain activity in
stage 1 for targets/re-paired foils and in stage 2 for new
foils. Although word length effects are typically strongest in
occipital regions, Hauk et al. (2009) showed a left prefrontal
effect that appears to match our observation.
We hypothesize that stage 3 reflects item retrieval, to
determine whether the presented words were learned during
the study phase of the experiment. First, the duration of
stage 3 varies strongly with fan and there is also a strong
effect of fan on brain activity in stage 3. Existing models of
the fan effect assume that the effect originates in declarative
memory, implying that this stage is memory related (e.g.,
Anderson & Reder, 1999). Second, for new foils this is the
stage where information has to be retrieved about whether
the words were studied or not. After the third stage there is
only a short response stage, which is similar to stage 6 of
the targets/re-paired foils. Given the matching time course,
we assumed that stage 3 reflects an item retrieval stage for
targets/re-paired foils as well.

State 1 and 2 seem stable over the different conditions,
even between the two different HMMs. This matches the
observation that their state signatures are very similar. Stage
3 is longer for fan 2 items than for fan 1 (F(1,19) = 15.14, p
< .001). Stage 4 seems to be an intermediate stage that is
often skipped for the targets/re-paired foils, and it does not
change with condition. For the new foils, stage 4 is the final
stage. It does not change in duration with word length. Stage
5 varied strongly in duration with both Fan (F(1,19) =
16.12, p < .001) and Probe (F(1,19) = 20.32, p < .001).
Stage 6, the final stage for targets/re-paired foils, is longer
for fan 2 items than for fan 1 items (F(1,19) = 21.55, p <
.001). In addition, there is an interaction between Fan and
Probe (F(1,19) = 16.75, p < .001), with the fan effect being
stronger for re-paired foils than for targets.
The HMM-EEG analysis aims to find states with similar
brain signatures in the different conditions of the
experiment. Although that is the case, there might still be
differences between conditions within a stage. Figure 4A
shows the differences between conditions for the 6-state
HMM for targets/re-paired foils; Figure 4B for the 4-state
HMM for new foils. These differences were calculated by
estimating brain activity for each state, condition, and
subject. The resulting values were subjected to t-tests for
each electrode.

225

The idea of an early item retrieval stage and a later
associative retrieval stage (stage 5) resembles dual-process
theories of recognition (e.g., Rugg & Curran, 2007). To
judge whether a stimulus was experienced before, dualprocess theories assume an early ‘familiarity’ process,
followed by a functionally distinct recollection process.
With respect to our experiment, the familiarity phase could
correspond to stage 3 – in which it is determined whether
the items are familiar – whereas stage 5 could correspond to
the recollection stage in which associative information is
retrieved.
Familiarity and recollection processes have been related
to different ERP components (Rugg & Curran, 2007).
Familiarity elicits a negative response between 300-500 ms
over mid-frontal electrodes, with new items being more
negative than studied items. This matches the observation
that new foils in our experiment have a more negative brain
signature over mid-frontal electrodes than targets/re-paired
foils in stage 3. Recollection has been linked to the parietal
old/new effect, which is more positive for old than for new
items. If our stage 5 reflects recollection of associative
information, it should show a parietal positivity for targets
versus re-paired foils, which it does.
Stage 4 is skipped in 50% of the trials. We tentatively
hypothesize that it reflects working memory consolidation
of the items that are retrieved from memory in stage 3. This
is not a necessary process, which might explain why it is
skipped in 50% of the trials.
As explained above, we assume that stage 5 reflects
associative retrievals. Not only does it show the parietal
old/new effect, but it also varied in duration both with fan
and probe type, which are known to influence the length of
associative retrievals.
Stage 6 of the targets/re-paired foils and stage 4 of the
new foils are the final stages in the task. We assume that
they reflect response stages. The duration of stage 6 changes
with fan, and shows an interaction between fan and probe
type. For new foils this last stage is shorter than for the
other conditions. We interpreted these duration differences
as an effect of response confidence. Subjects responded
faster and more accurate to new foils than to targets/repaired foils, and faster and more accurate to fan 1 items than
to fan 2 items – indicating they might have been more
confident in those responses.
The effects on brain activity support this interpretation.
There were differences over parietal electrodes between
targets and re-paired foils (targets being more positive),
between fan 1 and 2 items (fan 1 items being more positive),
and between new foils and targets/re-paired foils (the
signature of new foils is slightly more positive). We
hypothesize that these effects resemble a P300, which is
known to increase with response confidence (Wilkinson &
Seales, 1978).

analyze EEG data. For the associative recognition task, the
method yielded a 6-state solution for targets and re-paired
foils and a 4-state solution for new foils. These solutions
seem to be reasonable, and could be interpreted by using
information about how the stages varied in length, and how
the brain activity within stages differed between conditions.
The results matched dual-process theories of recognition,
both in expected stage duration and brain activity.
Naturally, other interpretations of these results are also
conceivable. For instance, the duration of the last two stages
could be explained with an accumulator model, which
samples faster for the easier conditions.
That being said, especially in combination with earlier
promising effects on fMRI data (e.g., Anderson & Fincham,
in press; Anderson et al., 2010), we think that the HMMEEG method shows great promise for investigating human
information processing.

References
Anderson, J. R., Betts, S., Ferris, J. L., & Fincham, J. M.
(2010). Neural imaging to track mental states while
using an intelligent tutoring system. PNAS USA,
107(15), 7018–7023. doi:10.1073/pnas.1000942107
Anderson, J. R., & Fincham, J. M. (in press). Uncovering
the Sequential Structure of Thought. Cognitive Science.
Anderson, J. R., & Reder, L. M. (1999). The fan effect:
New results and new theories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology General, 128(2), 186–197.
Borst, J. P., Schneider, D. W., Walsh, M. M., & Anderson,
J. R. (submitted). Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A,
497–505.
Donders, F. C. (1868). De snelheid van psychische
processen (On the speed of mental processes).
Hauk, O., Pulvermüller, F., Ford, M., Marslen-Wilson, W.
D., & Davis, M. H. (2009). Can I have a quick word?
Early
electrophysiological
manifestations
of
psycholinguistic processes revealed by event-related
regression analysis of the EEG. Biological psychology,
80(1), 64–74.
Rabiner, L. R. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov models
and selected applications in speech recognition.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 77(2), 257–286.
Rugg, M. D., & Curran, T. (2007). Event-related potentials
and recognition memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
11(6), 251–257.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages:
Extensions of Donders’ method. Acta psychologica, 30,
276–315.
Wilkinson, R. T., & Seales, D. M. (1978). EEG eventrelated potentials and signal detection. Biological
psychology, 7(1), 13–28
Yu, S. Z., & Kobayashi, H. (2006). Practical
implementation of an efficient forward-backward
algorithm for an explicit-duration hidden Markov model.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 54, 1947–51.

Discussion
In this paper we have presented a new method for
identifying processing stages in a task, which uses HMMs to

226

