UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distinguishing between Category-based and Similarity-based Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0r77h109

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Miser, Tracey
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distinguishing between Category-based and Similarity-based Induction
Tracey Miser (miser.4@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH43210 USA

Vladimir Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH43210 USA

Abstract
Performing inductive generalizations is critical for learning,
yet there is much debate regarding the mechanisms
underlying this ability. One view posits that similarity-based
induction, utilizing perceptual features, may allow for
increased encoding and higher memory accuracy on
recognition tests. While category-based induction, utilizing
semantic information, may result in limiting encoding of
perceptual detail, thus resulting in decreased memory
accuracy. In Experiment 1, we attempted to impair
spontaneous categorization by presenting a second Working
Memory load task. In Experiment 2, we attempted to impair
perceptual processing by introducing a second Visual Search
task. Results indicate that adult participants can rely on either
mechanism when performing induction.
Keywords: Induction; Learning; Memory.

Introduction
The ability to generalize from the known to novel is a
critical aspect of cognition – this ability allows expanding
knowledge to new situations. At the same time, the learner
may not know how far new knowledge can be expanded
outside of the learning situation. Suppose that one learned
that adenosine promotes myelination in the brain of the
Capuchin monkey. Should this knowledge be generalized to
New World monkeys, all monkeys, all primates, or all
mammals? One way of generalizing knowledge is by
identifying a common category that licenses such
generalization. For example, one may decide that
MONKEY is such a category and generalize knowledge to
all monkeys. However, while knowledge of categories is
useful, it is not necessary for inductive generalization. For
example, one may decide that animals share a property to
the extent their similarity exceeds some criterial value.
The latter mechanism seems to be a good candidate for
generalization early in development, whereas the former
could be a product of development. However, despite the
fact that inductive generalization exhibits early onset
(Baldwin, Markman, & Melartin, 1993; Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001; Welder &
Graham, 2001), the mechanisms underlying early induction
are hotly debated.

According to the naïve theory approach (see Murphy,
2002, for a review) induction is a two-step process: children
first identify encountered entities as members of categories,
and, if entities belong to the same category (say, the same
natural kind), then infer that these entities share many
properties. The inference is licensed by children’s
assumptions that members of some categories (such as, for
example, natural kinds) share many properties. Given that
children are more likely to know basic-level categories (e.g.,
MONKEY)
than
superordinate
categories
(e.g.,
MAMMAL), they are more likely to generalize properties
within basic-level categories.
According to another position (i.e., the similarity view),
induction is a generalization process, and young children
generalize on the basis of multiple commonalities, or
similarities, among presented entities (e.g., Jones & Smith,
2002; McClelland & Rogers, 2003; Sloutsky, Fisher, & Lo,
2001; Sloutsky, 2003, Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b).
This view does not attribute conceptual assumptions to
young children.
In an attempt to address these issues, Sloutsky and
Fisher (2004b; Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005) introduced
Induction-then-Recognition (ITR) paradigm. The idea is
based on the following reasoning. There is a well-known
“level-of-processing effect” – deeper semantic processing
facilitates correct recognition of presented items, increasing
the proportion of “hits” (Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Craik &
Tulving, 1975). At the same time, deeper processing also
results in higher levels of memory intrusions – false
recognition of non-presented “critical lures” of semantically
associated or categorically related items (e.g., Koutstaal &
Schacter, 1997; Rhodes & Anastasi, 2000; Thapar &
McDermott, 2001). Due to elevated levels of false alarms,
the net result of deep semantic processing on recognition
accuracy (i.e., Hits – False Alarms) is negative. At the same
time, it is known that focusing on perceptual details of
pictorially presented information leads to more accurate
recognition (Marks, 1991) – although hits might be slightly
lower, false alarms are significantly lower than under deep
semantic processing. Therefore, these memory findings
suggest that categorization (which is a variant of deeper
semantic processing) would result in a higher level of
memory intrusions and thus in lower recognition accuracy

3056

than shallow perceptual processing (see also Brainerd,
Reyna, & Forrest, 2002, for related arguments).
Thus, a memory test administered after an induction
task may reveal differential encoding of information during
induction: if participants perform category-based induction,
they should be engaged in deep semantic processing, and
therefore exhibit low discrimination of studied items from
critical lures during a memory test (compared to a noinduction baseline condition). On the other hand, if
participants perform similarity-based induction, they should
be engaged in shallow perceptual processing, and as a result
their memory accuracy should not decrease compared to the
baseline. Because, unlike adults, young children were
expected to perform similarity-based induction, this
reasoning led to a nontrivial prediction that after performing
induction, young children may exhibit greater memory
accuracy (i.e., have fewer false alarms) than adults.
These predictions have received empirical support: the
pattern of results reported by Sloutsky and Fisher (2004a;
2004b; Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005) indicated that while adults
perform category-based induction, young children perform
similarity-based induction. In particular, after performing
inductive generalizations about members of familiar animal
categories (i.e., cats, bears, and birds), adults’ memory
accuracy attenuated markedly compared to the no-induction
baseline, and, these effects of induction were robust across a
wide range of animal categories (Fisher & Sloutsky, 2004).
At the same time, young children were accurate in both the
baseline and induction conditions, exhibiting greater
accuracy in the induction condition than adults.
Although these findings are compatible with the idea of
different mechanisms of induction across development (i.e.,
similarity-based early induction and category-based mature
induction), a number of alternative explanations have been
proposed. In particular, Wilburn and Feeney (2008) and
Hayes, McKinnon, & Sweller (2008) suggested that the
mechanism of induction does not change across
development (with induction being category-based) and the
higher memory accuracy of children simply reflects their
inability to filter out irrelevant perceptual information. In
other words, whereas adults process primarily category
information, young children cannot focus efficiently, and, as
a result, they process both category and perceptual
information. Although there are several phenomena that this
idea cannot explain (see Sloutsky, 2008), we deemed it
necessary to address the issue directly.
To do so, we created a new paradigm to examine the
issue. The underlying idea is to selectively impair either
categorical or perceptual processing and to examine
induction and memory performance. If participants can rely
on either information (which we believe is the case with
adults), then neither manipulation should have an effect on
induction. If participants rely primarily on perceptual
information (which we believe is the case with children),
then impairing perceptual processing should impair
induction.

Each manipulation should also have a different effect
on memory. Impairing categorical processing should force
participants to process items perceptually, thus potentially
increasing memory accuracy after performing induction. At
the same time, impairing perceptual processing should force
participants to process items categorically, thus potentially
decreasing memory accuracy.
In research reported here, we tested this paradigm with
adults. The main idea is to introduce a second task when
participants perform induction. To impair categorical
processing, we introduce a working memory task, whereas
to impair perceptual processing, we introduce a visual
search task.
In what follows, we report two experiments: In
Experiment 1, the second task is a working memory task,
whereas in Experiment 2, the second task is a visual search
task. We compare performance on these experiments with
performance reported by Sloutsky and Fisher (2004), when
no secondary tasks were introduced.

Experiment 1: Induction with Working
Memory Load
The experiment was a replication of Sloutsky and Fisher
(2004b) ITR paradigm with one difference: during the study
phase participants were presented with a second task, whose
goal was to increase working memory load.

Method
Participants. Sixty-two introductory psychology students
participated in the experiment for class credit. Twenty-six
participants were excluded due to low accuracy on check
trials in the recognition portion of the experiment.
Materials, Design and Procedure. Visual Stimuli
consisted of 44 color photographs of animals on white
backgrounds (see Figure 1 for examples). Auditory Stimuli
consisted of ten familiar words (e.g., one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten) presented through
headphones between 68-72 dB.
Similar to Sloutsky and Fisher (2004b), the experiment
included two between-subjects conditions: Memory and
Induction. In both conditions, the experiment was divided
into two phases: the study phase and the recognition phase.
During the study phase of both conditions, participants
received a working memory (WM) task. For the WM task,
participants were initially presented with five randomly
selected Auditory Stimuli and asked to listen for one of the
words to be played more than one time on each of the
subsequent study phase trials. At the end of each trial
participants were asked if one of the words had been
repeated and were provided with Yes/No feedback.
The primary task of interest differed across the
conditions: in the Induction condition participants were
asked to generalize properties and in the Memory condition,
they were asked to remember the items as accurately as
possible.

3057

Study Phase: Induction Condition. During the study phase,
participants were presented with 30 pictures of animals, one
at a time, in a random order. The animals were selected
from 3 categories: 10 bears, 10 birds, and 10 cats. The
pictures were presented centrally on a 22” wide screen
monitor for 2750 ms each. After being introduced to the
WM task, participants were then shown a picture of a cat
and were told the cat had “beta cells in its blood.”
Throughout the study phase of the Induction condition,
participants were first asked after each trial whether one of
the words had been repeated and Yes/No feedback was
provided. They were then asked to decide whether each
presented animal also had beta cells. Yes/No feedback was
provided indicating that only cats had beta cells.
Study Phase: Memory Condition. The Memory condition
was similar to the Induction condition, with a single
difference: instead of performing an induction task,
participants were asked to remember the items as accurately
as possible. They were also warned about the upcoming
memory test.
Recognition Phase. The recognition phase was identical
across both conditions. The recognition phase immediately
followed the study phase. During recognition, participants
were presented with 28 images, 14 of which had been
presented in the study phase and 14 of which were new
images. Participants were instructed to determine whether
each image had been presented during the study phase and
neither feedback nor secondary task was given.

Results and Discussion
In this experiment, it was expected that spontaneous
categorization would be hindered due to increased working
memory load. Therefore, compared to a single task
condition in Sloutsky and Fisher (2004b), the dual task
condition may increase the overall task difficulty thus
attenuating recognition accuracy in the Memory condition.
At the same time, it may block categorization, thus
increasing recognition accuracy in the Induction condition.
The average rate of correct induction was over 98%,
compared to over 75% induction accuracy in Sloutsky and
Fisher (2004b).
To analyze recognition memory accuracy, Hit and False
Alarm (FA) rates were calculated (see Table 1). Also in the
Table are Hit and FA rates from Sloutsky and Fisher
(2004b). Because these researchers did not use a secondary
WM task, we will refer to their experiment as “Baseline”.
To further examine the ability to discriminate old items
from critical lures, we computed memory sensitivity A'
scores. A' is a nonparametric analogue of the signal
detection statistic d' (Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988; Wickens,
2002). If participants do not discriminate old items from
critical lures, A' is at or below .5. The greater the
discrimination accuracy, the closer A' is to 1. A' scores for
Experiment 1 are presented in Figure 2 alongside A' scores
for Experiment 2, as well as the results of the Sloutsky and
Fisher (2004b) Baseline data.
Data in the figure were submitted to a 2 (Experiment:
Working Memory vs. Baseline) by 2 (Condition: Induction
vs. Memory) ANOVA. The analysis revealed a significant
interaction between experiment and condition, F (1, 80) =
5.58, p= .02 as well as a significant main effect of
condition, F (1, 80) = 14.38, p < .000. Independent samples
t-tests indicated that memory accuracy in the Memory
condition of the current experiment was lower than that in
Sloutsky and Fisher (2004b), t (35) = -2.23, p < .05. At the
same time the opposite was true for the Induction condition,
in which the WM load of the current experiment resulted in
marginally higher memory accuracy than a single task
induction accuracy reported in Sloutsky and Fisher (2004b),
t (45) = 1.54, p = .13.

Table 1
Mean Proportions of Hits and False Alarms (FA) and
Mean Accuracy
Condition
WM-Ind
WM-Mem
*S&F-Ind
*S&F-Mem

Hits
.78 (.16)
.77 (.14)
.83 (.20)
.89 (.10)

FA
.59 (.26)
.52 (.22)
.76 (.25)
.47 (.31)

Accuracy
(hits-FA)
.19
.24
.07
.42

Note. WM – working memory; *S&F – Sloutsky & Fisher
(2004b); Standard deviations are in parentheses.

3058

Taken together results of Experiment 1 indicate that
impairing categorization by introducing a secondary WM
task does not affect induction accuracy, but it does affect
memory accuracy. Most importantly, memory accuracy in
the Induction condition increased somewhat, compared to
the memory accuracy in the single-task Induction, which
was not the case for the Memory condition. These results
confirm that if categorization is impaired, adults can rely on
perceptual information to perform induction. In Experiment
2, we attempted to impair participants’ perceptual
processing.

Experiment 2: Induction with Perceptual Load
The experiment was similar to Experiment 1, with one
critical difference: the second task was a visual search task,
whose goal was to impair perceptual processing rather than
categorization.

Method
Participants. Fifty-six introductory psychology students
participated in the experiment for class credit. Thirty
participants were excluded due to low accuracy on check
trials in the recognition portion of the experiment.
Materials, Design and Procedure. Visual Stimuli
consisted of the same 44 color photographs used in
Experiment 1. Visual Search Stimuli consisted of a total of
16 red or black “+” and “o” symbols. These stimuli were
presented in random sequence by Rapid Serial Visual
Presentation, with items being displayed for 250 ms each
and having an inter stimulus interval of 250 ms. Visual
Search stimuli were presented in the upper right hand corner
of the screen with eccentricity of approximately 23° visual
angle and subtending approximately 1.4° of visual angle.
Experiments were conducted on a Dell Optiplex 790
computer and were programmed in E-Prime Professional
2.0 software.
Similar to Experiment 1, this experiment included two
between-subjects conditions: Memory and Induction. Also,
similar to Experiment 1, the two conditions differed only in
the Study phase, while having identical Recognition phase.
The Study phase of each condition was similar to the
respective condition of Experiment 1, with a single
difference. The second task in Experiment 2 was a Visual
Search (VS) task.
During the study phase of both conditions, participants
were presented with Visual Search stimuli in the upper right
corner of the monitor and asked to watch for red “+” signs
on each of the subsequent study phase trials. The Visual
Search stimuli preceded the onset of animal pictures by
3000 ms and continued 2000 ms after the picture of the
animal disappeared. The study phase consisted of the same
30 pictures of animals as in Experiment 1 and were
presented centrally on a 22” wide screen monitor for 2750
ms each. After each study phase trial, participants were first
asked whether a red “+” sign had been presented. In both

conditions, participants were instructed to not look directly
at the animal pictures. Participants’ eye gaze was monitored
by an experimenter and verbal corrective feedback was
provided. Immediately following the last Visual Search
stimuli on each trial, participants were asked whether they
had seen any red “+” signs and Yes/No feedback was
provided.
Study Phase: Induction Condition. During the Induction
Condition, participants were first asked whether they had
seen any red “+” signs and were provided with Yes/No
feedback. They were then asked whether the animal had
beta cells and were given Yes/No feedback indicating that
only cats have beta cells.
Study Phase: Memory Condition. The Memory condition
was similar to the Induction condition, with a single
difference: instead of performing an induction task,
participants were asked to remember the items as accurately
as possible.
Recognition Phase. The recognition phase was similar to
that in Experiment 1: in the Memory condition participants
were told in advance about the upcoming recognition phase,
whereas in the Induction condition, no advanced warnings
about upcoming recognition were given. The recognition
phase immediately followed the study phase. During
recognition, participants were presented with the same 28
images that were presented in Experiment 1, 14 images had
been presented in the study phase and 14 were new images.
Participants were instructed to determine whether each
image had been presented during the study phase and
neither feedback nor secondary task was given.

Results and Discussion
In this experiment, it was expected that perceptual
processing would be impaired due to the demands of the
Visual Search task. The average rate of correct induction
was over 94%, compared to over 75% induction accuracy in
Sloutsky and Fisher (2004b).
Hit and false alarm rates are presented in Table 2 and
A' scores for Experiment 2 are presented in Figure 2
alongside A' scores for Experiment 1, as well as the results
of the Sloutsky and Fisher (2004b) Baseline data. Hit and
false alarm percentages for Experiments 1 and 2, as well as
the Sloutsky and Fisher Baseline percentages are presented
by condition in Table 3.

3059

Table 2
Mean Proportions of Hits and False Alarms (FA) and
Mean Accuracy
Condition
VS-Ind
VS-Mem
*S&F-Ind
*S&F-Mem

Hits
.71 (.20)
.58 (.22)
.83 (.20)
.89 (.10)

FA
.59 (.28)
.39 (.23)
.76 (.25)
.47 (.31)

Accuracy
(hits-FA)
.12
.18
.07
.42

Note. VS – Visual Search; *S&F – Sloutsky & Fisher
(2004b); Standard deviations are in parentheses.

Memory Sensitivity (A')

A' scores shown in Figure 2 were submitted to a 2
(Experiment: Visual Search vs. Baseline) by 2 (Condition:
Induction vs. Memory) ANOVA. The analysis revealed a
significant interaction, F (1, 70) = 4.65, p < .05, as well as
a main effect for condition, F (1, 70) = 10.08, p = .002.
Furthermore, two tailed independent samples t-tests
indicated a significant decrease in memory accuracy in the
Memory condition of Experiment 2 compared to Sloutsky
and Fisher (2004b), t (29) = -2.38, p < .05; but not in the
Induction condition t (41) = .60, p = .55.

General Discussion

Induction
Memorization

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Sloutsky &
Fisher (2004)

Working
Memory

Visual Search

Figure 2. Memory Sensitivity scores (A’) across experimental
conditions. The dashed line represents the point of no sensitivity.
Error bars show standard errors of the mean.

Table 3
Mean Proportions of Hits and False Alarms (FA) and
Mean Accuracy
Condition
WM-Ind
WM-Mem
VS-Ind
VS-Mem
*S&F-Ind
*S&F-Mem

Hits
.78 (.16)
.77 (.14)
.71 (.20)
.58 (.22)
.83 (.20)
.89 (.10)

FA
.59 (.26)
.52 (.22)
.59 (.28)
.39 (.23)
.76 (.25)
.47 (.31)

Accuracy
(hits-FA)
.19
.24
.12
.18
.07
.42

Note. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
*Indicates data from Sloutsky & Fisher (2004).

Overall, results of Experiment 2 indicate that impairing
perceptual processing does not impair inductive inference in
adults, while significantly impairing recognition accuracy in
the memory condition.

The two reported experiments introduce and test a new
paradigm for studying the mechanism of induction.
Experiment 1, attempts to impair semantic categorization by
introducing a secondary Working Memory task, while
Experiment 2 attempts to impair perceptual processing by
introducing a secondary Visual Search task. Results indicate
that whereas participants were able to perform inductive
inference in both conditions, each manipulation somewhat
differently affected recognition accuracy in the Memory and
Induction conditions.
First, both tasks impaired recognition accuracy in the
Memory condition compared to a single task Baseline,
perhaps more so in the Visual Search than in the WM
condition. Note that when Visual Search was the secondary
task, recognition memory in the Induction condition (similar
to the Baseline) was not different from 0.5 (p > .12), which
indicates no discrimination between old items and critical
lures. At the same time, when working memory was the
secondary task, recognition memory in the Induction
condition was above 0.5 (p < .05) In addition, the WM task
(whose goal was to block semantic categorization) increased
somewhat memory accuracy in the Induction condition.
The reported results support the idea that adults may
perform inductive inference by relying on either conceptual
or perceptual information. In future research, we plan to
present these tasks to children. If mechanisms of induction
in children are equivalent to those of adults, then, similar to
adults, children should be able to perform induction in either
condition (although their memory accuracy may attenuate
due to increased task demands). In contrast, if children rely
on perceptual (but not conceptual) processing when
performing induction, their induction performance should
drop in the Visual Search, but not in the WM condition. We
believe that the new paradigm presented here can address
these issues.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the NSF (BCS0720135) to V. M. Sloutsky.

References
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M.,& Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infants’ ability to draw inferences about nonobvious
object properties: Evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64, 711-728.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Forrest, T. J. (2002). Are
young children susceptible to the false-memory illusion?
Child Development, 73, 1363-1377.
Craik, F. I. & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing:
A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Craik F. I. & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and
the retention of words in episodic memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 268-294.
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2005). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for gradual transition from

3060

similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development, 76, 583-597.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within
natural kind and artifact categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 20, 65-95.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In
S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes (Eds.), Perspectives on
language and thought: Interrelations in development.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Hayes B. K., McKinnon, R., & Sweller, N. (2008). The
Development of category-based induction: Reexamining
conclusions from the induction then recognition (ITR)
paradigm. Developmental Psychology, 44, 1430-1441.
Jones, S. S., & Smith, L. B. (2002). How children know the
relevant properties for generalizing object names.
Developmental Science, 5, 219-232.
Koutstaal, W., & Schacter, D. L. (1997). Gist-based false
recognition of pictures in older and younger adults.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 555-583.
Marks, W. (1991). Effects of encoding the perceptual
features of pictures on memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 566577.
McClelland, J. L. & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rhodes, M. G., & Anastasi, J. S. (2000). The effects of a
levels-of-processing manipulation on false recall.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 158-162.

Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2008) Analogy is to priming as relations
are to transformations. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
31, 396-397.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher A. V. (2004a). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher A. V. (2004b). When
Development and learning decrease memory.
Psychological Science, 15, 553-558.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y. F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar?
Linguistic labels and the development of inductive
inference. Child Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1998). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to
dementia and amnesia. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 117, 34-50.
Thapar, A., & McDermott, K. B. (2001). False recall and
false recognition induced by presentation of associated
words: Effects of retention interval and level of
processing. Memory and Cognition, 29, 424-432.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants’ inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.
Wilburn C.,& Feeney A. (2008). Do development and
learning really decrease memory? On similarity and
category-based induction in adults and children.
Cognition, 106, 1451-1464.

3061

