UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distributed remembering in a social context: Effects of communicating a shared past on
what is remembered

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/03q3s1ww

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Coman, Alin
Echterhoff, Gerald
Edelson, Micah
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distributed remembering in a social context:
Effects of communicating a shared past on what is remembered
Alin I. Coman (acoman@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08544 USA

Gerald Echterhoff (g.echterhoff@uni-muenster.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Münster
Fliednerstr. 21, 48149, Münster, Germany

Micah Edelson (micah.edelson@weizmann.ac.il)
Department of Neurobiology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 76100, Israel

William Hirst (hirst@newschool.edu)
Department of Psychology, New School for Social Research, 80 Fifth Avenue, NY, NY 10003 USA

Kourken Michaelian (kmichaelian@bilkent.edu.tr)
Department of Philosophy, Bilkent University, Ankara, 06800, Turkey

Charles B. Stone (charlie.stone@gmail.com)
Psychological Sciences Research InstituteDepartment of Psychology, Université catholique de LouvainCatholic University of
Louvain, Place du Cardinal Mercier 10, B-13248, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium

Keywords: Distributed cognition, memory,
conversations, agent-based modeling, collective memory

offer a range of different approaches. Dr. Stone explores
how public speeches can induce forgetting as well as
reinforce memories across a large population and thereby
promote a mnemonic convergence through a single social
interaction.
Dr. Echterhoff considers the role of
motivation in moderating conversational influences. Dr.
Coman investigates whether these conversational
influences propagate across large networks of individuals
and can thereby promote a mnemonic convergence. Dr.
Edelson examines the neuroscience underlying memory
conformity.
And Dr. Michaelian engages the
philosophical underpinning of the concept of collective
memory. In a short summation, Dr. Hirst places these
papers in the larger context of social aspects of memory
and moderates further discussion.

Challenging Issue
Remembering frequently involves collaboration among
two or more individuals, often taking the form of a
conversation. In some conversations, one person conveys
new information to another, as when a daughter
announces to her mother that she is engaged. In other
conversations, two people talk to each other about a
shared past, as when a couple reminisce about the evening
on which they became engaged. When the conversation
is about a mutually experienced event or a shared body of
knowledge, it has the potential to shape both what
emerges in the discussion, as, for instance, when one
participant scaffolds the remembering of the other. It also
has the potential to reshape how participants might
subsequently remember the material, with the possibility
that the memories of the participants will be more similar
after the conversation than before it. In other words, what
people remember is, in part, the result of how they jointly
recount the past with others. Yet, despite the critical
contribution of joint conversational remembering to
memory, detailed study of this phenomenon is only
beginning to be undertaken. The objective of this
symposium is to bring together several strands of research
that explores conversational, or, more generally,
communicative influences on memory. The speakers

Charles B. Stone
A conversation can not only reinforce already existing
memories and implant misleading ones, but also induce
forgetting for unmentioned, but related memoriesaterial.
Dr. Stone discusses how this selective remembering can
induce forgetting not only in speakers, but also in
listeners. In his talk, he extends the laboratory finding on
induced forgetting to the effects of political speeches on
public memories, showing that listening to a recent
speech by the King of Belgium induced forgetting for
unmentioned, but related political material, but not
unmentioned, unrelated material for French-speaking

77

Kourken Michaelian

Belgians. Similar induced forgetting was not observed in
French-speaking Belgians who did not listen to the speech
or Dutch-speaking Belgians more generally. The finding
underscores the importance of communicative influences
on everyday memories.

Much of the psychological work on communication and
memory evokes the concept of collective memory, in that
conversations are considered one critical means for
forming a collective memory. Dr. Michaelian explores
the philosophical underpinnings of the concept of
collective memory. Although some scholars treat the
concept as more than a metaphor that likens collective
memory to individual memory, Dr. Michaelian argues
that, when the process of consolidation is considered,
critical differences exist between individual and collective
memory that suggests that the concept of collective
memory is metaphorical at best.

Gerald Echterhoff
After tuning their message to their audience’s attitude
during an initial retelling, communicators’ subsequent
memory for the topic often reflects the audience-tuned
view expressed in the message. Dr. Echterhoff presents
research investigating the motivational underpinnings of
such audience-congruent memory alignment, specifically,
speakers’ motives to create a “shared reality” with their
audience. Shared-reality creation, in turn, satisfies
epistemic needs, that is, needs for a valid and confidently
held understanding of the world. When speakers are
epistemically uncertain, they should be more likely to
incorporate the audience-tuned view into their mnemonic
representation. Dr. Echterhoff discusses recent work that
demonstrates the importance of epistemic motives in
creating a “shared reality” and explores the implications
for the social sharing of memories.

William Hirst
Building on his extensive work on conversational
remembering and the formation of collective memory,
Hirst relates these different approaches to the study of
communication and memory and articulates how they
provide a foundation for understanding how conversations
can influence individual and collective memory.
Acknowledgements

Alin Coman

Dr. Echterhoff would like to acknowledge the
contributions of Drs. Olivier Klein (Free University of
Brussels) and René Kopietz (University of Münster), and
Sabrina Pierucci (Free University of Brussels); Dr. Stone
would like to acknowledges, the contributions of Drs.
Olivier Luminet, (Université catholique
de LouvainCatholic University of Louvain), Olivier Klein
(Free University of Brussels) and Laurent Licata (Free
University of Brussels).

Do the conversational influence observed by Drs. Stone
and Echterhoff, among others, propagate across a network
of individuals? Are there limits to the extent of this
propagation? How do these limits shape the formation of
collective memories within the network? Dr. Coman
addresses these questions using agent-based modeling
techniques in order to investigate how macro-level social
phenomena, such as mnemonic convergence, can emerge
out of psychologically informed micro-level local
dynamics. The findings show that communicative
influences at the dyadic level, as well as network factors
(network size, network topology, number of
conversations) interact to drive mnemonic convergence in
communities.

Micah Edelson
The underlying brain mechanisms through which the
social environment influences human memory are
unknown. Dr. Edelson reports on studies of memory in
individuals exposed to contradictory recollections of
others. Using fMRI, the research finds that social milieu
influences memory through evolutionary conserved
medial temporal circuits, whereas the ability to overcome
social influence is mediated by newer prefrontal circuits.
The interplay between these systems determines the
balance of personal memory versus conformity to the
group.

78

