UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Diversity, Collaboration, and Learning by Invention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7kc3w1ns

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Wiley, Jennifer
Goldenberg, Olga
Jarosz, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Diversity, Collaboration, and Learning by Invention
Jennifer Wiley (jwiley@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison Street
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

Olga Goldenberg
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison Street
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

Andrew F. Jarosz
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison Street
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

Michael Wiedmann
Institut für Psychologie, Engelbergerstr. 41
D-79085 Freiburg DE

Nikol Rummel
Institut für Erziehungswissenschaft, Universitätsstraße 150
D-44801 Bochum DE

Abstract
Learning-by-invention is an approach to mathematical
instruction where small groups explore possible methods of
solution before learning the “right answer” (e.g., Schwartz &
Martin, 2004; Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2011). In a series of studies
we have been investigating the effects of group composition
in terms of math ability on learning by invention. An initial
result showed that groups consisting of a mix of both high and
low math ability students generated a broader range of
solution attempts when asked to invent a formula for standard
deviation compared to more homogeneous math ability
groups. Moreover, this wider range of solution alternatives
predicted better performance on quizzes following a lesson on
the topic. Subsequent work is suggesting that who emerges as
the leader of the group matters. Ongoing analyses are also
exploring which features of the collaborative discourse are
critical for students to take advantage of the affordances of
learning by invention.
Keywords: Collaboration, Learning, Problem Solving.

Introduction
It is said that the road to success is paved with failure. It’s
also said that those who do not learn from their mistakes are
destined to repeat them. The provocative implication of
these aphorisms is that there may be ways in which failure
may be instrumental for successful learning, as long as one
is able to take something away from the failure experiences.
This is the premise behind learning-by-invention activities.
In learning-by-invention, students are asked to attempt to
create a mathematical formula to accomplish a goal before
an instructional lesson is provided about the canonical
approach. The experience of working in a problem space
before being told a correct answer may lay the groundwork
for future conceptual understanding, and thereby prepare

students for future learning. And, these benefits might
accrue when solvers become aware of what approaches do
not work, or become aware of constraints, obstacles, or
desired properties for a solution through previous failures.
There is now substantial evidence that having students
engage in learning-by-inventions activities in small groups
can lead to better understanding of new mathematical and
statistical formulas compared to more traditional, direct
methods of instruction (e.g., Schwartz & Martin, 2004;
Kapur, 2012; Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2011). One main
question for our investigations is whether the composition
of the small groups in terms of their relative expertise or
math ability might affect the likelihood that group members
are able to take advantage of learning-by-invention
activities. A second main question is whether there are
critical features of the group interactions, such as in who
emerges as a discourse leader, or what is said during group
discussions, that can be shown to facilitate learning.
Although one could expect that groups where all members
possess superior math skills would be more successful at
any mathematical problem solving activity, another
hypothesis is that there may be advantages to being in a
group where there are a variety of backgrounds,
perspectives or viewpoints that can be contributed. In
particular, these investigations are exploring whether
diversity in small groups may be one key to unlocking the
potential benefits of learning-by-invention activities.
Obviously working in groups with students with more
advanced math skills or knowledge may help students with
less advanced skills or knowledge by exposing them to
advanced math concepts or ideas that they might not
consider when working alone. However, it is also possible
that collaborating with students with less math knowledge

3765

might contribute to more successful problem solving or
learning by students with more math knowledge. The work
of Webb and others has suggested that more skilled students
may benefit from teaching or explaining math concepts to
others (e.g. Webb, 1980). In addition, to the extent that
students with different mathematical backgrounds might
approach problem solving in different ways, then diverse
groups may help all members think about a broader range of
possible solution approaches which may be particularly
important when creative, inventive or innovative thinking is
required (Canham, Wiley, & Mayer, 2012; Dunbar, 1995;
Wiley & Jensen, 2005; Wiley & Jolly, 2003).
Previous research on learning-by-invention tasks has
suggested that groups who generate the widest range of
possible solution attempts during the invention phase
experience the best learning from the activity (Kapur &
Bielaczyc, 2011). Based on this, we predict that the
composition of the group in terms of their math expertise
should matter, and that there may be special affordances to
working in diverse groups. In addition, for groups whose
members demonstrate the best understanding of the new
principle following learning-by-invention, we explore what
features of their discussion may have contributed to their
success.

Consistency in Tea
Small groups of undergraduates worked together on an
invention activity before receiving a lesson on the standard
deviation formula. For the invention activity, students were
given data sets representing yearly antioxidant levels for 5-6
years of tea grown by three tea growers. Students were told
that a company wished to buy tea from the grower with the
most consistent levels of antioxidants from year to year and
the company has asked for the students’ help. They were
prompted to generate as many invented formulas or step-bystep instructions as they could for how they could compute
the consistency of antioxidant levels for each tea grower.

Methodology
Two populations of undergraduate Psychology students at
the University of Illinois at Chicago participated in this
study1. Complete data are available for 25 triads who
participated as part of a Research Methods course, and 20
triads from an Introductory Psychology course.
Math ability/expertise was estimated based on a mediansplit derived from historical data from this student
population. Students with Math ACT scores of 24 or below
were considered to have relatively low skill, and those with
1
Participants from the Research Methods Sample, who were
more advanced in their studies, were found to outperform the
Introductory Psychology Sample on the quiz, F(1,125) = 5.90, p <
.02, η² = .05. Importantly, this did not interact with the group
composition factor, F < 1.07, which meant the two samples could
be collapsed in order to increase power, while the sample variable
was retained as a covariate in all aggregated analyses reported
below (for analyses of samples separately, see Wiedmann, Leach,
Rummel, & Wiley, 2012).

scores of 25 or above were considered to have relatively
high skill. A score of 25 puts students in the 80th percentile
in national norms. Students categorized as having low
(M=21.1, SD=2.91) versus high math skill (M=28.5
SD=2.78) differed significantly on the Math ACT, t(122) =
14.46, p < .001. Of the 45 groups, all students were
considered to have low math skill in 11 groups, all students
were considered to have high skill in 9 groups, and 25
groups had a mix of high and low skill members. Students
were not informed about the nature of their group
compositions.
Groups first worked on the invention task for 30 minutes,
and discussions were video recorded for the Introductory
Psychology groups. For all groups, the worksheets from the
invention activity were collected. Following the invention
activity, participants individually read through an overview
of the standard deviation formula and a worked example of
how to compute standard deviation. Following instruction,
all students were given a quiz to assess learning outcomes.
Two items asked students to apply the formula of standard
deviation to a new problem about the weather, and a third
item required them to use standard deviation to invent
standardized scores in order to compare two students’ test
performances across different courses. Each item asked
students to explain the mathematical reasoning behind their
answers. This quiz served as the assessment of learning
outcomes from the activity.

Solution Attempts and Quiz Performance
Coding The group worksheets from the invention activity
(and video protocols when available) were coded for their
inclusion of a variety of different solution approaches to the
problem. An initial coding scheme was developed based on
categories used by Kapur (2012). It included 5 main
categories: 1) computing central tendencies and sums, 2)
graphical representations, 3) frequency counts, 4)
computing differences between adjacent scores, and 5)
computing ranges and deviations from the mean. The final
coding scheme with 22 subcategories was established post
hoc based on an examination of the solutions that were
actually obtained so that each distinct solution type had its
own subcategory. To score the data, coders assigned each
solution attempt to one of the 22 codes. They then
determined whether an instance of each subcategory was
represented in the written artifacts or not using 0, 1 coding.
The total number of different solution approaches was
computed by adding the number of subcategories that had at
least one instance present in the worksheet or discussion
(i.e., the total of the 0, 1 coding across the 22 categories).
In addition, a task analysis of understanding the standard
deviation formula was used to identify several critical
insights that students might reach during their discussions.
The first is that methods such as noticing a high score,
graphing histograms or bar graphs, summing scores or
computing central tendencies will not help or are not
sufficient to quantify consistency. Noticing differences in
the range of values across data sets is an important first step

3766

toward understanding variance. Two other key insights are
that variance is best computed in relation to some reference
point (such as a mean), and that somehow variations in
positive and negative directions need to be preserved so that
they do not cancel out when summed. Based on this
analysis, solution attempts that included recognition of
range, deviations from the mean, and the need to consider
absolute values were all categorized as being of higher
quality, and a subtotal of higher quality solution approaches
was computed in addition to the overall total number of
different solution approaches.
Quiz responses were scored by categorizing each
explanation according to the mathematical concept that was
referenced. The same basic categories were applied across
the 3 problems. Explanations that focused on central
tendencies, sums, or maximum scores earned 1 point.
Explanations that focused on ranges or differences between
scores earned 2 points. If explanations included an incorrect
approximation of the SD formula, they received 3 points. If
explanations demonstrated a correct use of the SD formula
they received 4 points. Combining across the three items, a
maximum of 12 points could be reached and the final
explanation quality composite score was computed as a
proportion of that total. Cronbach’s α among the three quiz
items was .80. Krippendorff’s α indicated good interrater
reliability on all coding metrics (> .77).
Quiz Performance An ANCOVA showed a significant
effect of group composition on quiz performance, F(2,123)
= 12.41, p < .01, η² = .17. Planned comparisons indicated
that students in the all-low math groups had lower scores on
the quizzes than students in either the mixed or all-high
groups, who did not differ in quiz performance.
A follow-up analysis was performed to see if group
heterogeneity affected low-skill and high-skill students
differently. As shown in Figure 1, both high- and low-skill
members seemed to benefit from participation in mixed
groups. A 2x2 ANCOVA (Math Skill x Group
Heterogeneity) revealed two significant main effects. As
might be expected, high skill students did better than low
skill students, F(1, 122) = 28.44, p < .01, η² = .19. In
addition, the main effect for group heterogeneity, F(1, 122)
= 6.29, p = .01, η² = .05, and the lack of a significant
interaction, F < 1, indicated that both high-skill and lowskill students benefited from working in heterogeneous
(mixed) groups.
Solution Attempts Average totals of different solution
approaches as a function of group composition are shown in
Figure 2. Examples of the inscriptions made on worksheets
during the different kinds of solution attempts are shown in
Figure 3. An ANCOVA on the total number of different
solution approaches showed a significant effect of group
composition, F(2, 41) = 8.55, p = .001, η² = .29. Planned
comparisons indicated that the mixed groups considered
significantly more different solution approaches than the alllow and all-high groups, who did not differ.

Figure 1: Quiz performance by group composition
When only higher quality solution approaches were
considered, a different pattern emerged. An ANCOVA on
the number of higher quality representations included in the
group worksheets showed a significant effect of group
composition, F(2, 41) = 9.47, p < .001, η² = .32. Planned
comparisons indicated that the all-low groups considered
fewer different high-quality solution approaches than the
all-high and mixed groups, who did not differ. Although the
mixed groups also tended to include higher numbers of lowquality solution approaches, this effect did not reach
significance, F(2, 41) = 2.76, p < .08, η² = .12.

Figure 2: Solution attempts by group composition
Mediational analyses suggested that it was the discussion of
a wide range of solution approaches during learning-byinvention activities, including the number of higher quality
solution attempts, that mediated the effects of group
composition. Heterogeneity predicted the variety of
representations, B = 1.83 (SE = .27), t(126) = 6.61, p < .05,
and variety of representations predicted quiz performance, B
= .02 (SE = .01), t(126) = 2.47, p < .05. The total effect of
heterogeneity on quiz performance was also significant, B =
.09 (SE = .03), t(126) = 2.84, p < .05. However, this
relationship decreased to non-significance when the
mediating influence of the variety of representations was
included in analysis, B = .04 (SE = .04), t(126) = 1.23, p =
.22.

3767

In addition, the indirect effect (the mediated effect) of
heterogeneity on quiz performance through representation
variety was 0.05 (SE = 0.02), and the 95% bias-corrected
confidence intervals for the size of the indirect effect did not
include zero, (.01, .08) which shows that the indirect effect
was significant at a p = .05 level (Preacher & Hayes, 2004,
2008; Shrout & Bolger, 2002). Taken together, these
findings provide evidence for full mediation. This analysis
suggests that heterogeneity in groups led to better quiz
performance because it affected the variety of solutions that
were discussed during the learning-by-inventing activity.
Additional analyses showed that the benefits of solution
diversity during group discussion were demonstrated to
contribute to better quiz performance even when the math
ability of the students was taken into account.

Analyses of Group Interactions
The second phase of analyseshas been attempting to
understand conditions led to the success of the more diverse
groups. In this pass through the data, the potential effects of
group interactions, such as who emerges as a discussion
leader, as well as the quality and content of group
discussions, on learning outcomes are examined. Research
on decision making groups using hidden profile paradigms
has demonstrated the important role of leaders and experts
in information sharing. For example, recognition of
expertise has been found to be critical for increasing
contributions to the group by expert members (Franz &
Larson, 2002). In addition, group members are more likely
to share valuable information when they are assigned a high
status position, such as a group leader (Wittenbaum,
Hollingshead, & Botero, 2004). This supports the
hypothesis that the expertise of group leaders may be an
important predictor of effective information sharing in
learning-by-invention tasks that can subsequently influence
learning outcomes. Differences in the group discourse and
their relation to learning outcomes are also being explored.
Coding Discourse coding was performed on the 14 mixed
group discussions for which video recordings were
available. Leadership was operationalized by identifying the
group member who contributed the largest proportion of
utterances to the group discussion. Seven of the groups in
the sample had a leader high in math skill, and seven of the
groups had a leader low in math skill.
A second goal for the discourse analyses was to explore
the content and nature of the discourse acts. Each utterance
made by a group member was coded into one of the
following categories: (a) solution proposal, (b) clarification
request or response, (c) evaluative comment, (d) comment
related to group task coordination, (e) calculation, (f)
comment on expertise, (g) comment about being stuck or at
impasse, or (h) off-task comment.

Figure 3: Example inscriptions from solution attempts

Leadership When the effects of these two leader types were
examined, we found that groups with high math leaders
discussed more high quality solution attempts (M = 3.00, SD

3768

= .38) than groups with low math leaders (M = 1.57, SD =
.79), t(12) = 2.97, p < .05. In terms of learning outcomes,
members of groups with high math leaders scored higher on
the quiz assessing their understanding of the standard
deviation formula (M = .82, SD = .16) than members of
groups with low math leaders (M = .68, SD = .16), t(40) =
2.78, p < .01. The results of a 2x2 between-subjects
ANOVA (math skill by leader type) with quiz performance
as the dependent variable revealed no significant interaction
(F(1, 38) < 1), suggesting that the expertise of the leader
benefited both high and low skill students similarly.
Content of Discussions On average, these groups
contributed around 180 utterances during the invention
discussion. Only about 10 of these utterances were
proposals or amendments to proposals for solution methods.
Almost half of the comments were clarifications or requests
for clarifications about a proposed solution. About 30 were
evaluations of suggested approaches. All other categories
represented 10% or less of the utterances.
Results from this discourse analysis suggest that groups
who generated a wider range of solutions, proposed more
solutions, made more clarifications of proposed solutions,
and made fewer comments about being at impasse. A more
interesting observation is that they also engaged in more
discussion of task coordination. When explored in the
context of leader type, groups with a high math leader made
more comments related to task coordination, fewer
comments about being at impasse, and devoted less
discussion to determination of math expertise. Ongoing
analyses are more specifically examining who contributes
what to the discussion and when. Analyses suggest that low
math students are the ones more likely to make comments
about expertise, and also, surprisingly, that they are the ones
more likely to contribute evaluations of the proposed
solutions. This may account for why evaluative comments
do not seem to relate to better performance in this sample.
As the discourse analysis deepens and matures, this
approach is hoped to generate a better understanding of
what features of discussion may be critical for learning from
invention, so that these features may be used to engineer the
design of effective classroom invention activities.

Discussion
The results of this research have shown that groups with
members of different backgrounds or expertise may
generate a broader range of solution approaches during
invention tasks, and that this may benefit understanding of
the canonical solution. Group composition in terms of math
skill affects when students are able to get the most out of
mathematical learning-by-invention activities. Students who
worked in mixed groups were better at explaining their
understanding of standard deviation on a quiz following the
activity than students who worked in more homogeneous
groups. Significant effects of group composition were seen
in the variety of solution approaches that were considered
by groups, particularly higher quality approaches.

Interestingly, it was the mixed groups who generated the
widest variety of solution attempts, suggesting that they
seem to be in a particularly good position to make the most
of invention exercises. This is consistent with several other
findings suggesting that diversity in expertise among group
members contributes to more adaptive, flexible and creative
problem solving (Canham, Wiley, & Mayer, 2012;
Goldenberg & Wiley, 2011; Wiley & Jensen, 2005; Wiley
& Jolly, 2003). Additionally, the consideration of a wider
variety of solution approaches during the invention phase,
including a larger number of higher quality approaches,
predicted the uptake of a later lesson about the standard
deviation formula and mediated the effects of group
composition and diversity on learning.
To further explore the conditions that might enable
effective learning from invention, we found that who
emerges as the leader of a diverse group matters. Mixed
groups with high math leaders discussed more high quality
solution attempts as compared to groups with low math
leaders. Interestingly, our discourse coding is also
suggesting an important role for defining or coordinating the
task among group members (c.f. Moreland & Levine, 1992).
Groups with high math leaders made more comments in
relation to task execution which seemed to relate to their
productivity. Yet, it is important to recognize that the
leaders self-selected in this study and this can introduce
many reasons why these particular groups may have been
more or less effective. We are currently conducting a
follow-up experiment, again in the context of statistics
instruction as part of an undergraduate Psychology course,
where we will be assigning high math and low math
students to be leaders for the small group activity.
Experimental assignment is critical for determining whether
and how the expertise of the group leader itself may be
important for effective learning from invention activities.
The results thus far suggest that generating a wide variety
of approaches to solution may be one important factor
determining whether invention discussions prepare students
for later learning. Yet, in some cases a richer discussion
around fewer alternatives may also lead to successful
learning-from-invention, especially if the discussion leads to
key insights. Alternatively, we have some evidence that a
few of the groups seemed to benefit from the visual
affordances of the graphical representations they made. It is
possible that some specific kinds of solution attempts may
be particularly helpful toward preparation for future learning
(i.e., more visual ones or more abstract ones; Ainsworth,
2006, Schwartz, 1995).
The continued analysis of the discussion protocols is
intended to serve as source of insight on what particular
behaviors one may wish to support while students engage in
learning-by-invention tasks. Thus far interactions among
group members have not been scripted, roles have not been
assigned, and students have not been given any specific
direction how to engage in the task together. A next step
that others have already begun pursuing (Kapur &
Bielaczyc, 2011; Roll, Aleven & Koedinger, 2009) is to

3769

provide some support to students in order to maximize the
benefits of engaging in invention tasks, but not so much
support that the benefits of invention over direct instruction
are nullified. Indeed, in most of Webb’s previous studies
showing benefits of peer collaboration on learning in math,
the peer interaction was carefully scaffolded which may
have allowed for more stable benefits of mixed ability
groups to emerge. One goal for the closer analysis of our
discussion protocols is to gain an even better understanding
of the conditions that facilitate learning by invention, and
how we can capitalize on the intriguing possibility that
exploration and failure can sometimes reap benefits toward
more
sophisticated
conceptual
understanding
in
mathematics and statistics.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by a Humboldt Research
Fellowship to the first author, supporting her research stays
in Germany, and a Studienstiftung des Deutschen Volkes
Fellowship to Michael Wiedmann, supporting his research
stay in the US. A portion of the work reported here served
as part of a thesis project submitted by Michael Wiedmann
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Diploma in
Psychology at the University of Freiburg. The authors thank
Matthew Cavers, Kelly Currier, Pat Cushen, Thomas
Griffin, Robert Hickson, Sabrin Jaber, Allison Jaeger and
Ryan Leach for their assistance with data collection, coding,
and their diverse contributions to collaborative discussions.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for
considering learning with multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 16, 183-198.
Canham, M., Wiley, J., & Mayer, R. (2012). When diversity
in training improves dyadic problem solving. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 26, 421-430.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J. Sternberg &
J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 365-395).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Franz, T. M., & Larson, J. R., J. (2002). The impact of
experts on information sharing during group discussion.
Small Group Research, 33, 383-411.
Goldenberg, O., & Wiley, J. (2011). Quality, conformity,
and conflict: Questioning the assumptions of Osborn's
Brainstorming technique. Journal of Problem Solving,
3(2).
Kapur, M. (2012). Productive failure in learning the concept
of variance. Instructional Science, 40, 651-672.
Kapur, M., & Bielaczyc, K. (2011). Designing for
productive failure. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
41, 45-83.
Moreland, R. L., & Levine, J. M. (1992). Problem
identification by groups. In S. Worchel, W. Wood, & J.
A. Simpson, (Eds.), Group processes and productivity.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2004). SPSS and SAS
procedures for estimating indirect effects in simple
mediation models.
Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 36, 717-731.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and
resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect
effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research
Methods, 40, 879-891.
Roll, I., Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2009). Helping
students know 'further' - increasing the flexibility of
students' knowledge using symbolic invention tasks.
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 1169-1174.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract
representations in dyad problem solving. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 1, 321-354.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare
for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging
original student production in statistics instruction.
Cognition and Instruction, 22, 129–184.
Shrout, P. E., & Bolger, N. (2002). Mediation in
experimental
and nonexperimental
studies:
New
procedures
and
recommendations. Psychological
Methods, 7, 422-445.
Webb, N. M. (1980). A process-outcome analysis of
learning in group and individual settings. Educational
Psychologist, 15, 69-83.
Wiedmann, M., Leach, R., Rummel, N. & Wiley, J. (2012).
Does group composition affect learning by invention?
Instructional Science, 40, 711-740.
Wiley, J. (1998) Expertise as mental set: The effects of
domain knowledge in creative problem solving. Memory
& Cognition, 26, 716-730.
Wiley, J., & Jensen, M. (2006). When three heads are better
than two. Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, 2375-2380.
Wiley, J. & Jolly, C. (2003). When two heads are better than
one expert. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2375-2380.
Wittenbaum, G. M., Hollingshead, A. B., & Botero, I. C.
(2004). From cooperative to motivated information
sharing in groups: Moving beyond the hidden profile
paradigm. Communication Monographs, 71, 886-310.

3770

