UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do older Gaelic-English bilinguals show an advantage in inhibitory control?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9q50c51r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kirk, Neil
Scott-Brown, Kenneth
Kempe, Vera

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do older Gaelic-English bilinguals show an advantage in inhibitory control?
Neil W. Kirk (n.kirk@abertay.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Abertay Dundee,
Bell Street, Dundee DD1 1HG UK

Kenneth C. Scott-Brown (k.scott-brown@abertay.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Abertay Dundee,
Bell Street, Dundee DD1 1HG UK

Vera Kempe (v.kempe@abertay.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Abertay Dundee,
Bell Street, Dundee DD1 1HG UK

Abstract

& Diaz, 1986), variables that can affect cognitive
functioning (Mezzacappa, 2004). While recent studies
reporting a bilingual advantage try to match bilinguals and
monolinguals on SES, it is often difficult to match
participants in cultural background, and immigrant status
especially for older participants. For example, in Bialystok
et al. (2004), the older monolinguals resided in North
America while the majority of older bilinguals resided in
India. Similarly, in Bialystok et al. (2008), 20 out of 24
older bilinguals were immigrants who had arrived in North
America as children or adolescents suggesting that they
belonged to an immigrant community likely to differ
culturally from monolingual North American controls.
Finally, while Schroeder and Marian (2012) do not
explicitly report immigrant status or age of arrival in North
America for their bilinguals, the range of languages spoken
by their participants suggests that they were predominantly
first or second generation immigrants from different cultural
backgrounds than the monolinguals.
There is evidence that differences in cultural background
are associated with differences in executive processing
(Sabbagh, Xu, Carlson, Moses & Lee, 2006). This can be
attributed to culture-specific parenting attitudes or
educational and leisure practices which influence exposure
to activities that require and promote executive processing,
such as musical training (Bialystok, 2011), playing of video
games (Green & Bavelier, 2003) and a host of other, as of
yet, unknown factors.
There is also the possibility that genetic effects may be
responsible for cultural differences in executive processing:
For example, population-genetic studies have shown that the
prevalence of the 7-repeat allele of the dopamine receptor
gene (DRD4), is markedly lower in East and South East
Asia compared to North America (Chang, Kidd, Kivak,
Pakstis, & Kidd, 1996). This allele has been associated with
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; Faraone,
Doyle, Mick, & Biederman, 2001), which, in turn, often
manifests itself in poor executive processing (Schachar,
Tannock, Marriott, & Logan, 1995); although the
relationship between DRD4 and ADHD itself seems to be
subject to cross-cultural variation as culture may affect the

We examined whether a bilingual advantage can be found in
older bilinguals that share the same cultural background with
monolinguals. Sixteen Gaelic-English bilinguals over the age
of 60 years were compared with three monolingual control
groups in performance on the Simon task, as well as in
general intelligence and socio-economic status. Some of the
monolinguals were bidialectal allowing us to also test whether
switching between dialects can incur similar cognitive
benefits as bilingualism. Results showed no group differences
in overall reaction times as well as in the Simon effect
suggesting that individuals that share a cultural background
may not exhibit differences in inhibitory control even if they
routinely use another dialect or another language. This opens
up the possibility that other factors associated with
bilingualism, like immigrant status, may be responsible for
the bilingual advantage found in some but not in other studies.
Keywords: Bilingualism; bildialectism; inhibitory control;
Simon test.

Introduction
A considerable number of studies have demonstrated a
bilingual advantage in executive processing (for a review
see Bialystok, Craik, Green & Gollan, 2009), which seems
to be most pronounced in young children and older adults
(Bialystok, Martin & Viswanathan, 2005). It has been
suggested that knowing and using two or more languages on
a regular basis requires individuals to inhibit one language
while using the other, both at the level of selecting the
appropriate linguistic setting as well as on the level of
selecting individual words (Hilchey & Klein, 2011). Thus,
bilingualism has been causally linked to improved executive
processing which transfers to non-linguistic domains. In
older individuals, such improved executive processing may
be beneficial for maintaining cognitive flexibility later in
life (Bialystok et al., 2004) so much so as to even delay the
onset of dementia (Bialystok, Craik & Freedman, 2007).
However, because random assignment is not possible in
quasi-experimental studies with bilingual participants, there
is always the possibility that bilingualism is confounded
with differences in a variety of hidden factors (Hilchey &
Klein, 2011), most notably socio-economic status (SES), but
also educational and cultural background (Hakuta, Ferdman

782

phenotypic realisation of this genotype (Nikolaidis & Gray,
2010). Somewhat contradictory, Chen, Burton, Greenberger
& Dmitrieva (1999) have shown a link between the long
alleles of DRD4 and population migration patterns,
indicative of migration selecting for traits like noveltyseeking and openness. The personality trait of openness, in
turn, has been associated with better performance in some
aspects of executive functioning (Williams, Suchy, Rau,
2009). This may imply the possibility of a reverse causal
relationship between bilingualism and executive processing:
individuals with superior executive abilities might be more
likely to be bilingual because of a potentially greater
propensity to make life choices leading to migration or,
when placed in a multi-lingual environment, greater success
in maintaining use of multiple languages. Although
reconciling these different findings is beyond the scope of
this paper, they point to the intriguing possibility of a
genetic origin of group differences in executive processing,
which may co-vary with cultural background, immigrant
status and bilingualism. Indeed, Morton and Harper (2007)
failed to observe a superior inhibitory control when
comparing non-immigrant bilingual with monolingual
children matched for SES and cultural background.
However, a similar study controlling for cultural
background and immigrant status has not yet been
conducted with older bilinguals. The present study therefore
aims to test the bilingual advantage in executive processing
in older bilinguals that share cultural background with the
monolingual controls.
Studying Gaelic-English bilinguals allowed us to
address this issue because Gaelic, a Celtic minority
language, is spoken by a non-immigrant community of
about 58,000 individuals residing mainly in the West of
Scotland. Since Gaelic language schooling was abolished in
1872 and has been reintroduced only in 2006 there are no
Gaelic monolinguals. Rather, older Gaelic-English
bilinguals acquired Gaelic in early childhood before being
introduced to English in school, and tend to use Gaelic in
the home and in the local bilingual community. However, in
terms of cultural attitudes and values, educational practices,
leisure activities, media exposure and immigrant status,
these bilinguals do not differ from English monolinguals.
In this study, we used the Simon test, closely modeled
after Experiment 1 in Bialystok et al. (2004) to test whether
Gaelic-English bilinguals exhibit benefits in inhibitory
control compared to monolinguals recruited from the same
cultural background. We restricted our exploration to the
testing of inhibitory control, one component of executive
processing, because this component had been examined in
older bilinguals before (Bialystok et al., 2004; Bialystok et
al., 2008; Schroeder & Marian, 2012). In the Simon Task,
participants have to inhibit a pre-potent spatially cued
response when responding to the colour of a stimulus. This
requires inhibitory control (Lu & Proctor, 1995), which has
been shown to be superior in bilinguals (Bialystok et al.,
2004).

One issue that arises in a Scottish context is related to
choosing appropriate monolingual controls: Britain is a
country with extraordinary dialectal diversity and speakers
of British English are often exposed to various local
varieties of English. Specifically, in Scotland 85% of the
population report using one of the local varieties of the
Scots dialect to varying degrees (Scottish Government
Social Research, 2010), in addition to Standard Scottish
English (SSE). Even though dialects of the same language
are traditionally considered to be mutually intelligible there
is considerable variability rendering the boundaries between
languages and dialects fluid. Consequently, the linguistic
classification of Scots, a Germanic language variety, is
subject to much debate with some considering it a separate
language, while others classifying it as a dialect of English
or as a register used in specific social contexts (see Aitken,
1985). Indeed, local varieties of Scots differ considerably
from SSE in their phonetic, lexical and even some syntactic
features (Smith & Durham, 2012). Thus, bidialectal
speakers must monitor continuously who can or cannot be
addressed in Scots, choose appropriate articulatory settings,
and inhibit phonetic and lexical variants pertaining to the
variety not currently used. It is therefore important to
carefully control dialect use in the monolinguals. Moreover,
the question as to whether use of multiple dialects can incur
executive processing benefits similar to those observed in
bilinguals is an interesting question in its own right, and will
also be explored in this study. We tested three monolingual
control groups: (1) bidialectal speakers who reported
switching continuously between SSE and Dundonian, a
local variety of Scots spoken in Eastern Scotland, (2)
monodialectal speakers of SSE residing in the same locale
as the bidialectals but who reported never or rarely using
Dundonian, and (3) monolingual speakers of Anglo-English,
a variety spoken in the South of England, for whom Scots
was for the most part unintelligible. Note that the label
monodialectal is used to refer to those monolingual
participants who share a geographical and cultural
background with the bidialectal participants. If inhibitory
control advantages arise for different languages only then
one would expect to find faster reaction times and a smaller
Simon effect only in the Gaelic-English bilinguals. If
regular switching to dialect also results in an inhibitory
control advantage one would expect bidialectals to also
exhibit shorter reaction times and a smaller Simon effect
compared to monodialectals and monolinguals.

Method
Participants:
Sixty-four older adults (M = 70.3 years, SD = 7.6 years,
range = 60.2 – 88.7 years) participated in the experiment.
The 16 bilingual participants (6 men) were speakers of
Gaelic and SSE, the 16 bidialectal participants (7 men) were
speakers and regular users of both SSE and Dundonian
Scots, the 16 monodialectal participants (5 men) were
monolinguals speakers of SSE who did not use Dundonian
Scots, and the 16 monolingual participants (6 men) were

783

speakers of Anglo-English. The monodialectal and
bidialectal participants were recruited from the Dundee area,
the Gaelic-SSE bilinguals were recruited from the Western
Isles and the West coast of Scotland, and the English
monolinguals were recruited from different parts of England
and Scotland (all but one had not lived in Scotland for any
considerable length of time and were either visitors or had
recently retired to the area).
The Background Questionnaires (described below)
revealed that the bilinguals’ daily use of Gaelic and the
bidialectals’ use of Dundonian Scots ranged between 30%
and 70% of times. The monodialectals reported less than 25
% use of Dundonian Scots. Three other participants reported
predominantly using Dundonian Scots. As it proved
impossible to recruit further monodialectal speakers of this
type, these monodialectals were excluded from the study.
One bilingual participant was excluded due to 90% SSE and
only 10% Gaelic usage, and one participant failed to
perform the Simon Task correctly and was also excluded.

in these trials participants had to inhibit the pre-potent
response of selecting the spatially congruent key, and
instead had to select the key associated with the colour of
the square. The reaction time difference between
incongruent and congruent trials is considered to be a
measure of inhibitory control. Participants were given 4
congruent and 4 incongruent practice trials with feedback
before moving on to the 28 critical trials (7 each of
congruent red, congruent blue, incongruent red, incongruent
blue) presented without feedback.

Procedure:
Participants were first given the Background Questionnaire,
which inquired about their knowledge and use of the various
languages and varieties of English. The monolingual
speakers were asked about their daily usage of different
varieties of English and other foreign languages; for the
Scottish participants these questions pertained to their use of
Dundonian Scots. The responses indicated to what extent
participants were fluent in one or two varieties and were
using them on a daily basis. For the bilingual speakers, these
questions pertained to their use of Gaelic and SSE. The
bilinguals also received the LEAP-Q after the Background
Questionnaire, to obtain information about their self-rated
proficiency in each language, the age at which they starting
learning each language, the age at which they became fluent
and the proportion of time they currently use each language.
Participants were then given the Vocabulary and Matrix
Reasoning subscale of the WASI. In the Vocabulary
subscale, participants have to provide definitions of words.
In the Matrix Reasoning subscale, participants were shown
series of shapes instantiating a rule and were asked to
identify which shape fits in the missing slot.
Finally, the Simon task was presented on a Toshiba
laptop, with presentation controlled by Eprime. Participants
first saw a fixation cross in the middle of the screen for 800
ms, followed by an interval of 250 ms. Half of the
participants were randomly assigned to press the ‘1’ key for
‘red’ and the ‘0’ key for ‘blue’; the assignment was reversed
for the other half of participants. The keys were marked
with white stickers on the keyboard. Then, a red or blue
square appeared either to the left or the right of the screen,
subtending five degrees of visual angle. The squares were
visible for 1000 ms if there was no response. Timing began
with the onset of stimulus, and was terminated with the
response. The next item started after a 500 ms blank
interval. The experiment began with 8 practice trials for
which participants received feedback. Practice was followed
by the 28 critical trials presented without feedback. Order of
the 14 congruent and 14 incongruent trials was randomised.

Materials:
Background Questionnaire: A background questionnaire
was used to gather relevant background information about
the participants’ educational background (including the age
they left school, whether they continued to further or higher
education and which qualifications they gained) as well as
the occupations they had held throughout their working
lives. It also inquired about their dialect usage and any
second languages they had learned. The Gaelic-SSE
bilinguals additionally received a modified version of the
LEAP-Q (Marian. Blumenfeld & Kauschanskaya, 2007), a
questionnaire designed to determine bilingual language
status that has been validated using behavioural measures of
language proficiency.
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI):
Two subscales of the WASI were used to determine
participants’ verbal and non-verbal IQ. The Vocabulary
subscale tested the participants’ verbal reasoning ability and
required them to give definitions of words with increasing
difficulty. The Matrix Reasoning subscale consisted of
patterns designed to measure abstract non-verbal reasoning
ability. Participants’ raw scores were converted to t-scores
which are normalised for each age range and combined to
give an overall score from which a final IQ score was
determined.
Simon Task: The Simon Task was modelled after
Experiment 1 in Bialystok et al. (2004). Participants were
presented with red and blue squares, half of which appeared
on the left side of the screen, and the other half on the right.
Participants were asked to press a key on the left (the ‘1’
key) or the right (the ‘0’ key) of the keyboard depending on
the colour of the square. Assignment of colours to keys was
counterbalanced across participants.
In congruent trials, the response associated with the
colour of the square corresponded to the presentation
location; in incongruent trials, the square was presented on
the opposite side of the location of the response key. Thus,

Results
We first compared the four groups on linguistic,
demographic and cognitive measures which are presented in
Table 1.

784

Table 1: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for
linguistic, demographic and cognitive measures (voc:
Vocabulary subscale of WASI, matrix: Matrix Reasoning
subscale of WASI, skill: skill level as measure of SES,
%use: % daily use of Anglo-English or SSE). F denotes Fvalue in one-way ANOVAs with df = 3,60 for all conditions
except the WASI subscales, where df = 3,59).

age
voc
mat
skill
%use

monolinguals
monoling monodial
(AngloE) (SSE)
70.3
69.7
(7.6)
(7.6)
60.3
57.1
(9.6)
(8.4)
61.0
59.5
(10.5)
(10.3)
3.13
2.88
(1.20)
(0.89)
100.0
94.6
(0.0)
(7.3)

biling

F
(3,60)

69.8
(5.5)
57.9
(9.0)
59.5
(5.7)
3.37
(0.81)
44.3
(15.3)

0.5 n.s.

bidial
72.4
(8.6)
55.5
(6.7)
59.1
(7.7)
2.37
(0.89)
52.6
(9.7)

congruent, incongruent) ANOVA, which yielded no
significant effects.
For correct trials, reaction times greater than 2.5 standard
deviations above the mean were excluded from the analysis
(Ratcliffe, 1993), which affected an additional 56 (2.9%) of
trials. For the reaction times, a 4 (Group: bidialectal,
monodialectal, bilingual, monolingual) x 2 (Trial Type:
congruent, incongruent) ANOVA yielded a main effect of
Trial Type, F(1, 60) = 80.3, p < .001 (see Figure 1). There
was no main effect of Group nor was there a significant
interaction between Group and Trial Type. Thus, as
expected, performance on incongruent items was slower
indicating that inhibiting the incongruent spatial location of
the stimulus required additional effort. However, overall
reaction time and Simon effect did not differ between the
groups.

0.5 n.s.
0.1 n.s.
3.2
p<.05
135.7
p<.001

Percent language use: Participants’ self-reported
percentages of daily use of either Anglo-English or SSE
were submitted to a one-way ANOVA to compare the four
groups. This analysis yielded a significant effect of Group
(see Table 1). Post-hoc tests using Tamhane’s T2 for
unequal variances indicated that bilinguals and bidialectals
reported significantly less use of English (i.e. only an
average of 48% of time) than monolinguals and
monodialectals, all p’s < .001.
Socio-economic status (SES): To determine SES, we
used the 2010 Standard Occupation Classification (UK
Office of National Statistics) to categorise participants’
occupations into one of four skill levels based in the amount
of formal qualifications or work-based training estimated to
be necessary to perform the occupational tasks. These skill
levels ranged from 1 (occupations requiring general
education) to 4 (professional/managerial occupations
requiring degree-level education). We disregarded
participant income as another measure of SES as 75% of
participants were retired.
A one-way ANOVA for skill levels yielded a significant
effect of Group (see Table 1). Post-hoc comparisons using
Tamhane’s T2 for unequal variances indicated that the
bilingual group had a significantly higher skill level than the
bi-dialectal group, p < .05. No other significant differences
were found.
WASI: WASI scores were missing for one
monodialectal participant who was unable to complete the
session. One-way ANOVAs comparing performance of the
groups on each of the subscales separately yielded no
significant effects (see Table 1).
Simon Task: Participants committed a total of 3.4% of
errors. Error rates were submitted to a 4 (Group: bidialectal,
monodialectal, bilingual, monolingual) x 2 (Trial Type:

Figure 1: Reaction times for congruent and incongruent
trials in the Simon task in bidialectal, monodialectal,
bilingual and monolingual speakers. Error bars show 1 S.E.
One possible explanation for the discrepant findings
between this and the Bialystok et al. (2004) study may be
related to differential treatment of reaction time outliers.
Bialystok et al. (2004) do not report any exclusion of
outliers. To achieve comparability with that study, we
repeated the ANOVA with all reaction times from the
correct responses included. This analysis yielded a main
effect of Trial Type, F(1,60) = 9.29, p < .01, but no effect of
Group and no interaction between the two factors.
Because SES is associated with executive processing
(Morton and Harper, 2007), we included skill level, our
measure of SES, as a covariate in the ANOVA for the
reaction times (outliers excluded), which did not change the
outcome of the analysis. Moreover, an analysis ignoring
language group and including only skill level as the
between-subjects variable did not yield any significant
effects either.
In sum, while all 4 language groups showed significantly
slower reaction times for incongruent trials in the Simon
Task, there were no significant differences between any of

785

the groups in global reaction time and levels of inhibitory
control.

in children, and in younger and middle-aged adults. While a
considerable number of studies report a smaller Simon
effect for bilinguals (Bialystok et al., 2004, 2005; Bialystok,
2006), others failed to find such a difference (Humphrey &
Valian, 2012; Kosaie & Phillips, 2012a,b; Paap &
Greenberg, 2013). Findings of a bilingual advantage also
tend to be inconsistent for other tests of executive
processing (e.g. Stroop task, Flanker task, anti-saccade task)
and for different aspects of executive processing (e.g.
response suppression, switching, monitoring, updating – for
overviews see Hilchey & Klein, 2011, and Paap &
Greenberg, 2013). We would like to suggest that differences
in cultural background and immigrant status are likely
candidates for explaining the differences between
monolinguals and bilinguals.
It should be mentioned that our failure to find an
executive processing advantage in older Gaelic-English
bilinguals contrasts with the advantage of Gaelic-English
bilingual children in various measures of verbal and nonverbal IQ such as the Block design, Vocabulary and
Arithmetic sub-tests of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children reported by Lachlan, Parisi and Fadda (2012). As
the bilingual children were all schooled in Gaelic, the
authors conclude that schooling in the minority language
may have consolidated their bilingualism, in contrast to a
group of Sardinian-Italian bilingual children who were not
schooled in the minority language and did not differ from
Italian monolinguals in performance on the same tests. We
agree that Gaelic schooling may indeed have been a
beneficial factor for children’s intellectual development as
considerable resources have been expended by the Scottish
government on re-introduction of Gaelic-medium education,
perhaps making it more compelling for more aspirational
parents to enroll their children into the better funded Gaelic
tracks. For these reasons, and because psychometric
intelligence does not constitute a direct measure of
executive processing, we are not convinced that this finding
constitutes support for superior executive processing in
Gaelic-English bilinguals.
In sum, our failure to replicate an inhibitory control
advantage in older Gaelic-English bilinguals and Scots-SSE
bidialectals points to the importance of controlling factors
like cultural background and immigrant status when
studying the link between bilingualism and executive
processing.

Discussion
Our findings did not show a bilingual advantage in nonlinguistic inhibitory control for older Gaelic-English
bilinguals, nor did we find such an advantage for bidialectal
speakers who routinely switch between Dundonian Scots
and SSE. Moreover, we also did not find a global reaction
time advantage for bilinguals and bidialectals, which has
been interpreted as an indicator of improved general
executive processing. This is in contrast to a substantial
body of evidence demonstrating a bilingual advantage in
executive processing in general, and in inhibitory control
specifically. We therefore carefully compared our findings
to the three other studies that had tested older bilinguals and
monolinguals to determine whether differences in
administration of the Simon task may have resulted in these
discrepant results.
Our experiment was closely modeled after Experiment 1
in Bialystok et al. (2004). For the monolinguals, that
experiment showed mean reaction times of 1437 ms for the
congruent trials, and 3150 ms for the incongruent trials. For
the bilinguals, the reaction times were somewhat faster
(congruent: 911 ms, incongruent: 1959 ms). These are
unusually slow reaction times, in stark contrast to the much
faster reaction times in our study (see Figure 1), which
contained the same timing, the same number of trials, and a
comparable sample size. Moreover, in Experiment 2 of the
Bialystok et al. (2004) study, participants received a
centered control condition and a 4-colour condition in
addition to the standard 2-colour condition, as well as an
increased number of trials. Still, reaction times in the
comparable 2-colour condition were of a similarly large
magnitude (older monolinguals: 1012 ms vs. 1595 ms, older
bilinguals: 889 ms vs. 1101 ms, for congruent and
incongruent trials, respectively). Again, these overall
reaction times and the Simon effect are far beyond what is
considered to be the standard Simon effect in older adults
(Hilchey & Klien, 2011; Van der Lubbe & Verleger, 2002).
This leaves open the possibility that group differences
between older bilinguals and monolinguals emerge only for
unusually long reaction times which may be indicative of a
substantial slowing of cognitive performance in some older
populations, perhaps due to diminished experience with
computerised testing or due to sub-clinical effects of
dementia. However, the fact that Bialystok et al. (2008) and
Schroeder and Marian (2012) found a bilingual advantage in
the Simon effect for older bilinguals with overall reaction
times similar to the ones reported here suggests that the
bilingual advantage is not an artifact of long reaction times
but emerges when bilinguals and monolinguals differ in
cultural background and immigrant status.
Although an analysis of other age groups is beyond the
scope if this paper, it is worth mentioning that a similarly
inconsistent picture emerges for studies of inhibitory control

Acknowledgements:
Part of this research was sponsored by a Carnegie Travel
Grant to Neil Kirk and by Leverhulme Trust Research
Project Grant RPG-375 to Vera Kempe.

References:
Aitken, A. H. (1985). Is Scots a language? English Today, 1,
41-45.
Bialystok, E. (2006). Effect of bilingualism and computer
video game experience on the Simon Task Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 68-79.

786

Bialystok, E. (2011). How does experience change
cognition? Evaluating the evidence. British Journal of
Psychology, 102, 303–305.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., & Freedman, M. (2007).
Bilingualism as a protection against the onset of
symptoms of dementia. Neuropsychologia, 45, 459–464.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., Green, D. W., & Gollan, T. H.
(2009). Bilingual minds. Psychological Science in the
Public Interest, 10, 89-129.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., Klein, R., & Viswanathan, M.
(2004). Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive control:
Evidence from the Simon task. Psychology & Aging, 19,
290-303.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., & Luk, G. (2008). Cognitive control
and lexical access in younger and older bilinguals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 34, 859-873.
Bialystok, E., Martin, M. M., & Viswanathan, M. (2005).
Bilingualism across the lifespan: The rise and fall of
inhibitory control. International Journal of Bilingualism,
9, 103–119.
Chang, F.-M., Kidd, J. R., Kivak, K. J., Pakstis, A. J., &
Kidd, K. K. (1996). The world-wide distribution of allele
frequencies at the human dopamine D4 receptor locus.
Human Genetics, 98, 91–101.
Chen, C., Burton, M., Greenberger, E., & Dmitrieva, J.
(1999) Population migration and the variation of
dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) allele frequencies around
the globe. Evolution and Human Behavior, 20, 309-324.
Faraone, S. V., Doyle, A. E., Mick, E., & Biederman, J.
(2001). Meta- analysis of the association between the 7repeat allele of the dopamine D(4) receptor gene and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 158, 1052–1057.
Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2003). Action video game
modifies visual selective attention. Nature, 423, 534–537.
Hakuta, K., Ferdman, B. M., & Diaz, R. M. (1986).
Bilingualism and cognitive development: Three
perspectives and methodological implications. Los
Angeles: Center for Language Education and Research,
University of California.
Hilchey, M. D., & Klein, R. M. (2011). Are there bilingual
advantages on nonlinguistic interference tasks?
Implications for plasticity of executive control processes.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 625-658.
Humphrey, A. D. & Valian, V. V. (2012) Multilingualism
and cognitive control: Simon and Flanker task
performance in monolingual and multilingual young
adults. Paper presented at the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, Minneapolis, MN.
Kousaie, S. & Phillips, N. A. (2012a). Conflict monitoring
and resolution: Are two languages better than one?
Evidence from reaction time and event-related brain
potentials. Brain Research, 1446, 71-90.
Kousaie, S. & Phillips, N. A. (2012b). Aging and
bilingualism: absence of a “bilingual advantage” in
Stroop interference in a nonimmigrant sample. The

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65, 356369.
Lauchlan, F., Parisi, M., & Fadda, R. (2012). Bilingualism
in Sardinia and Scotland: Exploring the cognitive benefits
of speaking a 'minority' language. International Journal of
Bilingualism, DOI: 10.1177/1367006911429622.
Lu, C-H., & Proctor, R. W. (1995). The influence of
irrelevant location information on performance: A review
of the Simon and spatial Stroop effects. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 2, 174-207.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M.
(2007). The language experience and proficiency
questionnaire (LEAP-Q): Assessing language profiles in
bilinguals and multilinguals. Journal of Speech, Language
and Hearing Research, 50, 940-967.
Mezzacappa, E. (2004). Alerting, orienting, and executive
attention:
Developmental
properties
and
sociodemographic correlates in an epidemiological
sample of young, urban children. Child Development, 75,
1373–1386.
Morton, J. B., & Harper, S. N. (2007). What did Simon say?
Revisiting the bilingual advantage. Developmental
Science, 10, 719–726.
Nikolaidis, A., & Gray, J. R. (2010). ADHD and the DRD4
exon III 7 –repeat polymorphism: an international metaanalysis. SCAN, 5, 188-193.
Paap, K. R. & Greenberg, Z. I. (2013). There is no coherent
evidence for a bilingual advantage in executive
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 66, 232-258.
Ratcliff, R. (1993). Methods of dealing with reaction time
outliers. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 510–532.
Sabbagh, M.A., Xu, F., Carlson, S.M., Moses, L.J., & Lee,
K. (2006). The development of executive functioning and
theory of mind: a comparison of Chinese and US
preschoolers. Psychological Science, 17, 74–81.
Schachar, R., Tannock, R., Marriott, M., & Logan, G.
(1995). Deficient inhibitory control in attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 23, 411–437.
Schroeder, S. R., & Marian, V. (2012). A bilingual
advantage for episodic memory in older adults. Journal of
Cognitive
Psychology,
DOI:
10.1080/
20445911.2012.669367.
Scottish Government Social Research (2010) Public
attitudes towards the Scots language. Retrieved from:
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2010/01/061051
23/0. Accessed 1/2/13.
Smith, J., & Durham, M. (2012). Bidialectalism or dialect
death? Explaining generational change in the Shetland
Isles, Scotland. American Speech, 87, 57-88.
Van der Lubbe, R. H. J., & Verleger, R. (2002). Aging and
the Simon task. Psychophysiology, 39, 100–110.
Williams, P. G., Suchy, Y., & Rau, H. K. (2009). Individual
differences in executive functioning: implications for
stress regulation. Annals of Behavioral Medicine 37, 126140.

787

