UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does the Semantic Integration of Emotion Words Depend on Emotional Empathy? N400,
P600 and Localization Effects for Intentional and Proprioceptive Emotion Words in Sentence
Contexts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7321b74s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Rak, Natalia
Kontinen, Jarmo
Kuchinke, Lars
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does the Semantic Integration of Emotion Words Depend on Emotional Empathy?
N400, P600 and Localization Effects for Intentional and Proprioceptive Emotion
Words in Sentence Contexts
Natalia Rak1, Jarmo Kontinen2, Lars Kuchinke1, and Markus Werning2
({natalia.rak, jarmo.kontinen, lars.kuchinke, markus.werning}@rub.de)
1

Department of Psychology, Ruhr University Bochum
Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum

2

Abstract
Empathy with other persons’ emotions has been suggested to
root in a simulation process involving brain regions that play
a crucial role in the production of one’s own emotions. The
current ERP study combines this approach with an embodiedsimulative view of semantics. This view implies that those
very brain regions should also be involved in the semantic
memory and linguistic comprehension of intentional and
proprioceptive emotion words. The relation between cognitive
empathy measured by the MET test and the size of the N400
effect occurring when semantic emotions words violate
semantic expectations is investigated.
Keywords: empathy, semantic memory, N400, P600,
emulative semantics, embodied cognition, simulation theory,
mirror neuron system, emotion, proprioception, multifaceted
empathy test (MET)

Introduction
The current debate about the neural realization of
linguistic meaning and semantic memory can be
characterized by two opposing views: According to the
abstract-symbolic view, semantic memory is a modular and
amodal system. Semantic representations are considered as
rather stable, decontextualized mental symbols that are
processed in a largely informationally encapsulated way and
do not essentially recruit mechanisms from perceptual,
motoric or emotional brain processes. Combining various
neurolinguistic findings, Friederici (2002) e.g. argues that
“semantic processes are mainly subserved by the left
temporal region and that the frontal cortex is recruited when
strategic and/or memory aspects come into play”.
The embodied-simulative view, in contrast, assumes that
the processing of linguistic meaning essentially involves
perceptual, motoric and emotional brain regions
corresponding to the contents of the words to be
comprehended. Based on a review of neurobiological data,
Pulvermüller (1999) suggests that neural assemblies that
pertain to the sensory-motor cortices and are bound by
neural synchronization play an important role in
understanding the meanings of words and sentences. These
cortical sensory-motor action and perception circuits are
interdependent in language comprehension. According to
Barsalou (2005) semantic representations can be regarded as
simulators of sensory-motor and emotional contents.
Werning (2012) has coined the notion of Emulative
Semantics and proposes a compositional, but non-symbolic

recurrent neural network model that generates simulations
for semantic representations.
Support for the embodied-simulative view comes from a
number of neuro-linguistic studies especially in the domain
of action words. Neuroimaging investigations have shown
that the linguistic comprehension of verbal stimuli involve
motor circuits, i.e. specific motor activations can be found
when subjects understand speech sounds, word meanings,
semantic categories and sentence structures (Pulvermüller &
Fadiga, 2010) involving action words or words associated
with actions. FMRI studies (Pulvermüller, 2005) regarding
the understanding of action verbs, e.g., hint at a differential
top-down activation of motor and pre-motor areas. Martin
(2007) reports that the understanding of concrete nouns like
hammer, for which not only features, but also affordances
are salient, results in an activity distributed over the
premotor and the visual cortex. Brain areas involved in
motor control contribute to neural networks in which verb
representations are grounded. Studies on motor deficits such
as Parkinson disease, e.g., reveal impairment of patients’
action naming (Rodríguez-Ferreiro et al., 2009).
Embodied-simulative accounts of the semantics of action
words have been linked to mirror neuron systems. Mirror
systems have been reported in humans not only for actions
(Rizzolatti et al., 1996), but also for intentional emotions
(Bastiaansen et al., 2009; disgust – Wicker et al., 2003;
facial expressions – Carr et al., 2003), and proprioceptive
emotions (pain – Avenanti et al., 2005; touch – Blakemore
et al., 2005). Mirror neuron systems map the perceptions of
actions and intentional as well as proprioceptive emotions of an
observed person onto the perceiver’s own somatosensory,
viscero-motor, or motor representations of actions and
emotions. Such a mapping is supposed to enable the observer
of another person’s actions and emotions to feel as if he were
performing that action or experiencing that emotion himself.
Since mirroring mechanisms may constitute sub-personal
instantiations of embodied simulations, Gallese (2003)
proposes mirror neuron systems as a neuronal basis of
empathy.
These findings and theoretical considerations lay the
ground for the current study. If the embodied-simulative
view of linguistic meaning also applies to emotion words,
the processes underlying empathy with other persons’
emotions should be not entirely independent of processes
underlying the comprehension of emotion words.

1187

Table 1: Stimuli

INT (intentional
emotion)

PROP (proprioceptive emotion

PHYS (physical
control)

CON
(congruent)
Als Adrian von seinen hohen Gewinnen an der Börse erfährt, ist er darüber
sehr erfreut.
When Adrian hears about his high gains on the stock market, he is very
happy about it.
Nachdem Kerstin stundenlang ohne Wasser in der Hitze umherlief, ist sie
nun sehr durstig.
After Kerstin has been walking around without water in the heat, she is now
very thirsty.
Da niemand die Türen jemals geölt hatte, begannen sie nach kurzer Zeit zu
quietschen.
Since nobody had oiled the doors, they soon began to squeak.

Furthermore, since the capacity and inclination to empathize
with other persons’ emotions varies across subjects, we
consider it an interesting question whether good emotional
empathizers “feel” semantic violations in the context of
emotion words more strongly than poor emotional
empathizers. One should thus predict that this results in
stronger N400 effects.
The examination of the N400 effect in the event-related
potentials (ERPs) is a common approach to investigate
semantic integration in sentence processing. An N400 is a is
a monophasic negativity between 200 and 600 ms after
word onset, largest over centro-parietal sites (Kutas &
Federmeier, 2011). When comparing semantically expected
and unexpected words, observed higher amplitudes of the
N400 are discussed to reflect greater demands of semantic
integration of an unexpected word at the sentence or the
discourse level. Thus, N400 effects are particularly observed
for critical words that do not fit into a sentence's context.
Recent evidence from sentence processing has shown that
the integration of contextual semantic information is
dependent on emotional processing (Chwilla et al., 2011;
Federmeier & Kutas, 2011; Pinheiro et al., 2013).

Methods
Participants
25 female students from the University of Bochum
(M=24.19, SD=2.58) volunteered for the experiment. They
were compensated with 10€ per hour for their time and
effort. They were recruited through local advertisements on
the university campus. Only healthy, right-handed women
without a history of previous head injury, psychiatric and
neurological disorders were included in the study. All were
German native speakers, had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were free of medication.

EEG study
Sentence preparation A total set of 32x3x3x3=864 test
sentences and 3x32=96 filler sentences was generated. Each
sentence consisted of two clauses conjoined by a
coordinating or subordinating conjunction. The target word
was always the last word of the sentence and consisted in a
medium frequent bisyllabic verb, adjective or participle. The
logarithmic frequency of each target word was determined

INCON
(incongruent,)
… besorgt.

UNREL
(unrelated)
…empört.

concerned
…hungrig.

indignant
…hellwach.

hungry

awake

…bollern.
thud

…tröpfeln.
drip

from Wortschatz Leipzig (http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de)
as the WL index. A WL index of n means that the most
frequent German word “der” is 2n times more frequent than
the target word. Following a 3x3 design we introduced the
three content categories INT “intentional emotion”, PROP
“proprioceptive emotion”, and PHYS “physical control” and
three congruency categories CON “congruent”, INCON
“incongruent”, and UNREL “unrelated” for the target
words.
The target words of category INT semantically denoted or
lexically entailed an emotional relation between an
experiencer and an intentional object. A further grammatical
criterion was a verb/adjective valence of at least 2. Words of
category PROP semantically denoted or lexically entailed a
proprioceptive feeling of an experiencer. Grammatically,
these words had either a verb/adjective valence of less than
2 or were causatives resulting in a proprioceptive feeling.
Category PHYS was designed as a control with non-mental
target words. The target words for each of the content
categories were grouped into triplets with one word for each
of the three congruency categories (32 triplets for INT,
PROP and PHYS each). For each triplet three different, but
contentwise similar sentential contexts of the above
mentioned two-clause structure were created such that the
sentences completed by the word of condition CON would
describe a semantically congruent and plausible scenario.
The word of condition INCON was closely semantically
related to that of condition CON (being typically an
antonym or contrastive word), but would make each of the
three sentential contexts semantically incongruent and
implausible. The word of condition UNREL was not or only
distantly semantically related to that of condition CON and
would make each of the three sentential contexts grossly
semantically incongruent and implausible. By combination
altogether 9 sentences were created from each triplet and the
three contexts. This allowed us to present the sentences to
the subjects in random selection and order such that each
subject saw all three target words of each triplet and all
three of the corresponding sentential contexts without any
repetition of either the target words or the contexts. Priming
effects were thus avoided.
There were no significant differences in logarithmic
frequency of the target words across the 9 conditions of the

1188

a)

b)

Figure 1. Cluster-based permutation test for intentional emotion words. The test compares the congruency
conditions UNREL to CON in the content condition INT for all channels and each 2ms segment (α=0.025). The
resulting significant clusters are marked red a) Negative cluster corresponding to an N400 effect with onset at 396ms
and offset at 498ms (p=0.0096). b) Positive cluster corresponding to a P600 effect with onset at 610ms and offset at
694ms (p=0.0048).

3x3 design (M=13.49, SD=2.26). The word classes were
balanced between verbs, adjectives, and participles. The
reason for the filler sentences was to balance semantically
congruent (CON and Fillers) and incongruent (INCON and
UNREL) scenarios. Each subject saw 288 test sentences and
96 filler sentences, i.e. altogether 384 sentences. See Tab. 1.
Sentence Task Subjects viewed whole sentences, presented
in Presentation software (Neurobehavioral Systems Inc.,
Albany, CA, USA) on the screen in front of them, in small
chunks of words at a time for 500ms each. The sentence
started after the presentation of a centered fixation cross that
stayed on the screen for 1000ms. The words were presented
in black letters on a grey background in the center of the
screen. There was an inter-stimulus interval between the
chunks of 50ms, which showed a blank screen only. The last
word was always the target word and determined the onset
of the N400 measure epoch. After 33% of the sentences, a
question mark appeared 2000ms after the offset of the target
word which required the subject to press a button (“yes” or
“no”) for whether they considered the sentence to be
sensible or not. The filler sentences mentioned above were
necessary to enable an approximately equal number of
button presses. The question mark was followed by a
2000ms blank screen until the next sentence started. The
main purpose of the question served to keep participants
engaged and alert during passive viewing.

Background Measures
Multifaceted empathy test (MET) As a measure of
empathy, the MET depicts 40 different photographs of
various people in emotionally charged situations, with a
varying degree of expression on their faces (Dziobek, 2008).
In the computer task, each picture is presented three times
with three different questions. Cognitive empathy is
assessed by the question “How does the person feel?”. By

pressing a number from one to four, the subject has to
choose one of four possible emotional states, only one of
which is defined as correct. The maximum score is 40
points. Two kinds of affective empathy are measured.
Explicit empathy is assessed by the question “How much do
you compassionate with this person?” and implicit empathy
is compiled by the question “How strongly aroused are you
by the picture”. In both conditions, subjects are asked to rate
their emotional engaging on a nine-point scale ranging from
1 (not at all) to 9 (very much). The implicit empathy
measure reduces the subject’s tendency to answer socially
desirable. The maximum scores for both affective empathy
measures are 9 points each.

Procedure
Participants were seated comfortably in a chair, at a distance
of 75cm from the screen in a sound-proof and electrically
shielded room with ambient lighting. Upon arrival, they
signed informed consent, completed the Edinburgh
handedness test and the eating disorders subtests of the
DIPS (Diagnostisches Interview bei psychischen Störungen,
reported elsewhere). Electrodes were applied to the scalp.
After receiving task instructions, a short practice task of five
training trials was introduced to ascertain comprehension of
the task requirements. A total of 384 sentences, presented in
a randomized order and split up into three equal presentation
blocks, were presented on the screen. A keyboard with two
response buttons was positioned in front of the subjects on
the table. In between the blocks, participants had resting
periods of at least 5 minutes in order to recover from fatigue
and concentration loss. The total duration of the
experimental task was 1 hour. By the end of the recording
procedure, subjects completed the multifaceted empathy test
(MET) offline.

1189

electrode. The sampling rate was 500Hz and impedance was
lowered to below 5kΩ. The EEG data were analyzed using
BrainVision Analyzer 2.0 (BrainVision, München). After
recording with a 0.5305–70Hz online filter, the data were
filtered off-line through a 0.5305–30Hz bandpass zero phase
Butterworth filter. Afterwards eye-blink artifacts were
removed by an independent component analysis (ICA)
which was performed for each subject. The reference
electrode was offline re-referenced retrospectively to the
linked mastoids comprising TP9 and TP10. An automatic
artifact rejection removed all trials with amplitudes above
90 μV and below -90 μV. Segments from 200 ms pre-target
onset until 1000 ms post-onset were separately extracted
and averaged for every subject and for each of the 3x3
conditions {INT, PROP, PHYS}×{CON, INCON,
UNREL}.

Electroencephalography Recording and Data Analysis
The analysis is based on 30 active electrode channels that
recorded an electroencephalogram (EEG) from the subjects’
scalp surface with a BrainAmp acticap EEG recording
system (BrainAmps amplifier, München) according to the
international 10-20 system. Four additional electrodes
measured participants’ electrooculogramm (EOG) for both
vertical and horizontal eye movements for later removal of
eye movement artifacts. The reference electrode was placed
in the position of the FCz and AFz served as ground
a)

Results
Onset and offset of N400 and P600
b)

c)

Figure 2. Grand average ERP waveforms for the
electrode Cz. The two congruency conditions UNREL and
CON are compared. The dotted lines mark the onsets and
offsets of the N400 and, respectively, the P600 effects
according to the cluster based permutation test. a) Intentional
emotion words (INT). Cluster significance: p(N400)=0.0096,
p(P600)=0.0048. b) Proprioceptive emotion words (PROP).
Cluster significance: p(N400)=0.0004, p(P600)=0.0325. c)
Physical controls (PHYS). Cluster significance: p(N400)=
0.0016, p(P600)= 0.0072.

In order to determine the onset and offset of N400 and P600
effects, we compared the ERPs in the congruent condition
against the ERPs in the unrelated condition for all three
content conditions. The onset and the offset of the N400 and
P600 were determined by a resampling procedure, the
cluster-based permutation test: The averaged ERPs for each
subject in the CON and UNREL condition were collected in
a single set, which was then randomly partitioned into two
equally sized subsets. The data-points (time x channel) were
compared between the partitioned sets by a dependent t-test.
The significantly different – α=0.025 (The significance level
of 0.05 was Bonferroni corrected by a factor 2 since both
negative and positive clusters were of interest) – data points
were then clustered according to temporal-spatial adjacency.
The cluster-level statistics was calculated by taking the sum
over the t-values for each cluster. This procedure was
repeated 10,000 times. The p-values of the observed clusterlevel statistics were estimated as the proportion of partitions
that resulted in a higher cluster-level statistics than the
observed one (Maris & Oostenveld, 2007).
The resampling procedure revealed the positive and
negative clusters, i.e. collections of time-channel points
where the measured amplitude in the UNREL condition was
significantly higher (resp. lower) than in the CON
condition. The onset of the cluster was taken to be the first
time point contained in the cluster, whereas the offset was
taken as the last time point in the cluster. The results of the
cluster-based permutation test for condition INT is shown in
Fig.1. Fig. 2 displays the grand averages on electrode Cz for
all three content conditions with onsets, offsets and p-values
for the N400 and P600 clusters determined by the clusterbased permutation test. Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the
topographical distribution of the N400 and P600 effects.

MET scores and N400
We were interested whether subjects’ MET scores correlate
with the effect-sizes of the N400 effects. To gain insight on

1190

Figure 3. Topography of the N400 effects. The topographical mapping shows the difference between the congruency
conditions UNREL and CON for the three content conditions averaged between onset and offset of the N400 effect
according to the cluster-based permutation test. In all three content conditions the N400 effect has a centro-parietal
extension.

Figure 4. Topography of the P600 effects. The topographical mapping shows the difference between the congruency
conditions UNREL and CON for the three content conditions averaged between onset and offset of the P600 effect
according to the cluster-based permutation test. a) For intentional emotion words (INT) the P600 effect has a medialfrontal focus. b) For proprioceptive emotion words (PROP) the P600 effect has a centro-parietal focus. c) In the physical
control condition, the P600 effect has a centro-parietal focus with a right hemispheric dominance.
a)

b)

Figure 5. Comparing the N400 effect for intentional emotion words on the median split between HIGH and LOW
cognitive empathizers. a) The difference between the congruency conditions UNREL and CON for intentional emotion
words for the HIGH and LOW cognitive empathy group averaged over electrodes in the significant cluster. b)
Topographical mapping of the differences between the HIGH and the LOW group (HIGH - LOW) for the N400 effect on
the time interval determined by the cluster-based permutation test. The effect difference between HIGH and LOW
cognitive empathizers peaks in the fronto-central region.

1191

this matter, we did a median split of the tested group of
subjects with respect to the three MET-scores: The subjects
were split into HIGH (N=12) and LOW (N=13). We
conducted a cluster-based permutation test to find out the
significant differences between the HIGH cognitive
empathy and the LOW cognitive empathy group in the time
window of the main N400 effect for condition INT (396498ms).
The cluster-based permutation test confirmed that the HIGH
cognitive empathy group has a significantly (α=0.05,
p=0.0286) stronger N400-effect than the LOW cognitive
empathy group in the time interval 462-498ms for condition
INT, see Fig. 5 Due to space limitation the significant
findings regarding proprioceptive emotion words are not
discussed here.

Discussion
As argued above, the embodied-simulative view of meaning
predicts that subjects who have a higher capacity to
empathize with the emotions of other persons should be
more sensitive also to semantic violations that occur when
an emotion word is embedded in an incongruent or even
unrelated sentence context. This stronger sensitivity should
correlate with a stronger N400 effect, which is a widely
acknowledged measure for the violation of semantic
expectations. As our study revealed, subjects with a high
MET score for cognitive empathy with emotions, indeed,
show a significantly stronger N400 effect when an
intentional emotion word is embedded in a semantically
unrelated sentence context than those with a low score. This
difference is strongest in fronto-central regions of the brain.
Aside from these results interesting localization
differences in the P600 effects were found between
intentional and proprioceptive emotion words and the
physical control condition while only marginal localization
differences occurred for the N400 effects. Due to space
limits a discussion of those will be deferred.

References
Avenanti A., Bueti D., Galati G., Aglioti S. M. (2005).
Transcranial magnetic stimulation highlights the
sensorimotor side of empathy for pain. Nature
Neuroscience;8(7):955-60.
Barsalou, L. W. Cohen, H. & Lefebvre, C. (2005, Eds.)
Situated conceptualization Handbook of categorization in
cognitive science, Elsevier (pp. 619-50).
Bastiaansen J. A., Thioux M., Keysers C. (2009). Evidence
for mirror systems in emotions. Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological sciences;364(1528):2391-404.
Blakemore S. J., Bristow D., Bird G., Frith C., Ward J.
(2005). Somatosensory activations during the observation
of touch and a case of vision-touch synaesthesia.
Brain;128:1571-83.
Carr L., Iacoboni M., Dubeau M. C., Mazziotta J. C., Lenzi
G. L. (2003). Neural mechanisms of empathy in humans:
a relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America;100(9):5497-502.
Chwilla D. J., Virgillito D., Vissers C. T. (2011). The
relationship of language and emotion: N400 support for
an embodied view of language comprehension. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience;23(9):2400-14.
Dziobek, I., Rogers, R., Fleck, S., Bahnemann, M.,
Heekeren, H.R., Wolf, O.T., Convit, A. (2008).
Dissociation of Cognitive and Emotional Empathy in
Adults with Asperger Syndrome Using the Multifaceted
Empathy Test (MET). J Autism Dev Disord, 38:464–473.
Friederici, A. D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory
sentence processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, , 6,
78-84.
Gallese V. (2003). The roots of empathy: the shared
manifold hypothesis and the neural basis of
intersubjectivity. Psychopathology;36(4):171-80.
Kutas M., Federmeier K. D. (2011). Thirty years and
counting: finding meaning in the N400 component of the
event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of
Psychology;62:621-47.
Maris E., Oostenveld R. (2007). Nonparametric statistical
testing of EEG- and MEG-data. Journal of Neuroscience
Methods;164(1):177-90.
Martin A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in
the brain. Annual Review of Psychology;58:25-45.
Pinheiro A. P., Del Re E., Mezin J., Nestor P. G., Rauber
A., McCarley R. W., Gonçalves O. F., Niznikiewicz M.
A. (2013). Sensory-based and higher-order operations
contribute to abnormal emotional prosody processing in
schizophrenia: an electrophysiological investigation.
Psychological Medicine;43(3):603-18.
Pulvermüller F. (2005). Brain mechanisms linking language
and action. Nature Reviews Neuroscience;6(7):576-82.
Pulvermüller F., (1999). Words in the Brain's Language
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1999, 22, 253-279.
Pulvermüller F., Fadiga L. (2010). Active perception:
sensorimotor circuits as a cortical basis for language.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience;11(5):351-60.
Rizzolatti G., Fadiga L., Gallese V., Fogassi L. (1996).
Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor actions.
Cognitive Brain Research;3(2):131-41.
Rodríguez-Ferreiro J., Menéndez M., Ribacoba R., Cuetos
F. (2009). Action naming is impaired in Parkinson disease
patients. Neuropsychologia;47(14):3271-4.
Werning, M. (2012) Non-symbolic Compositional
Representation and Its Neuronal Foundation: Towards an
Emulative Semantics. In Werning, M., Hinzen, W., &
Machery, M. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of
Compositionality. Oxford University Press, Oxford (pp.
633-654).
Wicker B., Keysers C., Plailly J., Royet J. P., Gallese V.,
Rizzolatti G. (2003). Both of us disgusted in my insula:
the common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust.
Neuron;40(3):655-64.

1192

