UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Friendship Influence Space Perception? With Particular Reference to the Curse of
the Suspicious Participants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/26k7k4qf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Morgado, Nicolas
Muller, Dominique
Pinelli, Mathieu
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Friendship Influence Space Perception? With Particular Reference to the Curse
of the Suspicious Participants
Nicolas Morgado (nicolas.morgado@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurocognition (CNRS), Université Pierre-Mendès-France, 38040 Grenoble, France

Dominique Muller (dominique.muller@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Laboratoire Interuniversitaire de Psychologie, Institut Universitaire de France et Université Pierre-Mendès-France, 38040
Grenoble, France

Mathieu Pinelli (mathieu.pinelli@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurocognition (CNRS), Université Pierre-Mendès-France, 38040 Grenoble, France

Éric Guinet (eric.guinet@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurocognition (CNRS), Université Pierre-Mendès-France, 38040 Grenoble, France

Édouard Gentaz (edouard.gentaz@unige.ch)
Université de Genève / FAPSE UNI MAIL ; 40, Boulevard du Pont-d'Arve 1211 Genève 4

Richard Palluel-Germain (richard.palluel@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurocognition (CNRS), Université Pierre-Mendès-France, 38040 Grenoble, France
Abstract
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that social relationships
affect the perception of distance. When participants imagined
passing through a wall and a disliked-person, they perceived
shorter aperture widths than when they intended to pass
between a wall and a liked-person. This result was observed
only for passable apertures suggesting that social constraints
may influence visual perception only when people can
actually perform this action. We discuss the results according
to an embodied approach to visual perception but also with an
alternative explanation in terms of possible demand
characteristics. We also discuss some methodological points
supposed to improve the validity of such experiments.
Keywords: Space Perception; Embodiement, Psychosocial
Resources; Affective Closeness; Demand Characteristics

Introduction
According to Proffitt and Linkenauger (2013) the visual
perception of space depends on the phenotype of the
perceiver. More precisely, the optical information would be
scaled on the morphological, physiological, and behavioral
properties of the body. For instance, decreasing people’s
ability to reach an object leads them to perceive it as being
farther away (e.g., Lourenco & Longo, 2009; Morgado,
Gentaz, Guinet, Osiurak, & Palluel-Germain, in press).
Previous works tried to extend this account to the
influence of social factors on visual perception (Chambon,
2009; Harber, Yeung, & Iacovelli, 2011; Morgado, Muller,
Gentaz, & Palluel-Germain, 2011). For example, Schnall,
Harber, Stefanucci, & Proffitt (2008) observed that people
underestimate the slant of a steep hill when they are
accompanied by a friend instead of being alone. According

to the authors, this difference in slant estimation reflects that
social support, as a social resource, can compensate the
potential effort associated with climbing the hill and thus
reduces its perceived steepness.
In some cases, however, the social constraints associated
with a given action constitute a cost rather than a resource.
Previous works suggest that people maintain a personal
space around them and that they feel discomfort when
someone invades this space (Hayduk, 1983). Moreover, this
discomfort seems to increase as the physical interpersonal
distance decrease (Hayduk, 1981). Interestingly, the
discomfort associated with personal space invasion seems to
vary according to the social relationship (Sundstrom &
Altman, 1976). Consistent with these findings, we recently
observed that people’s action-scaled perception of a space
between two acquaintances is correlated with the
participants’ affective closeness toward these acquaintances
(Morgado et al., 2011). Indeed, the closer participants felt to
their classmates, the more passable the space between the
classmates pictures appeared and the less space they needed
to pass. These results might suggest that participants
perceived the space between the two classmate pictures (i.e.,
the aperture width) differently because of the closeness
feeling.
In the present study, we aimed to investigate further
whether social relationships influence the visual perception
of an aperture between a wall and an acquaintance. More
precisely, participants had to estimate the width of an
aperture between the picture of a wall and that of a human
figure evoking a liked person or a disliked person.
Participants also indicated if the aperture was wide enough
to allow them to pass. Our hypothesis was that the
participants from the disliked-person group should perceive
smaller apertures than participants from the liked-person

3110

group. Moreover, this study aimed to replicate the observed
correlation between affective closeness and the passability
judgments.

Method
Participants
Sixty undergraduates (52 females; Mage = 21, SDage = 3)
from the University of Grenoble took part in this experiment
for course credit. The participants had normal or correctedto-normal vision, as indicated by self-report. None had
participated in our previous study. The present study was
conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
and with the understanding and the written consent of each
participant. It was approved by the local ethics committee of
the LPNC (CNRS and the University of Grenoble).

Apparatus and procedure
To manipulate social relationships, we chose to use a similar
mental imagery task as the one used by Schnall et al.
(2008). Participants sat down in front of a computer for the
mental imagery task. Headphones provided the instructions
to the participants who were randomly assigned to the
disliked-person or the liked-person group (respectively, n =
31 and n = 29). Using headphones enabled the experimenter
to be blind to experimental groups while increasing
standardization of the instructions.
The instructions indicated that the experiment concerned
visual perception of space and that participants would have
to estimate the width of an aperture between a picture of a
wall and a human figure. Instructions underlined that recent
studies indicated that such a task is too difficult in artificial
situations. Supposedly to make the task more natural, they
had to imagine that the human figure was an acquaintance.
At the beginning of the mental imagery task, participants
had to complete a relaxation exercise. Then, participants in
the disliked-person group had to choose an acquaintance
who they did not like at all and who made them
uncomfortable. In contrast, participants in the liked-person
group had to choose an acquaintance that they liked very
much and who made them feel good. Participants could take
all the time they needed to choose this acquaintance and
they pressed a key to hear the next instructions. Then, they
had to imagine the presence of this acquaintance while
thinking about their feeling toward this person, while
visualizing his or her physical appearance, and while
keeping in mind how they usually interact with this person.
At the end of this mental imagery task, the instructions
indicated that participants had now to estimate aperture
width and they had to keep in mind a picture of the chosen
acquaintance.
For the perceptual task, participants stood at 3.7 m in
front of a white screen on which the picture of a wall and
those of a human figure were projected (Figure1). The

dimensions of the two pictures were identical (height: 169
cm, width: 41.5 cm). The instructions were projected on the
screen at the beginning of this task. Throughout this task,
participants had to imagine the previously chosen
acquaintance in place of the human figure projected on the
screen. Since the constraints of a given action influence the
perception mainly when people intend to perform this action
(e.g., Witt, Proffitt, & Epstein, 2005), participants had to
imagine passing through the aperture between the wall and
their acquaintance before each width estimation. Since arm
posture seems to influence perceived aperture widths
(Stefanucci & Geuss, 2009), participants had to keep their
arms along their body. To estimate the aperture widths,
participants completed a visual-matching task (for a similar
measure see Stefanucci & Geuss, 2009). The experimenter
stood at 190 cm from the participants’ right side and
progressively unrolled a tape measure located at 130 cm
from the floor. Participants had to stop the experimenter
when they considered that the length of the tape measure
was equal to the aperture width. To reduce the potential
experimenter effect on participants’ estimations, the
experimenter could not see which aperture width the
participants had to estimate. Moreover, the experimenter
tried hard to keep his gaze on a fixed point in the wall in
front of him while unrolling the tape measure. Neither the
experimenter, nor the participants could see the graduation
of the tape measure during the estimations. The
experimenter could only see the measure after participants
were satisfied of their estimation to record it in the
computer. Then, participants made a “yes” or “no”
passability judgment (Warren & Whang, 1987) to indicate if
the aperture was wide enough to allow them to pass through
it without rotating their shoulders. The experimenter
recorded this judgment and launched the next trial.
Participants completed 32 trials including 4 practice trials
and 28 test trials. The actual aperture widths used for the
test trials ranged from 30 cm to 95 cm with a 5-cm step. The
actual aperture widths used for the practice trials (31 cm, 39
cm, 52 cm, 82 cm) were randomly selected among this
range of width and were the same for all the participants.
The actual aperture widths were randomly presented during
the practice and test trials.

Figure 1: Experimental setup and device (P: participant;
E: experimenter).

3111

Immediately after the completion of the perceptual task,
the experimenter asked participants if the overall procedure
was clear and probed them for suspicion about the
hypothesis. The experimenter asked two questions to the
participants: (1) “In your opinion what hypothesis is tested
in this study?” (2) “Do you think that some aspects of the
experiment could have influenced your responses? If so,
what were these aspects?” Then the experimenter recorded
participants’ shoulder width as the distance between the tips
of the two humerus. Finally, participants sat down and
answered a post-experimental questionnaire projected on the
screen. The items of this questionnaire were gathered
together by themes which were presented in a fixed order:
(1) impressions about the mental imagery task, (2)
information about the chosen acquaintance, (3) participants’
feelings toward the acquaintance, (4) participants’ preferred
interpersonal distance with the acquaintance (for a similar
measure see Pedersen, 1973), (5) participants’ physical
state, and participants’ mood. Items, however, were
randomly presented among the themes.

participants (nliked = 29, ndisliked = 27). We considered
participants as suspicious when they indicated that they
thought that we aimed to test the effect of social relationship
on the perception of aperture or when they indicated that
social relationship was an aspect that influenced their
estimations. In spite of our cover story, 39.29 % of our
participants suspected the true purpose of the study.
Moreover, there were more suspicious participants in the
disliked-person group (55.56 %) than in the liked-person
group (24.14 %), t(54) = 2.49, p < .02, η² = .10.

Results
We conducted a set of t-tests to check the effectiveness of
our experimental manipulation with Social Relationship as a
between-group factor and the different items of the postexperimental questionnaire dependent variables. The
participants in the liked-person group indicated more
positive feelings toward their acquaintance (M = 4.42, SD =
.34) than those in the disliked-person group (M = 2.46, SD =
.36), t(56) = 21.32, p < .001, η² = .89. In line with the
literature (Sundstrom & Altman, 1976), participants in the
liked-person group preferred keeping a significantly shorter
interpersonal distance with the acquaintance (M = 30.02, SD
= 22.26) than those of the disliked-person group (M =
141.83, SD = 44.69), t(56) = -12.19, p < .001, η² = .73.
Participants in the liked-person group indicated having more
frequent contacts with the acquaintance (M = 3.17, SD =
1.05) than those of the disliked person group (M = 1.86, SD
= .85), t(56) = 5.19, p < .001, η² = .73. Moreover,
participants in the liked-person group indicated that the
pictures generated during the mental imagery task were
more pleasant (M = 4.6, SD = .49) than those in the dislikedperson group (M = 2.11, SD = .59), t(56) = 17.28, p < .001,
η² = .84. There was no other significant difference for the
other items of the post-experimental questionnaire (i.e.,
duration of the relationship, mood, vividness of the imagery
task, easiness to imagine the target person, and easiness to
imagine passing through the aperture). It is noteworthy,
however, that it was marginally easier to imagine the liked
person (M = 3.23, SD = 1.22) than the disliked one (M =
2.64, SD = 1.25), t(56) = 1.82, p = .07, η² = .06.
An inspection of the Studentized deleted residuals on the
aperture width estimations revealed the presence of two
outliers (see Judd, McClelland, & Ryan, 2009). They were
excluded of the subsequent analyses. Two other participants
were also excluded because of a power cut during data
collection. After these exclusions, it remained 56

Figure 2. Perceived distance as a function of Actual
Aperture Width and Social Relationship. Error bars denote
standard errors of the means.
We conducted an analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
Social Relationship (liked person, disliked person) as a
between-subjects factor and Actual Aperture Width (30 cm,
35 cm…90 cm, 95 cm) as a within-subject factor. The
Estimated Aperture Width was the dependent variable.
Given that the exclusion of all the suspicious participants
would lead to decrease dramatically the statistical power of
the analysis, we entered Suspicion (suspicion vs. no
suspicion) as a covariate in this analysis. We also entered
Shoulder Width as a covariate since this variable is known
to influence perceived aperture widths. This analysis
revealed that participants in the disliked-person group
estimated shorter aperture widths (M = 58.5, SD = 1.35)
than those of the liked-person group (M = 61.5, SD = 1.51).
However, this main effect of social relationship was not
statistically significant, F(1, 51) = 2.21, p < .14, η² = .04.
Neither the main effect of suspicion, nor those of shoulder
width were significant (ps > .1). The main effect of Actual
Aperture width was significant, F(13, 663) = 7.31, p < .001,
η² = .13. Interestingly, the interaction between actual
aperture width and social relationship was significant, F(13,
663) = 2, p < .02, η² = .04 (see Figure 2). This seems to
reflect the fact that participants in the disliked-person group
tended to estimate shorter aperture widths than those of the
liked-person group for the aperture judged wide enough to
pass, F(1, 51) = 3.08, p < .09, η² = .06, but not for those

3112

judged too small to pass, F(1, 51) = .68, p < .41, η² = .01.
Importantly, the interaction between the actual aperture
width and the social relationship did not depend on
suspicion (p = .73). Moreover, these results did not change
dramatically when we controlled for the easiness to imagine
the target person. We also conducted an ANOVA with
social relationship as a between-subject factor and the
percentage of “yes” passability judgments as a dependent
variable. We also entered suspicion and shoulder width in
this analysis to statistically control for these variables.
Although the percentage of “yes” passability judgments was
smaller for the disliked-person group (M = 53.32, SD =
4.33) than for the liked-person group (M = 60.36, SD =
4.89), this difference was not significant (p > .74).
Neither the correlation between the familiarity with the
acquaintance and the percentage of “yes” passability
judgments, nor those between the preferred interpersonal
distance and the percentage of “yes” passability judgments
were significant (r = -.08, p = .71 and r = -.22, p = .28
respectively). Interestingly, the correlation between the
affective closeness and the percentage of “yes” passability
judgments was significant for the participants in the
disliked-person group (r = .64, p = .01), but not for those in
the liked-person group (r = -.42, p = .23). Importantly, this
pattern of correlations remained the same when we
statistically controlled for the shoulder width of the
participants and for the suspicion.

Discussion
When participants intended to pass between a wall and a
disliked-person stimulus, they tended to estimate shorter
aperture widths compared with when they intended to pass
between a wall and a liked-person stimulus, but only for
passable apertures. As observed in our previous study
(Morgado et al., 2011), we also observed a positive
correlation between the affective closeness and percentage
of “yes” passability judgments. More precisely, the closer
participants felt to the acquaintance, the more passable the
aperture appeared. Surprisingly, it was only true for the
participants in the disliked-person group, but not for those in
the liked-person group. At a first glance, these results seem
consistent with the social extension of the phenotypic
account of perception (Proffitt & Linknauger, 2013).
According to this account, the anticipation of personal space
invasion might lead to perceive shorter aperture widths in
the presence of disliked persons than in the presence of
liked ones.
The observed interaction between the actual aperture
width and the social relationship is consistent with previous
results suggesting that the constraints related to an intended
action influence visual perception only when people can
actually perform this action (Lessard, Linkenauger, &
Proffitt, 2009). The correlation between affective closeness
and passability judgments observed only with disliked
persons might also suggest that affective closeness is more
relevant for passability with disliked persons compared with
liked ones.

One might be willing to explain our results in terms of the
ease to keep in mind the person stimulus. For instance, it
might be easier to imagine the disliked-person than the
liked-person given the literature on attention to negative
stimuli (e.g., Smith, Cacioppo, Larsen, & Chartrand, 2003).
If so, such a difference might explain our results. The data
from our post-experimental questionnaire, however,
indicated that the difference between the disliked-person
and the liked-person groups for the vividness of the imagery
task was not significant. In contrast, it was marginally easier
to imagine the liked-person than the disliked one.
Importantly, the interaction between the actual aperture
width and the social relationship remained significant when
we statistically controlled for the easiness to imagine the
target person. In the same vein, one might also invoke mood
as a potential confound in our results since mood seems to
influence visual perception of space (e.g., Riener,
Stefanucci, Proffitt, & Clore, 2011). However, our postexperimental did not provide any support for this alternative
explanation.
Durgin et al. (2009) underlined the necessity to take into
account the suspicion of the participants in studies about the
influence of the action capabilities on visual perception of
space. According to their concerns, the large number of
suspicious participants in our sample rises another possible
explanation for our results in terms of demand
characteristics. Demand characteristics refers to the cues
which provide an experimental hypothesis to the
participants (Orne, 1962). Moreover the large number of
suspicious participants in the disliked-person group suggests
that these participants were more likely to be affected by
demand characteristics. Thus, they could have reduce their
width estimations and adjust their passability judgments in
line with their guess about our hypothesis. If it was the case,
one could argue that the interaction effect between the
actual aperture width and the social relationship should
depend on whether participants were suspicious or not.
Interestingly although the interaction between actual
aperture width, social relationship, and suspicion was not
significant, the increasing difference with the actual aperture
in estimated aperture width between the disliked-person and
the liked-person groups seems to be present for the
suspicious participants only. Even if these results are only
descriptive, it is important to underline the fact that our
study was not primarily designed to test such a three-way
interaction. Considering our sample size, a lack of statistical
power needed to test such an interaction might explain this
non-significant result. Another important limit relies on the
fact we used very basics questions to probe the suspicion of
the participants. Further studies primarily designed to test
the relevance of the demand characteristics in perception
studies will have to use a more sophisticated postexperimental questionnaire.
One could also argue that the experimental demand in the
liked-person and the disliked-person group was the same
since the two groups had to imagine the presence of an
acquaintance. Yet, we observed more suspicion in the

3113

disliked-person group than in the liked-person one, which
means that demand cues are not equally spread into the two
groups or at least that the participants' receptivity to these
cues are different between the two group. One possible
explanation of this asymmetry might rely on an
inconsistency between the cover story and the disliked
group. More precisely, participants could have found
paradoxical to imagine the presence of a dislike person to
make the task more natural. Such asymmetry has important
implications for studies contrasting positive and negative
experimental manipulations and researchers should be
encouraged to find a way to rule out this potential confound.
In spite of the limits of our study, it highlights the need of
using a systematic and standardized post-experimental
questionnaire in perception studies. Indeed, we think that
dealing with the demand characteristic explanation need
more than just indicating that participants were probed for
suspicion. For instance, it seems that participants tend to
admit their suspicion more in a computerized postexperimental questionnaire than in a face-to-face interview
with the experimenter (Blackhart, Brown, Clark, Pierce, &
Shell, 2012). Thus it is important that the perception
researchers take into account such results when they probe
their participants for suspicion. One could doubt of the use
of questionnaire to deal with the demand characteristics for
at least two reasons. The first reason is that if demand
characteristics exert an implicit influence on the
participants’ behavior, the participants should not be aware
of this influence. Thus the interest of simply asking people
about this influence with a post-experimental questionnaire
should be highly limited (e.g., Nisbett & Wilson, 1977).
However, the fact that much of the demand bias should be
implicit is not guaranteed. Moreover, even if one considers
demand bias as implicit, the demand characteristics which
produce this bias can be perceived explicitly by the
participants. Thus using a post-experimental-questionnaire
remains useful to assess the receptivity of the participants to
the demand characteristics. The second reason that can lead
scholars to doubt the usefulness of the post-experimental
questionnaire is the fact that such questionnaire captures the
impression of the participants after the experiment. It is
possible that some participants did not think very much
about the hypothesis during the experiment and that the
post-experimental questionnaire increases their suspicion
when they answer to it. Horvat (1986) observed, however,
that care in the design of the questionnaire and in the coding
of the responses can improve the reporting of true suspicion
and decrease the reporting of false suspicion.
The use of theoretical accounts of demand bias to improve
post-experimental questionnaire and experimental design is
particularly relevant (e.g., Allen, 2004; for a review see also
Strohmetz, 2008). According to such accounts, to consider
that there is a risk of demand bias, researchers have to
consider three critical variables. The first variable is
receptivity of the participants to the demand cues. The
presence of such cues can lead the participants to guess the
hypotheses. We can assess the receptivity of the participants

using a quasi-control group as proposed by Orne (1962) or
with a post-experimental questionnaire. Interestingly, we
can also reduce the receptivity of the participants to the
critical cues by diverting their attention with deceptive cues.
With such a “red herring technique”, Laney et al. (2008)
succeed in reducing the suspicion of the participants about
their hypothesis. They used a traditional cover-story to hide
the purpose of their study, but in addition they included
perceptible cues suggesting that the study had another
purpose (i.e., the red herring). Importantly, this red herring
cannot be confounded with the true purpose of their studies
so that any demand bias in favor of the red herring cannot
lead the participants to confirm the true purpose.
The second variable is the participants’ motivation to
comply with the demand cues. Indeed, without such a
motivation, the receptive participants have no reason to
comply with demand cues. Allen (2004) in his postexperimental questionnaire used some items about the
motivation of the participants to comply or not with what
they thought was expected.
The third variable is participants’ ability to voluntarily
modify their responses according to the demand cues. The
question of this ability is highly relevant in behavioral
research and seems to be ignored by researchers working on
the so called low-level processes. Such tendency might
relied on a confusion between what it is studied (i.e., a lowlevel process) and the way by which we have access to this
process (i.e., a response). Yet, even if visual perception
implies low-level processes that some authors consider as
cognitively impenetrable (e.g., Pylyshyn, 1999), the
response of the participants might rely on a voluntary motor
act. In that case, as in the cases of visual-matching estimate
of or affordance judgments, participants might have the
opportunity to voluntarily influence their responses.
Assuming that any response used to study a low-level
process is not sensitive to response bias is a strong claim
and had to be examined for each response or at least for
each category of response.
Finally, we observed mixed evidences supporting the idea
that social relationships influence the visual perception of
distance. We have, however, to qualify this conclusion
according to the potential implication of a demand bias in
our results. To conclude, if overgeneralizing the explanation
in terms of demand bias to experiments with very different
experimental design is flawed, ignoring the potential
presence of a demand bias in an experiment is also an
important concern.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the “Agence National de la
Recherche” (ANR) under Grant ConstrainPercept.

References
Allen, C. T. (2004). A theory-based approach for improving
demand artifact assessment in advertising
experiments. Journal of Advertising, 33(2), 63–73.

3114

Balcetis, E., & Dunning, D. (2010). Wishful seeing: More
desire objects are seen as closer. Psychological
Science, 21(1), 147–152.
Blackhart, G. C., Brown, K. E., Clark, T., Pierce, D. L., &
Shell, K. (2012). Assessing the adequacy of
postexperimental inquiries in deception research
and the factors that promote participant honesty.
Behavior research methods, 44(1), 24–40.
Chambon, M. (2009). Embodied perception with others’
bodies in mind: Stereotype priming influence on
the perception of spatial environment. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 45(1), 283–287.
Durgin, F. H., Baird, J. A., Greenburg, M., Russell, R.,
Shaughnessy, K., & Waymouth, S. (2009). Who is
being deceived? The experimental demands of
wearing a backpack. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 16(5), 964–969.
Harber, K. D., Yeung, D., & Iacovelli, A. (2011).
Psychosocial resources, threat, and the perception
of distance and height: Support for the resources
and perception model. Emotion, 11(5), 1080–1090.
Hayduk, L. A. (1981). The permeability of personal space.
Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 13(3),
274–287.
Hayduk, L. A. (1983). Personal space: Where we now stand.
Psychological Bulletin, 94(2), 293–335.
Judd, C. M., McClelland, G. H., & Ryan, C. S. (2009). Data
analysis: A model comparison approach.
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Laney, C., Kaasa, S. O., Morris, E. K., Berkowitz, S. R.,
Bernstein, D. M., & Loftus, E. F. (2008). The Red
Herring technique: A methodological response to
the
problem
of
demand
characteristics.
Psychological Research, 72(4), 362–375.
Lessard, D. A., Linkenauger, S. A., & Proffitt, D. R. (2009).
Look before you leap: Jumping ability affects
distance perception. Perception, 38(12), 1863–
1866.
Lourenco, S. F., & Longo, M. R. (2009). The plasticity of
near space: Evidence for contraction. Cognition,
112(3), 451–456.
Morgado, N., Gentaz, E., Guinet, E., Osiurak, F., & PalluelGermain, R. (in press). Within reach but not so
reachable: Obstacles matter in visual perception of
distances. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Morgado, N., Muller, D., Gentaz, E., & Palluel-Germain, R.
(2011). Close to me? The influence of affective
closeness on space perception. Perception, 40(7),
877–879.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than
we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes.
Psychological Review, 84(3), 231–259.
Orne, M. T. (1962). On the social psychology of the
psychological
experiment:
With
particular
reference to demand characteristics and their
implications. American Psychologist; American
Psychologist, 17(11), 776–783.

Pedersen, D. M. (1973). Development of a personal space
measure. Psychological Reports, 32, 527–535.
Proffitt, D. R., & Linkenauger, S. A. (2013). Perception
viewed as a phenotypic expression. In W. Prinz, M.
Beisert, & A. Herwig (Eds.), Tutorials in Action
Science. MIT Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1999). Is vision continuous with cognition?:
The case for cognitive impenetrability of visual
perception. Behavioral and brain sciences, 22(03),
341–365.
Schnall, S., Harber, K. D., Stefanucci, J. K., & Proffitt, D.
R. (2008). Social support and the perception of
geographical slant. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 44(5), 1246–1255.
Smith, N. K., Cacioppo, J. T., Larsen, J. T., & Chartrand, T.
L. (2003). May I have your attention, please:
electrocortical responses to positive and negative
stimuli. Neuropsychologia, 41(2), 171–83.
Retrieved
from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12459215
Stefanucci, J. K., & Geuss, M. N. (2009). Big people, little
world: The body influences size perception.
Perception, 38(12), 1782–1795.
Strohmetz, D. B. (2008). Research Artifacts and the Social
Psychology of Psychological Experiments. Social
and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(2), 861–
877.
Sundstrom, E., & Altman, I. (1976). Interpersonal
relationships and personal space: Research review
and theoretical model. Human Ecology, 4(1), 47–
67.
Warren, W. H., & Whang, S. (1987). Visual guidance of
walking throught apertures: Body scaled
information
for
affordances.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 13(3), 371–383.
Witt, J. K., Proffitt, D. R., & Epstein, W. (2005). Tool use
affects perceived distance, but only when you
intend to use it. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
31(5), 880–888.

3115

