UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dual Processes in Mental State Understanding: Is Theorising Synonymous with Intuitive
Thinking and is Simulation Synonymous with Reflective Thinking?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8p76w4xc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Wilkinson, Meredith
Ball, Linden

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dual Processes in Mental State Understanding:
Is Theorising Synonymous with Intuitive Thinking and is Simulation Synonymous
with Reflective Thinking?
Meredith R Wilkinson (mwilkinson@dmu.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology, School of Applied Social Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, De Montfort University,
The Gateway, Leicester, LE1 9BH, UK

Linden J. Ball (LBall@uclan.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Central Lancashire, Darwin Building, Preston, Lancashire, PR1 2HE, UK

Abstract
In this paper we develop an idea first mooted by Wilkinson, Ball,
and Cooper (2010), which is that the dichotomy between theorybased and simulation-based reasoning in the context of mental
state understanding is synonymous with the distinction between
intuitive and reflective thinking in dual-process accounts of human
reasoning (e.g., Evans, 2010). To support this proposal we draw
upon a range of concepts and findings deriving from both
mainstream reasoning research and from studies of social
cognition. We also consider the implications of our proposal for
the formulation of an integrative approach to understanding
reasoning in all of its many manifestations, whether undertaken for
the attainment of socially-oriented goals or for the purposes of
learning and discovery.
Keywords: Dual Processes, Intuitive thinking, Reflective thinking
Simulation Theory, Theory Theory

Introduction
The question of how we understand and reason about other
people’s minds has resulted in considerable debate within
psychology and philosophy (e.g., Bach, 2011; Wilkinson,
Ball, & Cooper, 2010). Some researchers propose that such
mental state reasoning is achieved through the adoption of
tacit and non-tacit “theories” that are typically based around
conditional inference rules (e.g., Carruthers, 1996). An
example of such a theory might be that if someone fails to
achieve something for which they have worked hard then
they will feel upset. Other researchers, however, posit that
mental state reasoning arises via a process of mental
simulation. Such simulation might involve imagining how
we would feel in a given situation and assuming that others
are sufficiently like us that they will feel the same (e.g.,
Gordon, 1986). An alternative proposal (Goldman, 2006) is
that we take our own beliefs and desires “offline”, input the
beliefs and desires of the other person, and thence reason as
if we had the beliefs and desires of the other person. It is
important to note that when we refer to “simulation” in the
present paper we adopt a restricted notion that relates solely
to the simulation of mental states, whether our own or other
people’s. We acknowledge that simulation can arise when
reasoning in other domains such as design (e.g., see Ball &
Christensen, 2009), but we do not extend our discussion to
this issue. Second, we note that the term “simulation” has
different meanings to different authors. As explained by
Goldman (2006), there is high-level simulation, which refers

to the type of simulation we are discussing in this paper, and
also lower-level simulation, which refers to the functioning
of mirror neurons when engaged in activities such as
imitation. Mirror neurons are neurons that are activated both
when we perform an action and when we observe the same
action being performed (e.g., Gallese & Goldman, 1998).
Although we acknowledge the evidence for the existence of
mirror neurons, we, like others (e.g. Saxe, 2005) are unsure
of the explanatory power of this form of simulation.
Recently, theorists have started to move away from
polarised views as to whether theorising or simulation is
adopted in mental state reasoning and have instead
acknowledged that both processes may be at play. This has
resulted in a flurry of hybrid approaches appearing in the
literature (e.g., Bach, 2011; Mitchell, Currie, & Ziegler,
2009), which not only propose that both theorising and
simulation can occur in mental state reasoning, but which
also claim that there are content-based effects that govern
the mechanism that is triggered. For example, Mitchell et al.
(2009) have argued that we deploy simulation as a “default”
process, using theorising in familiar situations. We have
recently provided empirical support for a hybrid view in a
study that required people to think aloud when reasoning
about counterfactual scenarios pertaining to mental states
(Wilkinson et al., 2010). Participants adopted both
theorising and simulation for these scenarios, with content
effects being evident in that more simulation and less
theorising arose with scenarios involving “controllable”
compared to “uncontrollable” events.
In the present paper we extend an argument first
presented by Wilkinson et al. (2010) to the effect that the
theorising versus simulation distinction is synonymous with
the “intuitive” versus “reflective” distinction as described in
contemporary dual-process theories of thinking and
reasoning (see Evans, 2010, for an overview). According to
the dual-process framework, intuitive thinking is classed as
fast, automatic, high capacity, low effort and independent of
working memory resources, whereas reflective thinking is
classed as slow, controlled, low capacity, high effort and
dependent on working memory. We argue here that these
characteristics of intuitive and reflective thinking align well
with key features of theorising and simulation in contexts
associated with mental state understanding. In subsequent
sections we support this proposal by drawing on concepts

3771

and findings from contemporary reasoning research and
from studies of social cognition. We suggest that
conceptualising theorising and simulation in a dual-process
manner has the potential to enable researchers to move
towards a more compelling account of mental state
reasoning that can be subjected to rigorous empirical
examination. We conclude the paper by addressing issues
that researchers might wish to consider further if they find
merit in our proposed dual-process conceptualisation of the
processes underpinning mental state understanding.

Proposed Parallels: Theorising as Intuition;
Simulation as Reflection
Evans (2010) describes multiple distinctions between
intuitive and reflective reasoning and we take these
distinctions as a foundation for demonstrating how one can
arbitrate between theorising and simulation within a dualprocess framework. The first distinction that Evans notes is
that intuitive reasoning is fast whereas reflective reasoning
is slow. We similarly propose that theorising is a fast
process whereas simulation is slower. This in turn is linked
to the cognitive effort required for theorising and
simulation. Like intuitive reasoning, which Evans proposes
involves low cognitive effort, we view theorising as being
low effort compared to simulation, which is high effort,
much like reflective reasoning. Evans further argues that
intuitive reasoning is high capacity and reflective reasoning
is low capacity. We contend that the same holds for
theorising and simulation, respectively. In addition, for
people to engage in theorising they need to have a store of
pre-existing theories pertaining to others’ mental states, with
these theories being drawn upon in an automatic manner
when primed by particular contexts. Simulation, however,
takes the form of a concurrent and incremental reasoning
process (Goldman, 2006), which will require more
controlled than automatic processing. Again, this distinction
parallels the notion that intuitive reasoning is automatic
whereas reflective reasoning is controlled. Evans has made
further claims concerning the links between intuitive versus
reflective reasoning and working memory. He argues that
reflective reasoning is dependent upon working memory
resources whereas intuitive reasoning is independent of such
resources. We propose that this distinction holds for
theorising and simulation too, with simulation being highly
dependent upon working memory and executive functioning
(e.g., Currie, 1996; Goldman, 2006).

Empirical Evidence for the Proposed Parallels
A robust finding in the reasoning literature concerns the
phenomenon of “belief bias”, which is typically studied in
relation to people’s abilities at syllogistic inference. Within
a standard conclusion-evaluation paradigm participants are
presented with two premises that they should assume are
true and an associated conclusion. They are then required to
determine whether the conclusion follows logically from the
premises. Many studies have shown that participants are
biased by the conclusion’s believability when making

evaluations, rather than reasoning on the basis of the
conclusion’s validity (e.g., see Stupple, Ball, Evans, &
Kamal-Smith, 2011).
Numerous dual-process accounts have been forwarded as
to why belief-bias occurs (see Ball, 2011, for a review). For
the purposes of our argument, however, we draw on the
“selective processing model” of Evans (e.g., 2000), itself an
example of a more general class of dual-process models
referred to as “default-interventionist” theories (Evans,
2007). According to the selective processing model of belief
bias, intuitive reasoning cues a response that may or may
not be overridden by a reflective process. The default,
intuitive response is to accept or reject conclusions based
solely on their believability. If, however, reflective
reasoning is applied then this reasoning is influenced by the
conclusion’s belief status such that participants will search
for confirming models when a conclusion is believable and
for disconfirming models when it is unbelievable. Whether a
logically correct evaluation ensues for a problem is,
therefore, dependent on the interplay between the intuitive
and reflective processes, with certain problems (e.g., those
with invalid but believable conclusions) being especially
difficult because the belief status of the conclusion biases
both the default response and the confirmation-oriented
reflective response (Stupple et al., 2011).
We propose that in tasks of mental state reasoning people
can be similarly biased by their personal beliefs. This is
demonstrated by the so-called “curse of knowledge”,
whereby participants are unable to pass false belief tasks
because they cannot inhibit viewing a situation from their
own perspective (e.g., Birch & Bloom, 2007). In such tasks
(e.g., Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985) participants
(typically young children) are introduced to two
protagonists in a room, both of whom are aware of a
particular state of affairs, such as a marble in a basket. Then
one protagonist leaves the room and the remaining
protagonist moves the marble to a box. The participant is
asked, “Where will the protagonist who left the room look
for the marble upon returning?” If the individual is able to
reason about another person’s beliefs then they should state
that the protagonist will look for the marble in the basket.
Individuals who fall foul of the curse of knowledge will
respond by saying that the protagonist will look in the box
(where they themselves know the marble is currently
located), demonstrating a form of belief-biased reasoning.
We suggest that overcoming this bias, especially when
encountering such a situation for the first time, requires the
deployment of a controlled process of mental simulation in
which the reasoner takes their own beliefs off-line and
reasons from the beliefs of the protagonist (e.g., Mitchell et
al., 2009). This is equivalent, we propose, to the way that
people can engage in reflective reasoning in an effort to
overcome belief bias in syllogistic reasoning (Stupple et al.,
2011), although, as noted above, even reflective reasoning
does not guarantee success since it may itself be biased.
We now return to Evans’ (2010) description of the
characteristics of intuitive versus reflective reasoning in

3772

order to assess the evidence for the proposed parallels
between dual-process views and the theorising/simulation
distinction in mental state reasoning. Evans argues that
intuitive reasoning is fast whereas reflective reasoning is
slow, a view that we propose aligns well with the
theorising/simulation distinction. Evidence for our claim
comes from Atkinson, Bell, and Feeney (2009), who
examined the influence of a speeded-response requirement
on how participants reasoned about counterfactual scenarios
that were constructed to tap into two robust effects: (1) the
“action effect”, which is a tendency to regret action more
than inaction in the short term (e.g., Kahneman & Tversky,
1982), with the reverse being the case in the long term (e.g.,
Gilovich & Medvec, 1994); and (2) the “temporal order
effect” (e.g., Byrne, Segura, Culhane, Tasso, & Berrocal,
2000), which is the tendency to attribute more negative
affect to the person committing the final act in a sequence of
actions when a negative outcome occurs. Atkinson et al.
(2009) asked participants to reason about the presented
scenario, which entailed reading a vignette describing two
agents in a negative situation, either in a speeded condition,
in which they had to answer as quickly as possible, or in a
non-speeded condition, in which they were able to take as
long as they wished. Whereas the temporal order effect was
unaffected by the speed manipulation, the action effect was
disrupted, with the actor selected significantly less in the
speeded compared to the non-speeded condition. In relation
to the temporal order manipulation we propose that
participants uniformly access a “theory” that if a person acts
last in a sequence of events leading to a negative outcome
then they will feel worse. However, in the case of the action
effect, we propose that participants need to run simulations
of the mental states of both protagonists to evaluate the
interplay between action/inaction and the time that events
arose. Such an evaluation process is time-consuming
relative to accessing a pre-stored theory, which would
explain why the speeded-response requirement only affects
the action effect and not the temporal order effect. These
findings further demonstrate how a simulation may overturn
an initial theory. The fact that the actor was chosen less
often in the speeded compared to the non-speeded condition
suggests that people held an initial theory that the non-actor
would feel more regret, but when afforded the time to run
simulations they could overturn this initial response, much
as reflective reasoning can overturn an initial belief-biased
response in syllogistic inference (Stupple et al., 2011).
The fact that simulation seems to be slower than
theorising also speaks to likely discrepancies in the
cognitive effort required for these reasoning types. We
propose that theorising is low effort, like intuitive reasoning,
whereas simulation is high effort, like reflective reasoning.
As such, simulation will be dependent on general cognitive
resources, including executive functioning and cognitive
inhibition (e.g., Currie, 1996; Goldman, 2006) whereas
theorising will work independent of such mechanisms. In
addition, simulation will be dependent upon working
memory whereas theorising will not. Evidence in support of

this claim comes from a study using the “director task” (Lin,
Keysar, & Epley, 2010), where participants are presented
with a grid that contains slots that can be seen by both
themselves and a director, who is actually a confederate.
Some items, however, are only visible to the participant,
since they are occluded from the director’s view.
Participants are instructed what object to move. On critical
trials the perspective between director and participant differs
so the director may say “move the small mouse” when there
are three mice and only the smallest one can be seen by the
participant. This requires the participant to engage in
simulation by shifting their perspective to that of the
director’s in order to fulfill the instruction correctly.
Importantly, Lin et al. (2010) found that participants with
higher working memory capacities performed better on the
director task than those with lower working memory
capacities. This provides a link between simulation and
working memory that bears strong similarities to the link
between reflective reasoning and working memory. For
example, De Neys (2006) has shown that individuals with
greater working memory resources perform better on belieforiented syllogistic reasoning tasks, and Stanovich, West,
and Toplak (2011) have argued that reflective reasoning is
dependent upon executive functioning resources. We
propose that just as the intuitive/reflective distinction is
associated with differential involvement of working
memory, so too is the theorising/simulation distinction.
Theorists proposing dual-process accounts of reasoning
have also recently begun to draw upon neuroscientific
evidence to support their claims. For example, Goel (2003)
has presented evidence for “dual pathways” in syllogistic
reasoning, with intuitive processes associated with the
frontal-temporal pathway and reflective processes
associated with the parietal pathway. In a review article,
Goel (2007) acknowledges that the question of which neural
regions are responsible for particular types of processing is
one that has demonstrated differing findings, but that the
evidence nevertheless points towards a fractionated system
for deductive reasoning rather than a unitary one.
Neuroscientific evidence for theorising and simulation in
mental state reasoning is equally complex and has been
criticised for failing to provide a clear differentiation
between brain regions specialised for such processing (e.g.,
Apperly, 2008; Wilkinson & Ball, 2012). Nevertheless,
findings are suggestive. For example, Mitchell, Banaji, and
Macrae (2005), found that the ventral medial prefrontal
cortex was activated when participants made judgements
concerning facial expressions. This provides evidence of a
partial locus for theory-based reasoning, since an intuitive
judgement is all that would be required for this task, with no
simulation being necessitated. We believe that our claims
for the intuitive/theorising parallels here are strengthened by
the observation that this brain region is also known to be
activated in syllogistic reasoning tasks when participants
provide belief-biased responses (e.g., Goel & Dolan, 2003).
As for simulation in mental state reasoning, it is
admittedly not easy to locate a specific brain region

3773

responsible for such processing. Part of the difficulty
originates from the differing conceptualisations of
simulation within the literature, with some theorists (e.g.,
Gallese & Goldman, 1998) arguing for lower-level
simulation (Goldman, 2006). Studies of higher-level
simulation in paradigms such as the director task suggest the
involvement of a number of brain regions, including the
superior dorsal medial prefrontal cortex and the
superior/middle temporal sulci extending to the extrastriate
body area and the posterior superior temporal sulcus
(Dumontheil, Küster, Apperly, & Blakemore, 2010).
Admittedly, the evidence for the localisation of simulation is
not clear-cut, but again is suggestive of distinct brain
regions being associated with theorising and simulation.
Problem Presentation
Initial stage of pre-attentive theorising

Theorising

Simulating

Conflict Resolution

Generation of Final Response
Figure 1: A schematic representation of a hybrid dualprocess model of theorising and simulating.

Issues Arising from the Proposed Parallelism
In the previous section we outlined how Evans’ (2010)
distinction between intuitive and reflective thinking can map
onto the concepts of theorising and simulation in mental
state reasoning. However, there is still much for theorists to
consider if they see benefits in examining such apparent
parallels more extensively. In this respect we note that
reasoning researchers have now begun to move away from
normative accounts of human reasoning towards a
descriptivist agenda (e.g., Elqayam & Evans, 2011). We
generally support this approach and suggest that using
theorising and simulation within a descriptivist dual-process
framework affords an opportunity to develop a rich and
innovative programme of empirical and theoretical research.
However, several questions need to be borne in mind when
pursuing such a project, which we consider below.
A first, critical question is this: exactly how do theorising
and simulation function within a dual-process framework?
The reasoning literature contains both sequential and
parallel dual-process models of phenomena such as belief
bias. Sequential models of the default-interventionist variety
propose that intuitive reasoning generates a default response

and that reflective reasoning serves either to confirm or
override this initial judgement (e.g., Evans, 2006). Parallel
models (e.g., Sloman, 2002; Stupple & Ball, 2008) propose
that intuitive and reflective reasoning compete in generating
a response. Evans (2009) has also proposed a “hybrid” dualprocess model, which combines sequential and parallel
processes. We think it likely that theorising and simulation
can operate both sequentially and in parallel such that a
hybrid model may capture key subtleties most effectively
(see Figure 1). We propose an initial stage of pre-attentive
theorising, whereby representational structures such as
scripts and schemas are attended to before a decision is
made to apply further theorising or simulation. If a theory is
insufficient for generating an inferential response then
people can switch to first-person or third-person simulation,
with the possibility of returning to theorising. A simulation
might also override an initial theory-based response.
Furthermore, we follow Mitchell et al. (2009) in suggesting
that there will be occasions when an appropriate theory is
unavailable, such that people will have to engage in
simulation to make some kind of inference. Our model
therefore operates in a highly content-dependent manner.
Undoubtedly, empirical evidence needs to be provided for
the model presented in this paper. In fact, this model grew
out of a series of experiments that we conducted, including
one reported by Wilkinson et al. (2010), which showed that
people simulate more when reasoning about scenarios
involving controllable rather than uncontrollable events,
with the reverse pattern for theorising. We propose that our
model can readily accommodate such evidence for contentdependency in mental-state reasoning. We suggest that more
simulation is evoked for controllable events because
participants are more readily able to engage in hypothetical
thinking and planning in relation to such scenarios, whereas
in the case of uncontrollable events participants are likely to
engage in the extraction of a theory since there is little more
that they are able to do. Wilkinson et al. (2010) also found
that participants often switched between theorising and
simulation within the same response. This finding aligns
well with Figure 1, which can accommodate this process
and the inter-dependence of theorising and simulation in
that participants may start out theorising and then adopt
simulation to develop their answer further. Furthermore,
Wilkinson et al. (2010) noted that participants’ theory-based
responses tended to be much quicker than their simulationbased responses. This is explicable given that the extraction
of theories is assumed to arise in a high-capacity but loweffort manner, whereas simulation is assumed to be more
involved, requiring a longer and more controlled reasoning
process (e.g., Goldman, 2006). We acknowledge, however,
that such claims would benefit from corroboration via the
deployment of chronometric measures.
A further important issue in relation to theorising and
simulation processes within a hybrid model is whether these
processes operate independently or whether there are
dependencies, with the output of one process determining
the likelihood of deploying the other process (see Elqayam,

3774

2009, for a discussion of this issue in the context of dualprocess theories of reasoning). It is too soon to speculate on
this matter, although what has been established in our own
research using think-aloud techniques is that people are
readily inclined to switch between theorising and simulating
within the same reasoning task (Wilkinson et al., 2010).
This evidence is at least suggestive of a degree of
interdependence between the two processes.
We finally turn to the question of what happens in our
proposed model when conflict arises between theorising and
simulation. For example, imagine a scenario in which a
student fails an important assignment and where our
inferential goal is to understand what they might be feeling.
Using theorising we might infer that the person will be
upset, since if someone fails to pass an assessment they are
likely to be distraught. However, if we are also presented
with the information that the individual spent every evening
drinking in the pub during the week prior to the assignment
deadline, we may run a simulation of the person’s mental
state to draw the conclusion that the assignment was not of
much importance to them. We propose that when such
conflict arises a “type 3” conflict-resolution process comes
into play (see Evans, 2009). This process would arise
subsequent to processes of theorising and/or simulation, but
before the generation of a final response. In this way it
would be possible for simulation to override a theory-based
decision when conflict occurs between the two processes,
much as reflective reasoning can override a belief-oriented
response in syllogistic inference tasks (e.g., see Ball, 2011).

Conclusions
We have presented arguments for why theory-based
reasoning can be viewed as synonymous with intuitive
reasoning and simulation-based reasoning can be viewed as
synonymous with reflective reasoning within a dual-process
framework. This argument was originally advanced by
Wilkinson et al. (2010), but we have extended it here so as
to provide a more complete and compelling explanation of
the parallels between these two hitherto separate conceptual
dichotomies. We have additionally considered some of the
key questions that need to be addressed by researchers who
see value in exploring these suggested parallels further.
Our proposals also resonate with recent calls for greater
integration between theorising and simulation accounts of
social cognition (Bach, 2011). Bohl and van den Bos argue
that the general notion of “theory of mind” is primarily
focused on type 2 processing (reflective thinking) rather
than type 1 processing (intuitive thinking). We contest this
point and instead propose that the traditional distinction
between theory-based and simulation-based inferences is
best viewed as aligning with the intuitive (type 1) versus
reflective (type 2) distinction.
In terms of the development of dual-processes, Evans
(2011) has stated that he does not wish to propose that
reflective reasoning replaces intuitive reasoning, but rather
that the two co-occur in adulthood. This proposal is similar
to Mitchell et al.’s (2009) claim that theorising and

simulation operate side-by-side in adulthood. Of course, it is
difficult at this point to map out a developmental
progression of intuitive and reflective reasoning. Mitchell et
al. propose that we start out by simulating and Bach (2011)
has suggested that theories may grow out of repeated
simulations. These ideas initially seem counterintuitive,
since simulation is so dependent upon general cognitive
resources (Currie, 1996; Goldman, 2006), which tend not to
be well developed in young children. However, the claim is
not that children necessarily make correct inferences;
indeed false belief studies show that they start out by giving
incorrect responses by answering from their own
perspective (Mitchell et al., 2009). When it comes to the
development of intuitive and reflective reasoning the pattern
should, of course, align fully with that for theorising and
simulation, with reflective reasoning developing first and
intuitive reasoning later, which does seem to capture aspects
of the development of expertise. For example, when one
first learns to drive a car the process is deliberate and
controlled, but after time things become automated. We
propose that this represents a shift from deliberate reflection
to automatic intuitive reasoning.
We trust that by advancing an account of how theorising
and simulation align with intuitive and reflective thinking
we have provided inspiration for future empirical work and
theoretical development and will enliven future discussion
concerning the processes involved in mental state reasoning.

Acknowledgements
We thank Rachel Cooper for previous discussions relating
to the ideas presented in this paper. We also thank the ESRC
for funding the first author’s interdisciplinary PhD in
Psychology and Philosophy at Lancaster University, UK.

References
Apperly, I. A. (2008). Beyond simulation-theory and
theory-theory: Why social cognitive neuroscience should
use its own concepts to study “theory of mind”.
Cognition, 107, 266-283.
Atkinson, L., Bell, D., & Feeney, A. (2009). The
relationship between counterfactual thinking and
emotional reactions to event outcomes: Does one account
fit all? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 724-728.
Bach, T. (2011). Structure-mapping: Directions from
simulation to theory. Philosophical Psychology, 24, 2351.
Ball, L. J. (2011). The dynamics of reasoning: Chronometric
analysis and dual-process theories. In K. I Manktelow, D.
E. Over & S. Elqayam. (Eds.) The science of reason: A
Festschrift for Jonathan St. B. T. Evans (pp. 283-307).
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Ball, L. J., & Christensen, B. T. (2009). Analogical reasoning
and mental simulation in design: Two strategies linked to
uncertainty resolution. Design Studies, 30, 169-186.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does
the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition, 21,
37-46.

3775

Birch, S. A. J., & Bloom, P. (2007). The curse of knowledge
in reasoning about false beliefs. Psychological Science,
18, 382-386.
Bohl, V., & van den Bos, W. (2012). Toward an integrative
account of social cognition: Marrying theory of mind and
interactionism to study the interplay of type 1 and type 2
processes. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 1-15.
Byrne, R. M. J., Segura, S., Culhane, R., Tasso, A., &
Berrocal, P. (2000). The temporality effect in
counterfactual thinking about what might have been.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 264-281.
Carruthers, P. (1996). Autism as mind-blindness: An
elaboration and partial defence. In P. Carruthers & P. K.
Smith (Eds.) Theories of theories of mind (pp. 257-273).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Currie, G. (1996). Simulation-theory, theory-theory and the
evidence from autism. In P. Carruthers & P. K. Smith
(Eds.) Theories of theories of mind (pp. 242-256)
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
De Neys, W. (2006). Dual processing in reasoning two
systems but one reasoner. Psychological Science, 17, 428433.
Dumontheil, I., Küster, O., Apperly, I. A., & Blakemore, S.
(2010). Taking perspective into account in a
communicative task. Neuroimage, 52, 1574-1583.
Elqayam, S. (2009). Models of dependence and
independence: A two-dimensional architecture of dual
processing. Thinking & Reasoning, 15, 377-387.
Elqayam, S., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (2011). Subtracting
“ought” from “is”: Descriptivism versus normativism in
the study of human thinking. Behavioral & Brain
Sciences, 34, 233-248.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2000). Thinking and believing in J.
Garcia-Madruga, N. Carriedo, & M. J. González-Labra
(Eds.) Mental models in reasoning (pp. 41-56). Madrid:
UNED.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2006). The heuristic-analytic theory of
reasoning: Extension and evaluation. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 13, 378-395.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2007). On the resolution of conflict in
dual process theories of reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 13, 321-339.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2009). How many dual-process theories
do we need? One, two, or many? In J. St. B. T. Evans &
K Frankish (Eds.) In two minds: Dual processes and
beyond. (pp. 33-54). New York, US: Oxford University
Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2010). Thinking twice: Two minds in one
brain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2011). Dual-process theories of
reasoning: Contemporary issues and developmental
applications. Developmental Review, 31, 86-102.
Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2, 493-501.

Gilovich, T., & Medvec, V. H. (1994). The temporal pattern
to the experience of regret. Journal of Personality &
Social Psychology, 67, 357-365.
Goel, V. (2003). Evidence for dual neural pathways for
syllogistic reasoning. Psychologica, 32, 301-309.
Goel, V. (2007). Anatomy of deductive reasoning. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 11, 435-441.
Goel, V., & Dolan, R. J. (2003). Explaining modulation of
reasoning by belief. Cognition, 87, B11-B22.
Goldman, A. I. (2006). Simulating minds: The philosophy,
psychology and neuroscience of mindreading. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gordon, R. M. (1986). Folk psychology as simulation. Mind
& Language, 1, 158-171.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The psychology of
preferences. Scientific American, 246, 160-173.
Lin, S., Keysar, B., & Epley, N. (2010). Reflexively
mindblind: Using theory of mind to interpret behavior
requires effortful attention. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 46, 551-556.
Mitchell, J. P., Banaji, M. R., & Macrae, C. N. (2005). The
link between social cognition and self-referential thought
in the medial prefrontal cortex. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 17, 1306-1315.
Mitchell, P., Currie, G., & Ziegler, F. (2009). Two routes to
perspective: Simulation and rule-use as approaches to
mentalizing. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 27, 513-543.
Saxe, R. (2005). Against simulation: the argument from
error. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 174-179.
Sloman, S. A. (2002). Two systems of reasoning. In T.
Gilovich, D. Griffin & D. Kahneman (Eds.). Heuristics
and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp.
379-396). New York, US: Cambridge University Press.
Stanovich, K. E., West, R. F., & Toplak, M. E. (2011). The
complexity of developmental predictions from dual
process models. Developmental Review, 31, 103-118.
Stupple, E. J. N., & Ball, L. J. (2008). Belief–logic conflict
resolution in syllogistic reasoning: Inspection-time
evidence for a parallel process model. Thinking &
Reasoning, 14, 168-181.
Stupple, E. J. N., Ball, L. J., Evans, J. St. B. T., & KamalSmith, E. (2011). When logic and belief collide:
Individual differences in reasoning times support a
selective processing model. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 23, 931-941.
Wilkinson, M. R., & Ball, L. J. (2012). Why studies of
autism spectrum disorders have failed to resolve the
theory theory versus simulation theory debate. Review of
Philosophy and Psychology, 3, 263-291.
Wilkinson, M. R., Ball, L. J., & Cooper R. (2010).
Arbitrating between Theory-Theory and Simulation
Theory: Evidence from a think-aloud study of
counterfactual reasoning. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.) Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 10081013). Austin, Texas: Cognitive Science Society.

3776

