UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dyadic Cooperation Enhances Retrieval and Recall of Crossword Solutions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5ck4z7p6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Szary, Janelle
Dale, Rick

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dyadic Cooperation Enhances Retrieval and Recall of Crossword Solutions
Janelle Szary (jszary@ucmerced.edu)
Rick Dale (rdale@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced, 5200 North Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract
The benefits of collaborative activities have been
demonstrated in many domains, but there remain mixed
results across several others as to whether collaborative
groups can achieve greater performance than individuals, and
can achieve greater performance than nominal group
comparisons. Here we develop a task that is especially suited
to testing collaborative gains. In a collaborative crossword
game, two individuals solved puzzle questions either alone or
collaboratively through discussion. When talking, participants
solved more puzzle questions, solved them more quickly and
accurately, and in general seemed to recall the words from
collaborative contexts better than from matched independent
contexts. By extracting the audio of their interaction, we also
demonstrate interesting relationships between spoken
interaction and performance on the collaborative tasks. This
task environment further substantiates the notion that, in the
context of knowledge retrieval, two heads are better than one.
Keywords: Dyadic cooperation; collaborative recall.

Introduction
Knowledge can be thought of as a probabilistic distribution.
As samples are repeatedly taken from this distribution, a
more complete picture emerges of the underlying
knowledge. Often, as is implied by the phrase “the wisdom
of crowds”, the probability distribution is quite accurate
with respect to its information representation—so that as
samples are collected, an increasingly accurate picture
emerges. For example, when eight-hundred attendees of a
stock and poultry exhibition were asked to estimate the
weight of a large ox, the mean of their estimates was very
accurate (Galton, 1907). The error of the mean estimate was
in fact much lower than the mean error of each individual’s
estimate. This “wisdom of crowds” effect has continued to
be demonstrated in a number of domains: aggregate
financial forecasts tend to be better than individual forecasts
(Clemen, 1989), polls of the audience in game shows tend to
reveal correct answers (Surowiecki, 2004).
The probabilistic nature of knowledge is also apparent
when an individual accesses his or her own knowledge over
time. When individuals were asked to make quantitative
estimates of worldly information on two separate instances,
the average of their estimates tended to be more accurate
than either individual estimate (Vul & Pashler, 2008). When
multiple individuals work interactively on a joint decision,
however, the “two heads are better than one” intuition does
not always hold. In general, the literature on group
performance shows that groups rarely outperform their best
members—the whole is rarely greater than the sum of its
parts (Bahrami et al., 2010; Hastie & Kameda, 2005; Kerr &

Tindale, 2004). In fact, across a large number of contexts,
individuals tend to remember less when they’re working
with others (Rajaram & Pereira-Pasarin, 2010).
In these studies, subjects are usually presented with a list
of items and must study and reproduce the items either
individually or as a group. On average, groups tend to recall
more items than individuals, but recall fewer items than
nominal groups (consisting of the pooled, non-overlapping
items recalled by individuals working alone; Barnier,
Sutton, Harris & Wilson, 2008). That is, individuals
working in a group context don’t perform at their full
potential. The leading explanation for this observation is the
retrieval disruption hypothesis (Basden, Basden, Bryner &
Thomas, 1997). According to this hypothesis, individuals
use their own, idiosyncratic, strategies to organize and
encode information. When recall takes place in an
interactive context, the output of one member disrupts the
retrieval strategies of the other(s), inhibiting recall
performance.
The large body of empirical work providing evidence for
the detrimental effects of collaboration on memory is
unified by the term social contagion research (Barnier,
Sutton, Harris & Wilson, 2008; and see Rajaram & PereiraPasarin, 2010, for a review). In addition to disrupting the
recall of correct items, collaborators can even introduce the
recall of incorrect items. When a confederate collaborator
misleadingly recalled an incorrect item, participants later
recalled that item themselves, as if it had been in the
original recall list (Roediger, Meade & Bergman, 2001).
This effect extends beyond laboratory recall studies, as
individuals can often misremember important life events.
Loftus has worked extensively on issues surrounding the
fallibility of memory, especially as it applies to false
memories and eyewitnesses, showing that social context can
significantly impact the accuracy of memory (Loftus, 1996).
A related example of the negative consequences of social
context is groupthink—a phenomenon where groups of
people may end up making poor decisions, generally
because of a motivation to reduce conflict and reach
consensus, therefore failing to continue the search for an
optimal solution (see Esser, 1998). This collaborative
inhibition may be related to both retrieval disruption or
social loafing (reduced effort or motivation when in a group
context; Weldon, Blair & Huebesch, 2000).
Despite the abundance of theories and supporting
evidence for social contagion, there exists an intuitive
feeling that we should benefit from working with others. In
addition to social contagion research, Barnier and
colleagues (2008) define two other approaches to

3492

investigating the effects of social context on memory:
collaborative recall, and transactive memory. These
approaches tend to seek out the beneficial effects of social
context. In collaborative recall research, the social context
is conceptualized as part of a broader environmental and
situational context which can facilitate an individual’s recall
through priming. This priming could be detrimental, such as
in retrieval disruption, or could be beneficial through cueing
or triggering of correct information.
Bahrami and colleagues (2010) found that group
performance interacted dynamically with social context.
They designed a low-level perceptual decision-making task
where members of a dyad reported their own decisions then
agreed on a joint decision to report. When members of a
dyad had unequal performance levels, the dyad tended to do
worse overall than the better-performing member. However,
performance exceeded aggregate individual performance
when members had equal visual sensitivities and could
communicate openly to discuss their observations (Bahrami
et al., 2010), and when they used similar task-relevant
linguistic forms (Fusaroli et al., 2012). In order to come to
an agreement regarding an ambiguous low-level stimulus,
members of a dyad must attempt to communicate subjective
and graded confidence levels. The combination of
information for higher-level decision-making tasks, such as
those involving knowledge and memory, may be very
different. For example, if two friends are attempting to
recall the Spanish word for “countryside” from a long-ago
language course, one may offer: “I think it was something
like camping”, which may trigger the other to remember the
correct “campo.” In this sense, members of a dyad can
prime each other and iteratively build greater information.
Finally, in transactive memory research, the group is
conceptualized as the unit of analysis: individuals are
components of a coupled, distributed memory system
(Wegner, 1987). In these transactive memory systems,
group members may share the tasks of encoding, storing, or
retrieving information in any combination. Wegner (1987)
notes that memories are connected concepts—such as the
concept “tomato” with the concept “red”—and these
connections are formed through encoding, which can be
done at the group level. As an example, consider a couple
discussing the odd behavior of a mutual friend. The male
partner mentions that their mutual friend seemed quiet at a
recent party, while the female partner instead thought he
seemed overly friendly. This reminds the man that their
mutual friend had been thinking about splitting from his
wife, which leads the couple to conclude that their mutual
friend had been flirting with the female partner, and
subsequently acted awkwardly around the male partner
(from Wegner, Giuliano & Hertel, 1985). Through
collaboration (discussion), the couple in this example was
able to bind information and encode a quantitatively and
qualitatively different memory than either would have
achieved individually. Conceptualizing the distributed
storage of memories is more intuitive: We already store
much of our information externally (books, to-do lists, smart

phones), and in much the same way we could rely on a
partner to remember something for us (essentially
‘outsourcing’ the storage of that information to another
person).
From the perspectives of both the collaborative recall and
the transactional memory traditions, the performance of a
group can come to be greater than the performance of its
members. In this paper, we work from these intersecting
perspectives to investigate the potential benefit of working
with two minds instead of one on a knowledge-based trivia
task. Individuals are randomly assigned to dyads and given
trivia questions, which they solve either independently or
collaboratively. These general knowledge trivia questions
provided a set of stimuli on which subjects’ knowledge
varied widely, and allowed for rich discussions during
collaborative sessions. Following four rounds of ten trivia
questions, subjects were given individual recall tests for the
answers to the preceding trivia questions.
As described by Hare (1976), research on social influence
can be characterized by two factors: the “social climate”,
which could be either individuals collaborating or
individuals working independently; and the “task
completion”, which is a measure of either the group product
or the individual product. Consistent with previous work on
joint performance measures (i.e., Hill, 1982), the current
study design allowed us to first compare [1] the group
product of collaborating individuals (group performance on
collaborative trivia rounds) to [2] the individual product of
individuals working alone (individual performances on
independent trivia rounds). The recall task allowed us to
compare [1] the individual product of collaborating
individuals (individual recall of trivia items from
collaborative rounds) to [2] the individual product of
individuals working alone (individual recall of items from
independent rounds).
By analyzing task performance and efficiency at the
group and individual levels, and resultant memory at the
individual level, we substantiate the beneficial gain of
collaborative cognitive performance. Our results suggest
that in knowledge-based tasks, two heads are indeed better
than one.

Methods
Sixty two participants were recruited from a subject pool of
University of California, Merced, undergraduate students
who participated for course credit. The participants had an
average age of 19.6 (SD = 1.7) and were mostly female (16
male; 46 female). The participants were grouped into thirtyone dyads. Each dyad participated in four rounds of a trivia
game, where each round of ten questions was to be solved
individually or collaboratively, followed by a surprise recall
task after all four rounds.
Participants were seated directly across from each other at
a small table with IBM ThinkPad laptop computers. This
allowed each participant to have a private workspace during
the independent tasks, but also enabled easy communication
during the collaborative tasks. Participants wore Shure Beta

3493

= 8), fill-in-the-blank (FITB, n = 8), categories (n = 2), and
sayings (n = 4). The examples in Table 1 were each used.

20

40

60

80

	  

0

	  
Correctly Answered (%)

54 supercardiod microphone headsets, and their
conversations were recorded using an M-Audio MobilePre
recording interface and Audacity software.

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Question

Figure 2: Question norming. Potential questions are ranked
by the percentage of participants who answered correctly.
Dotted lines show the question rankings we used.

Figure 1: Experimental setup.

Materials
Trivia questions were collected from a variety of crossword
puzzles from www.bestcrosswords.com. Questions were all
straight-forward (i.e., not “cryptic”) type clues. In total, 140
questions were collected with types that were categorized as
culture (n = 23), general knowledge (n = 21), definitions (n
= 27), logic (n = 22), fill-in-the-blank (FITB, n = 20),
categories (n = 16), and sayings (n = 11). Table 1 gives
examples of each type.
Table 1: Example trivia types.
Type
Culture
Knowledge
Definition
Logic
FITB
Categories
Sayings

Question
“Kill Bill” star Thurman
U.S. spy organization
Gift to charity
Hour subunits
“If all ____ fails”
Tulips and irises, for example
“Rolling in dough” meaning

	  

Answer
Uma
CIA
Donation
Minutes
Else
Flowers
Rich

The trivia questions were normalized for difficulty. 449
University of California, Merced undergraduate students
with an average age of 18.4 (SD = 1.4; 200 male, 249
female) were given surveys containing trivia questions.
There were 10 versions of the survey, each of which
contained 14 trivia questions with lines indicating the
number of letters the answers. Participants were allowed to
leave answers blank, but were instructed to do the best they
could to answer to each question, guessing when possible.
Results showed that questions varied widely in difficulty
(see Fig. 2). For the present study, 40 questions were chosen
that were answered correctly about half of the time. As
shown in Figure 2, these trivia questions were solved by 4577% of participants, and they contained all types: culture (n
= 6), general knowledge (n = 8), definitions (n = 4), logic (n

Trivia Program The experimental interface was
programmed by the authors using Adobe Flash CS5. The
program led participants through four experimental blocks
(rounds) containing ten questions each. For each round, the
program instructed participants to work either individually
(I) or collaboratively (C). During collaborative sessions,
participants were asked to work together and discuss each
answer as a team. Across all subjects, the order of questions
and condition (I-C-I-C or C-I-C-I) was randomized and
counterbalanced between dyads, but was kept the same
within each dyad.
Each question was provided alone on the screen with a
sequence of blank squares indicating the number of letters in
the answer. The space-bar was used to submit answers, and
subjects were given feedback about their submission. If
correct, a green checkmark appeared briefly before moving
on to the next question. If incorrect or missing, a red “X”
marked the incorrect or blank boxes. Subjects were given 20
seconds to correctly answer each question (with as many
tries as necessary) before being automatically moved on to
the next question. Between blocks, subjects were given the
new condition and asked to wait for their partners before
moving on. Progress was indicated using flip cards with
“Working” on one side, and “Ready when you are!” on the
other (see Fig. 1).

Procedure
Participants were given five minutes to introduce
themselves at the beginning of the study, in order to
facilitate comfort and camaraderie (consistent with previous
findings that more familiar groups tend to perform better on
collaborative tasks; Barnier et al., 2008). After this brief
familiarization period, headsets were fitted and the Flash
program was started. The program began with instructions,
which the researcher read aloud and subjects read on their
respective screens, then the researcher left the room. After

3494

!1.0
!0.6

!4000

6

!0.4
!0.2

!2000

0.0

0

2

2000

0.2

0
!2

Ranked Dyads
Figure 3: Collaboration gains for the following measures:
(a) average number of correct answers, (b) average time
taken to achieve a correct answer (ms), (c) average number
of incorrect attempts, per question. Gain for each dyad is
calculated as the difference between aggregate performance
on collaborative versus non-collaborative rounds. All points
above x=0 show dyads benefitting from collaboration. For
illustration, dotted lines show median ranked dyads.

Recall

Trivia Performance
On all three aggregate measures, collaborative dyads
outperformed their non-collaborative counterparts. Out of
the twenty questions presented in each condition, the
average correctly answered by collaborative dyads was
14.94 (SD = 3.77), while the average correctly answered by
non-collaborative dyads was 12.35 (SD = 3.11). This
difference was significant, t(30) = 5.58, p < .0001. Dyads
were also faster to submit correct answers while they were
collaborating (M = 5527ms, SD = 1212ms) as compared to
when they were not collaborating (M = 6611ms, SD =
1181ms), and this difference was also significant, t(30) =
3.17, p < .005. Finally, the number of incorrect attempts
made before achieving a correct answer was smaller for
collaborative dyads (M = .26, SD = .16) than for noncollaborative dyads (M = .61, SD = .27), which is also
significant, t(30) = 7.19, p < .0001.
Thus, working collaboratively conferred benefits on all
three measures of task performance: it increased the
number, speed, and accuracy of successful submissions.
Figure 3 shows the performance gain results, where gain for
each dyad is calculated as average performance on
collaborative rounds, minus average performance on noncollaborative rounds.
1

4

Results
Thirty-one dyads participated in the experiment, but one
dyad’s audio was not recorded due to equipment error.
Thus, task performance results are given for thirty-one
dyads, while the audio results reflect thirty dyads.
For each question, the Flash program recorded (1)
whether a correct answer was submitted before time ran out.
If a correct answer was achieved, it also recorded (2) how
much time elapsed from the beginning of the trial to the
submission of the correct answer, in milliseconds, and (3)
the number of incorrect attempts before the final, correct
submission. Because each participant worked on his own
computer, two independent data sets were collected for each
dyad. For purposes of data analysis, results for each trial
were averaged over the members of the dyad. These
aggregated results were used to compare each dyad’s
performance on individual versus collaborative rounds.
Dyads are independently sampled (though, individual
performance is not, as one is not independent of one’s
partner), and hence at the dyad level, conditions (I vs. C)
can be compared using paired-samples t-tests (unless
otherwise noted below).1

c

!0.8

b

8

a

!6000

completion of the four trivia rounds, subjects removed their
headsets and summoned the researcher. The trivia program
was closed and each subject was given a blank text editor.
Subjects were instructed to recall and type as many of the
answers to the previous trivia questions as possible. They
were given five minutes and asked to work individually.

We also examined individual-level performance across most
measures, and results are consistent with the dyad-level analyses.

The list of recalled items for each participant was first
checked for accuracy and incorrect recalls were removed.
This was relatively rare, however, as incorrect recalls
represented only 5.7% of the total recalled items across
participants (36 out of 629). Each recalled item was
matched to the round and condition in which it was
encountered. At the group level (i.e., averaged within
dyads), the average number of items recalled from each
round was, respectively, 1.60 (SD = .74), 2.27 (SD = 1.35),
1.97 (SD = .91), 3.71 (SD = 1.57). Items from the last round
were recalled significantly more often than any other round,
t(30) = 4.25, p < .001, indicating a serial position effect of
recency. Although the mean recall from the first round was
the lowest, there was also evidence of a serial position effect
from primacy. This pattern is shown in Figure 4, which
plots the number of recalled words from each round, binned
by the number of individuals recalling each number of
items. A generalized linear model, fit to the data, shows
both the recency and the (more subtle) primacy effects.
In general, subjects tended to remember more items from
the rounds in which they participated collaboratively. Figure
5 shows ranked, aggregated dyads’ recall from each round,
separated by condition. For each round there was a tendency
towards enhanced recall from collaboration, but this
difference was only significant in the fourth round, t(28.88),
p < .05 (Welch’s two-sample t-test). Overall, group level

3495

1

Collaborating
Non!Collaborating

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

2

Items Recalled

3

4

5

6

7

recall was not significantly better for items from
collaborative rounds (M = 5.24, SD = 2.35) compared to
non-collaborative rounds (M = 4.31, SD = 2.00). At the
individual level, however, where dyad members are not
aggregated and are instead treated as independent, there was
a significant effect of condition. That is, individuals recalled
more items they had encountered during collaborative
rounds (M = 5.24, SD = 2.63) than during independent
rounds (M = 4.31, SD = 2.47), t(61) = 2.03, p < .05. Thus,
there appears to be a tendency for enhanced recall from
collaboration. Admittedly, these effects are smaller than the
performance measures, though more power may bear this
out.

Ranked Dyads
Figure 5: Recall for items from Rounds 1-4 for each
dyad, ranked in order of performance. Dotted lines with
empty circles show the aggregated number of items recalled
by dyads working collaboratively; Solid lines with filled
circles show recall by dyads working non-collaboratively.
that when uncertain of an answer, dyads spend more time in
discussion in order to figure it out. Indeed, when
considering the percentage of time spent talking, there was
a positive correlation with performance, r(28) = .27,
although this trend did not achieve significance. Figure 6
shows the relationship between talking and performance, as
measured by both absolute and percentage metrics of
talking.

Figure 4: Binned individual-level recall per round. Circle
sizes illustrate the number of individuals that recalled the
corresponding number of items from each round. The line
shows the fit of a generalized linear model with quadratic
term.

Conversation Analysis
In order to further quantify the effects of collaboration on
performance, conversations during the collaborative
sessions were recorded. A coarse analysis of these
recordings allowed us to collect information on the total
amount of time each dyad spent in the collaborative
sessions, as well as the amount of this time that was spent
talking. On average, dyads spent 241.13 seconds (SD =
71.37) in the (summed) collaborative rounds, and used, on
average, 109.29 of these seconds (SD = 34.72) conversing.
Because the amount of time spent in the collaborative part
of the task varied between dyads, a measure of percent
talking was also calculated for each dyad. This percent
talking measure varied from about 27% to 70% (M = 46.54,
SD = 10.76).
As in the previous analyses, results were aggregated over
dyads and each data point represents the group-level mean,
across a dyad’s participants. The total amount of time each
dyad spent talking was negatively correlated with their
performance, as measured by the number of correct answers
they submitted during the collaborative rounds, r(28) = -.77,
p < .0001. That is, the more talking they did, the worse they
performed. This negative correlation may reflect the fact

Figure 6: Relationship between talking and performance.
The scatterplot on the left shows each dyad’s performance
(percentage of questions answered correctly) as a function
of the total number of seconds spent talking (regression line
m = -0.4229). On the right, performance is shown as a
function of the percentage of time spent talking (regression
line m = 0.4724).

3496

General Discussion
On all measures of performance for the trivia task, there
appeared to be a collaborative benefit. Aggregate dyads
achieved more correct answers in the collaborative rounds
than in the independent rounds, and they did so with greater
accuracy. Interestingly, aggregate dyads were actually faster
in the collaborative rounds than in the independent rounds,
despite the fact that they had the added task of
communicating with their partner for each question. With
respect to the terminology described earlier (Hare, 1976),
we observed that the group product, produced by
collaborating individuals, was better than the individual
product, produced by individuals working alone. The recall
task also suggested a benefit from collaboration. Previous
work has shown that participating collaboratively in recall
enhances future independent recall (Basden, Basden &
Henry, 2000), but our results also suggest that collaborative
encoding could enhance independent recall: the individual
recall product of collaborating individuals was (slightly)
greater than the individual recall products of individuals
acting alone.
It must be noted, however, that the present study was
specifically designed to enable us to look for evidence of a
collaborative gain. The collaborative benefit apparent in this
situation may not apply to other situations, as previous work
described earlier has found that the degree of collaborative
gain is highly influenced by social context. Future work is
needed to elaborate on the specifics of the social,
environmental and task contexts which allow for these
collaborative gains. We would also like to address the
current findings in the context of interpersonal alignment, in
future work. It was noted earlier that the use of similar taskrelevant linguistic forms benefits dyadic cooperation,
(Fusaroli et al., 2012), and a growing body of research
addresses how interpersonal interactions can cause
automatic alignment to spread between physical, linguistic,
and other cognitive states (Tollefsen & Dale, 2012). This
begs the question of whether collaborative performance on
knowledge-based and memory tasks can be influenced or
indicated by various levels of behavioral, linguistic, and
cognitive alignment.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported partially by NSF grants BCS0826825 and BCS-0926670. We would like to thank
Jacqueline Pagobo and Maxine Varela for their assistance
with data collection.

References
Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Latham, P. E., Roepstorff, A., Rees,
G., & Frith, C. D. (2010). Optimally interacting minds.
Science, 329(5995), 1081-1085.
Barnier, A. J., Sutton, J., Harris, C. B., Wilson, R. A.
(2008). A conceptual and empirical framework for the
social distribution of cognition: The case of memory.
Cognitive Systems Research, 9(1-2), 33-51.

Basden, B. H., Basden, D. R., Bryner, S., & Thomas III, R.
L. (1997). A comparison of group and individual
remembering: Does collaboration disrupt retrieval
strategies? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(5), 1176-1189.
Clemen, R. T. (1989). Combining forecasts: A review and
annotated bibliography. International Journal of
Forecasting, 5, 559-583.
Esser, J. K. (1998). Alive and well after 25 years: A review
of groupthink research. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 73(2-3), 116-141.
Fusaroli, R., Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Roepstorff, A., Rees,
G., Frith, C., & Tylén, K. (2012). Coming to terms:
Quantifying the benefits of linguistic coordination.
Psychological Science, 23(8), 931-939.
Galton, F. (1907). Vox populi. Nature, 75(1949), 450-451.
Hare, A. P. (1976). Handbook of small group research. New
York: Free Press.
Hastie, R., & Kameda, T. (2005). The robust beauty of
majority rules in group decisions. Psychological Review,
112(2), 494-508.
Hill, G. W. (1982). Group versus individual performance:
Are N + 1 heads better than one? Psychological Bulletin,
91(3), 517-539.
Kerr, N. L., & Tindale, R. S. (2004). Group performance
and decision making. Annual Review of Psychology, 55,
623-655.
Loftus, E. F. (1996). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Rajaram, S., & Pereira-Pasarin, L. P. (2010). Collaborative
memory: Cognitive research and theory. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 5(6), 649-663.
Roediger, H. L., Meade, M. L., & Bergman, E. T. (2001).
Social contagion of memory. Pschonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8(2), 365-371.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds. New York:
Random House.
Tollefsen, D. P. (2006). From extended mind to collective
mind. Cognitive Systems Research, 7(2-3), 140-150.
Tollefsen, D. P., & Dale, R. (2012). Naturalizing joint
action: A process-based approach. Philosophical
Psychology, 25(3), 385-407.
Vul, E., & Pashler, H. (2008). Measuring the crowd within:
Probabilistic
representations
within
individuals.
Psychological Science, 19(7), 645-647.
Weldon, M. S., Blair, C., Huebsch, P. D. (2000). Group
remembering: Does social loafing underlie collaborative
inhibition? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(6), 1568-1577.
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive memory: A
contemporary analysis of group mind. In B. Mullen & G.
R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior, (pp. 185208). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Wegner, D. M., Giuliano, T., & Hertel, P. T. (1985).
Cognitive interdependence in close relationships. In W.
Ickes (Ed.), Compatible and incompatible relationships,
(pp. 253-276). New York: Springer-Verlag.

3497

