UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamic Field Theory: Conceptual Foundations and Applications in the Cognitive and
Developmental Sciences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8q74k3nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Spencer, John
Schoener, Gregor
Sandamirskaya, Yulia

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dynamic Field Theory: Conceptual Foundations and Applications in the Cognitive
and Developmental Sciences
John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology and Delta Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA USA

Gregor Schöner (gregor.schoener@rub.de) and Yulia Sandamirskaya (sandayci@rub.de)
Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany

Objectives and scope

1. Spencer, J.P., Perone, S., & Johnson, J.S. (2009). The dynamic field theory and embodied cognitive dynamics. In
J.P. Spencer, M.S. Thomas, & J.L. McClelland (Eds.) Toward a Unified Theory of Development: Connectionism
and Dynamic Systems Theory Re-Considered. Oxford University Press, pages 86-118

Dynamical Systems thinking has been influential in the way
psychologists, cognitive scientists, and neuroscientists think
about sensori-motor behavior and its development. The initial emphasis on motor behavior was expanded when the concept of dynamic activation fields provided access to embodied
cognition. Dynamical Field Theory (DFT) offers a framework for thinking about representation-in-the-moment that
is firmly grounded in both Dynamical Systems thinking and
neurophysiology. Dynamic Neural Fields are formalizations
of how neural populations represent the continuous dimensions that characterize perceptual features, movements, and
cognitive decisions. Neural fields evolve dynamically under
the influence of inputs as well as strong neuronal interaction,
generating elementary forms of cognition through dynamical
instabilities. The concepts of DFT establish links between
brain and behavior, helping to define experimental paradigms
in which behavioral signatures of specific neural mechanisms
can be observed. These paradigms can be modeled with Dynamic Neural Fields, deriving testable predictions and providing quantitative accounts of behavior.
One obstacle for researchers wishing to use DFT has been
that the mathematical and technical skills required to make
these concepts operational are not part of the standard repertoire of cognitive scientists. The goal of this tutorial is, therefore, to provide the training and tools to overcome this obstacle.
We will provide a systematic introduction to the central
concepts of DFT and their grounding in both Dynamical Systems concepts and neurophysiology. We will discuss the concrete mathematical implementation of these concepts in Dynamic Neural Field models, giving all needed background
and providing participants with some hands-on experience
using interactive simulators in MATLAB. We will review
robotic implementations to make the ideas concrete. Finally,
we will take participants through a number of selected, exemplary case studies in which the concepts and associated models have been used to ask questions about elementary forms
of embodied cognition and their development.
The interactive simulators will be available at the tutorial.
We will take participants through the process of building and
simulating models. We will use online tools available now

2. Schutte, A.R. & Spencer, J.P. (2009). Tests of the dynamic
field theory and the spatial precision hypothesis: Capturing a qualitative developmental transition in spatial working memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 35:1698-1725.
3. Johnson, J. S., Spencer, J.P. & Schöner, G. (2009): A
layered neural architecture for the consolidation, maintenance, and updating of representations in visual working
memory. Brain Research 1299:17-32
4. Sandamirskaya, Y. & Schöner, G. (2010): An embodied
account of serial order: How instabilities drive sequence
generation. Neural Networks 23:1164-1179
5. Samuelson, L.K., Smith, L.B., Perry, L.K. & Spencer, J.P.
(2011). Grounding Word Learning in Space. PLoS One, 6,
e28095.
6. Lipinski, J., Schneegans, S., Sandamirskaya, Y., Spencer,
J.P. & Schöner, G. (2012). A neuro-behavioral model
of flexible spatial language behaviors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
38:1490-1511.
7. Sandamirskaya, Y., Zibner, S., Schneegans, S., Schöner,
G. (2013): Using Dynamic Field Theory to extend the embodiment stance toward higher cognition. New Ideas in
Psychology (in press, 2013)

Target audience
No specific prior knowledge of the mathematics of dynamical
systems models or neural networks is required as the mathematical and conceptual foundations will be provided during
the tutorial. An interest in formal approaches to cognition is
an advantage.

Material covered in the course
1. Conceptual foundations of Dynamical Systems Thinking
and Dynamical Field Theory (DFT): Embodied and situated cognition; Stability as a necessary property of embod-

Suggested Readings
(available at online, see below)

49

Gregor Schöner holds the Chair for Theory of Cognitive Systems and is the Director of the Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany. Following
his PhD in 1985 in theoretical physics at the University of
Stuttgart, he held positions at the Center for Complex Systems of Florida Atlantic University, the Institut für Neuroinformatik, and the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience of the
CNRS in Marseilles, France before returning to Bochum,
Germany in 2001 to assume his current position. Dr. Schöner
has received funding from different agencies in the US, Germany, France, and the European Union. He has published
over to 200 scientific articles and chapters. Dr. Schöner is
considered one of the world’s experts on dynamic systems
theory within the fields of Psychology and Cognitive Science,
and is also a pioneer in the application of Dynamic Neural
Fields to autonomous robotics. He will teach the conceptual
and mathematical tutorials (numbers 1, 2 below).
Yulia Sandamirskaya is a Post-Doctoral researcher at the
Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany. She obtained her PhD (Dr.rer.nat.) in Physics for
her work on embodied sequence generation within DFT. In
her research, Dr. Sandamirskaya develops DNF models and
robotic implementations of DNF architectures for sequence
generation, behavior organization, and spatial language. Her
work has been published in three journal articles, several conference proceedings, and a book chapter. Dr. Sandamirskaya
will lecture on autonomy and sequence generation in DFT
and present robotic implementations that demonstrate how
concepts of DFT can lead to autonomous behavior in real environments (number 5 below).

ied cognitive processes; Distributions of population representation as the basis of spatially and temporally continuous neural representations;
2. Dynamical Systems and Dynamic Field Theory Tutorial:
Concept of dynamical system; Attractors and stability;
Input tracking; Detection, selection, and memory instabilities in discrete neuronal dynamics; Dynamical Fields
and the basic instabilities: detection, selection, memory,
boost-driven detection; Learning dynamics; Categorial vs.
graded mode of operation; Practical implementation of
DFT in simulators; Interactive simulation; Illustration of
the ideas through robotic implementations;
3. Case study using DFT to understand embodied cognition
and its development: visual and spatial working memory in
children and adults; spatial precision hypothesis as a developmental mechanism in spatial recall, position discrimination, and change detection; mapping of DFT to functional
neuroimaging with children.
4. Case study using DFT to understand brain-behavior relations in humans with functional neuroimaging: mapping
of neural activation patterns in dynamic neural fields to the
hemodynamic response measured with fMRI and fNIRS;
case study on the neural processes that underlie visual
working memory in children and adults.
5. Case study using DFT to understand how flexible action
sequences can be generated: Dynamics of serial order and
behavior organization; Coupling to real sensor and motor systems; Stability and flexible timing of actions in a
sequence; Autonomy and executive control in neural and
robotic systems.

Schedule
1. Conceptual foundations of Dynamical Systems Thinking
and Dynamical Field Theory (DFT): 30 minutes
2. Dynamical Systems and Dynamic Field Theory Tutorial:
90 minutes

Lecturers
John P. Spencer is a Professor of Psychology at The University of Iowa and the founding Director of the Delta Center
(Development and Learning from Theory to Application). He
received a Sc.B. with Honors from Brown University in 1991
and a Ph.D. in Experimental Psychology from Indiana University in 1998. He is the recipient of the Irving J. Saltzman
and the J.R. Kantor Graduate Awards from Indiana University. In 2003, he received the Early Research Contributions
Award from the Society for Research in Child Development,
and in 2006, he received the Robert L. Fantz Memorial Award
from the American Psychological Foundation. His research
examines the development of visuo-spatial cognition, spatial
language, working memory, and attention, with an emphasis on dynamical systems and neural network models of cognition and action. He has had continuous funding from the
National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation since 2001 and has been a fellow of the American Psychological Association since 2007. He will teach the tutorials
on development and functional neuroimaging (numbers 3, 4
below).

3. Case studies using DFT to understand embodied cognition
and its development: 60 minutes before and 60 minutes
after the lunch break
4. Case study using DFT to understand brain-behavior relations 60 minutes
5. Case study using DFT to understand flexible action sequences 60 minutes

Computer use
Participants who bring lab-tops with Matlab installed (student
version is sufficient) will be able to follow demonstrations by
actively working with the simulator during the lectures.

Online resources
Publications, lecture material, and interactive simulators can be found at our DFT Summer School
websites
http://www.robotics-school.org
and
http://www.uiowa.edu/delta-center/research/dft

50

