UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamic Structure of Joint-Action Stimulus-Response Activity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5ps7f3rb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Malone, Mary Lauren
Castillo, Ramon
Holden, John
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dynamic Structure of Joint-Action Stimulus-Response Activity
MaryLauren Malone (malonemo@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action & Perception, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA;

Ramon D Castillo (castilrn@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action & Perception, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA;
Universidad de Talca, Chile

John G Holden (holdenjn@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action & Perception, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA;

Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action & Perception, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA;

Michael J. Richardson (michael.richardson@uc.edu).
Center for Cognition, Action & Perception, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA;

Abstract

actors. Interestingly, coordination emerges even when no
explicit coordination is required, for example when people
are completing separate parts of the task. The present study
aims to further investigate this latter form of coordination.

The mere presence of a co-actor can influence an individual’s
response behavior. For instance, a social Simon effect has
been observed when two individuals perform a Go/No-Go
response to one of two stimuli in the presence of each other,
but not when they perform the same task alone. Such effects
are argued to provide evidence that individuals co-represent
the task goals and the to-be-performed actions of a co-actor.
Motivated by the complex-systems approach, the present
study was designed to investigate an alternative hypothesis—
that such joint-action effects are due to dynamical (timeevolving) entrainment processes that perturb and couple the
behavior of socially situated actors. To investigate this
possibility, participants performed a standard Go/No-Go
Simon task in joint and individual conditions. The dynamic
structure of recorded response times (RTs) was examined
using fractal statistics and instantaneous cross-correlation.
Consistent with our hypothesis that participants responding in
a shared space would become behaviorally coupled, the
analyses revealed that RTs in the joint condition displayed
decreased fractal structure (indicative of an interpersonal
coupling perturbing and constraining participant behavior)
compared to the individual condition, and were more
correlated across a range of time-scales compared to the RTs
of pseudo-pair controls. Collectively, the findings imply that
self-organizing dynamic processes might underlie social
stimulus-response compatibility effects and shape joint
cognitive processes in general.

Joint Stimulus-Response Compatibility (JSRC)
Over the past decade, a growing amount of research has
been conducted investigating joint-action via so-called
‘go/no-go tasks’ (e.g., Sebanz, Knoblich, & Prinz, 2005;
Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich, 2006; Tsai, Kuo, Jing,
Hung & Tzeng, 2006). In such tasks, participants are
instructed to ‘go’ when given a certain stimulus context
(e.g., when they are presented with a red stimulus), and to
‘not go’ when given the alternative (e.g. a blue stimulus
image). The compatibility aspect of these experiments lies
in the spatial orientation of the stimulus relative to the
location of the responding individual. For instance, if a
stimulus is presented on the same side of a display with
respect to where a participant is seated, the response is
deemed “compatible”. Alternatively, if a stimulus is
presented on the opposite side of a display screen with
respect to where a participant is seated, the response is
deemed “incompatible”.
To examine the effects of such stimulus-response
mappings in a joint-action setting, the reaction times (RTs)
are compared between two conditions: one in which the
participant sits on one side of the display screen and
responds alone to one stimulus type (the individual
condition), and another where the task requirements are
exactly the same except that another participant, seated on
the opposite side of the display screen, responds to the
alternative stimulus (the joint condition). The general
finding is that even though participants in the joint condition
are performing the exact same task as in the individual
condition, a greater SRC effect exists when two people are
completing the task in one another’s presence compared to

Keywords: joint action; stimulus-response compatibility;
interpersonal coordination; pink noise; dynamical systems

Introduction
Social interaction is a hallmark of everyday activity.
Examples include a parent helping a child get dressed, a
couple washing dishes together, people playing a team
sport, or two workers carrying a heavy item up a flight of
stairs. In each of these cases, a form of cooperation emerges
such that the activity is coordinated across all participating

1
966

when they complete the task alone. In other words,
incompatible responses are significantly slower than
compatible responses in joint conditions, but only
marginally different (or not significantly different at all) for
individual conditions.
These findings are generally taken as evidence for the
co-representation of action goals during a joint-action
setting, whereby actors form a shared representation of the
collective task goal. That is, individuals mentally represent
the actions of their co-actor and integrate them into their
own action planning. This co-representation or action
integration therefore results in slower RTs for incompatible
stimulus situations compared to compatible stimulus
situations. When completing the task alone, however, no
such integration or co-representation occurs, and thus the
spatial compatibility of the stimulus has little or no effect.
The JSRC effect has been observed across a wide range
of stimulus and response manipulations, including hand
posture (Cho, Proctor, & Yamaguchi, 2007), non-biological
response mechanisms (Buhlmann, Umilta, & Wascher,
2007), orthogonality of stimulus location (Bae, Cho, &
Proctor, 2009; Figliozzi, Silvetti, Rubichi, & Doricchi,
2010), and auditory stimuli (Buetti & Kerzel, 2008). It is
also known to be influenced by various social psychological
variables, such as the facial features of a co-actor, and tasksharing paradigms (Philipp & Prinz, 2010; Jung, Holländer,
Müller, & Prinz, 2011).
JSRC effects also appear to suggest that knowing what
another person’s task is during joint-action is the means by
which an individual can understand others’ action intentions
and points to shared representations as the casual basis of
this integration or modulation process. A consequence of
this co- or shared-representation and action integration
emphasis, however, is that no research has attempted to
examine the time-evolution or behavioral dynamics of
actors’ responses during JSRC tasks, nor the degree to
which JSRC effects are a result of the dynamical
entrainment or coordination processes that are known to
exist during co-present joint-action situations (Richardson et
al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2011). The aims of the present
study were therefore to (i) examine the dynamical structure
of JSRC task behavior and (ii) investigate whether the
standard (visual) JSRC effect might be a result of dynamic
coordination or entrainment processes coupling the response
behavior of co-acting individuals.

al., 2011). The temporal structure of RT variability (i.e.,
deviations from the mean over time), however, often
provides additional and meaningful information about how
behavior emerges over time (Gilden, 2001). For instance,
there is evidence that the seemingly error-induced variation
in responses may actually be reflective of how people
execute discrete motor responses in a certain spatiotemporal
context (Wing & Kristofferson, 1973). Furthermore, even if
the mean value and standard deviation are the same, the
structure of RT time series that result in those means and
standard deviations could in fact be quite different.
In order to examine the dynamic structure and
unfolding variability of RTs over time, recent research has
utilized fractal methods that provide deeper insight into the
dynamics of an ongoing activity (Bassingthwaighte,
Liebovitch, & West, 1994; Gilden, Thornton, & Mallon,
1995; Jensen, 1998; Van Orden, Holden, Turvey, 2003).
Conceptually similar to geometric fractal patterns
(Mandelbrot, 1982), fractal patterns in experimental timeseries data correspond to nested patterns of variability found
across repeatedly measured behaviors. Instead of comparing
the overall means, fractal analysis involves determining how
the variability exhibited in a time-series changes with
changes in time-scale. That is, fractal analysis involves
determining if the structure of variability in an RT timeseries is statistically self-similar or scale invariant, such that
small variations in the data have essentially the same
structure as large variations (Brown & Liebovitch, 2010;
West & Deering, 1995). As in geometrical fractal patterns,
if one were to “zoom in” (i.e., examine a smaller scale) on
the measurement time-series, one would discover essentially
the same pattern of fluctuations evident at the larger scale
(Holden, 2005). Accordingly, fractal statistical methods do
not rely on partitioning the variability in measurement into
different components, but rather assess the structure of the
time-evolving variability observed.
A time-series containing random fluctuations (i.e.,
white noise) indicates that the observed variability is the
result of unsystematic or unrelated changes from trial to trial
(Van Orden, 2010). Alternatively, the variability in an RT
time-series containing fractal or scale invariant structure
contains trial-to-trial variability that is long-term correlated.
In other words, the time-series contains nested patterns of
variability wherein small variations in measurement have
the same structure as large variations. Such structure in
repeated measurements is often referred to as “pink noise”
or 1/f noise and are characteristic of a wide range of
naturally occurring complex (interaction-dominant) systems
and phenomena, from eye movement patterns (Aks,
Zelinsky, & Sprott, 2002) and heart rate variability (Eke et
al., 2002), to self-reported mood change (Delignières,
Fortes, & Ninot, 2004).
There are numerous methods for determining the
degree to which the variability in a behavioral or response
time-series is scale invariant or pink (see Delignières et al.,
2006 for a review). One of the most robust methods is
detrended fluctuation analysis, commonly referred to as

Examining the Dynamics of JSRC
At the crux of the traditional statistical analyses for
JSRC experiments is a comparison of means, wherein each
participant’s time series of responses is represented as a
single, unchanging number. The average RT response for
each condition is understood as capturing the core and most
meaningful aspect of the recorded RT behavior. The
variability or time-evolution that occurs from trial-to-trial is
simply discarded as error or mentioned only briefly in terms
of how localized the mean is (for an exception see Vesper et

2
967

DFA (Bassingthwaighte et al., 1994; Peng, Havlin, Stanley,
& Goldberger, 1995). DFA quantifies the long-term
correlative properties of behavior by detrending the time
series of adjacent bins, or collections of consecutive data
points, at all time scales. The residual variance obtained
from the least-square regression line subtraction of each bin
is calculated for progressively larger bin sizes. Bin size is
plotted against variance on a log-log plot, and the scaling
exponent, H, is revealed by the slope of the best-fitting line.
For DFA, H ≈ 1.0 indicates that the response variability or
"noise" is pink (i.e., fractal). White noise, however,
corresponds to H = 0.5.
Deviations away from ‘perfect’ pink noise (i.e., H =
1.0) can result from changes in system flexibility (Kloos &
Van Orden, 2010). For instance, increasing task constraints
or difficulty, such as coupling responses to external timers
or events (i.e., metronomes), or increasing task speed, can
whiten RT variability and result in H << 1.0 (Chen, Ding, &
Kelso, 2001; Delignières et al., 2009; Hausdorff et al.,
1996). Changes in H across conditions thus reveal how
differing task manipulations result in processes that interact
or constrain each other, as well as influence the overall
organizational processes that underlie a series of behavioral
responses (Van Orden, 2010). Accordingly, the question
considered here was does the co-presence of an actor during
a JSRC task change the fractal structure of an individual’s
RT behavior, and if so, how and why?
One possibility is that the behavior of individuals
during joint-action conditions are subtly coupled or
dynamically entrained and that this coupling or entrainment
acts to constrain and/or perturb the behavioral responses of
the individuals involved. There is a significant body of
research demonstrating how the behaviors of co-present
individuals often become dynamically coordinated or
entrained (see Schmidt & Richardson, 2008; Marsh,
Richardson, & Schmidt, 2009 for reviews) and that such
processes can modulate and perturb individual behavior
(Richardson et al., 2009, 2012; Riley, et al., 2011; Romero
et al., 2012). If this is the case, then the fractal structure of
the RT variability should be whiter in the joint condition
compared to the individual condition.
To explore this possibility, we employed a standard
SRC task, the Simon task (Craft & Simon, 1970), and had
participants complete the task under joint and individual
go/no-go conditions. We performed a fractal analysis on the
resting RT time-series using DFA, with the expectation that
the joint condition would exhibit a whiter fractal structure
(H closer to 0.5) compared to RT time-series in the
individual condition. In addition to performing a fractal
analysis, we also employed instantaneous cross-correlation
(Barbosa, Yehia, & Vatikiotis-Bateson, 2008) to index the
degree to which the RTs of co-acting individuals were
correlated (i.e., coordinated) with each other over time. If
the behavioral responses of individuals are entrained during
a joint-action situation, then the temporal correlation should
be greater between the RT time series of individuals in the
joint condition compared to RT time series of pseudo–pairs

created using RT time-series from participants who
performed the task in the individual condition. We
employed instantaneous cross-correlation because it allows
one to determine how correlated two behavioral time-series
are across multiple time-scales. The method is ideally suited
for determining highly subtle non-synchronous coordination
that occurs at variable time-lags. It essentially computes the
correspondence between two signals recursively, generating
a time-series of how past and future samples are correlated
at all points in time. Setting a minimum r value as a cut-off
for what is considered to be correlated or not (i.e., r = .25)
then allows one to calculate the percentage of points that
resulted in correlation values greater than that cutoff. The
resultant value is the proportion of correlated activity and
can be understood as providing a measure of percent
coupling.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-four undergraduate students from the University of
Cincinnati (7 male, 17 female) participated in the study.
They ranged in age from 18 to 22 years old and received
class credit for participation in the experiment.

Materials
A 19” Dell Flat Panel monitor was used to present stimuli.
Stimuli included a blue “X” or red “X” (1” high, ½” wide),
displayed on the left or right of the screen (positioned 5½”
from the top and bottom of the screen, and 2” from the left
or right side of the screen, respectively). Stimulus
presentation and data collection was controlled using Direct
RT. An Apple keyboard, modified to be millisecond
accurate, was used to collect reaction time data. The shift
keys were used as response indicators on the keyboard. A
red sticker was placed on the right shift key and a blue
sticker was placed on the left shift key. The monitor and the
keyboard were placed in the center of a desk, with the
keyboard 7” from the front of the desk and 8” from the
monitor. Participants were seated in chairs that were placed
next to each other in front of the keyboard. Each seated
participant was positioned approximately 30” from the
display screen.

Procedure
Participants completed a visual go/no-go Simon task in
which they were instructed to respond with a key press to a
specific stimulus color presented on the screen. Participants
were assigned only one of the two stimulus colors (e.g. red)
and were instructed to respond only to their designated
color, regardless of location, while ignoring the alternative
(e.g. blue). Participants completed the task in one of two
experimental conditions: a joint condition or an individual
condition. For the individual condition, participants
performed the task alone. For the joint condition pairs of
participants performed the task together. Similar to the
procedure of Sebanz et al. (2003), subjects assigned to the

3
968

red key sat on the right, and subjects assigned the blue key
sat on the left, regardless of condition (see Figure 1). A brief
instruction screen was presented on the computer monitor
prior to the start of the experiment. Clarifying instructions
were administered verbally and an opportunity for questions
or clarification was offered.

63).

Reaction Time (ms.)

500

Compatible
Incompatible

450
400
350
Individual

Joint

Experimental Condition

Figure 2: Mean reaction time (RT) as a function of
experimental condition and compatibility.

Fractal Analysis
DFA was performed on the last 512 responses for each
participant. Prior to analysis, the RTs were normalized by
subtracting the relevant condition means for each participant
in order to examine the variability of the residual
fluctuations (see Gilden, 2001 for a detailed description of
the rationale). Consistent with our hypothesis that
participants responding in the joint condition would exhibit
a whiter fractal structure of responses due to task constraints
and coupling, a between samples one tailed t-test performed
on H values calculated using DFA revealed a significant
effect of experimental condition, t(22) = 2.25, p < .05, with
the fractal structure of RTs in the joint condition being
significantly lower H (M = 0.57, SD = 0.06) than in the
individual condition (M = 0.63, SD = 0.08) (see Figure 2).
One sample t-tests indicated that H values were significantly
different from a test value of 0.5 (hypothetical white noise)
for both the individual, t(11) = 5.93, p <.01, and the joint
conditions, t(11) = 34.53, p <.01.

(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Experimental setup for (a) the individual
condition, and (b) the joint condition.
Each trial began with a white crosshair presented for
400 ms in the center of the screen, followed by a blank
screen also lasting 400 ms. Stimuli were presented for a
maximum time of 1200 ms or until a response was
indicated. Irrespective of RT, 400 ms of a blank screen was
then presented 1200 ms after the stimulus presentation,
followed by the white crosshair indicating the beginning of
the next trial. In all conditions, participants completed 1100
trials, preceded by eight practice trials. An equal number of
red and blue stimuli on both the left and right sides of the
display were presented in a random order over the duration
of the experiment.

0.65
Hurst (Η)

Results
Analysis of Mean Reaction Time
A 2 (compatible vs. incompatible) × 2 (joint or individual
experimental condition) mixed design ANOVA was
conducted to determine whether the standard JSRC effect
had occurred. Consistent with previous research (Sebanz et
al., 2003; Sebanz et al., 2005), the analysis revealed a
significant interaction between response compatibility and
experimental condition, F(2,22) = 5.86, p < .01, with an
effect of compatibility only being observed in the joint
condition. This was confirmed using Bonferroni post hoc
analyses, indicating that mean RTs were significantly faster
for compatible responses (M = 395, SD = 36) than for
incompatible responses (M = 411, SD = 45) in only the joint
condition (p < .05). There was also a main effect of
experimental condition, F(2,22) = 26.99, p < .01, with RTs
in the joint condition (M = 403, SD = 40) being significantly
faster than RTs in the individual condition (M = 464, SD =

0.60
0.55
0.50
Individual

Joint

Experimental Condition

Figure 3: Mean Hurst (H) as a function of experimental
condition.

Instantaneous Correlation
To determine the degree to which the RT time-series of
participants in the joint condition were entrained or coupled
to each other over time, we calculated the percentage of
correlations within the time-series of instantaneous
correlations for delays of -60 to 60 trials that had an r > .25.
As mentioned above, the resultant value can be understood
as a measure of percent coupling or the proportion of

4
969

% Coupling (r>.25)

correlated activity. We then used a between samples onetailed t-test to compare the percent coupling observed
between participants in the joint condition to the percent
coupling calculated between pseudo pairs of participants
created by randomly pairing participants from the individual
condition. Consistent with the hypothesis that the behavioral
response of participants in the joint condition might be
dynamically entrained or coupled, the analysis revealed that
the percent coupling for the joint condition (%30.9) was
(marginally) significantly greater, t(22)= 1.65, p = .059,
compared to pseudo pairs (%21.6) created from participants
in the individual condition (see Figure 3).

completed the individual condition. The results of this
analysis revealed that the response behavior of pairs in the
joint condition exhibited greater temporal correlation
compared to pseudo pairs, providing more evidence that the
response behaviors of co-present individuals in the current
go/no-go task were dynamically entrained. The magnitude
of these temporal correlations was by no means large and
occurred at non-synchronous time-lags. Thus, like most
other forms of interpersonal entrainment or behavioral
coupling (see e.g., Chartrand and Bargh, 1999; Schmidt &
Richardson, 2008; for reviews), the entrainment that
occurred was most likely intermittent, rather than constant,
and did not occur synchronously or at any fixed time lag.
The weak and complex nature of the interpersonal influence
should not be discounted, however, given the fact that the
mean differences in RT are also relatively small (as is
typically the case JSRC studies). Indeed, the relative change
in mean RT, fractal dimension (H), and % coupling are all
somewhat equivalent.
In conclusion, the current study provides the first
evidence that the response behavior of co-actors during a
JSRC task is dynamically entrained and that such dynamical
entrainment processes operate to constrain and perturb the
time-evolving response variability of co-acting individuals.
Although not directly tested here, it is possible that these
dynamic processes of constraints and coupling may underlie
the JSRC effect, rather than some form of shared
representation. In truth, the dynamical systems and
representational accounts of such behavior are not mutually
exclusive and may in fact provide complementary
explanations for such joint-action phenomena. Future
research should be directed towards investigating these
issues in order to better understand how the dynamics of
joint-action activity shape joint cognitive processes.

40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
Individual
Joint
Experimental Condition

Figure 4: The percent coupling calculated using
instantaneous cross correlation as a function of experimental
condition.

Discussion
The experimental study present here was aimed at
examining the behavioral dynamics of individuals during a
joint-action stimulus-response compatibility task. We
submitted recorded RT time-series during a JSRC task to
both a standard comparison of means, and to various
dynamical analysis methods in order to examine how RT
variability evolved over time. We compared these patterns
of variability between joint and individual conditions.
Consistent with previous research, we found a
significant difference in the overall reaction times between
the individual and joint conditions, as well as a significant
compatibility effect in the joint condition. More
importantly, by measuring the fractal structure of
participants’ RTs, we found that that the structure of
variability in the joint condition was much whiter than in the
individual condition, as predicted. The current results
therefore extend previous research by demonstrating that the
mere presence of another individual not only affects average
RT, but also affects the dynamics of an individual’s
response behavior. This difference was theorized to be a
consequence of the dynamical entrainment processes that
mutually perturb and constrain the behavior of individuals
in a shared environment (Schmidt & Richardson, 2008).
To further examine whether the response behaviors of
participants were dynamically coupled, an instantaneous
correlation analysis was performed. We compared the
degree to which the RT behavior of pairs in the joint
condition was correlated to the degree of RT correlations
that occurred for pseudo pairs created from participants who

Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge Guy Van Orden for his
invaluable contribution to the field of complex systems.

References
Aks, D.J., Zelinsky, G.J., & Sprott, J.C. (2002). Memory
across eye movements: 1/f dynamic in visual search.
Nonlinear Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences, 6, 125.
Bae, G.Y., Cho, Y.S., & Proctor, R.W. (2009). Transfer of
orthogonal stimulus-response mappings to an orthogonal
Simon task. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(4), 746-765.
Barbosa, A.V., Yehia, H.C., & Vatikiotis-Bateson, E.
(2008). Algorithm for Computing Spatiotemporal
Coordination.
Bassingthwaighte, J. B., Liebovitch, L. S., & West, B. J.
(1994). Fractal physiology. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Brown, C., & Liebovitch, L. (2010). Fractal Analysis. Los
Angeles: Sage.

5
970

Buetti, S., & Kerzel, D. (2008). Time course of the Simon
effect in pointing movements for horizontal, vertical, and
acoustic stimuli: Evidence for a common mechanism.
Acta Psychologica, 129, 420-428.
Buhlmann, I., Umilta, C., & Wascher, E. (2007). Response
coding and visuomotor transformation in the Simon task:
The role of action goals. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33(6), 1269-1282.
Chen Y., Ding M., & Kelso J.A.S. (2001). Origins of timing
errors in human sensorimotor coordination. Journal of
Motor Behavior 33, 3–8.
Cho, Y.S., Proctor, R., & Yamaguchi, M. (2007). Influences
of response position and hand posture on the orthogonal
Simon effect. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 61(7), 1020-1035.
Craft, J.L., & Simon, J.R. (1970). Processing symbolic
information from a visual display: Interference from an
irrelevant directional cue. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 83(3), 415-420.
Delignières, D., Fortes, M., & Ninot, G. (2004). The fractal
dynamics of self-esteem and physical self. Nonlinear
Dynamics in Psychology and Life Sciences, 8, 479-510.
Delignières D., Ramdani, S., Lemoine, L., Torre, K., Fortes,
M., & Ninot, G. (2006). Fractal analyses for ‘short’ time
series: A re-assessment of classical methods. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 50, 525-544.
Delignières D., Torre K., & Lemoine L. (2009). Long-range
correlation in synchronization and syncopation tapping: A
linear phase correction model. PLoS ONE, 4(11): e7822.
Figliozzi, F., Silvetti, M., Rubichi, S., & Doricchi, F.
(2010). Determining priority between attentional and
referential-coding sources of the Simon effect through
optokinetic stimulation. Neuropsychologia, 48, 10111015.
Gilden, D.L., Thornton, T., & Mallon, M.W. (1995). 1/f
noise in human cognition. Science, 267, 1837-1839.
Gilden, D.L. (2001). Cognitive emissions of 1/f noise.
Psychological Review, 108(1), 33-56.
Hausdorff J.M., Purdon P.L., Peng C.K., Ladin Z., Wei J.Y.,
& Goldberger A.L. (1996). Fractal dynamics of human
gait: Stability of long-range correlations in stride interval
fluctuations. Journal of Applied Physiology 80(5), 1448–
1457.
Holden, J. G. (2005). Gauging the fractal dimension of
response times from cognitive tasks. In M. A. Riley & G.
C. Van Orden (Eds.), Contemporary Nonlinear Methods
for Behavioral Scientists: A webbook tutorial (pp. 267318).
Jung, C., Holländer, A., Müller, K., & Prinz, W. (2011).
Sharing a bimanual task between two: evidence of
temporal alignment in interpersonal coordination.
Experimental Brain Research, 211, 471-482.
Kloos, H., & Van Orden, G. (2010). Voluntary Behavior in
Cognitive and Motor Tasks. Mind & Matter, 8(1), 19-43.
Marsh, K.L., Richardson, M.J., & Schmidt, R.C. (2009).
Social connection through joint action and interpersonal
coordination. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 320-339.

Peng, C.K., Havlin, S., Stanley, H.E., & Goldberger, A.L.
(1995). Quantification of scaling exponents and crossover
phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat time series. Chaos,
5(1), 82-87.
Philipp, A.M., & Prinz, W. (2010). Evidence for a role of
the responding agent in the joint compatibility effect. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63(11),
2159-2171.
Richardson, M. J, Campbell, W.L, & Schmidt, R. C. (2009).
Movement interference during action observation as
emergent coordination. Neuroscience letters, 449(2), 11722.
Richardson, M. J., Harrison, S. J., May, R., Kallen, R. W.
& Schmidt, R. C. (2012). Self-Organized Complementary
Coordination: Dynamics of an Interpersonal CollisionAvoidance Task. BIO Web of Conferences 1, 00075.DOI:
10.1051/bioconf/20110100075.
Romero, V., Coey, C., Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J.
(2012). Movement Coordination or Movement
Interference: Visual Tracking and Spontaneous
Coordination
Modulate
Rhythmic
Movement
Interference. PLoS ONE 7(9): e44761.
Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J. (2008). Dynamics of
Interpersonal Coordination. In A. Fuchs & V. Jirsa (Eds.).
Coordination: Neural, Behavioral and Social Dynamics.
(281-308)
Schmidt, R.C., Fitzpatrick, P., Caron, R., & Mergeche, J.
(2011). Understanding social motor coordination. Human
Movement Science, 30, 834-845.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Representing
others’ actions: Just like one’s own? Cognition, 88, 11-21.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2005). How two
share a task: Corepresenting stimulus-response mappings.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 31(6), 1234-1246.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: Bodies and minds moving together. TRENDS in
Cognitive Science, 10(2), 70-76.
Tsai, C.C., Kuo, W.J., Jing, J.T., Hung, D.L., & Tzeng,
O.J.L. (2006). A common coding framework in self-other
interaction: Evidence from joint action task. Experimental
Brain Research, 175, 353-362.
Van Orden, G.C., Holden, J.G., & Turvey, M.T. (2003).
Self-organization of cognitive performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132(3), 331-350.
Van Orden, G. (2010). Voluntary Performance. Medicina,
46(9), 581-594.
Vesper, C., van der Wel, R.P.R.D., Knoblich, G., & Sebanz,
N. (2011). Making oneself predictable: reduced temporal
variability facilitates joint action coordination.
Experimental Brain Research, 211, 517-530.
West, B. J., & Deering, B. (1995). The lure of modern
science. River Edge, NJ: World Scientific.
Wing, A.M., & Kristofferson, A.B. (1973). Response delays
and the timing of discrete motor responses. Perception
and Psychophysics, 14(1), 5-12.

6
971

