UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Explicit Abstract Knowledge and Simple Associations in Sequence Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/23x189p1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lee, Jessica
Livesey, Evan

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Explicit Abstract Knowledge and Simple Associations in Sequence
Learning
Jessica C. Lee (jlee4128@uni.sydney.edu.au)
Evan J. Livesey (evan.livesey@sydney.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Sydney
Sydney, NSW 2006 Australia
Abstract
This study examined the effect of an explicit relational rule on
sequence learning in a 3-choice serial reaction time task. Simple
probabilistic contingencies between pairs of response cues were
used in such a way that the sequence of cues moved predominantly
in one direction (i.e. either clockwise or counterclockwise).
Performance on cued and miscued responses was compared for a
group given a hint about the abstract rule describing the
relationship between the response cues, and a group given no
information about this relationship. Experiment 1A demonstrated
that XYZ and XYX subsequences showed performance differences
when the location of the target on each trial was random.
Experiment 1B showed that giving participants the explicit hint
affected XYZ subsequences more than XYX subsequences.
Implications for sequence learning and, specifically, the interaction
between rule and instance learning are discussed.
Keywords: serial reaction time; awareness; motor learning;
volitional control; sequence learning; rule vs. instance
learning

Introduction
Humans are remarkably capable at learning about
sequential material, such as the underlying sequence of
locations of a target in a serial reaction time (SRT) task
(Nissen & Bullemer, 1987). A typical paradigm involves
participants pressing keys corresponding to the location of a
target as it appears in positions on a computer screen. Speed
and accuracy of responses are emphasized. Unbeknownst to
participants, some or all of the positions can be predicted
using deterministic or probabilistic rules. Participants
exposed to this structured material generally show a
reduction in reaction times (RTs) for predicted locations,
relative to unpredicted (random) locations, suggesting that
they have learned about the underlying sequence. The SRT
task is an example of an implicit learning paradigm that
appears to show robust learning in the absence of
verbalizable knowledge (e.g. Destrebecqz & Cleeremans,
2001; Willingham, Nissen & Bullemer, 1989) and intention
to learn (Jiménez, Méndez, & Cleeremans, 1996; Jones &
McLaren, 2009). Since implicit learning is, according to
some definitions, unconscious (Reber, 1993), this
classification implies that learning is independent of explicit
knowledge, and should not be susceptible to cognitive
influences (Lewicki, 1986).
However, the implicit status of sequence learning has
been challenged by later studies showing that sequence
knowledge is reportable when appropriate tests are used
(e.g. Jimenez, Mendez, & Cleeremans, 1996; Perruchet &
Amorim, 1992). The results from several studies (e.g.

Dominey, Lelekov, Ventre-Dominey, & Jeannerod, 1998;
Jimenez, Vaquero, & Lupianez, 2006; Jones & McLaren,
2009) suggest that while learning is generally automatic (in
that it does not require an intention to learn and occurs
under a variety of learning conditions), giving participants
knowledge about the sequence or instructions to search for
an underlying rule can change what is learned, implying that
learning is under some degree of volitional control.
Conflicting results and ongoing disagreement about
appropriate methodology has meant that no firm
conclusions can be made about the status of implicit
learning and what learning mechanisms it embodies (Shanks
& St. John, 1994).
A corollary of the implicit/explicit distinction made by
several researchers is between the learning of rules and
instances. Explicit learning is assumed by some to involve
knowledge in the form of symbolic propositions that are apt
for describing abstract relations between events (Mitchell,
De Houwer, & Lovibond, 2009). In contrast, implicit
learning can be seen as the accumulation of statistical
information in an incremental fashion, and many have
argued is better suited for learning the surface structure or
physical properties of events in a sequence rather than
abstract relations (McLaren, Green, & Mackintosh, 1994;
Perruchet & Amorim, 1992). Conceptualizing implicit
learning in this way allows it to be explained using the same
simple associative learning mechanisms that have been
postulated to explain animal learning (McLaren, Green, &
Mackintosh, 1994). In support of this conceptualization,
models such as Elman’s (1990) Serial Recurrent Network
(SRN) have been quite successful in modeling human
performance in the SRT task using associative mechanisms
(e.g. Cleeremans & McClelland, 1991). The SRN captures
statistical regularities in the pattern of responses and allows
predictions to be made based on a limited temporal context
of responses. However, models such as these presuppose
that explicit representation of sequence knowledge is
limited, and assume rule learning to be a separate, higherorder process. While it seems obvious that humans are
capable of rule learning and hypothesis testing, the question
of interest is whether these explicit processes have any place
in sequence learning.
Where abstract relations between events can be described
in ways that do not depend on the physical properties of
those events, the content of rule learning often differs from
that of instance learning (e.g. Natal, McLaren, & Livesey,
2013; Livesey & McLaren, 2009; Shanks & Darby, 1998;).
It is possible to derive evidence for both rule and instance

2843

learning in an SRT task with appropriately constructed
sequences. For example, Dominey et al. (1998) found that
participants under implicit and explicit learning conditions
were able to learn about surface contingencies in an SRT
task, but only those in the explicit condition were able to
learn about, and transfer their knowledge of, the underlying
abstract rule. This study shows that what is learned in an
SRT task depends on the learning conditions imposed, and
while rule learning requires appropriate learning conditions
(sufficient cognitive resources, or in this case, explicit
instructions to search for a rule), instance learning can occur
automatically.
In Dominey et al.’s (1998) study, evidence of a
dissociation between the learning of abstract and surface
structure was sought by testing transfer to sequences
containing different surface features but the same abstract
rule. An alternative approach used by Jones and McLaren
(2009) is to allow participants to make a prediction about
the target’s location before the onset of the target, with the
assumption that some sequences will benefit from an
intentional search for sequences more than others. In a twochoice (X,Y) SRT task, Jones and McLaren found that
participants given incidental learning conditions showed the
strongest evidence of learning for subsequences containing
an alternation (e.g. YYX, YXY) and the least evidence of
learning for subsequences consisting of runs of the same
response (XXX). However, when participants were
presented with two cue positions and given instructions to
predict what would happen on the next trial, this pattern of
results was reversed, with the best learning occurring for the
more salient XXX subsequences. This study shows that the
effect of explicit instructions can differentially affect certain
subsequences. Giving participants the intention to learn or
alluding to the existence of sequences does not entail that all
subsequences will benefit from these manipulations.
However, the fact that learning in the SRT task is even
affected by these manipulations suggests that sequence
learning cannot be considered implicit in the traditional
sense.
The translation of abstract rules to the performance of a
concrete action is not necessarily a straightforward task,
even when the rule is explicitly identified. Many researchers
have assumed that it requires intentional mental effort (Gick
& Holyoak, 1983; Gomez, 1997; Shanks & St. John, 1994).
Although the rules used in the studies by Dominey et al.
(1998) and Jones and McLaren (2009) could be explained
verbally and symbolically, they were relatively complex.
Once known, implementation of the rule involved retention
of at least two items in working memory in order to use the
abstract relationship to determine the next response.
In contrast, in this study a relatively simple rule was used;
the sequence of response cues moved clockwise most of the
time for some participants, and moved counterclockwise
most of the time for others. This rule can be applied purely
on the basis of the preceding response but was still abstract
in the sense that it involved a relationship between at least
two events and can be applied flexibly to any of the

response cues in the sequence. Although the rule was
probabilistic in nature and not necessarily obvious to
participants performing the task, it was easy to describe and
(we assumed) easy to implement once recognized explicitly.
Thus the primary aim of current study was to explore the
degree to which learning in an SRT task could be affected
by explicit knowledge of an abstract rule describing the
probabilistic contingencies in the task.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 used a simplified version of the SRT task with
three response locations (A, B and C, see Figure 1) and
probabilistic contingencies to minimize hypothesis-testing
strategies and the development of explicit sequence
knowledge during training (see Jiménez & Méndez, 2001).
The target never appeared in the same location twice in a
row, meaning that each set of three consecutive responses in
the sequence contained either three unique responses (XYZ,
e.g. ACB, ABC) or a repetition of one response as the first
and third in the set (XYX, e.g. ABA, ACA).

Figure 1. Illustration of the target positions (A, B, C) and
an example of the contingencies arranged between them (in
this case, resulting in a predominantly clockwise direction
of motion). Curved, bold lines indicate cued trials (p = .75)
and dotted straight lines indicate miscued trials (p = .25).
Experiment 1A sought to establish performance
differences on these two subsequences using a single control
group that performed the SRT task with a randomly
generated sequence. Experiment 1B compared learning
between two groups: a group given a hint before the
experiment about the nature of the contingencies embedded
within the target locations (hint group), and a group who did
not receive a hint (no hint group). The contingencies were
arranged such that most of the time, the target appeared to
be moving in one direction (clockwise or counterclockwise),
with the direction of motion randomly chosen for each
participant. If the target was moving clockwise, for
example, there was a .75 probability that the next location
would be the next clockwise position (cued trials), and a .25
probability that the next location would be the next

2844

counterclockwise direction (miscued trials, and vice versa
for counterclockwise, see Figure 1).
Since the contingencies were probabilistic, an explicit hint
about the direction of motion would still mean that the
location of the target on any given trial could not be
predicted with complete accuracy. We expected that both
groups in Experiment 1B would learn the sequence, but the
group given the hint would show both better overall
learning (a larger cueing effect) and higher levels of
awareness in subsequent tests. Furthermore, we
hypothesized that even with a simple abstract rule its
application on each trial would not be straightforward. Since
responses are made rapidly, there is little time to prepare for
the next response based on the direction of motion. Thus,
although the directional rule is applicable to every response,
we expected that the effectiveness of the hint when applied
to specific instances would be greater on the more salient
XYZ subsequences than the XYX subsequences because the
presence of a consistent direction of motion for several
responses would facilitate the use of the rule.

Method
Participants and Apparatus In Experiment 1A, fifteen
University of Sydney staff and students participated. In
Experiment 1B, forty-six University of Sydney first year
Psychology students participated in exchange for course
credit. The experiment was programmed using
PsychToolbox for Matlab (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) and
run on Apple Mac Mini desktop computers connected to 17
inch CRT monitors, refreshed at a rate of 85 Hz.
Participants made responses using a standard Apple
keyboard and mouse. Testing was conducted in individual
cubicles in groups of up to six.
Procedure For both experiments, participants performed a
SRT task where they were asked to respond to a series of
targets appearing in one of three positions (on the left, top
and right) on the computer screen by pressing corresponding
arrow keys. Training in both experiments was presented to
participants in one continuous block of 720 responses. In
Experiment 1A, the position of the target was completely
random, such that no learning could occur. In Experiment
1B, the sequence of locations followed a probabilistic rule
such that the sequence of response locations usually moved
in a clockwise or counterclockwise direction around the
screen, and each trial was either cued (75% of the time) or
miscued (25% of the time, see Table 1). The direction of
motion was randomly chosen for each participant.
Participants in Experiment 1B were allocated to either a
hint or no hint group. The hint group received written
instructions at the beginning of the experiment that stated
that the target moved in either a clockwise or
counterclockwise direction most of the time, and that their
task was to work out which direction it went. The no hint
group did not receive any explicit instructions about the
possibility of an underlying sequence, nor did the control
group in Experiment 1A. All participants were informed that

they would have to respond as quickly and as accurately as
possible to the targets appearing around the screen.
After the training phase, both groups in Experiment 1B
were told that there was a pattern in the sequence of
locations in the training phase, and they would now be
asked questions about the sequence. Participants completed
a recognition test and a prediction test, in counterbalanced
order. Participants in Experiment 1A did not complete any
awareness tests, as there were no contingencies to assess.
Table 1. Probability of occurrence for each triplet type
and conditional probability of the last response cue (cue t)
in each triplet given the preceding cue (cue t-1).
_________________________________________
p(triplet)
p(cue t | cue t-1)
XYZ – Cued
0.5625
0.75
XYZ – Miscued
0.0625
0.25
XYX – Cued
0.1875
0.75
XYX – Miscued
0.1875
0.25
_
Recognition Test On each trial in the recognition test,
participants were presented with two sequences in which
they had to respond to the target in the same way as in
training. One of the two sequences was the same sequence
they saw in training, and the other sequence was the
opposite (the direction of motion was reversed). Each
sequence contained 12 response cues and participants
completed 10 trials. After responding to the two sequences,
participants were asked to press a key to indicate which of
the two sequences they thought was most similar to their
training sequence.
Prediction Test The prediction test simply presented
participants with the target in one of the three positions and
asked which of the remaining two positions they would
predict the next position to be. This test consisted of 3 trials
(one for each of the target positions).

Results
All of the following RT analyses refer to response times on
correct trials only, excluding responses > 1 second.
Experiment 1A Participants in Experiment 1A took on
average 317ms to respond on XYZ trials (with 98%
accuracy), and 363ms to respond on XYX trials (with 94%
accuracy). Thus participants were both faster, F(1,14)=
119.91, p<.001, and more accurate, F(1,14)=21.81, p<.001,
on XYZ trials, relative to XYX trials. These performance
differences indicated that the repetition of a recentlyperformed response on XYX trials interfered with fast and
accurate responding, or conversely that performing all three
responses without repetition facilitated responding. This
effect was not based on differential contingencies (after
each response, the remaining two cues were equally likely)
and is similar to alternation effects found in other choice
response tasks, which are most likely not based on sequence
learning effects (e.g. see Barrett & Livesey, 2010). In any

2845

case, performance differences provided further impetus for
examining the XYX and XYZ subsequences separately.
Experiment 1B: Training All trials were classified as
being either cued or miscued, and the cueing effect taken as
the difference between the cued and miscued trials.
Figure 2 shows the mean RTs for cued and miscued trials
in Experiment 1B for both the hint (n=23) and no hint
(n=23) groups, and the mean RTs for the control group
(n=15) in Experiment 1A, across the 4 training quarters. It is
evident that in both the hint and no hint groups, participants
were slower to make a response on miscued trials, and faster
to make a response on cued trials, relative to what would be
expected without any contingencies (the control group). An
ANOVA with group (hint x no hint) as a between-subjects
factor, and cueing (cued x miscued) and quarter (1-4) as
within-subjects factor revealed an overall cueing effect,
F(1,44)=344.15, p<.001, and a marginal interaction with
group, F(1,44)=3.99, p=.05, with the hint group exhibiting a
larger cueing effect overall. There was also a significant
linear trend in the cueing effect, F(1,44)=74.17, p<.001,
which did not interact with group, F<1, indicating that the
cueing effect increased during training.

subsequence types and for both groups is shown in Figure 3.
It is evident that while both the hint and no hint groups
obtain similar cueing effects for the XYX subsequences
across training, the hint group’s cueing effect increased
sharply in the 3rd quarter. This may be because it took
participants in the hint group some time to translate the hint
given at the start of the SRT task into confident knowledge
about the direction of motion, and therefore for this
knowledge to affect their performance.
There was a significant group difference for XYZ cueing,
F(1,44)=7.29, p=.001, but not for XYX cueing, F<1. Thus it
appears that the effect of the hint increased cueing for XYZ
subsequences but not for XYX subsequences, relative to the
no hint group.

Figure 3. Cuing effect by training quarter in Experiment
1B, for both groups and subsequence types, showing a
significant difference between hint and no hint groups for
XYZ cuing, but not for XYX cuing.
Recognition Test The hint group showed a recognition
score (61.1%) that was statistically above chance,
F(1,21)=8.56, p=.008, while the no hint group did not
(55.2%, F<1).
Figure 2. Mean reaction times for the hint and no hint
groups in Experiment 1B, and mean reaction times for the
control group in Experiment 1A.
To examine whether the effect of the hint differed
between the two subsequences, a repeated measures
ANOVA with cueing (cued x miscued), subsequence type
(XYZ x XYX) and quarter (1-4) as within-group factors and
group (hint x no hint) as a between-subjects factor was
performed. As hypothesized, a significant 4-way interaction
was found F(3,132)=3.37, p=.02. The cueing effect for both

Prediction Test Mirroring the recognition test, the hint
group showed a level of performance (65.4%) that was
statistically higher than chance, F(1,21)=8.06, p=.01, and
the no hint group did not (59.4%, F(1,21)=1.58, p=.22).
Cueing and Awareness To examine the relationship
between awareness and cuing, each participant’s recognition
score was correlated with their cuing effect for XYZ and
XYX sequences separately (Figure 4). There was a
significant correlation between recognition and cuing for the

2846

XYZ subsequences in the hint group only, r(23)=.45, p=.03.
Comparing the correlation coefficients between groups,
there was a stronger relationship between awareness and
cuing in the hint group for XYZ subsequences (r(22)=.45)
than the no hint group (r(22)=.2), z=2.2, p=.028.

Figure 4. Scatterplots of the cuing effect (in seconds) as a
function of recognition accuracy for each subsequence type
(XYX and XYZ) and each group (Hint and No Hint) in
Experiment 1B.

General Discussion
In this study, we observed a robust sequence learning
effect using probabilistic contingencies arranged between 3
target locations in both a group given an explicit hint about
an abstract rule underlying the contingencies and a no hint

group who performed the task as usual. The hint group
exhibited a marginally larger cuing effect overall and
produced above-chance results on both a recognition and
prediction test.
Experiment 1A demonstrated that participants were both
faster and more accurate to respond on XYZ subsequences
(consisting of 3 unique responses) than on XYX
subsequences (when the response on the current trial is the
same as the response 2 trials back) when there were no
contingencies present. Closer inspection of the different
subsequences indicated that the benefit of the hint group
over the control group in Experiment 1B was only evident
on subsequences that did not contain a repetition (XYZ),
and that participants in both groups learned about
subsequences with a repetition (XYX) equally well. While
the hint group were able to produce results on the awareness
tests at a level greater than chance, there was a significant
correlation between cueing and recognition on XYZ
subsequences only.
The results from this study suggest that the relationship
between explicit abstract knowledge and performance in
sequence learning tasks is complex. The SRT task utilized
in this experiment shows a strong dissociation between two
subsequence types – participants given an explicit hint about
the underlying contingencies could use this knowledge to
produce a larger cueing effect (relative to those given no
hint) on XYZ subsequences, and the amount of cueing was
related to how well those in the hint group performed in the
recognition test. On the other hand, whether or not
participants received the hint did not make any difference to
the magnitude of the cueing effect on XYX trials, and the
cueing effect was not correlated with recognition
performance.
These results indicate that while the hint may have been
successful in helping participants to discover the abstract
rule amongst the contingencies, this knowledge could only
be applied to XYZ trials and not XYX trials. One potential
reason for this may be that certain subsequences are learned
better in intentional learning conditions because they are
more salient (see Jones & McLaren, 2009). The repetition of
two clockwise or counterclockwise positions in the XYZ
subsequences may be particularly salient if participants are
searching for the correct direction of the target. This is in
line with our initial prediction that the abstract information
provided by the hint would be easier to implement (and thus
produce a greater facilitatory effect) on trials where the
direction of motion was consistent for several cues. An
alternative reason may be simply that XYX subsequences
are harder to respond to in general, and therefore applying
explicit knowledge on these trials may also be more
difficult. According to this explanation, whatever property
of the XYX subsequences that produced the slower reaction
time and lower accuracy in Experiment 1A might also be
responsible for interfering with the expression of any
knowledge of the sequence that participants had acquired.
While Experiment 1B demonstrated that giving
participants explicit knowledge did affect their SRT

2847

performance, it is also obvious that this knowledge is not
necessary to display a cueing effect. In fact, very robust
cueing effects were evident in the no hint group, along with
poor performance (not differing significantly from chance)
on awareness tests. However, the fact that giving
participants an explicit hint about the underlying sequence
affected performance suggests that there is some degree of
volitional control in sequence learning, and that learning is
not impervious to cognitive influences such as intention to
learn. However, whether or not explicit knowledge about an
abstract rule can be expressed in sequence learning seems to
be dependent on the properties of the subsequences to be
learned.
In summary, this experiment demonstrates that sequence
learning does not appear to be independent of explicit
knowledge of the abstract relations between the cues in the
sequence. However, participants are not able to apply their
knowledge equally to all subsequences even when, in
principle, the abstract relation applies to all instances. These
results are most consistent with an explanation in which
simple associations between events are learned and
expressed relatively automatically, but explicit symbolic
knowledge has a strong influence on performance only
when specific conditions permit its use.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a University of Sydney
Bridging Support Grant to EJL. The authors would like to
thank Lauren Shone and Dorothy Kwok for helpful
comments on an earlier version of this manuscript.

References
Barrett, L. C. & Livesey, E. J. (2010). Dissociations
between expectancy and performance in simple and twochoice reaction-time tasks: A test of associative and nonassociative explanations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 36, 864877.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Cleeremans, A., & McClelland, J. L. (1991). Learning the
structure of event sequences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 120, 235-253.
Destrebecqz, A. & Cleeremans, A. (2001). Can sequence
learning be implicit? New evidence with the process
dissociation procedure. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 8, 343-350.
Dominey, P. F., Lelekov, T., Ventre-Dominey, J., &
Jeannerod, M. (1998). Dissociable processes for learning
the surface structure and abstract structure of
sensorimotor
sequences.
Journal
of
Cognitive
Neuroscience, 10, 734-751.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Gick, M. L. & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.

Gomez, R. L. (1997). Transfer and complexity in artificial
grammar learning. Cognitive Psychology, 33, 154-207.
Jiménez, L. & Méndez, C. (2001). Implicit sequence
learning with competing explicit cues. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A, 345-369.
Jiménez, L., Méndez, C., & Cleeremans, A. (1996).
Comparing direct and indirect measures of sequence
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 22, 948-969.
Jones, F. W., & McLaren, I. P. L. (2009). Human sequence
learning under incidental and intentional conditions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 35, 538-553.
Lewicki, P. (1986). Nonconscious social information
processing. New York: Academic Press.
Livesey, E. J., & McLaren, I. P. L. (2009). Discrimination
and generalization along a simple dimension: Peak shift
and rule-governed responding. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 35, 554-565.
McLaren, I. P. L., Green, R.E. A., & Mackintosh, N. J.
(1994). Animal learning and the implicit/explicit
distinction. In Implicit and explicit learning of languages
(ed. N. C. Ellis), pp. 313-332. London: Academic.
Mitchell, C. J., De Houwer, J, & Lovibond, P. F. (2009).
The propositional nature of human associative learning.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 183-246.
Natal, S. D. C., McLaren, I. P. L., & Livesey, E. J. (2013).
Generalization of feature- and rule-based learning in the
categorization of dimensional stimuli: Evidence for dual
processes under cognitive control. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
39, 140-151.
Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional
requirements of learning: Evidence from performance
measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial Vision, 10, 437-442.
Perruchet, P., & Amorim, M. A. (1992). Conscious
knowledge and changes in performance in sequence
learning: Evidence against dissociation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18, 785-800.
Reber, A. S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Shanks, D. R. & Darby, R. J. (1998). Feature- and rulebased generalization in human associative learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 24, 405-415.
Shanks, D. R. & St. John, M. F. (1994). Characteristics of
dissociable human learning systems. Behavioral & Brain
Sciences, 17, 367-447.
Willingham, D. B., Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1989).
On the development of procedural knowledge. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 15, 1047-1060.

2848

