UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Text Titles and the Timing of Keywording Tasks on Metacognitive Monitoring

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0zq303gv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lippmann, Marie
Narciss, Susanne
Schwartz, Neil H.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Text Titles and the Timing of Keywording Tasks on Metacognitive
Monitoring
Marie Lippmann (lippmann@psychologie.tu-dresden.de)
Psychology of Learning and Instruction, Technische Universität Dresden, Zellescher Weg 17
01062 Dresden, Germany

Susanne Narciss (susanne.narciss@tu-dresden.de)
Psychology of Learning and Instruction, Technische Universität Dresden, Zellescher Weg 17
01062 Dresden, Germany

Neil H. Schwartz (nschwartz@csuchico.edu)
Department of Psychology, 400 West First Street
Chico, CA 95929, USA

Robert W. Danielson (robert.danielson@usc.edu)
Rossier School of Education, 3470 Trousdale Parkway
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA

judgments is influenced by the cues that learners use to
make their judgments. According to the Cue-UtilizationFramework (Koriat, 1997), metacognitive judgments are
inferential in nature. ‘[Learners] do not monitor directly the
strength of the memory trace of the [to-be-judged
information], but use a variety of cues that are generally
predictive of subsequent test performance’ (Koriat, 1997,
p.2).
The authors believe that titles may function as such cues
whenever they are used to prompt learners’ metacognitive
judgments. Considering that a title related to a text provides
a stronger link to relevant information from the text than an
unrelated title, related titles should serve as more valid cues
for metacognitive monitoring than unrelated titles.

Abstract
Successful learning from text takes place when the cognitive
demands of the learning task – i.e. the comprehension and
retention of text material – and the metacognitive demands of
the learning task – i.e. the accurate assessment of one’s own
learning process—are met. The present study was designed to
investigate text titles – a factor known to affect cognitive
learning processes- as well as the timing of keywording tasks
– a factor known to affect metacognitive processes – and their
effects on metacognitive monitoring and learning outcomes.
The results of the study showed that both factors affected
learning on the cognitive as well as the metacognitive level.
Keywords: Text-based learning; metacognition.

Effects of Titles on Learning and
Metacognitive Monitoring
Text titles, a common feature of written text, affect
cognitive learning processes and outcomes by: (a) providing
a context for an upcoming text (Ausubel, 1968), (b)
activating relevant prior knowledge (Ausubel, 1968), and (c)
guiding a reader’s attention towards certain information in
the text (Lorch & Lorch, 1996). Titles also serve as
retrieval cues for previously learned text information
(Sadoski, Goetz & Rodriguez, 2000) and foster the recall of
text information that is related to the title (Ritchey, Schuster
& Allen, 2008). While the cognitive effects of titles are
well-investigated, it is interesting to consider their potential
influence on metacognitive monitoring, as well.
Metacognitive monitoring takes place when learners
evaluate their own learning process with respect to a
learning goal (Butler & Winne, 1995; Dinsmore, Alexander
& Loughlin, 2008). In other words, learners engage in
metacognitive monitoring whenever they judge their current
state of learning relative to a desired state of learning
(Thiede & Dunlosky, 1999). The quality of metacognitive

Effects of Immediate vs. Delayed Keywording
on Metacognitive Monitoring
Aside from cues that arise from the text material, such as
titles, learning tasks provide further cues for metacognitive
monitoring (Thiede, Anderson & Therriault, 2003).
Keywording tasks are a type of learning task in which
learners summarize a previously studied text using a set of
keywords. The timing of when learners generate their
keywords affects the quality of their metacognitive
judgments with respect to recall test performance at a later
point in time. Learners who generate keywords immediately
after reading a text are less accurate in their metacognitive
monitoring than learners who generate keywords after a
delay (Thiede, Anderson & Therriault, 2003; Thiede,
Dunlosky, Griffin &Wiley, 2005).
Current research relates these findings to Activation
Theories of Text Understanding (Britton & Guelgoez,
1991)—theories that describe a spreading activation during
reading. More text information is available shortly after
reading a text than after a delay, when text information has

2914

decayed in memory. That means learners who generate
keywords immediately after reading a text experience a high
ease of recall in every keywording task. The high ease of
recall in each keywording task makes it hard for learners to
distinguish between well and less-well learned texts. It is
hard for learners to make that distinction because the
performance on an immediate keywording task is not a valid
indicator of performance on tests that occur at a later point
in time when text information has decayed in memory.
Learners who generate keywords after a delay do not
experience the same ease of recall in every keywording task,
because the learners need to access text information that has
been subject to memory decay to a much larger extent at the
time of the keywording task. Hence, the learners may be
able to generate only a few keywords for a text that they do
not recall well, while they may generate more keywords for
a text they recall better. Since delayed keywording requires
learners to access text information that has been subject to
memory decay to a larger extent than immediate
keywording, delayed keywording is a more valid indicator
of recall test performance with regard to tests taken at a later
point in time. Hence, learners who generate keywords after
a delay provide more accurate metacognitive judgments
than learners who generate keywords immediately.
While most of the current research has focused on the
effects of the timing of keywording tasks on relative
monitoring accuracy – i.e. the ability of learners to
distinguish between well-learned and less well-learned text,
the present study aims to investigate the effects of the
timing of keywording tasks on monitoring bias – i.e. the
extent to which learners over- or underestimate how much
they have learned from a text.

Hypotheses: Effects of Titles
1.

2.

Hypotheses: Effects of Immediate vs. Delayed
Keywording
3.

Purpose of the Present Study and Hypotheses
In order to develop learning materials that foster successful
learning from text, learning materials should be constructed
so that they foster learning on the cognitive, as well as on
the metacognitive level. Thus, the present study was
designed to investigate how related vs. unrelated text titles,
and immediate vs. delayed keywording, affect
metacognitive monitoring and learning outcomes.
The dependent measures of the study were comprised of a
set of cognitive and metacognitive measures, namely a)
performance on a keywording task as measured by the
number of keywords correct, b) metacognitive judgments of
learning for each text as measured by ratings on a 6-point
Likert scale, and c) recall test performance as measured by
the number of idea units recalled correctly in a free-recall
essay task. Monitoring bias (d) was calculated by relating
learners’ metacognitive judgments to their recall test
performance using the Self-Criterion-Residual-Strategy
(Paulhus & John, 1998).
With regard to the objectives of the present study, the
authors aimed to investigate the following hypotheses:

Titles affect learning outcomes – titles related to a text
serve as more valid retrieval cues than unrelated titles.
Thus, the authors expect higher recall test performance
for texts with related titles in both, the keywording task
(Hypothesis 1.1) and an essay task (Hypothesis 1.2).
Titles affect metacognitive monitoring – titles related to
a text serve as more valid cues for metacognitive
monitoring than unrelated titles. Thus, the authors
expect unrelated titles to evoke a stronger monitoring
bias than titles related to the text.

4.

The timing of keywording tasks affects learning
outcomes in the keywording task (Hypothesis 3.1), but
not in the essay task (Hypothesis 3.2). Learners who
generate keywords immediately after reading a text
have access to text information that is presumed to still
be rather active in their memory. They experience a
high ease of recall in every keywording task and are
able to generate many correct keywords. Learners who
generate keywords after a delay need to access
information in their memory that has been subject to
decay to a much larger extent. They do not experience
the same ease of recall as learners in the immediate
keywording group and, thus, are expected to generate a
smaller number of correct keywords. The authors do
not expect to find the same effect in the essay task,
because, in the essay task, learners in both keywording
conditions have to rely on text information that has
been subject to memory decay to the same extent (i.e.
about the same amount of time has passed in between
reading and essay writing).
The timing of the keywording task affects
metacognitive monitoring – learners who generate
keywords immediately after reading a text experience a
high ease of recall in every keywording task, which
may cue them to overestimate their ability to retrieve
the same text information at a later point in time, when
memory activation for text information has decayed.
Thus, the authors expect learners in the immediate
keywording group to show a stronger overestimation
bias than learners in the delayed keywording group.

Hypotheses: Interactive Effects of Titles and
Immediate vs. Delayed Keywording
5.

2915

Titles and the timing of keywording tasks interact with
the learning outcomes in the keywording task
(Hypothesis 5.1.), but not with the essay task
(Hypothesis 5.2). While learners who generate
keywords after a delay rely on titles as retrieval cues,
learners in the immediate keywording group do not,
because the text they just read is presumed to still be
rather active within memory. Thus, the authors expect
learners in the immediate keywording group to generate

6.

more correct keywords for texts with unrelated titles
than learners in the delayed keywording group. The
authors do not expect to find the same effect in the
essay task, in which learners in both keywording groups
have to access text information that has been subject to
memory decay to the same extent.
Titles and the timing of keywording tasks interact with
metacognitive monitoring – learners who generate
keywords immediately are expected to overestimate
how much they learned from texts with unrelated titles.
Learners who generate keywords after a delay are
expected to show less of an overestimation bias with
regard to texts with unrelated titles.

Methods
Participants. 213 undergraduate students of an American
university – 56 males and 157 females – participated in the
study. Participant’s ages ranged from 18 – 57 years (M =
22.2).
Design. The study follows a 2-Keywording (Immediate vs.
Delayed) x 3-Title (Related/Close vs. Related/Distant vs.
Unrelated) - design with repeated measures on the factor
‘Titles’. The order of topic and title appearance was
balanced within a Latin Square.
Materials. The study was conducted online. Materials were
comprised of 6 expository texts derived from online
databases and modified to suit the purpose of the study.
Each expository text consisted of 2 distinct subtopics of an
overall related theme. Themes varied for each text and were
chosen from topics which are neither part of the standard
US high school curriculum, nor part of the standard
undergraduate curriculum at the university from which
participants were recruited. The text concerning the overall
theme of ‘Art’, for example, was comprised of the subtopics
‘Expressionist Painting’ and ‘Dualism in Art’. To control
for confounding effects between a topic and its position in
the text, the order of topic appearance was counterbalanced
within a Latin Square, so that every participant experienced
every title condition twice throughout the study. In order to
control for confounding effects of text position, the order of
text appearance was also balanced within the Latin Square.
Each subtopic in a text consisted of 30 idea units. Idea Units
were defined as “single, meaningful piece[s] of information
conveyed by the passage, whether [they] consisted of a
word, a definition, or a phrase in the passage” (Meyer,
1975). The subtopics were balanced for word count (range:
190 - 284 words) and readability (Flesh-Kincaid readability
score; range: 11-13). The readability range was chosen to
match the target participant group of undergraduate
university students. Each text was accompanied by one of
three titles - a title that was related to the first subtopic in the
text (Related/Close), a title that was related to the second
subtopic in the text (Related/Distant), or a title that was
unrelated to either of the subtopics in the text (Unrelated).
While the authors had explicit hypotheses on the effects of
related versus unrelated titles on metacognitive monitoring
and learning outcomes, the distinction between

Related/Close and Related/Distant titles was made in order
to detect whether the position of the related information in
the text would have distinct effects on metacognitive
monitoring and learning outcomes.
Study procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to
the immediate or delayed keywording condition. Each
participant read 6 texts and was instructed to learn as much
from them as possible. Each text was presented for 2.5
minutes. Participants were asked to generate a maximum of
6 keywords prompted by the title, in order to capture the
main gist of each text. The immediate-keywording group
generated keywords immediately after reading each text.
The delayed-keywording group generated keywords only
after reading all 6 texts. After reading and keywording,
participants provided a metacognitive judgment of learning
on a 6-point Likert scale (1 = learned very little to 6 =
learned very much). Then, the text titles were presented one
at a time, and participants were asked to write essays about
what they remembered from the text. The time limit for each
essay was 3 minutes. Reading and writing times were
controlled in order to encourage participants to engage in
each task thoroughly. Reading and writing times were
allocated according to data derived from a pilot study
conducted prior to the actual investigation.

Results
Keywording task. Keywords were scored using a 4-category
scoring rubric. Keywords could be correct, incorrect,
missing, or they could be derived from prior knowledge,
rather than from the text. Only correct keywords were
included in the keyword analyses. The results of the
keywording task were analyzed using a 2-keyword
(Immediate vs. Delayed) x 3-title (Related/Close vs.
Related/Distant vs. Unrelated) Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) with repeated measures on the factor ‘titles’ and
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.
The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for the
timing of keywording tasks [F (1, 211) = 132.64; MSerror =
2.71; p < 0.01; partial η2 = 0.39 (large effect)]. Learners
who generated keywords immediately after reading a text
were able to generate more correct keywords (M = 3.97; SD
= 0.09) than learners who generated keywords after a delay
(M = 2.47; SD = 0.09).
The ANOVA also revealed a significant main effect for
titles [F (2, 422) = 20.86; MSerror = 1.19; p < 0.01; partial
η2 = 0.09 (moderate effect)]. Learners generated more
correct keywords when the title was related to the text (M ~
3.41; SD = 0.09), than when the title was unrelated (M =
2.82; SD = 0.09). The number of correctly generated
keywords did not differ significantly depending on whether
the title-related information was stated first in the text (MRC
= 3.41; SDRC = 0.09), or second (MRD = 3.42; SDRD = 0.09).
In other words, learners generated more correct keywords as
long as the title was related to the text, no matter in which
position the related information appeared.
The main effects of keywording and title conditions were
further qualified by a significant two-way interaction

2916

between the timing of keywording tasks and titles [F (2,
422) = 11.95; MSerror = 1.19; p < 0.01; partial η2 = 0.05
(small effect)]. Learners who generated keywords
immediately after reading a text had no problem generating
keywords for texts with unrelated titles (M = 3.87; SD =
0.13). Learners who generated keywords after a delay, on
the other hand, generated a smaller number of correct
keywords for texts with unrelated titles (M = 1.78; SD =
0.13).
Metacognitive judgments of learning. Metacognitive
judgments of learning were analyzed using a 2-keyword
(Immediate vs. Delayed) x 3-title (Related/Close vs.
Related/Distant vs. Unrelated) ANOVA with repeated
measures on the factor ‘titles’ and Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing. The results of the ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect for keywording conditions [F (1,
211) = 7.47; MSerror = 1.66; p < 0.01; partial η2 = 0.03
(small effect)]. Learners who generated keywords
immediately after reading a text provided higher judgments
of learning (M = 3.14; SD = 0.07) than learners who
generated keywords after a delay (M = 2.86; SD = 0.07).
The ANOVA also revealed a significant main effect for
titles [F (2, 422) = 39.62; MSerror = 0.68; p < 0.01; partial
η2 = 0.16 (moderate effect)]. Learners provided higher
judgments of learning for texts with related titles (M ~ 3.2;
SD = 0.07) than for texts with unrelated titles (M = 2.60; SD
= 0.07). The judgment magnitude did not vary significantly
depending on whether the related information was stated
close to the title (MRC = 3.25; SDRD = 0.07), or distant from
it (MRD = 3.16; SDRD = 0.07).
Essay task performance. Essays were scored for idea units
using a 5-category scoring rubric. Recalled idea units could
be correct, incorrect, partially correct to 50% or 25%, or
correct, but derived from prior knowledge rather than from
the text. Only partially or fully recalled idea units derived
from the texts were included in the essay analysis. The
results of the essay task were analyzed with a 2-keyword
(Immediate vs. Delayed) x 3-title (Related/Close vs.
Related/Distant vs. Unrelated) ANOVA with repeated
measures on the factor ‘titles’ and Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing.
The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for titles
[F (2, 422) = 21.14; MSerror = 3.54; p < 0.01; partial η2 =
0.09 (moderate effect)]. Learners recalled more idea units
from text with related titles (M ~ 4.9; SD ~ 0.21) than from
texts with unrelated titles (M = 3.89; SD = 0.21). The
number of idea units recalled did not vary significantly
depending on whether title-related information was stated
first in the text (MRC = 4.98; SDRC = 0.22), or second (MRD
= 4.84; SDRD = 0.21).
Metacognitive monitoring bias. Metacognitive monitoring
bias was computed using the Self-Criterion-ResidualStrategy (SCR-Strategy: Paulhus & John, 1998). For SCRAnalyses, self-reports (i.e. metacognitive judgments of
learning) are regressed on an external criterion (i.e. essay
task performance). The standardized residuals are used as
indices for monitoring bias (i.e. the extent to which an

individual’s monitoring accuracy differs from the average
monitoring accuracy observed in the participant sample).
The closer the standardized residual is to 0, the more
accurate the learner. Standardized residuals with negative
values indicate underestimation, while standardized
residuals above 0 indicate overestimation.
In a first step, the metacognitive judgment of learning for
each text was regressed on the learner’s essay task
performance on that text and the standardized residuals from
these simple regressions were saved. In a second step, the
mean standardized residual for each title condition was
computed for each participant. In a third step, a 2-keyword
(Immediate vs. Delayed) x 3-title (Related/Close vs.
Related/Distant vs. Unrelated) ANOVA with repeated
measures on the factor ‘titles’ and Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing was computed on the mean standardized
residuals for each title condition.
The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for
keywording conditions [F (1, 211) = 5.72; MSerror = 0.95;
p = 0.02; partial η2 = 0.03 (small effect); see figure 1]. In
general, learners showed virtually the same monitoring bias
(M = |0.09|; SD ~ 0.05) in both keywording groups – except
that learners who generated keywords immediately tended
to overestimate how much they had learned (M = 0.09; SD
= 0.05), while learners who generated keywords after a
delay tended to underestimate how much they had learned
(M = - 0.09; SD = 0.06).
The ANOVA also revealed a significant main effect for
titles [F (2, 422) = 29.12; MSerror = 0.39; p < 0.01; partial
η2 = 0.12 (moderate effect); see figure 1]. Learners tended
to overestimate how much they had learned when texts were
related to the title, while it did not matter whether the titlerelated information appeared first in the text (MRC = 0.16;
SDRC = 0.05), or second (MRD = 0.11; SDRD = 0.05). When
texts were unrelated to the title, learners tended to
underestimate themselves instead (MUR = - 0.26; SDUR =
0.05).

2917

Figure 1: Metacognitive monitoring bias at timing of
keywording task (Immediate vs. Delayed) x titles
(Related/Close vs. Related/Distant vs. Unrelated).

Discussion
Effects of Titles and Qualifying Interactions
Hypothesis 1: The authors expected titles to influence
learning outcomes in both – the keywording task
(Hypothesis 1.1) and the essay task (Hypothesis 1.2). The
results of the study are in line with the hypotheses – learners
generated more correct keywords for texts with related
titles, than for texts with unrelated titles. Learners also
recalled more idea units from texts with related titles, than
from texts with unrelated titles. These findings support the
idea that related titles provide a stronger link to relevant text
information than unrelated titles, and, thus, serve as more
valid retrieval cues for recalling text information than
unrelated titles.
It is important to note that the timing of the keywording
task influenced how strongly learners relied on titles when
generating keywords (Hypotheses 5.1). While learners in the
immediate keywording group were able to generate almost
as many correct keywords for texts with unrelated titles (M
= 3.87; SD = 0.13) as for texts with related titles (M = 4.01;
SD = 0.13), learners in the delayed keywording group
generated less correct keywords for texts with unrelated
titles (M = 1.77; SD = 0.13) than for texts with related titles
(M = 2.81; SD = 0.12). This finding is in line with the
assumptions of Activation Theories of Text Understanding
(Britton & Guelgoez, 1991) suggesting a spread of
activation during reading. Learners who generated keywords
immediately after reading a text were able to access text
information that was presumably still active within
memory. That is, the learners did not have to rely on the title
as a retrieval cue to the same extent as learners in the
delayed keywording group. The delayed keywording
learners needed to access text information from memory
that had decayed to a much larger extent at the time of their
keywording task. This interaction was not observable in the
essay task (Hypothesis 5.2), because for the essay task,
learners in both keywording groups had to access text
information in their memory that had been subject to decay.
About the same amount of time had passed in between
reading and essay writing in both keywording groups. Thus,
learners in the immediate keywording group could not rely
on information that was presumably active within memory
for the essay task, but needed to access information that had
decayed.
Hypothesis 2: The authors expected titles to affect
metacognitive monitoring. The authors specifically
hypothesized that related titles would serve as more valid
cues for making metacognitive judgments than unrelated
titles, resulting in a smaller monitoring bias for texts with
related, than for texts with unrelated titles. The results of the
study showed that monitoring bias was indeed influenced by
the title conditions. Learners tended to overestimate how
much they had learned from texts with related titles, while
they tended to underestimate how much they had learned
from texts with unrelated titles. The strength of the
monitoring bias differed between title conditions in the way

the authors hypothesized – while learners just slightly
overestimated how much they had learned from texts with
related titles (Mean standardized residual = 0.14), they
underestimated how much they had learned from texts with
unrelated titles to a much larger extent (Mean standardized
residual = - 0.26). This finding supports the idea that related
titles serve as more valid cues for making metacognitive
judgments than unrelated titles.

Effects of Immediate vs. Delayed Keywording
Hypothesis 3: The authors expected the timing of the
keywording task to influence the number of correctly
generated keywords (Hypothesis 3.1), but not the number of
correctly recalled idea units in the essay task (Hypothesis
3.2.) The results of the study provided evidence for these
hypotheses. Learners in the immediate keywording group
generated more correct keywords (M = 3.97; SD = 0.09)
than learners in the delayed keywording group (M = 2.47;
SD = 0.09). This finding again supports the assumptions of
Activation Theories of Text Understanding (Britton &
Guelgoez, 1991). Learners can easily access text
information shortly after reading, while it is harder to access
text information after a delay when memory activation has
decayed. This effect was not observable in the essay task
anymore, because for the essay task, learners in both
keywording groups had to access text information in their
memory that had been subject to decay to the same extent,
i.e. about the same amount of time had passed in between
reading and essay writing in both keywording groups.
Hypothesis 4: The authors expected the timing of the
keywording task to influence metacognitive monitoring. The
authors specifically hypothesized that learners in the
immediate keywording group would show a stronger
overestimation bias than learners in the delayed keywording
group. The results of this study support this hypothesis.
While learners in the immediate keywording group showed
a slight overestimation bias (M = 0.09; SD = 0.05), learners
in the delayed keywording group showed a slight
underestimation bias (M = - 0.09; SD = 0.06). It is important
to note that this result was influenced by the effects of the
unrelated title condition, although the authors could not
detect the hypothesized interaction (Hypothesis 6). That is,
the general underestimation bias evoked by unrelated titles
decreased the mean monitoring bias in both keywording
conditions.
In order to detect whether the direction of monitoring bias
was overall affected by the unrelated title condition, the
authors removed the effects of the unrelated title condition
from the analysis by conducting a separate analysis for texts
with related titles only. That is, the authors compared the
mean standardized residual for texts with related titles in the
immediate keywording condition (M = 0.2; SD = 0.08) to
the mean standardized residual for texts with related titles in
the delayed condition (M = 0.07; SD = 0.08). The t-test
revealed a significant difference between the keywording
groups (t (211) = -11.86; p < 0.01). While learners in both
keywording groups tended to generally overestimate how

2918

much they learned from texts with related titles, as indicated
by mean standardized residuals above 0, learners who
generated keywords immediately showed a significantly
stronger overestimation bias than learners who generated
keywords after a delay. This finding is in line with former
research investigating the delayed keywording effect
(Thiede, Anderson & Therriault, 2003). The authors believe
that this effect is due to the high ease of recall that learners
experience in the immediate keywording task, as indicated
by the large amount of keywords generated correctly. The
ability to generate a large number of keywords may cue
learners to believe that they have learned the text
information well and that they will be able to recall it at a
later point in time, as indicated by higher judgments of
learning in the immediate keywording group. Yet, a
learner’s performance on an immediate keywording task is
not a valid indicator of performance in the essay task, which
takes place at a later point in time when text information has
been subject to memory decay. Thus, learners who generate
keywords immediately tend to show a strong overestimation
bias due to the ease of recall they experience in their
keywording task. Learners who generate keywords after a
delay, on the other hand, need to access text information
that has already been subject to memory decay to a larger
extent and that is a much better indicator of performance in
the essay task, which takes place after an even larger delay.
That means that learners in the delayed keywording group
do not experience an ease of recall that could cue them to
overestimate themselves to the same extent as learners in the
immediate keywording group, resulting in more accurate
metacognitive monitoring in the delayed keywording group,
as compared to the immediate keywording group.

Conclusions and Outlook
The present study contributes to the current literature in
three ways. First, the authors could show that titles do not
only affect cognitive learning processes and learning
outcomes, but also metacognitive monitoring, with related
titles functioning as more valid cues for making
metacognitive judgments than unrelated titles. Second, the
results of the study showed that delayed keywording does
not only foster relative monitoring accuracy (i.e. the ability
to distinguish between well and less-well learned texts), but
also prevents overestimation bias (i.e. the tendency to
overestimate oneself) to a larger extent than immediate
keywording. Third, the results of the study showed that
titles and the timing of keywording tasks interact with
regard to certain learning tasks. This finding raises the
question of how closely cognitive and metacognitive
processes are related – a question that may be very
interesting to investigate in further studies.

References

Britton, B. K., & Gülgöz, S. (1991). Using Kintsch’s
computational model to improve instructional text: Effects
of repairing inference calls on recall and cognitive
structures. Jounal of Educational Psychology, 83, 329–
345.
Butler, D. L. & Winne, P. H. (1995). Feedback and selfregulated learning: A theoretical synthesis. Review of
Educational Research, 65, 245–281.
Dinsmore, D.L., Alexander, P.A. & Loughlin, S.M. (2008).
Focusing the conceptual lens on metacognition, selfregulation, and self-regulated learning. Educational
Psychological Review, 20, 391-409.
Koriat, A. (1997). Monitoring one’s own knowledge during
study: A cue-utilization approach to judgments of
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
126, 349 –370.
Lorch, R. F., Jr. & Lorch, E. P. (1996). Effects of
organizational signals on free recall of expository text.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 38-48.
Meyer, B. J. F. (1975). The organization of prose and its
effects on memory. New York: American Elsevier
Publishing.
Paulhus, D.L. & John, O.P.(1998). Egoistic and moralistic
biases in self-perception – The interplay of self-deceptive
styles with basic traits and Motives. Journal of
Personality, 66 (6).
Ritchey, K., Schuster, J. & Allen, J. (2008). How the
relationship between text and headings influences readers‘
memory. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 33, 859874.
Thiede, K. W., Anderson, M. C. M. & Therriault, D. (2003).
Accuracy of metacognitive monitoring affects learning of
texts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95 (1), 66- 73.
Thiede, K. W., & Dunlosky, J. (1999). Toward a general
model of selfregulated study: An analysis of selection of
items for study and selfpaced study time. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,and
Cognition, 25, 1024–1037.
Thiede, K.W., Dunlosky, J., Griffin, T.D. &Wiley, J.
(2005). Understanding the Delayed-Keyword Effect on
Metacomprehension Accuracy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31 (6).
Sadoski, M., Goetz, E.T. & Rodriguez, M. (2000). Engaging
Texts: Effects of concreteness on comprehensibility,
interest, and recall in four text types. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 92 (1), 85 – 95.

Acknowledgements
The present study was funded by the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD), as well as the Gesellschaft von
Freunden und Förderern der TU Dresden (GFF). The
authors thank David Philhour (CSU Chico) for statistical
support and insight.

Ausubel, D. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive
view. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.

2919

