UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Response and Presentation Format on Measures of Approximate Number System
Acuity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8dh0245v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lindskog, Marcus
Winman, Anders
Juslin, Peter

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Response and Presentation Format on Measures of Approximate
Number System Acuity
Marcus Lindskog (marcus.lindskog@psyk.uu.se), Anders Winman (anders.winman@psyk.uu.se), Peter Juslin
(peter.juslin@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, P. O Box 1225,
Uppsala, 751 42 Sweden

Abstract
Human adults, infants, and non-human animals are believed
to be equipped with an Approximate Number System (ANS)
supporting non-symbolic representations of numerical
magnitudes. Recent research has questioned both the validity
and reliability of tasks intended to measure acuity in the ANS.
Issues with validity and reliability might be due to differences
in methodology. In the present study, we compare four tasks
designed to measure ANS acuity, using a within-subjects
design. The tasks are compared with respect to response and
presentation format effects previously studied in the
psychophysics literature, but largely ignored in the ANS
literature. We find a presentation format effect and show that
when non-symbolic numerical stimuli are presented
sequentially the magnitude of the second stimulus is
overestimated. Further, the results indicate that people’s
sensitivity
to
differentiate
between
non-symbolic
numerosities is dependent on response format. The
implications of the results to measures of ANS acuity are
discussed.
Keywords: Approximate number system, response format,
presentation format, validity, reliability

Introduction
Imagine walking in the countryside. As you approach a
large field you spot two flocks of sheep, one with only white
sheep and one with only black sheep, and amuse yourself by
making a snapshot judgment of whether there are more
white than black sheep. Later in your walk, you encounter
another two flocks of sheep. This time the two flocks
emerge from a tunnel, one flock after the other, separated by
some short time interval. Once again, you test your
judgment skills by deciding which of the two flocks that is
the more numerous.
Human adults, infants and non-human animals have a
common ability to represent numerical magnitudes, such as
the number of sheep, without using symbols (Feigenson,
Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004). The core cognitive system
supporting this ability, the Approximate Number System
(ANS), represents magnitudes in an approximate fashion
with representations becoming increasingly imprecise as
numerosity increases (Dehaene, 2009; but see, Brannon,
Wusthoff, Gallistel, & Gibbon, 2001).
The accuracy with which the ANS can represent
numerical magnitudes, often referred to as the acuity of the
ANS, is conceptualized as the smallest change in
numerosity that can be reliably detected and is often
quantified by a Weber fraction (w). Acuity in the ANS
progresses (i.e., w decreases) developmentally from

childhood to adolescence (Halberda & Feigenson, 2008;
Halberda, Ly, Wilmer, Naiman, & Germine, 2012) but even
among adults there is considerable individual variability
(e.g., Halberda & Feigenson, 2008; Halberda et al., 2012;
Tokita & Ishiguchi, 2010).
Studies using brain imaging have identified a neurological
basis for the ANS in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) on the
lateral surface of the parietal lobe (Castelli, Glaser, &
Butterworth, 2006). Within the IPS, specialized neurons
(numerons) sensitive to numerosity have been identified in
macaque monkeys (Nieder, Freedman, & Miller, 2002). The
IPS, however, is not only activated by non-numerical
stimuli. In humans, it is also activated when they observe
numbers in different modalities and when they perform
simple arithmetic tasks (Piazza, Izard, Pinel, Le Bihan, &
Dehaene, 2004). That the IPS is activated for a wide variety
of numerical stimuli suggests a relationship between ANS
acuity and achievement in formal mathematics. Such a
relationship has been documented with children, even when
controlling for a large number of cognitive abilities,
(Halberda, Mazzocco, & Feigenson, 2008; Inglis, Attridge,
Batchelor, & Gilmore, 2011) but results from studies on
adults are mixed (Gebuis & van der Smagt, 2011; Inglis et
al., 2011; Price, Palmer, Battista, & Ansari, 2012).
At least part of the mixed results might be attributed to
differences in methodology. Recently the reliability and
validity of some of the most commonly used measures of
ANS acuity have been challenged (Gebuis & Van der
Smagt, 2011; Gilmore, Attridge, & Inglis, 2011; Lindskog,
Winman, Juslin, & Poom, 2013; Price et al., 2012) and
studies indicate that while some formats show reasonable
reliability and validity others are neither reliable nor valid
(Lindskog et al., 2013). The differences in reliability and
validity between different tasks that measure ANS acuity
highlight the question of whether task features influences
performance. Put differently, will you be better at deciding
which of the two flocks of sheep that is the more numerous
when you see them coming out of the tunnel, one flock at a
time, or when you see both flocks at the same time on the
field? The question of what factors that influence the
reliability of ANS acuity measures is important also because
reliability sets an upper limit on correlations between ANS
acuity and other cognitive abilities. The present study
addresses this question by comparing four ANS acuity
tasks, in a within-subjects design, that use different
presentation and response formats.

2908

Response and Presentation Formats
While ANS acuity tasks use response and presentation
formats that have been studied within the psychophysics
literature (e.g. Macmillan & Creelman, 2005) little or no
attention has been given to how the choice of format
influences the measures of ANS acuity per se. The typical
ANS acuity tasks present participants with two arrays of
non-symbolic stimuli. Most often the stimuli are dots (e.g.,
Halberda et al., 2008) but other types of stimuli, for example
arrays of squares, have also been used (e.g., Maloney,
Risko, Preston, Ansari, & Fugelsang, 2010). After being
presented with the two arrays participants’ ability to
differentiate between the numerosities of the two arrays is
tested using one of two response formats. With a
comparison format, similar to the two-alternative forced
choice (2AFC) procedure used in psychophysics
(Macmillan & Creelman, 2005), participants indicate which
of the two arrays that is the more numerous. For example,
Halberda et al. (2008) presented participants with two arrays
of dots, one array of yellow dots and one of blue dots, and
asked participants to indicate whether blue or yellow was
the more numerous color. In contrast, with a discrimination
format, similar to a same-different procedure used in
classification tasks in psychophysics (Macmillan &
Creelman, 2005), participants are to respond whether the
two arrays have the same amount of dots or if the amounts
of dots in the two arrays differ. The distinction between the
two formats is relevant because even though
psychophysicists have long known that the discrimination
format is notoriously more difficult than the comparison
format (Macmillan & Creelman, 2005) this difference has
not been acknowledged and investigated within the ANSliterature. Therefore, the present study compares the two
response formats directly in a within-subjects design.
In addition to the discrimination-comparison distinction,
tasks that measure ANS acuity can be classified with respect
to how the stimulus is presented temporally. With a
simultaneous presentation format, both arrays of stimuli are
presented at the same time. For example, in the study by
Halberda et al. (2008) the arrays of blue and yellow dots
were spatially intermixed and presented on a monitor at the
same time. In contrast to the simultaneous presentation
format, several studies have employed a sequential
presentation format (e.g., Gilmore et al., 2011) where the
two arrays are presented one at a time, separated temporally
by a short interstimulus interval (ISI). Two reasons make
the presentation format distinction important. First, previous
research has indicated that while tasks using a simultaneous
presentation format exhibit a reasonably good validity, tasks
with a sequential presentation format do not (Lindskog et
al., 2013). Second, the introduction of an ISI in 2AFC tasks
has been shown to introduce a bias, the time-order-error
(TOE), where the second stimulus is commonly judged
larger more often than the first (Hellström, 1985; Macmillan
& Creelman, 2005). Consequently, a sequence presenting

the two arrays as; Less numerous → More numerous, would
be correctly reported more often than the opposite sequence;
More numerous → Less numerous. Whether a TOE exists or
not in ANS acuity tasks is an empirical and potentially
important question. In the present study, we compare the
two presentation formats and investigate if a TOE is present
in ANS acuity tasks when using the sequential presentation
format together with the comparison response format.

The Present Study
Experiment 1 was designed to investigate the effects of
presentation format and response format on performance in
non-symbolic number differentiation tasks (i.e., ANS acuity
tasks). To foreshadow the results; the experiment
documented a TOE with a sequential presentation format
and a comparison response format. Experiment 2 was
designed to investigate the origin of the TOE by the use of
direct estimates of non-symbolic numerosities. Experiment
1 also documented an effect of response format with better
performance in the comparison than the discrimination
format. We designed Experiment 3 to investigate if this
effect was due to features of the ANS or due to a difference
in sensitivity related to task features.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants performed four tasks designed
to measure ANS acuity. The tasks were modeled from those
used in previous research on ANS acuity. The experiment
was designed to compare response formats and presentation
formats in general and more specifically to investigate if
two classical phenomena documented in the psychophysics
literature,
the
time-order-error
and
the
comparison/discrimination difference, were present in tasks
measuring ANS acuity.

Method
Participants. Participants (10 Male, 20 Female) were
undergraduate students from Uppsala University with a
mean age of 26.1 years (SD = 6.6 years). They received a
movie ticket or course credits for their participation.
Materials and procedure. Participants carried out a set of
four tasks, described in detail below and illustrated in Figure
1. The order of tasks was counterbalanced using a Latin
square. In none of the tasks did participants receive
feedback on their performance.
Parallel comparison. The parallel comparison task was
based on Halberda et al. (2008). On each of the 200 trials,
participants saw spatially intermixed blue and yellow dots
on a monitor. Exposure time (200ms) was too short for the
dots to be serially counted. We used five ratios between the
numerosity of the two arrays of dots (1:2, 3:4, 5:6, 7:8,
9:10) with the total number of dots varying between 11 and
30. One fifth of the trials consisted of each ratio. Half of the

2909

trials had blue and half had yellow as the more numerous
set. The dots varied randomly in size. To counteract the use
of perceptual cues dot arrays were matched for total area on
half of the trials and for average dot-size on the other half of
the trials. The participants judged which set was more
numerous by pressing a color-coded keyboard button.

(parallel/sequential)
and
response
format
(comparison/discrimination) as within-subjects independent
variables. This analysis showed a significant main effect of
presentation format (F(1,29) = 55.6, p < .001) with better
performance with the sequential format (M =.73, SEM =
.009) than with the parallel format (M =.67, SEM = .008).
There was also a significant main effect of response format
(F(1,29) = 546.1, p < .001) with higher proportion correct
with the comparison (M =.81, SEM = .01) than with the
discrimination (M =.59, SEM = .008) format. The two-way
presentation format by response format interaction did not
reach significance (F < 1).There were no effects of the
order of the ANS tasks (F < 1).
In the two tasks using a sequential presentation format,
the dot arrays are presented in one of two orders, either the
larger or the smaller array came first. To investigate if this
ordering influenced performance we entered proportion
correct as dependent variable into a 2x2 repeated measures
ANOVA with response format (comparison/discrimination)
and array-size order (larger-smaller/smaller-larger) as
within-subjects independent variables. The significant
interaction (F(1,29) = 19.2, p < .001), illustrated in Figure 2,
show that while the array-size order does not influence
performance with the discrimination format there is a
significant and substantial difference between the two orders
with the comparison format.

Sequential comparison. The sequential comparison task
used the same stimuli as the parallel comparison task. Here,
however, the stimuli were presented sequentially and
separated by a 300 ms interstimulus interval. The order of
color, and whether the first or second array was the more
numerous, was counterbalanced over trials.
Parallel discrimination. The parallel discrimination task
presented the stimuli in the same way as the parallel
comparison task. Stimuli for half of the trials were created
as in the comparison tasks with the same ratios between the
numerosity of the two sets of dots and the same total
number of dots. For the second half of the trials, both sets of
dots (i.e. the blue and yellow set) had the same number of
dots. Using the same numerosities as when the two sets
differed in the number of dots resulted in the total number of
dots varying between 10 and 32. In addition, while the
comparison tasks required participants to determine whether
the blue or the yellow set of dots was the more numerate,
the parallel discrimination task asked participants to
determine if the two sets of dots had the same or different
amount of dots.
Sequential discrimination. The sequential discrimination
task used the same presentation format as the sequential
comparison task and the same response format and stimuli
as the parallel discrimination task.

Results and Discussion
Because the discrimination tasks do not easily allow for the
modeling of an individual weber fraction, and because
previous research (Lindskog et al., 2013) indicates that
proportion correct is just as reliable and valid as w, we used
proportion correct as a measure of performance in all of the
four tasks.
We compared performance in the four tasks by entering
proportion correct as dependent variable into a 2x2 repeated
measures
ANOVA
with
presentation
format

Figure 2: Proportion correct as a function of response format
and array order. Vertical bars denote 95 % - confidence
intervals.

2910

In the comparison format the order which presents the
smaller array first leads to significantly higher proportion
correct (M =.92 , SEM = .012) than the order which presents
the larger array first (M =.75 , SEM = .022). The analysis
thus suggested that there might be a TOE present.
A TOE may occur either because the first stimulus is
underestimated, because the second stimulus is
overestimated or because it is psychologically easier to
detect an increase in numerosity rather than a decrease. We
designed Experiment 2 to distinguish between these three
possibilities and to investigate the origin of the TOE when
using non-symbolic numerosities as stimuli.
The response format effect might emerge for at least two
different and independent reasons. First, it might be a
feature of the ANS that it is adapted to detect the direction
of a difference. For example, the ANS might have
developed to determine that bush A contains more berries
than bush B, rather than to just determine that there is a
difference in the amount of berries on the two bushes.
Second, it might be that participants’ sensitivity is higher
with the comparison format than with the discrimination
format as suggested by signal detection theory (Macmillan
& Creelman, 2005). We designed Experiment 3 to
distinguish between these two possibilities.

position. Participants were told that if they altogether had
missed a presentation of stimuli, they could indicate this by
entering an error code.

Results and Discussion
Stimuli for which participants indicated that they had
missed the presentation, as well as outlier responses (|z| > 3)
were excluded from the analysis. These data made up 2.3%
of the responses. There were no effects of color sequence
order or stimulus type (size/area controlled).
Figure 3 shows judgments for control stimuli that
appeared in isolated presentations. As can be seen in the
figure, ratings were quite sensitive to the number of dots
(F(2, 38) = 38.0, p < .001, one-way repeated measures
ANOVA), but with a slight overestimation (the actual
number is depicted in the dotted line in the figure).
Figure 4 shows the data of the two presentation positions
and different numerosities. As can be seen in the figure,
ratings are higher in the second presentation position.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 investigated the origin of the TOE observed in
Experiment 1. Participants made direct estimates of the
number of displayed dots in a task closely matching the
sequential tasks from Experiment 1.

Method
Participants. Twenty undergraduate students took part in
the study, 12 females and 8 males. Average age was 24.8
(SD = 5.49). Participants received a cinema voucher or
course credits for their participation.

Figure 3: Mean judgments of the three numerosities when
presented separately (dotted line shows actual numerosity).
Vertical bars denote 95 % - confidence intervals.

Stimulus and procedure. Stimuli were three numbers of
dots (8, 11, and 14) that were presented in temporal
sequence in stimulus pairs (e.g. 8 – 11, 14 – 8 etc.) in a
randomized order in a fully crossed design (two presentation
positions (first/second) by three numerosities (8/11/14)).
The dots were either blue or yellow. The sequence of colors
was always the same for each participant, but randomized
between subjects. Each stimulus pair was presented 9 times.
Intermixed with these stimulus pairs each numerosity also
occurred in isolation as a control. Together this made up 96
trials per participant. The numerosities were presented for
200ms, with a blank interstimulus interval of 300ms. Half of
the trials were controlled for average dot-size, half for
cumulative area. The task consisted of directly estimating
the number of dots. This was done by entering a single
number (for control stimuli) or two numbers with the
keyboard. The input box was color coded, and always
occurred in a left/right fashion corresponding to first/second

Figure 4: Mean judgments of the three numerosities for each
presentation position (first /second). Vertical bars denote 95
% - confidence intervals.

2911

A two-way ANOVA with numerosity (8/11/14) and
stimulus presentation position (first/second) as independent
within-subjects variables and judged numerosity as
dependent variable shows that this presentation position
effect is statistically significant (F(1,19) = 34.5, p < .001).
The interaction was not significant (F(2, 38) = 1.8, p = .17)
A one-way ANOVA with condition (control/1st
presentation/2nd presentation) as independent variable
shows a significant effect on absolute error (F(2, 38) = 11.4,
p < .001). Error was lowest in the control condition (M =
1.93, SEM = .26), higher in the first presentation position (M
= 2.16, SEM = .27) and highest in the second presentation
position (M = 2.55, SEM = .34). A Scheffé’s post hoc test
revealed that the error in the second presentation position
was statistically significant from the two other conditions,
which did not differ significantly from each other. The
means of the absolute difference between participants’
estimates and the three numerosities 8, 11, and 14 (i.e. the
absolute error) were 1.42, 2.16, and 2.28 respectively. This
increase in absolute error was statistically significant
(F(2,38) = 6.8, p = .00292).
The results of Experiment 2 show that when two
numerosities occur in a brief temporal sequence, separated
by a short interval, the second numerosity is rated as more
numerous than the first, and with a larger error. There is no
clear indication of interference in the reversed temporal
direction, presenting a second numerosity does apparently
not have a deteriorating effect on the judgment of the first
numerosity. The results support the one of the proposed
explanations for the TOE found in Experiment 1;
Participants’ better performance with the smaller → larger
presentation order than with the larger → smaller order is
due to the inflation in experienced numerosity of the second
stimulus. This effect leads to participants correctly
identifying this order, but will hinder performance on the
larger → smaller sequence.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we added an extra response alternative to
the comparison format. In addition to answering whether the
blue or yellow array was the more numerous, participants
could also respond that they had the same numerosity. If a
feature of the ANS is that it is adapted to detect direction
(i.e. to detect that A > B rather than just that A ≠ B) we
expected better performance with this new response format
than with a discrimination format as a result of increased
performance on trials with different amount of dots.
However, if the effect from Experiment 1 could be
attributed to a change in sensitivity, the opposite was
expected because adding the extra response alternative
would make the task harder.

Method
Participants. The participants
participated in Experiment 3.

from

Experiment

2

Materials and procedure. Half of the participants carried
out the two comparison tasks described in Experiment 1.
The other half carried out the same tasks but with an
alteration to the response format. The alteration combines
the response formats of the comparison and discrimination
tasks in Experiment 1. In the original discrimination tasks,
participants could respond same or different while the
comparison format had blue and yellow as response
alternatives. In the modified task, participants had three
response options: blue, yellow, and same. All other features
of the task were identical to the comparison tasks of
Experiment 1. The order of tasks was counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
We compared performance in the four tasks by entering
proportion correct as dependent variable into a 2x2 split-plot
ANOVA with presentation format (parallel/sequential) as
within-subjects independent variable and response format
(same-different/yellow-same-blue) as between-subjects
independent variable. Both the main effect of presentation
format (F(1,18) = 36.3, p < .001) and the main effect of
response format (F(1,18) = 20.4, p < .001) were significant
while the interaction was not (F < 1). Participants in the
same-different condition performed better (M = .61, SEM =
.012) than did those in the yellow-same-blue condition (M =
.51, SEM = .012). Further, and replicating the results from
Experiment 1, performance was better in the sequential (M
= .60, SEM = .013) than in the parallel presentation format
(M = .52, SEM = .011).
These results show that the response format difference
from Experiment 1 was eliminated, and even reversed, when
an extra response alternative was added to the comparison
format. This indicates that the discrimination format is more
difficult than the comparison format and that the difference
seen in Experiment 1 could be accounted for by a difference
in sensitivity. However, even though the results lend support
for a sensitivity explanation it does not exclude the
possibility that the ANS is adapted not only to detect
differences but also to detect the direction of a difference.
This should be a question for future research to examine in
more detail.

General Discussion
Recently, a large body of research has investigated the ANS
and its relationship to mathematical achievement. This
research has used several different tasks to measure ANS
acuity. The present study extends previous research by
investigating response and presentation format effects on
performance in ANS acuity tasks and shows that
comparisons between tasks might not always be
straightforward.
In Experiment 1, we found three effects with potentially
important implications. First, the sequential presentation
format yielded approximately 8% (.72 vs. .67) better
performance than the parallel format. In ANS experiments

2912

were w, which is modeled on proportion correct (e.g.,
Halberda et al., 2008), rather than proportion correct is used
as a performance measure this corresponds to a 30-45%
difference in w for a typical participant (w = [.15 - .20]).
Thus, changing the presentation format can give rise to a
substantial difference in estimated w.
Second, in the sequential comparison task the order of
stimulus was found to affect performance, similar to a TOE.
Experiment 2 showed that the effect was due to an
overestimation of the second stimulus compared to the
control stimulus while no such bias could be found for the
first stimulus. While it remains for future research to
determine why the second stimulus is overestimated, one
possibility could be residual activation in the IPS from the
first stimulus. The effect has implications for measurements
of ANS acuity. First, it will be necessary for future research
using a sequential presentation format to counterbalance the
order of stimulus for each ratio. Second, counterbalancing
the order of stimulus might not be sufficient if numerosities
are used that give rise to asymmetric differences in
proportion correct. That is if the gain in one presentation
order is larger/smaller than the loss in the opposite order. It
remains for future research to investigate such asymmetries.
Finally, performance with a comparison format was
significantly better than with a discrimination format. We
proposed two possible explanations for this effect, that the
ANS is adapted to detect direction or a difference in
sensitivity, and showed in Experiment 3 that the latter was
supported. This suggests that research on ANS acuity might
benefit from, in addition to w and proportion correct,
introducing a measure of sensitivity as a performance
measure. The pattern of results, however, does not exclude
the possibility of the ANS being a system adapted to detect
the direction of a difference. This possibility should be an
intriguing question for future research.

Acknowledgments
This research was sponsored by the Swedish Research
Council. We thank Håkan Nilsson, Philip Millroth, Leo
Poom, and Mona Guath for valuable comments on earlier
versions of the manuscript.

References
Brannon, E. M., Wusthoff, C. J., Gallistel, C. R., & Gibbon,
J. (2001). Numerical subtraction in the pigeon: Evidence
for a linear subjective
number scale. Psychological
Science, 12, 238–243.
Castelli, F., Glaser, D. E., & Butterworth, B. (2006).
Discrete and analogue quantity processing in the parietal
lobe: A functional MRI study. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 103, 4693–4698.
Dehaene, S. (2009). Origins of Mathematical Intuitions.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1156, 232–
259.

Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 307–
314.
Gebuis, T., & Van der Smagt, M. J. (2011). False
approximations of the Approximate Number System?
PLoS ONE, 6, e25405.
Gilmore, C., Attridge, N., & Inglis, M. (2011). Measuring
the approximate number system. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 64, 2099–2109.
Halberda, J., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Developmental
change in the acuity of the “number sense”: The
approximate number system in 3-, 4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds
and adults. Developmental Psychology, 44, 1457–1465.
Halberda, J., Ly, R., Wilmer, J. B., Naiman, D. Q., &
Germine, L. (2012). Number sense across the lifespan as
revealed by a massive Internet-based sample. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 11116–11120.
Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M. M. M., & Feigenson, L. (2008).
Individual differences in non-verbal number acuity
correlate with maths achievement. Nature, 455, 665–668.
Hellström, Å. (1985). The time-order error and its relatives:
Mirrors of cognitive processes in comparing.
Psychological Bulletin, 97, 35–61.
Inglis, M., Attridge, N., Batchelor, S., & Gilmore, C.
(2011). Non-verbal number acuity correlates with
symbolic mathematics achievement: But only in children.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 1222–1229.
Lindskog, M., Winman, A., Juslin, P. & Poom, L. (2013).
Measuring approximate number system acuity reliably. In
preparation.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection
theory: a user’s guide (2nd ed.). Mahwah, N.J: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Maloney, E. A., Risko, E. F., Preston, F., Ansari, D., &
Fugelsang, J. (2010). Challenging the reliability and
validity of cognitive measures: The case of the numerical
distance effect. Acta Psychologica, 134, 154–161.
Nieder, A., Freedman, D. J., & Miller, E. K. (2002).
Representation of the quantity of visual items in the
primate prefrontal cortex. Science, 297, 1708–1711.
Piazza, M., Izard, V., Pinel, P., Le Bihan, D., & Dehaene, S.
(2004). Tuning curves for approximate numerosity in the
human intraparietal sulcus. Neuron, 44, 547–555.
Price, G. R., Palmer, D., Battista, C., & Ansari, D. (2012).
Nonsymbolic
numerical
magnitude
comparison:
Reliability and validity of different task variants and
outcome measures, and their relationship to arithmetic
achievement in adults. Acta Psychologica, 140, 50–57.
Tokita, M., & Ishiguchi, A. (2010). How might the
discrepancy in the effects of perceptual variables on
numerosity judgment be reconciled? Attention, Perception
& Psychophysics, 72, 1839–1853.

2913

