UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Encoding time and allocation of attention in analogical development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34t5t9fd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Simms, Nina
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Encoding time and allocation of attention in analogical development
Nina Simms (ninasimms@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60202 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60202 USA

Abstract
The aim of the current studies was to explore encoding time
differences in objects and relations and to investigate whether
these differences lead to differences in allocation of attention
to object similarity. Using a match-to-sample paradigm with
5- to 6-year-olds and adults, we found that (1) objects were
encoded faster than relations for both adults and children, and
that (2) children, but not adults, preferentially allocated
attention to object similarity. Ultimately, these questions are
aimed at identifying the factors responsible for the
development of adult-like analogical reasoning. We suggest
that changes in selective attention over development may
account for the pattern of results seen across these two
studies.
Keywords: analogical development; relational reasoning;
selective attention; encoding time

Introduction
Reasoning by analogy is a fundamental and powerful aspect
of human cognition (Gentner, Holyoak & Kokinov, 2001).
Analogical reasoning is based on relational similarity. That
is, two situations are analogous if they share a common
relational structure (e.g., lava lamps and plate tectonics are
both characterized by a system of convection); superficial
commonalities like the perceptual features of the objects
involved are generally irrelevant. However, reasoning on the
basis of relational similarity is not trivial. Two analogous
situations may share superficial commonalities that conflict
with an alignment based on relational similarity. For
example, to appreciate that 1:3 :: 3:9, one must understand
that the relationship that holds between 1 and 3 is the same
relationship that holds between 3 and 9. Based on this
shared relationship, the two smaller numbers in each
proportion correspond (1  3) and the two larger numbers
correspond (3  9). In this case, the identity match between
the two 3s must be disregarded, since this correspondence (3
 3) is inconsistent with the overall relational match.
Although 1:3 :: 3:9 may not seem like a particularly
challenging analogy for adults, instances where relational
similarity conflicts with object similarity can be very
challenging for young children (Gentner, 1988; Richland,
Morrison & Holyoak, 2006) In cases like these, children
will often reason on the basis of object similarity rather than
relational similarity. This tendency is referred to as the
object bias, but over development (with age as well as
experience), a relational shift occurs whereby children

become increasingly adept at reasoning on the basis of
relational rather than object similarity (Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991).
For example, Gentner and Toupin (1986) gave 6-year-old
children a simple story and asked them to reenact it with
new characters. They performed well when the
corresponding characters were highly similar between the
two stories, but performed very badly when similar
characters played different roles across the two stories (the
cross-mapped condition). Further studies have corroborated
this finding that when relational similarity is pitted against
object similarity children tend to be highly influenced by
object matches and less able to attend to relational matches.
For example, Richland and colleagues (2006) found the
same pattern of results in a picture-matching task. The
pictures depicted the same event structure, and the task was
to point out correspondences based on the event patterns.
When the object matches were inconsistent with the
relational match, younger children were greatly impeded in
choosing the correct relational match. This pattern of
results, in which object similarity disrupts young children’s
analogical reasoning, has been found repeatedly in a variety
of analogical tasks (Gentner & Rattermann, 1991) and even
across cultures (Richland, Chan, Morrison, & Au, 2010).
The object bias is a robust and well-documented
phenomenon, but a clear understanding of why it occurs is
still lacking. Most accounts of analogical development that
address the object bias implicitly or explicitly appeal to
some processing difference (or differences) between objects
and relations to explain the bias. Some of these differences
include representational complexity, familiarity or fluency,
salience, and automaticity. Improvements in relational
reasoning over development are then explained by changes
in this processing difference, and/or by improvements in
some additional capacity that tempers the effects of these
processing differences. For example, accounts of analogical
development that emphasize the role of relational
knowledge suggest that children are familiar with more
object concepts than relational concepts, but as children
gain more relational knowledge, and as this knowledge
becomes more fluent, they become able to focus on
relational similarity (Gentner, 1988, 2003). Other accounts
appeal to the idea that object similarity is more salient than
relational similarity, and that improvements in inhibitory
control over development allow children to combat the

1318

influence of salient object similarity when reasoning about
relations (Richland et al., 2006).
Without a clear understanding of the processing
differences between objects and relations, it is difficult to
precisely explain the object bias and to pinpoint what
changes over development to decrease this bias. Thus, the
goals of the present studies are to: (1) investigate one
operationalization of processing differences in objects and
relations, namely encoding time; (2) explore how encoding
time differences impact analogical reasoning, in particular
how it affects allocation of attention; and (3) examine how
these patterns change over development.
Encoding time differences are a promising potential
difference to investigate for a number of reasons. First, of
the many proposed processing differences between objects
and relations, faster encoding of objects than relations
would be predicted by – or at least consistent with – nearly
all of them. Second, prior research suggests that objects are
encoded faster than relations by adults (Goldstone & Medin,
1994; Sagi, Gentner & Lovett, 2012), and it is likely that
such a difference exists for young children as well. Finally,
encoding time differences may have important
consequences for how analogical reasoning unfolds.
During analogical reasoning, two representations are
aligned so that elements from each are placed into
correspondence with one another. According to StructureMapping Theory (SMT – Gentner, 1983; and modeled by
SME – Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner, 1989), alignment
is an incremental, multi-stage process. The mapping process
begins with individual identical elements from each
representation – including features, objects, and relations –
being placed into correspondence with one another. These
initial correspondences are promiscuous; individual
elements may map to multiple other elements (e.g., both cat
 cat and cat  boy). In successful analogical reasoning,
the final one-to-one correspondences are based upon shared
relational structure (e.g., chase  chase; therefore, catchaser  boy-chaser, mouse-fleer  cat-fleer).
We hypothesize that this incremental mapping process is
interleaved with encoding, which is also incremental
(Lovett, Gentner & Sagi, 2009). Pieces of the
representations become available at different times, and
correspondences between analogues are forged as these
pieces become available. Correspondences made early in the
mapping process may be particularly influential during
analogical reasoning. For example, they may guide attention
for further encoding and mapping (Kubose et al., 2002).
Early correspondences may also be privileged if initial,
incomplete mappings, rather than a full alignment, are used
to make a decision (i.e., “satisficing”, which young children
may be especially likely to do, cf. Thibaut, French, &
Vezneva, 2010). If objects are encoded faster than relations,
then object correspondences should also be found earlier,
resulting in attention initially being allocated to object
similarity. With a “satisficing” strategy, earlier object
correspondences would also lead to object-based (rather
than relation-based) reasoning.

The present studies use a match-to-sample task to explore
encoding time differences between objects and relations and
the impact of such differences on the allocation of attention
in children and adults. In Study 1 we ask whether objects
are encoded more quickly than relations (at least for the
stimuli used in these studies). In Study 2 we ask whether
encoding time differences predict attention to object
similarity. Integrating across these studies, we then ask what
might change over development to yield this pattern of
results.

Study 1
If objects are encoded faster than relations, then participants
should require less time to encode a stimulus in order to find
an object match and more time in order to find a relational
match. Thus, this study manipulated the amount of time
participants were given to encode a sample stimulus before
they were asked to find either the object match or the
relational match (a methodology used by Sloutsky and
Yarlas, as cited by Lovett et al., 2009).

Method
Participants Thirty-two adults and 41 5- and 6-year-olds
participated in this study. Adult participants came from the
undergraduate subject pool and received partial course
credit for their participation, or they were recruited from the
university area and given monetary compensation. Children
were recruited from an existing developmental research
database and given a book and t-shirt for participating.
Stimuli and Procedures This study used a match-to-sample
task administered on a touchscreen laptop. Stimuli consisted
of three shapes arranged in one of three patterns: ABA,
AAB, or BAA (Figure 1). On each trial, participants were
shown a sample stimulus, which disappeared and was
replaced by two choices. All participants completed two
versions of the task: object-matching, in which they had to
find the stimulus with the same shapes, and relationmatching, in which they had to find the stimulus with the
same pattern. In both versions, the incorrect foil did not
share objects or a relational pattern with the sample.
Participants selected their choice by touching it on the
screen.
Within each version of the matching task, there were three
sections: practice, long-encoding-time (LET) test trials, and
short-encoding-time (SET) test trials. The order of version
and short and long trials was fully counterbalanced. In the
practice sections, participants were shown an example triad
and the matching criterion was explained (“Find the one
with the same shapes/pattern”). Then, participants
completed several practice trials with feedback to ensure
that the task instructions were clear. Practice trials were
followed by a block of LET test trials or SET test trials.
LET trials displayed the sample stimulus for 1000ms. For

1319

adults, SET trials displayed the sample stimulus for 50ms,
and for children, 150ms.
We hypothesize that for both adults and children in this
study, objects will be encoded faster than relations.
Therefore, we expect high accuracy for object matching on
both LET and SET trials. In contrast, we expect high
accuracy for relational matching only on LET trials, in
which participants have had sufficient time to encode the
relational pattern in the sample; SET trials should not
provide enough time to encode the relational pattern, and
therefore participants should not be able to reliably select
the relational match in this case. In sum, we predict a
Version by Encoding Time interaction, with a larger effect
of Encoding Time for relation matching.

Figure 1: Example stimuli for Studies 1 and 2.

Results and Discussion
Results for Study 1 are shown in Figure 2.
Adults’ mean proportion correct was entered into a
2(Version) x 2(Encoding Time) repeated-measures
ANOVA. Overall, adults were more accurate on objectmatching than relation-matching, F(1,31) = 63.07, p < .001,
and more accurate on LET than SET trials, F(1,31) = 51.27,
p < .001. However, these main effects are best interpreted in
light of their interaction, F(1,31) = 25.27, p < .001. As
predicted, adults showed a larger decrement from shorter
encoding time for relation-matching than for objectmatching.
Children’s mean proportion correct was entered into a
2(Version) x 2(Encoding Time) repeated-measures
ANOVA. Like adults, children were overall more accurate
on object-matching than relation-matching, F(1,40) =
182.97, p < .001, and more accurate on LET than SET trials,
F(1,40) = 60.03, p < .001. The predicted Version x
Encoding Time interaction was marginally significant,
F(1,40) = 3.46, p < .10. As with adults, short encoding times
were more disruptive for relation-matching than for objectmatching.
These results support the hypothesis that for both children
and adults, objects are encoded faster than relations.
Although this may not be true in all cases, for the stimuli
used in this task, both groups needed less time to encode the
object information than the relational information. These
findings echo prior research suggesting that adults encode
objects more quickly than relations (Goldstone & Medin,
1994). To our knowledge, this is the first time this
processing difference has been shown for children as well.
What consequences might this difference have on
analogical reasoning? Assuming incremental and
interleaved encoding and mapping processes (Lovett et al.,
2009), information encoded early (i.e., object information)
could influence the allocation of attention during alignment.
Specifically, early-available object information should
initially direct attention toward object similarity. This would
predict that conflicting object similarity should disrupt
relational matching by diverting attention to the object
match, potentially leading to more errors (i.e., selecting the
object match instead of the relational match) and longer
latencies to correctly select the relational match (because
attention to the relational match should be delayed)
(Sloutsky & von Spiegel, 2004). However, for object
matching, conflicting relational matches should not disrupt
accuracy or response times (RTs). In Study 2, we explore
these predictions.

1320

Stimuli and Procedures This study used the same basic
match-to-sample task used in Study 1, with some
modifications. As in Study 1, stimuli consisted of three
shapes arranged in one of three patterns: ABA, AAB, or
BAA (Figure 1). Also as in Study 1, all participants
completed an object-matching and relation-matching
version, counterbalanced for order.
There were two primary differences between the tasks
used in Study 1 and Study 2. First, the encoding time
manipulation was removed. In Study 2, the sample was
displayed for 1500ms on all trials. Second, another type of
trial – a conflict trial – was added. On conflict trials, the foil
matched the sample on the non-relevant dimension. That is,
on the object-matching version, the incorrect foil was a
relational match, and on the relation-matching version, the
foil was an object match. These trials were interspersed with
no conflict trials, where the incorrect foil did not match the
sample at all (the type used in Study 1) (Figure 1).
If object similarity preferentially captures attention – one
possible consequence of faster object than relation encoding
– we expect participants to make more errors and respond
more slowly to conflict trials than no conflict trials on the
relation-matching task. However, participants should not
show this difference on the object-matching task.
Alternatively, if object similarity does not capture attention
(despite encoding time differences), we should not see this
asymmetrical pattern. In sum, a Version by Trial Type
interaction would suggest preferential attention to object
similarity.

Results and Discussion

Figure 2: Adults' and children's match-to-sample accuracy
in Study 1 by task version and encoding time.

Study 2
If object similarity captures attention as a result of early
object encoding, then the presence of conflicting object
similarity on a relation-matching task should result in more
errors and slower correct RTs compared to cases without
conflicting object similarity. In contrast, object matching
should be largely unaffected by the presence of conflicting
relational similarity. However, if this asymmetrical pattern
is not seen, it would suggest that object similarity is not
preferentially commanding attention, despite differences in
encoding time.

Method
Participants Thirty-two adults and 37 5- and 6-year-olds
participated in this study. Participants were recruited and
compensated as in Study 1.

Results for Study 2 are shown in Figure 3.
Adults’ mean proportion correct and RTs on correct trials
were entered into separate 2(Version) x 2(Trial Type)
repeated-measures ANOVAs. Adults were significantly
more accurate on the object-matching version than the
relation-matching version, F(1,31) = 10.92, p < .01. This
main effect of Version was modulated by an interaction with
Trial Type, F(1,31) = 4.31, p < .05. Adults showed a small
but reliable decrement in performance on the relationmatching task when a conflicting object match was present,
but no such difference on the object-matching task.
Consistent with faster encoding of objects than relations
found in Study 1, adults showed a main effect of Version in
their RTs. They made significantly faster correct responses
on the object-matching task than the relation-matching task,
F(1,31) = 7.94, p < .01. However, this did not interact with
Trial Type. That is, on both the object- and relationmatching versions, adults were equally fast to respond to
conflict and no-conflict trials.
Parallel analyses were carried out for children’s accuracy
and correct RTs. Children were significantly more accurate
on the object-matching version than the relation-matching
version, F(1,36) = 42.09, p < .001, and significantly more
accurate on no conflict than conflict trials, F(1,36) = 10.74,
p < .01. These factors also interacted, F(1,36) = 15.79, p <

1321

Figure 3: Adults’ and children’s accuracy and RT data from Study 2.
.001. The effect of conflict trials was larger for the relationmatching task than the object-matching task.
Children were also faster to respond correctly on the
object-matching task than the relation-matching task,
F(1,36) = 11.30, p < .01. Trial Type did not significantly
interact with Version, though the data do qualitatively
follow a pattern consistent with the accuracy results.
Specifically, compared to no conflict trials, conflict trials
showed longer latencies on the relation-matching task than
the object-matching task.
Though somewhat mixed, the pattern of accuracy and RT
results in Study 2 suggest a difference in adults’ and
children’s attention to object similarity. Children’s
performance resembles the pattern that would be predicted
if early object encoding led to preferential to object
similarity. Conflicting matches led to more errors and
longer RTs on the relation-matching task than the objectmatching task.
In contrast, adults’ performance suggests resilience
against conflicting object similarity. Conflicting object

matches did not increase response latencies on the relational
matching task, and the decrement in accuracy on relational
conflict trials was quite small. Altogether, the results from
Study 2 suggest that encoding time differences between
objects and relations may lead to preferential attention to
object similarity for children but not adults.

General Discussion
The aim of the current studies was to explore encoding time
differences in objects and relations and to investigate
whether these differences lead to differences in allocation of
attention to object similarity. Ultimately, these questions are
aimed at identifying the factors responsible for the
development of adult-like analogical reasoning.
In Study 1, we found that both children and adults
encoded objects faster than relations. Study 2 found a
pattern of object- and relation-matching that suggested
children, more than adults, preferentially allocated attention
to object similarity (but see Sloutsky & von Spiegel, 2004).
Thus, we see continuity in a basic processing difference

1322

between objects and relations, but the consequences of this
difference for analogical reasoning behavior changed over
development. Together, the results of Studies 1 and 2
implicate a change in an additional factor as key in
explaining the difference in children’s and adults’
susceptibility to conflicting object similarity.
We think our results are best explained by a change in
selective attention over development. Although adults
encoded objects faster than relations, object similarity did
not capture their attention when relational similarity was the
relevant matching criterion. Thus, it seems that adults were
able to selectively attend to the relational information,
despite the earlier availability of object information,
whereas children were not. Further work is needed to build a
strong case for the role of selective attention in analogical
development. However, this account is consistent with other
studies of analogical reasoning in children (e.g., Thibaut, et
al., 2010).
Future research will also need to explore how selective
attention interacts with other factors implicated in
analogical development. For example relational language
has been proposed to aid relational thinking in a number of
ways (Gentner, 2010). Performance on difficult analogical
reasoning tasks can often be improved by providing children
with language to describe the relevant relations (e.g.,
Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005). With regards to selective
attention, an intriguing possibility is that relational language
may strengthen top-down control of attention to relational
information.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by SILC (the Spatial Intelligence
and Learning Center), an NSF Science of Learning Center,
grant SBE-0541957. The authors would like to thank David
Uttal, Steve Franconeri, and the Cognition and Language
Group for invaluable feedback on this project. Many thanks
also go to Laura Willig, Ashley Poltermann, and the RAs of
the Project on Children’s Thinking for their assistance in
conducting this research.

Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10, 277-300.
Kubose T .T., Holyoak K .J., Hummel J. E. (2002). The role
of textual coherence in incremental analogical mapping.
Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 407-435.
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-353.
Lovett, A., Gentner, D., Forbus, K., & Sagi, E. (2009).
Using analogical mapping to simulate time-course
phenomena in perceptual similarity. Cognitive Systems
Research, 10, 216-228.
Richland, L. E., Chan, T. K., Morrison, R. G., & Au, T. K.
F. (2010). Young children’s analogical reasoning across
cultures: Similarities and differences. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 146-153.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J. (2006)
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249-273.
Sagi, E., Gentner, D. & Lovett, A. (2012). What difference
reveals about similarity. Cognitive Science, 36, 10191050.
Sloutsky, V. M. & von Spiegel, J. (2004). Automatic
processing of elements interferes with processing of
relations. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier
(Eds.), Proceedings of the XXVI Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thibaut J., French R., & Vezneva M. (2010). The
development of analogy making in children: Cognitive
load and executive functions. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 106, 1–19.

References
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping children’s learning:
Analogical processes and symbol systems. Cognitive
Science, 34, 752-775.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N. (Eds.).
(2001). The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Goldstone, R. L., & Medin, D. L. (1994). Similarity,
interactive activation, and mapping. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition, 20, 3-28.

1323

