UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
English/Italian Bilinguals Switch Gesture Parameters when they Switch Languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6tp989dh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Cavicchio, Federica
Kita, Sotaro

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

English/Italian Bilinguals Switch Gesture Parameters when they Switch Languages
Federica Cavicchio (federica.cavicchio@unitn.it)
Center for Mind/Brain Science, Corso Bettini 31
Rovereto (Tn), 38068 IT
and
School of Psychology, University of Birmingham
Edgbaston, B15 2TT UK

Sotaro Kita (kita.s @bham.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Birmingham
Edgbaston, B15 2TT UK

transfer was found. Nicoladis and colleagues explained their
results claiming that bilinguals have more “choices” about
how to package verbal messages with respect to
monolinguals. Therefore, bilinguals gesture more than
monolinguals (see also Pika et al., 2006). On the other hand,
a study by So (2010) found gesture transfer between
American English and Mandarin Chinese in EnglishMandarin bilinguals in Singapore. American English
monolinguals gestured significantly more than Mandarin
speaking monolinguals. Bilinguals gestured more when
speaking Mandarin than the Mandarin monolingual control
group, and when speaking English, they gestured at about
the same rate as English monolinguals.
Another gesture parameter that varies across cultures is
gesture size. Since the seminal study of Efron (1941/1972)
comparing Jewish and Italian immigrants’ gestures, we
know that in different cultures gestures differ in how they
are performed in the space. In particular, Efron observed
that Italian immigrants’ gestures were spatially expansive,
moving the entire arm from the shoulder joint, and tended to
occupy the lateral (transversal) plane. More recently, Müller
(1998) compared the gesture space of native Spanish and
German speakers involved in a naturalistic conversation task
with a language matching confederate. She found that
Spanish speakers produced more gestures in the space above
their shoulder than German speakers. Interestingly, Müller
did not find difference in gesture rates between German and
Spanish. She suggested that the difference in gesture
salience create an ‘illusion’ that Mediterranean region
cultures gesture more frequently than north European
cultures.
Gesture size is an interesting variable to consider for
gesture transfer in bilinguals. First, gesture size varies crossculturally: bigger in Mediterranean cultures than in northern
European cultures. Second, gesture size is determined by
different psychological processes than gesture rates (Chu,
Meyer, Foulkes & Kita, under review). Thus, gestural
transfer or lack of transfer for gesture rates and gesture size
may shed light on the relationship between speech and
gesture production processes. However, no previous studies
have investigated gesture size in bilinguals.
Because the evidence for transfer of gesture rates in the

Abstract
We investigated gestural communication in early bilinguals. In
particular, we tested which aspects of gestures were “transferred”
from a language to another. Though transfer in spoken languages
has been studied extensively, transfer in gesture is understudied.
Gesture transfer can provide useful information on the cognitive
architecture in bilingualism. In this study our focus is on gesture
rate and gesture space in Italian/English bilinguals. Contrary to
previous findings, we have no evidence of transfer. When
bilinguals switch language, their gesture parameters switch
accordingly. The switch of gesture (cultural) parameters such as
rate and salience show that language and gesture are tightly linked.
This suggests that a language and the corresponding gesture
parameters might be selected in a high level processing stage at
which verbal and nonverbal aspects of communication are planned
together.
Keywords: bilingualism; gesture rate; gesture space;
linguistic transfer; gesture transfer; lexical access.

Introduction
Different languages and cultures use gestures differently.
For example, Italian is reported as a high gesture frequency
language (Barzini, 1964; Kendon, 1992, 1995), as opposed
to (British) English, described as a low gesture frequency
language (Graham and Argyle, 1975).
It has been claimed that bilinguals’ gesture use is linked
to their proficiency in the two spoken languages. A common
measure of gesture use is gesture rate (the number of
gestures performed over the number of words uttered).
Sherman and Nicoladis (2004) found no differences
between bilinguals’ gesture rate when participants have an
equal proficiency in both their languages (Canadian English
and Spanish, where Spanish is supposed to be a high
frequency gesture rate language). Those studies (Nicoladis
et al., 1999; Pika, et al., 2006), however, are not very
informative about whether or gestural transfer occurs due to
the limitation in the design; for example they lack one of the
monolingual control groups (see Nicoladis, 2007).
The evidence for gestural transfer in the literature is
mixed. In a study on English/French bilingual children in
Canada Nicoladis and colleagues (2005) found that
bilinguals tend to gestures more than both the two
monolingual control groups, but no evidence for gestural

305

literature is mixed and there are no studies on transfer of
gesture space, we investigate transfer of gesture rates and
gesture space in Italian-English bilinguals. We tested two
monolingual control groups so that we can properly address
the question whether parameters of gesture production
transfer in bilinguals and whether bilinguals gesture
differently from monolinguals. The two monolingual
control groups of English and Italian speakers matched with
the bilinguals for gender, age and education background.
We focused on highly proficient Italian/English early
bilinguals (i.e. they learned both languages before age 6)
who had a very similar fluency in both languages.
Bilinguals and monolinguals described the exact same
stimuli in each language to a confederate language matching
speaker. Differently from previous studies using long
cartoons that were edited in shorter scenes, our stimuli
consisted of 10 single-scene cartoons.

Figure 1: On the left panel, an example of the Tomato man
cartoons used to elicit participants’ gestures. In this movie
Tomato man is “rolling down the hill”. On the right panel, a
participant describes the cartoon. The two dotted concentric
squares define the gesture space: centre (the inner square)
and periphery (the outer square).

Method
Procedure
Participants were seated at approximately 40 cm from the
computer screen. An assistant pressed the mouse button to
start the experiment. After the participants saw the first
stimulus they turned toward a listener sitting near the
camera and described what they had just seen. The
monolingual participants repeated twice the task in the same
language to two listeners who are native speakers of the
relevant language. The bilingual participants repeated the
task once in Italian, talking to a native speaker of Italian,
and once in English to a native speaker of English.
The order of the stimuli was counterbalanced. In
particular the stimuli run from clip 1 to clip 10 for the
forward order and from 10 to 1 for the backward one. For
bilinguals, the order of the task repetition was
counterbalanced by language across participants.

Participants
30 participants (10 English native speakers, Females= 8
Males=2, age mean=22.3 years, recruited at the University
of Birmingham; 10 Italian native speakers, Females=8,
Males=2 age mean=23.1, recruited at the University of
Trento; and 10 English/Italian bilinguals, Females=8,
Males=2; age mean=23.8, recruited at the University of
Birmingham and Trento) took part to the experiment. All
the participants took a test to assess their linguistic
background (Gullberg & Indefrey, 2003) and the Controlled
Word Association Test (COWAT; see Loonstra et al., 2001
for a review) in English and Italian. The COWAT scores
ensured that participants were equally fluent in both
languages. The mean fluency score for bilinguals was 62.8
words in English and 62.2 words in Italian. The mean
fluency score for Italian native speakers was 63.4 words and
for English native speakers was 61.7 words.
The bilinguals enrolled in this study started speaking both
languages before age 6, while the native speakers of Italian
and English did not learn any other language before age 11
and were not fluent respectively in English or Italian. They
were all students enrolled at university bachelor or master
degrees.

Data Transcription and Analysis
Transcriptions
Two native speakers of Italian and English transcribed the
videotapes following the instruction manual. Disfluencies,
repetitions and laughter were transcribed with special fonts.
The transcriptions were checked for accuracy by a second
fluent speaker. All the transcriptions were reported in Elan
4.3.3 to ensure a correct time alignment with coverbal
gestures.
Gesture were transcribed and aligned with videos and
transcriptions.

Materials
Participants watched 10 Tomato man stimuli (Özyürek,
Kita, & Allen, 2001) depicting two characters (i.e. Tomato
man and the green Triangle) performing some actions (Fig.
1, left panel). The goal of these stimuli was eliciting the
description of manner and path in the verbal and gesture
modality as the participants described Tomato and Triangle
actions. The stimuli were presented on a 13-inch TFT
monitor at a resolution of 800x600. Stimulus presentation
was controlled by a PC running Power Point. The
participants were audio and video recorded with a Sanyo
Xacti HD2000 camera at a medium shot (i.e. they were shot
from up their head to their knees, Fig. 1, right panel).

Gesture Coding
We coded the gestures produced by participants when
telling the whole cartoon to the listeners.
In this paper we focus on two main aspect of gesture
production:
Gesture Rate was calculated as the number of gesture
produced by each participant describing each cartoon over

306

the number of words produced in each cartoon description
(Ngestures/Nwords).
Gesture Salience: Gesture salience was coded for the target
gesture performed during the cartoon description (e.g. rolls
up, tumble down etc.). To code salience we followed
McNeill (1992), who divided the gesture space into sectors
using a system of concentric squares. Our annotation coding
scheme reflects this notation dividing the gesture space in 2
sectors (see Fig. 1, left panel): “centre” and “periphery”.
When the gesture stroke was produced in the central sector,
the gesture was annotated with 0 (not salient), whereas
when the gesture stroke was produced in the periphery
sector, the gesture was annotated with 1 (salient).
To ensure the reliability of the adopted coding scheme, a
subset of the corpus (659 gesture tokens) was annotated by
three independent coders. For gesture salience we found a
high agreement above the chance level (Kappa = 0.89).

linear mixed effect model output. We treated the t values as
they were draw from a normal distribution, using the pnorm
function in R. A post hoc power analysis through simulation
(n simulations=1000) revealed that 27 participants per group
(81 participants in total) would be needed to obtain
statistical power at .80 level.
In Fig. 2 we report the mean values of gesture rate for
each group (monolingual or bilingual) in each language
(Italian and English).

Results
We analysed our data in a linear (for gesture frequency) and
a general (for gesture salience) mixed-effect model, as
implemented in the statistical package, R. The analysis was
run in R 2.15 using the package lme4, version 0.999999-0
(the function glmer was used for the gesture salience
analysis).

Gesture Rate
A linear mixed model was performed on Gesture Rate
(observations n=390). We fit the linear mixed model on
gesture rate using a “maximum model random slopes”
approach, i.e. calculating random (slopes and intercepts)
effects for subject and item as well as the following fixed
effects: language (Italian vs. English) and language status
(bilingual vs. monolingual) and the interaction between
language and language status. Because of the high
correlation in the random effects (and the consequent danger
of over fitting the data), we used a “backward algorithm” to
set for the model that best described the variance in the data
without over fitting them. Starting from the maximal
random slopes and intercepts model, we first tested for the
exclusion of random slopes. In this way we set, step by step,
for the simpler model that better described the variance of
the data. To ensure that the models described the same
amount of variance, in each step we confronted the fitting of
the simpler model with the previous “more random” ones.
The model that better described the variance of the data had
random intercepts for subjects, random intercepts for items
(cartoons) and Language (Italian or English) varying by
subjects random slopes.
We found a significant effect for Language (Est. =0.06,
S.E.= 0.01, p<0.001), such that the gesture rate is higher in
Italian than in English, but no significant effect for
Language Status (monolingual or bilingual; Est.=-0.02,
S.E=0.02, p=0.19). Interaction between the fixed effects
(Language status and Language) was investigated but not
found (Est=0.007, S.E.=0.03, p=0.84).
p values were calculated from the t values obtained in the

Figure 2: Mean values of gesture rate for Language Status
(Bilingual, dotted line or Monolingual, solid line) in each
Language (English and Italian).

Gesture Salience
A generalized mixed linear model was performed on gesture
salience (sample size n= 390). Following the same
procedure described for gesture rate, we set for the model
that had by items (cartoons) random intercepts, by subjects
random intercepts and Language (English or Italian) varying
by subjects random slopes. We found a significant effect for
both Language (Est=1.85, S.E.=0.38, p<0.001) and
Language Status (Est.=0.98,S.E.=0.39, p=0.01). Interaction
between the fixed effects (Language status and Language)
was investigated but not found (Est=0.33, S.E.=0.76,
p=0.66). That is, gestures were more salient in Italian than
in English and bilinguals' gestures were more salient than
monolinguals'.
p values were automatically calculated from z scores by
glmer function. In Fig. 3 we report the probability of
producing salient gestures in each Language Status
(bilingual and monolingual) and each Language (Italian and
English). A post hoc power analysis conducted with data
simulation (n simulations=1000) revealed that 22
participants per group (monolingual English, monolingual
Italian, Bilinguals= 66 participants overall) would be needed
to obtain statistical power at .80 level.

307

in this study reported in the Linguistic Background
questionnaire that to them it was important to speak well
both languages and they equally liked to speak in both, it
might be that it is easier for the bilinguals tested in our study
to “keep apart” the two linguistic systems.
In contrast, bilinguals in Singapore might have been much
more exposed to two or more languages in daily life and it
has been documented that transfer of words occurred
together with gesture frequency transfer (So, 2010). The
bilinguals in this study had some tip-of-the-tongue
phenomena but did always choose to talk in the target
language. The societal and linguistic context may account
for the lack of gestural transfer found in Nicoladis et al.
(2005) and for the lack of difference in gesture frequency
between the two monolingual control groups. Their EnglishFrench bilingual children were recruited in Alberta, which is
an English speaking province of Canada. Thus, just like our
English-Italian bilinguals, one of the two languages
(French) was mostly spoken with parents, family members
and friends. Differently, the French monolingual group was
recruited in Quebec, a bilingual area of Canada where
French Canadians are highly exposed to English too.
One of the most interesting findings of this study is that
bilinguals' gestures were overall more salient than
monolinguals’ gestures. One possible explanation is that
bilinguals may often be in a communicative situation where
some people are weak in Italian and others are weak in
English. In such situations, bilinguals may make their
gestures more salient in order to facilitate communication.
This might become a habitual feature of bilinguals' gestures.
This speculation though needs to be substantiated by future
studies.
Our results indicate that language and gesture, even
gesture “cultural” parameters such as frequency and
salience, are tightly linked. In addition to that, our results
suggest that the selection of those parameters happens at a
pre-linguistic level, as these parameters have no strictly
communicative meaning. The features specifying a language
and the corresponding gesture parameters might be selected
at a high level processing stage in which verbal and
nonverbal aspects of communication are planned together.
This is compatible with the idea that bilinguals specify the
language at a conceptual level, as suggested by La Heij’s
concept selection hypothesis (2005). La Heij stated that the
semantic system directly activates target-language lexical
nodes over lexical nodes in the non-target language. Thus,
the intended language is selected at the conceptual stage
after a series of communicative aspects have been taken into
account (e.g. who is the interlocutor, in which
communicative situation we are etc.).

Figure 3: Probability of producing a salient gesture by
Language Status (Bilingual, dotted line or Monolingual,
solid line) in each Language (English and Italian).

Discussion
The aims of this study were to investigate gesture frequency
and gesture space in Italian/English bilinguals and the
relationship between gesture and language in bilinguals. In
addressing this question, the data from a bilingual and two
monolingual control groups have been collected and
analysed.
A first result was that Italian speakers gestured more
frequently and that their gestures were more salient than
English speakers. As observed by Kendon (1992) and Efron
(1972) Italian is indeed a “high gesture culture”. With
regard to gesture rate, we found no evidence of transfer
when bilinguals switch between Italian and English. With
regard to salience, we found, again, no evidence of transfer
but, overall, bilinguals' gestures were more salient with
respect to the gestures performed by the two control groups.
From our results we can conclude that when English/Italian
bilinguals switch language, their gesture parameters switch
accordingly with the language they talk.
Whether or not one finds gestural transfer in bilinguals
may depend upon many variables. First of all, the societal
context for bilingualism and the bilingualism level of the
participants can affect transfer. Unlike the current study, So
(2010) found evidence of transfer for representational
gestures only from American English (high gesture rate) to
Mandarin-Chinese (lower gesture rate) in Singapore. In
Singapore multilingualism is a long established and
prominent feature of the society, encouraged by laws. The
bilinguals who took part in the present study mostly grew up
in non bilingual communities (in Italy or the UK) where one
of the two languages was mostly spoken with parents,
family members and friends. Although bilingual participants

Acknowledgments
Dr. Cavicchio gratefully acknowledges the financial support
of the European Union and the Provincia Autonoma di
Trento (7th Framework Program “People”, Marie Curie
Action – COFUND-TRENTINO, project CoByGest).

308

movies: Stimulus kit designed to elicit manner, path and
causal constructions in motion events with regard to
speech and gestures. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Language and
Cognition group.
Pika, S., Nicoladis, E., & Marentette, P. (2006). A crosscultural study on the use of gestures: Evidence for crosslinguistic transfer? Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 9, 319–327.
Sherman, J.,& Nicoladis, E. (2004). Gestures by advanced
Spanish–English second-language learners. Gesture, 4,
143–156.
So, W. C. (2010). Cross-cultural transfer in gesture
frequency in Chinese–English bilinguals. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 25, 10, 1335-1353.

References
Barzini, L. (1964). The Italians. New York: Atheneum.
Chu, M., Meyer, A., Foulkes, L., & Kita, S. (under review).
Individual differences in frequency and saliency of
speech-accompanying gestures: The role of cognitive
abilities and empathy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General.
Efron, D. (1972). Gesture, race, and culture. The Hague:
Mouton. (Original work published as Gesture and
environment, 1941.) Graham, J. A., & Argyle, M. (1975).
A cross-cultural study of the communication of extraverbal meaning by gestures. International Journal of
Psychology, 10, 57–67.
Gullberg, M., & Indefrey, P. (2003). Language Background
Questionnaire. Developed in The Dynamics of
Multilingual Processing. Nijmegen, Max Planck Institute
forPsycholinguistics.http://www.mpi.nl/departments/other
-research/research-projects/the-dynamics-of-multilingualprocessing/toolshttp://www.mpi.nl/departments/otherresearch/research-projects/the-dynamics-of-multilingualprocessing/tools
Loonstra A. S., Tarlow, A.R., & Sellers, A. H. (2001).
COWAT metanorms across age, education, and gender.
Applied Neuropsychology, 8, 3, 161–166.
Kendon, A. (1992). Some recent work from Italy on
quotable gestures (‘emblems’). Journal of Linguistic
Anthropology, 21, 72–93.
Kendon, A. (1995). Gestures as illocutionary and discourse
structure markers in southern Italian conversation.
Journal of Pragmatics, 23, 247–279.
Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help
speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture (pp.
162–185). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Krauss, R. M., & Hadar, U. (1999). The role of speechrelated arm/hand gestures in word retrieval. In R.
Campbell & L. Messing (Eds.), Gesture, speech, and sign
(pp. 93–116). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
La Heij, W. (2005). Selection processes in monolingual and
bilingual lexical access. In J. F. Kroll & A. M. B. De
Groot (eds.), Handbook of bilingualism: Psycholinguistic
approaches, (pp. 289–307). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Levy, R. (2012) Probabilistic Models in the Study of
Language.http://idiom.ucsd.edu/~rlevy/pmsl_textbook/ch
apters/pmsl_8.pdf
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: Chicago University Press
Müller,
C.
(1998).
Redebegleitende
Gesten:
Kulturegeschichte -Theorie -Sprachvergleich. Berlin:
Berlin Verlag.
Nicoladis, E., Mayberry, R., & Genesee, F. (1999). Gesture
and early bilingual development. Developmental
Psychology, 35, 514–526.
Nicoladis, E. (2007). The effect of bilingualism on the use
of manual gestures. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 441–
454
Özyürek, A., Kita, S., & Allen, S. (2001). Tomato Man

309

