UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
English Words Are Processed Like Objects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59b38618

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Revie, Gavin
Kamide, Yuki

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

English Words Are Processed Like Objects
Gavin F. Revie (G.F.Revie@dundee.ac.uk)
Yuki Kamide (Y.Kamide@dundee.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK, DD1 4HN

Abstract
This experiment sought to explore the theory that
familiar English words are processed similarly to
objects. To do this, we looked for object-based
attentional facilitation where cues in a different
location to the target still facilitate target detection
as long as they are inside the same object.
Participants were shown two English words in an
array, and cues and targets were embedded inside
them. Reaction times for target detection were
measured.
It was found that in horizontally
presented English words, cues presented in a
different location to the target still facilitated target
detection if they occurred inside the same word.
This was not the case for vertically oriented words.
It was concluded that familiar words in a familiar
orientation are indeed processed in a similar way to
objects. These findings may be indicative that the
cortical networks that evolved for object processing
are also involved in the processing of words.
Keywords: object based; attention; reading;

Introduction
It has been long understood that humans are
capable of focussing their visual attention in one
place in preference over another.
This is
commonly described as spatial attention.
However, humans also have the capacity to allocate
their attention to a particular object regardless of
where it happens to be located (Blake & Sekuler,
2006). This is known as object based attention. In
day to day scenarios these two types of visual
attention will interact and overlap. However, how
object based attention contributes to the process of
reading (if at all) is not well understood.
Egly, Driver, & Rafal, (1994) conducted a study
on attention within objects. Participants saw a 2x2
array with a fixation point in the middle. The array
contained 2 rectangular shapes which each spanned
two of the quadrants. These shapes could be
oriented with either both of them vertical or both of
them horizontal. Within the individual cells of the
array very brief cues and targets were presented.
Participants had to detect the onset of a grey target
square following presentation of a 100ms
brightening cue. They had 3 possible cuing
conditions in their experiment. In the valid
condition, the cue and the target would appear in
the same location. In the invalid within-object
condition, the cue and the target were in different
locations, but still within the same object. In the
invalid different-object condition, the cue and the

target were in different locations and within
different objects. The targets in both of the invalid
conditions were the same distance from their cue,
and they were equally often oriented vertically as
horizontally.
The corner to corner diagonal
separation of the cue and target was not used due to
non-equal distance.
Egly et al. (1994) successfully manipulated the
deployment of attention. The valid trial types were
consistently responded to the fastest of all trial
types, indicating that the cues were successful in
heightening attention at their location. The crucial
point came in the comparison of the 2 invalid trial
types. Despite being the same distance away from
the cue and subject to the same variations of
orientation, the within-object invalid trials were
responded to faster than the different-object invalid
trials.
This suggests that an advantage was
conferred upon the invalid-within object trials
simply due to the presence of a shape containing
both cue and target locations. This has been
described as “Object Based Attention” – that
attending to a cue within an object will heighten
attention deployment to the whole object, including
non-cued locations. More recently Luo, Lupiáñez,
Funes, & Fu (2011) replicated these findings, and
found that these object-based effects could be
expected to be present even at very short stimulus
onset asynchronies.
They also highlighted
problems in using cues and targets which contain
implicit spatial information - something which was
deliberately avoided in this study.
Li & Logan (2008) sought to explore how object
based attention relates to reading. They performed
an almost direct replication of Egly et al. (1994),
but replaced the shapes with 2-character Chinese
words.
The words could be oriented either
horizontally or vertically in their experiment,
following the rules in the Chinese writing system.
The study was a target detection task with three
conditions of cue-target relationship. The cues
could be valid, invalid but within the same word,
and invalid and located in a different word.
Replicating Egly et al. (1994), Li and Logan (2008)
found that valid trials were responded to fastest.
Comparing the invalid trials it was found that
invalid targets occurring within the same word as
the cue were responded to faster than invalid
targets occurring within a different word from the
cue. This successful replication of Egly et al.
(1994) and may be taken as evidence that words are
treated like objects inasmuch that cues falling
within a word measurably facilitate target detection

3281

elsewhere within that word, presumably through
elevated attentional deployment.
Li and Logan have demonstrated that the visual
contiguity of shapes can be “simulated” by the
abstract lexical contiguity of words. There were no
physical connections between the characters in
their array, and yet the participants clearly treated
them as in some way connected. One way of
explaining this is that the participants were treating
the 2-character words as if they were a single
object. However, their findings might not be easily
translatable into English reading processes.
Chinese is both more visually dense than English,
and more spatially plastic in that the character
meaning is not necessarily extracted in a left-toright fashion. Traditionally, it could also be written
legally both left-to-right and top-to-bottom,
although that has become much rarer. As a
consequence the importance of serial order and
direction could be said to be comparatively lower
than in English, whereas the importance of what
lexical groups the symbols form could be said to be
greater. This may lend itself well to an object
based decoding strategy. Would the within-word
benefit carry over to English? We devised a study
to try and answer that question. In our study, we
stuck as close as possible to the method employed
by Li and Logan. There is no English equivalent to
the many 2-character words available in Chinese,
so in our experiment we transitioned to using 4character English words. Each quadrant of the 2x2
array would contain 2 characters.
In our
experiment, the words were presented either
horizontally or vertically. In particular it would be
interesting to see what effect the more linear and
less dense script of English has on the effects found
in comparison with Chinese. Can an object based
account explain reading single words generally, or
is it only a special-case phenomenon?

Method
Participants
The participants in this study were 25 female and 7
male students from the University of Dundee.
They were paid in course credits for their time.
Their ages ranged from 17 to 40. All participants
were fluent in English. This experiment utilized a
within subjects design so all participants were
exposed to all conditions of the stimuli. An
additional 4 participants were tested but their data
was not included due to abnormally high error
rates.

Apparatus
Stimuli were presented through an 18” monitor
running at 100 Hz and detection responses were
recorded on a gamepad, with the response button
pressed by the dominant hand. An SR Research

Eyelink-1000 desk-based eye tracker recorded
monocular eye position at 1000 Hz. A deskmounted chinrest kept participants’ eyes 60cm
from the screen and both their peripheral vision and
vision in their non-dominant eye were eliminated
through blinkered spectacles.

Stimuli
288 4-character words with a lemma frequency of
at least 200 per 16 million were selected using the
CELEX word database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, &
Gulikers, 1995). The 288 stimuli words were used
to create 144 test arrays containing 2 words each.
Each of these arrays was used only once per
subject. The letters were printed lowercase in
black, 46 point Monaco. Targets were background
colour patches that were red and cues were
background colour patches that were green. Cues
and targets would always span 2 characters of the 4
character word in which they occurred. Stimuli
arrays were assembled from several bitmaps and
controlled using a variable grid. Individual bitmaps
were created for each word, the fixation cross, the
cue and the target.

Design
The experiment consisted of an individually
randomized sequence of 144 trials: 72 valid trials
(cue and target were the same two letters), 24
invalid-within trials (cue and target were different
letter pairs in the same word), 24 invalid-between
trials (cue and target were in different words but
never in diagonally opposed letter pairs, to
maintain equidistance between cue and target
across all invalid trials; see Figure 1), and 20 catch
trials (no target appeared). Half of the arrays were
horizontally oriented and half were vertically
oriented for each subject. All stimulus arrays
appeared only once per subject. In the horizontal
version of the experiment the arrays were
configured in the traditional left-to-right writing
mode of English. In the vertical version of the
experiment, the array was configured in a more
novel top-to-bottom writing mode

Task and Procedure
After giving informed consent the eye tracker was
calibrated on the participant’s dominant eye,
determined via majority result from the Miles,
Porta, and Camera tests (Roth, Lora, & Heilman,
1992). Peripheral vision and non-dominant eye
were occluded with blinkered spectacles.
Participants were informed that they would be
periodically asked about the last array they had
seen in order to highlight the importance of actually
reading the words onscreen.
Figure 1 gives a schematic representation of trial
events. The start array for each trial contained two

3282

words. These were presented for 1500 ms, followed
by an additional fixation cross for 300 ms.
Participants were told to read the words silently and
then fixate the cross. The eye tracker was used to
ensure participants were indeed looking at the
fixation cross. A green colour patch was flashed
behind the first or last 2 letters of one of the words
for 100ms to cue attention to this location.
Following a further 100 ms of displaying the array
with words and the fixation cross but no cue or
target, a red target would appear under the first or
last two characters one of the words. The trial
proceeded only if fixation was within the region in
which the cues and targets would appear during this
cue-target onset asynchrony, or else an error

message appeared and the trial was discarded.
Participants were instructed to press the response
button as soon as they were aware of the
appearance of the target, but to avoid pressing the
response button when there was no target. Thus
this was a simple go/no-go task. The time from the
target onset to the button press was the reaction
time (RT). Participants were instructed to respond
as fast as possible to each target and to refrain from
responding in catch trials. Responses were issued
via a gamepad held in front of the participant, as
close to their midline as possible. The response
button was pressed with the dominant hand. If no
response was issued a new trial started after 3000
ms.

Figure 1. Trial sequence, illustrating an invalid-between word trial in the horizontal condition, and an invalidwithin word trial in the vertical condition. Not drawn to scale

3283

Results
Performance Data
The miss rate for present targets was extremely
low, less than 5%. Because of this false alarm rates
on catch trials (which tended to be higher) were
used as a criterion to remove underperforming
subjects. Any participants who achieved less than
75% correct on catch trials were removed from the
data. 4 participants were removed from the data for
this reason.
This left 32 participants who
responded correctly to catch trials 86% of the time.

Reaction Time Data
Outlier reaction times were removed through the
application of a 100-700ms reaction time filter.
Less than 2% of the most extreme scores were
removed by this filter. Filtered reaction times from
all participants were analysed using a 2 (word
orientation) by 3 (levels of validity) repeated
measures ANOVA. There was a significant main
effect of validity (F(2,62)=3.163, p=.049),
indicating that on average validly cued trials tended
to be responded to fast. Additionally there was a
significant interaction between word orientation
and validity (F(1.624,50.352)=3.507, p=.047
(Greenhouse-Geisser transformed)).
Simple
planned comparisons in SPSS were used to explore
these effects. Since it was necessary that we
demonstrate that cuing had an effect, both classes

of invalid trial were compared to valid trials which
should always be the fastest. The difference
between reaction times for Invalid Between trials
and Valid trials was significant when both
orientations were analysed together (F(1,
31)=4.705, p=.038), indicating that Invalid
Between trials were always slow compared to valid
trials. However, it was found that there was only a
marginally significant difference between reaction
times for Invalid Within trials and Valid trials when
both horizontal and vertical trials were analysed
together F(1, 32)=3.828, p=.059). Looking at the
graph it is evident that there is a big difference
between horizontal and vertical reaction times for
Invalid Within trials. This discrepancy was studied
using post-hoc Bonferoni corrected t-tests where it
was found that on Invalid Within trials, targets
inside horizontal words were responded to
significantly faster than targets inside vertical
words (t(31)=2.901, p<.05). However, on both the
Invalid Between and Valid trials were was no
significant difference between targets inside
horizontal and vertical words (t(31)=0.385, p>.05
and t(31)=0.697, p>.05 respectively). Thus, only
on the trials containing horizontally oriented words
did participants respond quickly to invalidly cued
targets that occurred inside the same word as the
cue. This is in accord with what would be expected
from object based facilitation since cues inside a
word are improving reaction times for targets
elsewhere in that word.

Figure 2. Reaction times for each level of validity and each word orientation. Error bars represent 1 standard
error.

3284

Discussion
This experiment was partially successful in replicating Li &
Logan's (2008) Chinese experiment, using a typologically
different language, English. Whilst they found that in both
the horizontal and vertical orientations invalid cues within
the same word as the target facilitated reaction times, we
found this effect only in the horizontal orientation. For
horizontally oriented words, invalid cues that occurred
inside the same word as the target facilitated target detection
reaction times up to a level that was almost
indistinguishable from true valid cuing. This indicates that
a cue landing anywhere within a horizontally oriented
English word will elevate attention levels to the whole word
and thereby facilitate target detection in non-cued locations.
This supports the idea that words can be treated like objects
because this is an "object based effect". However, this
effect was not present when the words were oriented
vertically.
Since it can be shown that English words have attentional
properties of the sort that would normally be associated with
objects, this can be seen as evidence for the role of object
based attention in reading. However it is of interest that we
were unsuccessful in demonstrating this effect in the vertical
orientation, where invalid but within word cues were
responded to just as slowly as invalid different word cues.
The fact that Li and Logan (2008) managed to show this
effect in Chinese, whereas we were unsuccessful in doing so
for English may be related to the properties of the two
languages. It is evident that characters in English and
Chinese are very different visually, but they are also
processed in different ways. In Chinese there are radicals
embedded inside characters that provide phonological and
semantic information about that character to the reader, and
they are not necessarily read in a strictly linear, left to right
fashion. Likewise up until fairly recently Chinese could
legitimately be written either left to right, or top to bottom.
This is now rare in mainland China but still encountered in
other Chinese reading countries.
Conversely, top to
bottom writing is fairly novel in English. As a consequence
it is fair to say that Chinese readers will be much more
receptive to seeing Chinese written top to bottom than
English readers will be to seeing their language written top
to bottom. In English, it would appear that the object based
representation of a word which produces these effects is
only activated when viewing the word in the familiar
orientation. This would imply that when written in the
vertical format, English words are decoded using an
alternative method which does not produce object based
attentional effects.
There are some criticisms that could be levelled at this
study. Unlike Li and Logan (2008) background colour
patches were used instead of character illumination. This
was done in an attempt to control the stimulus intensity of
the cues and targets. If we had illuminated letters then the
number of pixels that changed colour for any given cue or
target would vary wildly from trial to trial based on which

letters occupied that slot. Using the background colour
patches enabled us to ensure a much more constant degree
of stimulus intensity. However this approach did force
certain compromises. In order to have the same size, shape
and location of cues/targets between the horizontal and
vertical trials it was unavoidable that there would be a better
fit in one orientation, in our case horizontal (see Figure 1).
There is a possibility that this poor fit may go some way to
account for the differences between the horizontal and
vertical trials. Also, this was not an experiment that actually
involved reading per se. The words that were on screen did
not have any bearing on how participants tackled the target
detection task. The experimenter did take some steps to
ensure the participants were not ignoring the words outright
by asking participants to identify the previous pair of words
they had just seen. If a participant was repeatedly unable to
answer these questions, their data would have been
removed. However, no participants needed to be removed
for this reason. Nonetheless, the requirement of being able
to identify the previously shown array is not nearly as high
level as what would typically be considered a reading task.
Consequently, a new experiment is proposed that ensures
that cues and targets fit both orientations of words equally
well, and goes to additional lengths to ensure participants
were actually reading words.
Following every trial,
participants could be asked to use the previously seen words
in a sentence. This would enhance the level of processing
the words were subjected to. A further experiment could do
exactly the opposite, reproduce this task using non-lexical
symbol strings. This would remove reading as a component
entirely and address the possibility that these effects are
artefacts of tasks where cues and targets are embedded
inside letter-like stimuli.

Conclusion
This study found evidence that supports the idea that words
are sometimes treated as if they were objects by the human
attentional system.
Reaction time effects normally
associated with objects were observed using English words
when they were presented horizontally. Thus, the lexical
contiguity of words must have been acting in a similar way
to the visual contiguity of objects. These findings may
support the idea that the parts of the brain that evolved to
cope with object perception are at least a part of the network
deployed to assist in the novel process of reading.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the School of Psychology,
University of Dundee (PhD studentship awarded to GR).
We would like to thank Martin Fischer for helpful
discussion.

3285

References
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database (release 2)[cd-rom].
Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium,
University of Pennsylvania [Distributor].
Philidelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium,
University of Pennsylvania [Distributor]. Retrieved
from
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Searc
h&q=intitle:The+CELEX+Lexical+Database#0
Blake, R., & Sekuler, R. (2006). Perception (5th ed.). New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Egly, R., Driver, J., & Rafal, R. D. (1994). Shifting visual
attention between objects and locations: evidence
from normal and parietal lesion subjects. Journal of
experimental psychology. General, 123(2), 161–77.
Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8014611
Li, X., & Logan, G. D. (2008). Object-based attention in
Chinese readers of Chinese words: beyond Gestalt
principles. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 15(5),
945–9. doi:10.3758/PBR.15.5.945
Luo, C., Lupiáñez, J., Funes, M., & Fu, X. (2011). The
modulation of spatial congruency by object-based
attention: Analysing the “locus” of the modulation.
The Quarterly Journal of …, (April 2013), 37–41.
Retrieved from
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1747021
8.2011.591935
Roth, H., Lora, A., & Heilman, K. (1992). Effects of
monocular viewing and eye dominance on spatial
attention. Brain, 125, 2023–2035. Retrieved from
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/content/125/9/2023.sho
rt

3286

