UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Enhancing Robust Learning Through Problem Solving in the Genetics Cognitive Tutor

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rz5w6fq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Corbett, Albert
MacLaren, Ben
Wagner, Angela
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Enhancing Robust Learning Through Problem Solving
in the Genetics Cognitive Tutor
Albert Corbett (corbett@cmu.edu)
Ben MacLaren (maclaren@andrew.cmu.edu)
Angela Wagner (awagner@cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Linda Kauffman (lk01@andrew.cmu.edu)
Aaron Mitchell (apm1@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Ryan S. J. d. Baker (baker2@exchange.tc.columbia.edu)
Department of Human Development,
Columbia University Teachers College, New York, NY 10027
Abstract
In this paper, we examine the impact of three learning activities designed to foster more robust learning in a Genetics Cognitive Tutor module on pedigree analysis problem solving, in an experimental study. The three activities are (1) interleaved worked examples with student explanations; (2) enhanced feedback with tutor-provided
explanations of problem solving steps; and (3) explicit
scaffolding of the reasoning steps in this abductive process-of-elimination reasoning task. The study included
four between-subject conditions, a baseline condition in
which students exclusively solved standard problems,
and three conditions in which students engaged in one of
the new learning activities along with standard problem
solving. The scaffolded-reasoning condition was most
successful in fostering robust learning, as measured by
transfer, retention, and preparation for future learning
tests. The enhanced feedback condition, in contrast,
yielded the poorest performance on the robust learning
measures.
Keywords: Education; Problem solving; Robust Learning; Intelligent Tutors.

Introduction
Problem solving is an essential learning activity across
STEM domains. Successful problem solving results in
“robust” knowledge: knowledge that is well-grounded
in domain knowledge, and as a consequence, is wellretained by students, transfers more readily to related
problem situations and prepares students for more successful future learning (Koedinger, Corbett & Perfetti,
2012). One of the well-documented risks in problem
solving, across STEM domains, is that students can
develop superficial knowledge that fails these tests of
robust learning. In particular, when students are not
well-prepared for problem solving, they can develop
problem solving knowledge which focuses on surface
elements in problem situations, formal representations,
and features of the learning environment itself (Chang,
Koedinger & Lovett, 2003; Chi, Feltovich & Glaser,
1981; Rittle-Johnson & Siegler, 1998).

In this paper we examine how to structure problem
solving in an intelligent tutoring system to support robust learning in the domain of genetics. Because of its
foundational place in the biological sciences, genetics is
a large and growing component of high school biology
courses, but it is also viewed as one of the hardest topics in biology by both students and instructors, at the
secondary and at the post-secondary level (Tsui &
Treagust, 2006). Genetics problem solving is characterized by abductive reasoning. In contrast with deductive
hypothesis testing, abductive reasoning starts with a set
of observations and reasons backwards to infer properties of the genetic processes that produced the data (e.g.,
whether a trait is dominant or recessive).
In this paper, we study these issues within a tutor lesson for pedigree analysis in the Genetics Cognitive
Tutor (Corbett, Kauffman, MacLaren, Wagner & Jones,
2010), which has been successfully piloted in both high
school and college classrooms. Pedigree analysis relies
on a complex reasoning process, which nonetheless
lends itself to straightforward natural language description. This study examines whether robust learning is
supported by a scaffolded reasoning activity prior to
conventional problem solving, or by incorporating explicit explanations during problem solving.

The Domain: Pedigree Analysis
Basic pedigree analysis problems pose an interesting
challenge both for students and for an intelligent tutoring system. Figure 1 displays a typical pedigree analysis
problem, in the Genetics Cognitive Tutor (GCT). This
pedigree chart displays four generations in a small family. Females are represented as circles and males as
squares. In this family, the founding parents have a
daughter affected by a rare genetic trait, as represented
by the dark circle. No other family members are affected. The student’s task is to determine whether this
genetic trait is dominant or recessive, and whether it is
X-linked, or transmitted on one of the twenty-two autosomal chromosomes in humans.

2094

elimination task and is designed to precede conventional problem solving. As in Cognitive Tutors more
generally (Anderson, Corbett, Koedinger & Pelletier,
1995), in these activities, students receive immediate
accuracy feedback on each problem-solving step and
can request hints on any problem-solving step.

Figure 1. The GCT Interface for Pedigree Analysis.
This appears to be a reasonably simple task; the features
of the problem representation are readily interpretable
and there are only two problem-solving actions, but the
task involves complex abductive reasoning. It requires
students to employ their knowledge of genetic transmission to reason by process of elimination. For example,
the student can eliminate the possibility that this is a
dominant trait, because the daughter must inherit the
trait from one or both parents, and if the trait were
dominant the parent(s) who have the trait allele would
be affected.
This is also an atypical and challenging task for an
intelligent tutoring system to effectively support. The
task involves a complex multi-step reasoning process,
but since there are just two solution steps, there are no
natural opportunities (that is, no behavioral correlates of
intermediate reasoning steps) for the tutor to provide
assistance in the form of feedback and advice along the
way. Instead, the task is subject to shallow learning,
since students can readily memorize conclusions, (e.g.,
when an affected daughter has unaffected parents, the
trait must be autosomal recessive), without any understanding of the underlying genetics that supports the
conclusion. Finally, the task is subject to gaming the
system (Baker, Corbett, Koedinger & Wagner, 2004),
since each solution step consists of a menu with only
three alternatives – “dominant,” “recessive,” or “cannot
be determined,” in one case, and “autosomal,” “Xlinked,” or “cannot be determined in the other case.”
Unmotivated students can readily click through the
menu options to find correct answers.
Summative evaluations of Genetics Cognitive Tutor modules are consistent with these risks; pretestposttest learning gains for basic pedigree analysis are
only about half as large as the average gain across all
topics (Corbett, et al, 2010).

Pedigree Analysis Learning Activities
In this study we developed and evaluated three Cognitive Tutor activities intended to support robust learning in pedigree analysis problem solving. Two activities
integrate explicit reasoning explanations into the conventional problem-solving task - worked examples, in
which the student explains tutor-generated problem
solutions, and enhanced feedback, in which the tutor
provides explanations for student problem-solving
steps. The third activity, in contrast, explicitly scaffolds
the intermediate steps in this abductive process-of-

Interleaved Worked Examples It is well-documented
that integrating worked examples with problem solving
serves to decrease total learning time and yields improved learning outcomes (Pashler, Bain, Bottge,
Graesser, Koedinger, McDaniel & Metcalfe, 2007;
Renkl & Atkinson, 2003; Sweller & Cooper, 1985).
Recently, several studies have examined the benefits of
incorporating worked examples into intelligent tutoring
systems (ITSs) for problem solving across a variety of
math and science domains, including topics in algebra,
geometry, statistics, biology, chemistry and physics
(Anthony, 2008; Conati & VanLehn, 2000; Corbett,
MacLaren, Wagner, Kauffman, Mitchell, Baker &
Gowda, 2011; Mclaren, Lim & Koedinger, 2008; Reed,
Corbett, Hoffman, Wagner & MacLaren, 2013; Salden,
Aleven, Schwonke & Renkl, 2010; Schwonke, Renkl,
Krieg, Wittwer, Aleven & Salden, 2009; Weitz, Salden,
Kim & Heffernan, 2010). In these ITS studies, the chief
benefit of incorporating worked examples has been to
reduce learning time for a fixed set of activities compared to problem solving alone, but unlike the classic
worked-example literature, these ITS studies generally
do not find that incorporating worked examples leads to
more accurate posttest performance than problem solving alone. The exception is Salden, et. al (2010), which
found that adaptively fading examples led to some relative improvement on posttest problem solving. Similarly, the evidence that students learn more deeply when
worked examples are integrated into ITSs is mixed at
best, although Anthony (2008) and Salden, et al (2010)
report better retention of problem solving knowledge
and Schwonke, et al (2009) found some evidence of
greater conceptual transfer in one of two studies.
Pedigree analysis is a promising domain in which to
further explore worked examples, since each step in
problem solving depends on a complex, but readily
describable reasoning process. Figure 2 displays the
worked example interface. Each worked example displays a standard pedigree analysis problem and displays
the correct dominance and linkage of the trait directly
below the pedigree. These examples also identify a key
nuclear family in the pedigree and describe the pattern
of affected and unaffected individuals in the family that
allows the student to identify the dominance and linkage of the trait. Students select entries in the three
menus at the bottom of the screen to explain how to
determine the dominance and linkage from the pattern,
based on their knowledge of genetics transmission.
Feature Focusing We developed a contrasting activity
in which the student generates problem solutions and
the tutor provides explanations of the student’s correct
actions, to directly address two characteristics of basic

2095

Figure 4. The GCT interface at the end of a pedigree
analysis problem with enhanced feedback.

Figure. 2. The GCT Interface at the conclusion of a
pedigree analysis worked example.
pedigree analysis. The first is that the tell-tale patterns
can be hard to identify. For instance, Figure 3 displays
two pedigrees, which look similar, each with four affected males, but the trait on the left is autosomal dominant, while the trait on the right is X-linked recessive.

Figure 3. An autosomal dominant pedigree (left) and an
X-linked recessive pedigree (right).
The second challenge is that the immediate accuracy
feedback generally delivered by Cognitive Tutors (cf.
Anderson et al., 1995), is not all that informative in this
lesson, since there is a reasonably high probability that
the student performed the right action for the wrong
reason. Debriefing sessions revealed that students in
high school classrooms are aware of the latter risk, and
sometimes would like to receive an explanation after
selecting a correct menu entry, rather than a hint before.
To address these problems, we developed an enhanced feedback interface displayed in Figure 4. The
pedigree is initially displayed entirely in black and
without any explanatory text. Following each of the two
problem-solving steps, the tutor highlights the relevant
pattern in the figure, and provides an explanation. In
this example, after the student concluded that the trait is
recessive, (1) the relevant pattern was highlighted in
green, (2) the conclusion was summarized at the top of
the screen in green, and (3) an explanation of the conclusion was displayed in green in the window to the
right. After the student concluded that the trait is Xlinked, the relevant pattern remained highlighted in
green, the prior dominance conclusion and explanation
were grayed out, the linkage conclusion was summarized in green near the figure, and the linkage explanation was presented in green in the adjoining window.

Abductive Reasoning Scaffolds Finally, we developed
a problem-solving activity that directly engages students in the reasoning-by-process-of-elimination task.
While the other two interventions were integrated with
conventional problem solving, this is a separate task
that was designed to precede conventional problem
solving. Each problem in this task presents the phenotypes of three family members, two parents and a child,
as displayed in Figure 5. Immediately to the right, the
four possible modes of transmission are listed (autosomal dominant, X-linked dominant, autosomal recessive
and X-linked recessive). For each of the four modes, the
student enters what the underlying genotype of each of
the three family members would have to be, given their
respective phenotypes, and under the mode of transmission. (For example, if the trait were autosomal dominant, the two unaffected parents would have to be homozygous recessive, while the affected daughter would
have to have a dominant allele.) Then to the far right,
the student indicates whether the observed pattern of
phenotypes is possible under each mode of transmission, that is, whether the child could inherit its genotype
from its parents. (The observed pattern in Figure 5 is
impossible for an autosomal dominant trait, since neither parent has a dominant allele to transmit to the
daughter.) Finally, at the bottom of the screen the student summarizes which modes of transmission are possible for the observed phenotype pattern.

Figure 5. The GCT Pedigree Analysis Scaffolded Reasoning
task at the end of a problem.

This study includes four between-subject conditions and
evaluates the success of each of these three interventions in supporting the acquisition of problem-solving
skills, and robust learning, compared to standard problem solving.

2096

examples and problems to solve, followed by 18
standard problems.
• Scaffolded Abductive Reasoning (SR): Students
completed six problems in which the abductive reasoning process was explicitly scaffolded as described
above, followed by a set of 18 standard problems.

Method
Participants
Sixty-four high school students enrolled in high school
biology courses were recruited through newspaper ads
and classroom handouts to participate in this study for
pay. Students were randomly assigned to one of four
between-subject treatment groups.

In Session 2, all students completed the same set of
activities focused primarily on the PFL task.

Procedure

Tests

Students participated in two 2.5-hour sessions on consecutive days in a CMU computer lab. In Session 1,
students:

We developed four types of paper-and-pencil tests for
the study:
• Problem Solving Tests: Three forms were developed. Each form served as the pretest for 1/3 of the
students in each condition, the session-1 posttest for
1/3 of the students, and the session-2 delayed test for
1/3 of the students.
• Conceptual Knowledge Tests: A conceptual knowledge pretest was developed to evaluate students’
knowledge of genetic transmission.
• Transfer Tests: A transfer test was developed with
two types of problems: one type asked students to
solve basic pedigree analysis problems with novel
patterns requiring novel reasoning; a second asked
students to identify whether family pedigrees were
possible or impossible under the four modes of
transmission.
• Preparation for Future Learning (PFL): Two
forms of a PFL problem-solving test were developed.
Each form served as the initial test for 1/2 of the students in each condition, and as the second test for 1/2
of the students.

• viewed an instructional video and read instructional
text on basic pedigree analysis;
• completed a conceptual knowledge pretest and a
basic problem-solving pretest;
• completed basic pedigree analysis Cognitive Tutor
activities, which differed by condition;
• completed a basic problem-solving test and a transfer
problem-solving test.
The second session was devoted to an extended
preparation for future learning (PFL) activity, as well as
a delayed basic problem-solving test. The PFL task was
an advanced carrier-probability pedigree analysis task.
Each problem in the task displays a large pedigree chart
with five or six generations and students calculate the
probabilities that various unaffected individuals in the
chart carry a single recessive trait allele. Students:
• read instructional text on carrier probabilities pedigree analysis;
• completed an initial PFL paper-and-pencil test
• completed PFL Cognitive Tutor problems;
• completed a second PFL paper-and-pencil posttest;
• completed a delayed basic problem-solving test

Results
Table 1 displays mean accuracy (percent correct) for the
tests administered in the study. The conceptual knowledge (CK) and problem solving (PS1) pretests are displayed to the left, followed by the problem solving posttest (PS2) and the problem-solving learning gain from
pretest to posttest (PS2-PS1).
The four robust learning tests follow, including the
transfer test (TR); the initial PFL test (PFL1), which
preceded the session-2 PFL tutor problems; the second
PFL test (PFL2), which followed the GCT PFL problems; and finally the delayed basic problem-solving test
(PS3). The final column displays students’ change in
basic problem-solving accuracy over the retention interval (PS3 – PS2).

Design
There were four between-subject conditions in the
study, defined by students’ Cognitive Tutor learning
activities in the first session.
• Basic Problem Solving (PS): Students completed a
set of 78 basic pedigree analysis problems.
• Enhanced Feedback (EF): Students completed the
same 78 problems as in the PS group, but completed
the first 20 with enhanced feedback.
• Interleaved Worked Examples (WE): Students
completed a problem set with 14 interleaved worked

Table 1: Student test accuracy (percent correct).

Cond
SR
EF
PS
WE

CK
%C
92
86
91
92

PS1
%C
47
41
43
49

PS2
%C
47
53
48
56

PS
Gain
PS2-PS1
0
12
5
7

TR
%C
54
44
47
46

2097

PFL1
%C
36
19
34
31

PFL2
%C
60
40
52
61

PS3
%C
53
49
48
50

retention
change
PS3-PS2
6
-4
0
-6

Average scores on the Conceptual Knowledge pretest
(CK) were quite high, averaging about 90% correct,
indicating that students were very familiar with the
transmission genetics underlying pedigree analysis. An
ANOVA revealed no significant difference among the
four conditions on this pretest, F(3,60) = 1.33, ns.
Average scores on the Problem Solving pretest (PS1)
were much lower, averaging 45% correct. Again, an
ANOVA revealed no significant difference among the
four conditions on this pretest, F(3,60) = 1.31, ns.
Pedigree Analysis Posttest Performance
We performed an ANOVA on the five paper-andpencil posttest measures of student learning, including
the Problem Solving posttest (PS2), and the four robust
learning measures: the Transfer test (TR), the Preparation for Future Learning tests (PFL1 & PFL2) and delayed Problem Solving test (PS3). The main effect of
condition is not significant, F(3,60) = 1.26, ns, but the
interaction of condition and test type is significant
F(12,240) = 2.25, p < .01. (The main effect of test type
is also significant, F(4,240) = 28.59, p < .001, but not of
particular interest.)
As can be seen in the table, the new enhanced feedback (EF) and scaffolded reasoning (SR) had contrasting impacts. The EF activities yielded the largest problem-solving learning gain, but generally led to the lowest scores on the robust learning tests. In contrast, the
new SR activities led to no discernible learning gains
from PS1 to PS2, but generally led to the best performance on the robust learning tests.
Basic Problem Solving The new EF condition led to
the largest problem-solving learning gains, while the
new SR condition led to no discernible learning gains.
However, in an ANOVA on the PS gain displayed in
Table 1, the effect of condition was not significant,
F(3,60)=1.74, p<.17.
Robust Learning The SR condition generally outperformed the familiar PS and WE conditions, which in
turn outperformed the EF condition on the robust learning measures. The difference is fairly pronounced on
the transfer task, and in the retention change scores,
where the SR condition is the only condition that displays a small increase in scores over the retention interval. We performed an ANOVA on the transfer test, two
PFL tests and the retention change scores, and the effect
of condition is significant, F(3,60) = 2.80, p < .05. The
interaction of condition and test measure is not significant.
We performed an ANOVA on each of these four robust learning measures separately and condition was
significant only for the retention change measure,
F(3,60)=3.41. p < .05, where the SR group is the only
one which shows any sign of improving on basic problem solving by virtue of completing the intervening
Cognitive Tutor PFL task.

Tutor Performance
Session 1 Total Time Table 2 displays the total time
that the students in the four conditions spent on session1 GCT pedigree analysis learning activities. The session-1 tutor activities were designed to hold learning
time constant. As can be seen, average time was reasonably constant across conditions, ranging from about
24 to about 27 minutes. We performed an ANOVA on
session 1 time on task, and condition was not reliable,
F(3,60)=0.74, ns.
Table 2: Student performance on GCT activities in Session 1 and Session 2

Cond
SR
EF
PS
WE

Session 1
Min.
27.4
24.9
26.0
23.7

Session 2 (PFL GCT)
Min.
%C
%hints
25.4
58
19
31.2
41
41
26.6
49
32
26.1
55
26

Session 2 PFL Tutor Problems Student performance
in the session-2 carrier probabilities GCT task provides
an additional PFL measure with respect to the four session-1 learning activities. All students completed the
same set of 14 carrier probability problems in the second session. Table 2 displays the average time to complete the problems, student accuracy (the percentage of
problem-solving steps on which students’ first action
was correct), and help requests (the percentage of steps
on which a student requested a tutor hint). The students
in the SR condition were the most successful in session
2, responding most accurately, while requiring the least
time, and least assistance. In contrast, students in the EF
condition performed least successfully on all three
measures. In three ANOVAs, the main effect of condition is significant for accuracy, F(3,60)=2.77, p<.05,
and for hint requests, F(3,60)=3.55, p<.05, but not significant for total time, F(3,60)=1.86, ns.

Summary and Discussion
Among the three new GCT tasks, the scaffolded reasoning task was the most successful in preparing students for more robust learning in problem solving. The
SR combination of a scaffolded reasoning task, in conjunction with a single set of conventional problems,
yielded the most robust understanding of pedigree
analysis, as measured by transfer, preparation for future
learning, and retention of problem-solving skill.
However, design work remains to be done, since the
scaffolded reasoning task did not prepare students well
for conventional problem solving. Despite their robust
learning, students in this condition performed surprisingly poorly on the problem solving posttest, displaying
no learning gains.
A more promising design may be to insert the
worked example task between the scaffolded reasoning
task and conventional unassisted problem solving, to
provide students the opportunity to reflect on, and describe how to apply their abductive reasoning skills in

2098

the full problem-solving task. While students in the WE
condition did not perform discriminably better than
students in the baseline PS condition across the board,
there was at least a trend for the WE students to outperform the PS students on the PFL measures.
Finally, the newly designed enhanced-feedback problem solving condition was disappointing. There was a
modest and non-significant trend for the EF condition to
yield larger learning gains on the problem solving test,
but the EF condition led to generally poorer performance on measures of robust learning, especially the PFL
test and tutor activities. This may indicate that, to the
extent there is a benefit of the enhanced feedback, students are learning to identify the key patterns in pedigrees and to associate them with the corresponding
conclusions, but are not developing an understanding of
the underlying reasoning. Again, inserting the interleaved worked example activity between the EF task
and conventional problem solving might help students
build more effectively on any benefits of the EF condition.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences award R305A090549 “Promoting Robust
Understanding of Genetics with a Cognitive Tutor that
Integrates Conceptual Learning with Problem Solving.”

References
Anderson, J.R., Corbett, A.T., Koedinger, K.R. & Pelletier, R. (1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned.
The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, 167-207.
Anthony, L. (2008). Developing handwriting-based
intelligent tutors to enhance mathematics learning.
Unpub. doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University.
Baker, R.S., Corbett, A.T., Koedinger, K.R. & Wagner,
A.Z. (2004). Off-task behavior in the cognitive tutor
classroom: When Students “Game the System”. Proceedings of ACM CHI’2004 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 383-390.
Chang, N. M., Koedinger, K. R., & Lovett, M. C.
(2003). Learning spurious correlations instead of
deeper relations. Proceedings of the 25th Cognitive
Science Society, 228-233.
Chi, M.T.H, Feltovich, P.J. & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Conati, C. & VanLehn, K. (2000). Further results from
the evaluation of an intelligent tutor to coach selfexplanation. In the Proceedings of the 5th Internationational Conference on Intelligen Tutoring Systems, 304-313.
Corbett, A., Kauffman, L., MacLaren, B., Wagner, A.,
& Jones, E. (2010). A Cognitive Tutor for genetics
problem solving: Learning gains and student modeling. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 42,
219-239.
Corbett, A., MacLaren, B., Wagner, A., Kauffman, L.,
Mitchell, A., Baker, R. & Gowda, S. (2011). Prepar-

ing students for effective explaining of worked examples in the Genetics Cognitive Tutor. In Proceedings of the Thirty-third Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 1476-1481.
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.T. & Perfetti, C. (2012).
The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework: Bridging the Science-Practice Chasm to Enhance Robust Student Learning. Cognitive Science,
36, 757-798.
McLaren, B. M., Lim, S.-J., & Koedinger, K. R. (2008).
When is assistance helpful to learning? Results in
combining worked examples and intelligent tutoring.
In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 677-680).
Pashler, H., Bain, P., Bottge, B., Graesser, A., Koedinger, K., McDaniel, M., & Metcalfe, J. (2007). Organizing Instruction and Study to Improve Student
Learning. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education.
Reed, S.K., Corbett, A., Hoffman, B., Wagner, A., &
MacLaren, B. (2013). Effect of worked examples and
Cognitive Tutor training on constructing equations.
Instructional Science, 41, 1-24.
Renkl, A. & Atkinson, R. K. (2003). Structuring the
transition from example study to problem solving in
cognitive skills acquisition: A cognitive load perspective. Educational Psychologist, 38, 15-22.
Rittle-Johnson, B. & Siegler, R.S. (1998). The relation
between conceptual and procedural knowledge in
learning mathematics: A review. In C. Donlan (Ed.),
The development of mathematical skill (pp. 75-110).
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Salden, R. J. C. M., Aleven, V., Schwonke, R., &
Renkl, A. (2010). The expertise reversal effect and
worked examples in tutored problem solving. Instructional Science, 38, 289-307.
Schwonke, R., Renkl, A., Krieg, C., Wittwer, J.,
Aleven, V., & Salden, R. (2009). The workedexample effect: Not an artifact of lousy control conditions. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 258-266.
Sweller, J. & Cooper, G.A. (1985). The use of worked
examples as a substitute for problem solving in learning algebra., Cognition and Instruction, 2, 59–89
Tsui, C-Y. & Treagust, D.F. (2006). Understanding
genetics: Analysis of secondary students’ conceptual
status. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44,
205-235.
Weitz, R., Salden, R. J. C. M., Kim, R. S., & Heffernan,
N. T. (2010). Comparing worked examples and tutored problem solving: Pure vs. mixed approaches. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2876-2881).

2099

