UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Entrainment on the Move and in the Lab: The Walking Around Corpus

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wr90402

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Brennan, Susan
Schuhmann, Katharina
Batres, Karla

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Entrainment on the Move and in the Lab: The Walking Around Corpus
Susan E. Brennan (susan.brennan@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2500 USA

Katharina S. Schuhmann (katharina.schuhmann@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-4376 USA

Karla M. Batres (karla.batres@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2500 USA
Abstract
We examined lexical choice and variability in referring
expressions during direction-giving to pedestrians. The
Walking Around Corpus comprises an experimentally
parameterized collection of spontaneous spoken dialogues
produced by 36 pairs of people communicating by mobile
telephone; it provides both a testbed for lexical entrainment
“in the wild” as well as a resource for pedestrian navigation
applications. A stationary partner (the Giver) directed a
mobile partner (the Follower) to walk about 1.8 miles, to 18
destinations on a medium-sized campus. Givers viewed a map
marked with target destinations, labels, and photos. Followers
carried a cell phone with GPS and a digital camera in order to
photograph the destinations they visited; Givers monitored
Followers’ progress as a cursor on a map display.
Immediately after the navigation task, Followers returned to
the lab and both were tested individually on their spatial
ability and memory for the destinations. Next, the
Experimenter attempted to interfere with any conceptual
precedents they had established by giving Followers printed
copies of the photos they had just taken and prompting them
(sometimes with competing labels) to identify each
destination. Finally, each pair participated in 6 rounds of a
more traditional referential communication lab task to
repeatedly match duplicate copies of the Follower’s pictures
of the destinations. Results include significant rates of lexical
entrainment, evidence for partner-specific conceptual pacts,
and that joint navigation efficiency is affected by directiongivers’ spatial ability. The Walking Around Corpus is
available to the research community.
Keywords: Referential communication; conceptual pacts;
entrainment; collaboration; mobile communication; GPS
applications; pedestrian navigation; spatial cognition.

Introduction
Speakers make many expressive choices in conversation,
leading to enormous variability in spontaneous speech.
These choices emerge not only from their individual
proclivities and the availability of words in memory, but
also from collaboration with conversational partners (Clark
& Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). There is much less variation within
than between conversations; speakers are more likely to
continue using the same term with the same addressee than
with a new addressee (Brennan & Clark, 1996). Studies of
referential communication in laboratory settings show that

lexical choice is influenced not only by precedent (what a
speaker has said previously) and strength of precedent (e.g.,
how often a referent has been discussed), but also by partner
(whether the precedent was established with the current
partner or a different one) but that it can be maintained via
interactive cues provided during grounding (ibid).
We have proposed that lexical entrainment marks two
speakers’ beliefs that they are referring to the same thing; in
fact, breaking a conceptual pact, such as hearing a speaker
inexplicably abandon an entrained-upon expression for a
new expression when referring to the same referent, results
in slower comprehension than hearing the same new
expression from a different (new) partner (Metzing &
Brennan, 2003; Matthews, Lieven, & Tomasello, 2010). A
conceptual pact does not reflect a rigid mapping between
expression and referent, but emerges instead from a flexible,
temporary agreement arrived at with an interactive partner
to take a particular perspective on the referent; as such, it is
highly dependent on context. Although there is evidence
that the partner associated with a conceptual pact is
represented by a cue in memory (Horton, 2007; Horton &
Gerrig, 2005), this does not pre-empt an expression and
referent from being easily associated with a different partner
(Barr & Keysar, 2002; Brennan & Clark, 1996), nor does
having an existing conceptual pact with a partner inhibit a
new expression-referent association from being encoded
with that partner when the pragmatic context changes (ibid).
Lexical entrainment has been demonstrated in adults
(Brennan & Clark, 1996; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986;
Garrod & Anderson, 1986) and in children (Matthews et al.,
2010); in experts and in novices (Isaacs & Clark, 1987); in
native and native/non-native conversations (Bortfeld &
Brennan, 1997); and for lexicalized and non-lexicalized
referents (Gergle, Kraut, & Fussell, 2013; Schober &
Carstensen, 2010). It has also been measured in statistical
analyses of the transcripts of speech corpora (e.g., Nenkova,
Gravano, & Hirschberg, 2008’s studies of the Switchboard
and Columbia Games corpora, and Stoyanchev & Stent,
2009’s from Let’s Go, a real-world bus information system).
In laboratory studies of referential communication and
lexical choice, we and others have demonstrated effects of
psycholinguistic processing in interactive dialogue contexts,

1934

attempting to gain sufficient control to test hypotheses while
modeling spontaneous interaction in conversational
contexts. However, the question sometimes arises as to
whether dialogue in non-laboratory contexts may be too
noisy to show the same sorts of effects (Stoyanchev &
Stent, 2009).
In this project, we examine lexical entrainment and
conceptual pacts both outside of and inside the laboratory.

The Walking Around Project
Design and Materials
Visual Context Manipulation Visual evidence relevant to
a collaborative task has been shown to affect task strategies,
to incrementally shape the form and content of spontaneous
utterances, and to enable partners to shift the initiative or
distribute the responsibility for grounding utterances (see
Brennan, 2004 for discussion).
The amount of visual context provided to the stationary
direction-giving partner during the navigational task was
varied as a between-pairs and within-destinations factor. For
half of the target destinations, the direction-giver saw only a
close-up photo of the target (Figure 1) along with its
numbered location on a map; for the other half, they saw the
close-ups plus extra visual context (Figure 2). Each pair was
assigned to either List 1 or List 2, with Givers seeing
minimally illustrated targets in List 1 or extra visual context
in List 2, and vice versa.
Because the mobile partner in the navigation task had rich
visual information from being present within the local
context, while the stationary partner had global information
about the target location but less information about its visual
appearance and relative local landmarks, we predicted that
additional visual context for the stationary partner would
help them align their knowledge, making presentation and
acceptance phases of the directions more efficient jointly.
On the other hand, such knowledge might be unnecessary
for direction-givers who knew campus well (assessed during
the final questionnaire).

to examine lexical choices within and across different
interactive and solitary contexts; the spatial ability test
provided the opportunity to examine the impact of this
individual difference on strategies and performance.
Status of Corpus Project The corpus being released to the
research community includes 36 digitally recorded spoken
dialogues (with associated data on individual differences
and experimental parameters). The navigational dialogues
from these pairs have all been transcribed in detail
(including disfluencies and pauses, along with time stamps).
A full article in preparation will present data on the content
and sequencing of referring expressions and navigation
strategies. Here, we report findings from the post-navigation
recall test, entrainment data from the 6-round referential
communication task, and effects of spatial ability.

Figure 1: Close-up views of 10 targets seen by Givers
(L to R, top to bottom): Patriotic faces, Mushroom house,
Outside chalkboard, Ship sculpture, Sorority rock with girl,
Spaceship label, Goldfarb plaque, Cylindrical cement
structure, Cedar plaque, Warning sticker

Methods
Task Sequence Pairs of volunteers did a sequence of five
tasks during a 2-hour session: (1) a collaborative navigation
task in which one partner followed the other’s directions in
order to visit 18 pre-chosen destinations on campus, (2) a
timed mental rotation test of spatial ability, (3) individual
recall tests of their memory for the locations they had
discussed, (4) showing the Experimenter the photos taken of
the destinations (done by the mobile partner only) during
which the Experimenter provided competing labels for some
of the destinations, (5) 6 rounds of a referential
communication task in which pairs matched identical copies
of this set of photos (switching director-matcher roles
halfway through, with the mobile partner acting as director
for the first three rounds and the stationary partner as
director for the last three), and (6) a questionnaire,
completed individually. This sequence of tasks enabled us

Subjects
54 pairs of Stony Brook students were recruited from the
Psychology Subject Pool or via flyers on campus to
participate with another person in a task involving a nature
hike or walking around campus. All identified as native
speakers of English, all but two pairs were strangers, and all
gave informed consent. As they arrived, they were asked
whether they preferred to walk around or remain indoors;
roles were assigned according to their preferences.
Because the sessions involved so many tasks (with the
inevitable risks of equipment failure, bad weather, and
subjects who either failed to complete the navigation task or
who disregarded instructions and ran errands during the

1935

session), and since inclusion of the navigation dialogues in
the final corpus required both members of a pair to sign an
additional release form, 18 of the 54 sessions could not be
included in the Walking Around corpus. However, a total of
49 pairs completed most or all of the matching rounds, so
contributed usable data for the current analyses. Subjects
received their choice of either 2 research credits that could
be used to fulfill a course requirement, or $9 per hour.
The student assigned to the role of direction-Giver (G)
remained inside the lab with a landline phone to direct the
student assigned as Follower (F) to locations on campus.

Testing Services, 1962, 1975).
(3) Then each partner was tested individually for their
memory for the destinations. A SuperLab program on a
laptop randomly selected and displayed 36 pictures of
campus destinations, one at a time; half of these were the
close-ups of the eighteen target destinations from the
navigational task (as in Figure 1), and the other half
depicted destinations the partners had not seen. Each partner
was instructed to indicate within five seconds whether the
destination was old (discussed or visited in the navigation
task) or new. If a partner recognized the destination as old,
the program allowed 30 seconds for typing its name into an
expanding textbox. This task aimed to probe for the most
available conceptualization (presumably, related to the one
they had grounded with the partner during the navigational
study completed only a few minutes earlier).
(4) Next, the Experimenter attempted to interfere with any
conceptual precedents or pacts the pair may have
established by giving F printouts of the photos F had just
taken and having F identify them one by one; for some, the
Experimenter deliberately used different labels than had
been originally provided to G (see Table 1).
Table 1: Influences upon G and F, prior to matching task

Figure 2: Extra visual context provided to Giver (without
highlight) for selected targets from Fig. 1: Spaceship label,
Warning sticker, Sorority rock with girl, Patriotic faces.

Procedure
The sequence of tasks unfolded as follows:
(1) The goal of the collaborative navigation task was for F
to visit and identify each target destination in order, and to
take a photograph documenting the destination. F was
provided with a digital camera and a mobile phone with
GPS, but no information about the destinations, and so had
to rely entirely on G’s directions and descriptions. G used an
interactive web interface displaying a custom Google Map
of the relevant portion of Stony Brook’s campus, with 18
target destinations marked and numbered in the order in
which they were to be visited by F. By clicking on each
numbered destination on the map, G could view the
associated pop-up photograph(s) and label (Table 1 lists the
labels provided to G). In addition, the same photographs and
labels were provided as hard copy in a binder, with the
materials for one destination visible per page. The map
interface also displayed a cursor generated by F’s mobile
phone’s GPS tracking, providing G with visual evidence of
F’s location on campus, updated every few seconds.
(2) Immediately following the navigation task, F returned
to the lab, where both F and G were tested individually for
their spatial ability via a timed paper and pencil mental
rotation test (Card Rotation Test–S-1 [Rev.] by Educational

Label provided to Giver
(screen and binder):	  

Expression addressed to
Follower (by Exptr)	  

Cedar plaque	  
Goldfarb plaque	  
Patriotic faces	  
Warning sticker	  
Mushroom house	  
Outside chalkboard	  
Ship sculpture	  
Spaceship label	  
Cylindrical cement structure	  
Sorority rock with girl	  

Lebanon plaque	  
Stickball plaque	  
Profiles plaque	  
Watertower sticker	  
Brown brick structure	  
Physics chalkboards	  
Engineering sculpture	  
SUNYLab label	  
T-shaped cement block	  
Sorority rock with the moon	  

(5) After this, the partners re-joined one another to
participate in 6 rounds of a referential communication task
in which they repeatedly matched identical sets of pictures
of the 18 destinations. The pictures used in this phase
consisted of the actual photos taken by F while walking
around and were printed in grey-scale, on 8.5” X 11” paper.
G and F sat at separate tables, back-to-back; F played the
role of director for the first 3 rounds with G as matcher, and
they switched roles for the last 3 rounds. To begin each
round, each partner’s set of pictures was shuffled randomly,
with the director’s arranged as a stack from which to view
and describe one picture at a time, and the matcher’s spread
out on the table so that the matcher could identify and stack
each one in the same order as the director’s. Partners were
told to accurately order their pictures as quickly as possible;
the experimenter intervened if they made a matching error
or tried to peek at each other’s pictures.
(6) Partners filled out a questionnaire asking about their
familiarity with campus, whether they knew each other,
their length of time at SBU, whether they drive or live on

1936

campus, their confidence in their own sense of direction and
ability to read maps, and any other information they wanted
to volunteer as relevant. Then they were debriefed.

Round 2 F: structure in front of Engineering building,
the boat
Round 3 F: structure in front of Engineering building
Round 4 G: wire ship, *the*
F: *what?*
G: in front of theF: Engineering building?
G: yeah
F: okay
Round 5 G: the ship thing, in front of Engineering
Round 6 G: wire ship
(Pair 13, #13)

Coding and Examples
Entrainment coding We coded the content of referring
expressions that both partners used in the 6 rounds of the
matching task, including whether F’s and G’s expressions
had converged by Round 6 (F was director and G was
matcher for Rounds 1-3, with G as director and F as matcher
for rounds 4-6). We coded only the 10 target destinations for
which the Experimenter provided an expression to F before
the matching task, where the expression was distinct enough
to compete with G’s given label (illustrated in Figure 1 and
listed in Table 1).
Lexical convergence (as evidence for entrainment) was
coded for each of the 10 pictures using moderately strict
criteria (adapted from Brennan & Clark, 1996 and Bortfeld
& Brennan, 1997), as follows: if all of the content
morphemes (nouns, adjectives) in the expressions spoken by
the director (G) in Round 6 were included in any
expressions from Rounds 1-3 (where F was director), or
were also spoken or confirmed (e.g., by a backchannel or
verbal acknowledgment) by F (the matcher) in Rounds 4-5,
that counted as convergence.

In the example above, F’s “boat structure” was never
taken up by G, and G’s “wire” was never confirmed by F.
Note that when pairs failed to entrain on a referring
expression by Round 6, this did not mean that the
expressions they used were unrelated. In some cases, they
had all but converged in the 5th round, but introduced an
element new to their conversation in the 6th round (which
could not count as entrainment by our strict criteria). This is
the case with the next example (note also that in the
navigation task, G had told F that he hated this particular
object because he had run into it on his bicycle as a child):

Examples By these criteria, the expression “mushroom
house” (used by a particular G as director in Rounds 4-6)
was coded as not convergent with “mushroom hut” (which
the F partner had used throughout Rounds 1-3) because F
never used “house” and G never used “hut”).
It has been shown many times that entrained-upon
expressions become more efficient with repeated referring,
so by this criteria, “mushroom” produced during Round 6
was coded as a convergent, shortened form of “brick
mushroom” from Rounds 1-3.
Our coding ignored the order of propositional content, as
well as the appearance of proxy terms (e.g., “thingy” in
“mushroom thingy” or “blah blah” in “environmental blah
blah” were considered to be like a wild card or variable,
replaceable with other terms). Note that we did not include
prepositions or other function words in the coding, so
“moon rock girl” was coded as convergent with “girl on the
rock with the moon.”
However, when G introduced a new propositional
morpheme in Round 6 that F had not used or acknowledged
in Rounds 1-5, we coded this as a distinct expression (and a
failure to entrain), such as in the following example, for
which the given label was Ship sculpture, and the
Experimenter’s term was Engineering sculpture. (Note: in
this and other examples, matchers did not always verbally
respond, but would often just identify and arrange a picture.)
Round 1 F: boat structure
G: boat structure?
F: yeah, the- in front of the Engineering building

Round 1:
Round 2:
Round 3:
Round 4:

F: the cylinder you ran into
F: the cylinder you ran into
F: cylinder you ran into
G: cylinder
F: cylinder
Round 5: G: cylinder
Round 6: G: cement

(Pair 54, #15)

Note that for this destination, both the label given in the
binder and the Experimenter’s term had included “cement”
(see Table 1). Like other behaviorally expressed products of
human memory, conceptual pacts are subject to interference.
In other cases where pairs did not entrain, they sometimes
appeared to be in the process of converging on a conceptual
pact that was still a bit unstable, having included all of the
same elements but in partial combinations during the 6
rounds, with F never producing or accepting all of the
propositions in G’s final expression.
However, at other times, F and G did express distinct,
competing
conceptualizations
(possibly
expressing
disagreement), such as when F repeatedly used “submarine”
in Rounds 1-3 and G subsequently used “spaceship” on
Rounds 4-6, with neither comment nor discussion. Such
dueling perspectives rarely led to errors in the matching
task, but they do illustrate that pairs did not always succeed
in entraining on a stable perspective.
Some gave explicit evidence that they were monitoring
the sources of the content they expressed, both from
walking around and from hearing competing terms from the
Experimenter. In this example (coded as entrainment), F
refers explicitly to both:
Round 1: F: the thing I couldn't find, that really tall, I think

1937

Round 2:
Round 3:
Round 4:
Round 5:
Round 6:

she <the Experimenter> described it as a
watertower, the really tall thing that was by –
G: - the helium (tank)?
F: yeah, yeah, yeah
F: the helium tank, I think you said
F: helium, tank, or
G: the helium tank
G: helium tank
F: ( ) tank
G: helium tank
(Pair 30, #6)

Other Influences on Perspective Taking We also coded
the extent to which the expressions in Round 6 included
content that was (a) originally provided in the label provided
to G in the binder for the Walking Around task, (b) spoken
to F by the Experimenter after the recall test and before the
matching task, or (c) “other”, or not provided in (a) or (b).
We predict that “other” content of the referring expressions
will reflect conceptualizations and expressions that the pair
discussed during the navigation task, as here:
Round 1: F: the T-shaped structure that you thought
looked like a thumbtack
Round 2: F: T-shaped structure, thumbtack
Round 3: F: the thumbtack scri-, structure
Round 4: F: thumbtack
Round 5: F: thumbtack
Round 6: F: thumbtack
(Pair 49, #15)
Because we have not yet coded all of the destinationrelevant expressions produced in over 30 hours of recorded
navigation sessions, we cannot yet quantify the influence of
that task on the expressions pairs used later on. So for the
purpose of the current analyses, we use these proxies:
• Often, G began describing a destination in the Walking
Around task by first proposing the label given for that
target in the destination binder. So for the current
analyses, we used the initial labels from G’s binder as
an estimate of the conceptualization first proposed by G
and often elaborated, modified, or renegotiated and
replaced as F walked around.
• Likewise, we considered content from alternative
expressions directed at F by the Experimenter as
potentially interfering with conceptual pacts established
while walking around (especially due to the recency of
that label, heard immediately before the matching task).
• Finally, content coded as “other” was hypothesized as
having as its potential source the perspectives
negotiated by the partners while walking around.

Results and Discussion
Effects of Spatial Ability The time it took a given pair to
complete the Walking Around task was correlated with G’s
mental rotation ability, r = -.42, p = .004. Walking Around
time was not reliably correlated with F’s mental rotation
ability, r = - .24, p = .111.

Entrainment while Matching By Round 6, there was
evidence of lexical entrainment 74.8% of the time, with
individual pairs entraining on perspectives for 33% to 100%
of destinations, and particular target destinations showing
entrainment by 54% - 95% of the pairs.
This represents a rather strong degree of entrainment
considering that conceptual pacts are theorized to be flexible
across contexts, and the multiple contexts in our study
differed substantially from one another (e.g., during the
matching task, G viewed F’s photos for the first time, and
now needed to compare and distinguish the destinations
alongside one another. Brennan & Clark’s (1996) lab
experiments showed 56%-71% entrainment (this did not
include expressions where one was a shortened version of
the other, but the task context was far more uniform).
Hybrids When several perspectives are in the air, one
highly effective strategy is to hybridize them. In the next
example, G first read warning sticker in the binder. While
walking around, F proposed a big water tank or something,
while G proposed diamond shaped sticker. Later, F heard
watertower from the Experimenter. In the matching rounds,
each accommodated the other:
Round 1: F: the watertower with the triangle, diamond I
mean
Round 2: F: watertower, with the diamond, the colors
Round 3: F: the watertower with the diamond
Round 4: G: the, the watertower sign, triang-, diamond,
with the colors
Round 5: G: the watertower sign, warning sign
Round 6: G: the diamond watertower sign (Pair 49, #6)
Memory for Destinations & Labels G was more accurate
than F in correctly recalling the destinations discussed in the
navigation task (responding “yes” to old items), 90.6% to
80.4%, t(47) = 3.69, p = .001. G was also marginally faster
to respond than F, t(47) = 1.72, p < .10. This makes sense,
as the contexts in which G encoded the destinations were
consistent with the context of recall (memory prompts were
the same closeup photos from the binder, and G had ample
time to look at them as F walked around).
Convergence of Recalled Terms with Given Label After
responding “yes” in the recall test, the G partner produced
an expression with the identical content as the F partner
41.7% of the time. The fact that this was so much lower
than their entrainment rate in the matching rounds highlights
the difference between individual memories and
collaboratively-achieved perspectives.
The expression G recalled had all the same propositional
content as the given (binder) label 37.5% of the time, and a
somewhat shorter label 20.4% of the time. So 57.9% of the
time, the label G recalled matched the one G started out
with (we do not call this convergence “entrainment” since it
does not emerge from interpersonal interaction). G’s
recalled label added propositional content to the given label

1938

References

only 2.2% of the time (even though they often created
hybrid labels later when interacting with F in the matching
rounds). This is striking, as it suggests that when they
encoded the given label as precedent, they did so very
strongly. The rest of G’s recalled expressions (30.9%)
included no content from the given label.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

In flu en ce
of Gi ven
Te rm
In flu en ce
of Exptr's
Te rm
Exptr's
term on ly

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

ROUND ROUND ROUN D ROUND ROUND ROUND
1
2
3
4
5
6

Figure 3: Proportions of matching rounds that included
content from labels initially given to G (in G’s binder) or
spoken to F (by the Experimenter). The discontinuities
between Rounds 3 and 4 reflect a change in speaker roles (F
directed Rounds 1-3, and G directed Rounds 4-6).
Influence of Experimenter’s Label Finally, we consider
whether F designed referring expressions with G in mind by
quantifying the interference from expressions addressed by
the Experimenter to F just before the matching rounds.
Figure 3 shows that when F was director (R1-R3), some
content from those expressions made it into the expressions
F proposed to G (note: this does not yet take into account a
baseline for how often such terms were used while walking
around). If F chose referring expressions egocentrically or
based on recency alone, rather than designing them for G,
then the black bars in Figure 3 would be much higher.

Conclusions
The Walking Around Corpus and associated data from this
project demonstrate how spontaneous referring expressions
in conversation are shaped by partner-specific influences
and interaction, as well as by other factors that include prior
conceptualizations, spatial ability, and recent interference
from another speaker. We are analyzing the referring
expressions from the corpus to further explore evidence for
entrainment in real world contexts, as well as to address
applied questions. The corpus may be applicable to spoken
dialogue applications; although GPS-based spoken dialogue
systems for cars are now standard, such systems have not
yet been optimized for pedestrians. This corpus is available
to others for research purposes (contact the first author).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant #IIS-1043665. We thank M.
Walker and Z. Hu for helpful discussions, R. Bowmani for
technical assistance, and S. Eng, L. Snelling, R. A. Wang,
and M. Zhang for assistance with coding and transcription.

Barr, D. J., & Keysar, B. (2002). Anchoring comprehension
in linguistic precedents. Journal of Memory & Language,
46, 391-418.
Bortfeld, H. & Brennan, S. E. (1997). Use and acquisition of
idiomatic expressions in referring by native and nonnative speakers. Discourse Processes, 23, 119-147.
Brennan, S. E. (2004). How conversation is shaped by
visual and spoken evidence. In J. Trueswell & M.
Tanenhaus (Eds.), Approaches to studying world-situated
language use: Bridging the language-as-product and
language-as-action tradition. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 6, 14821493.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1–39.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you mean
in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Gergle, D., Kraut, R.E., & Fussell, S.R. (2013). Using visual
information for grounding and awareness in collaborative
tasks. Human-Computer Interaction, 28, 1-39.
Horton, W. S. (2007). The influence of partner-specific
memory associations on language production: Evidence
from picture naming. Language and Cognitive Processes,
22, 1114-1139.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2005). Conversational
common ground and memory processes in language
production. Discourse Processes, 40, 1-35.
Isaacs, E. A., & Clark, H. H. (1987). References in
conversation between experts and novices. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 116, 26–37.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1988). Imagery in learning. In M. S.
Gazzaniga (Ed.), Perspectives in Memory Research.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Tomasello, M. (2010) What’s in a
manner of speaking? Children’s sensitivity to partnerspecific referential precedents. Devel. Psychology, 46,
749-760.
Metzing, C. & Brennan, S. E. (2003). When conceptual
pacts are broken: Partner-specific effects in the
comprehension of referring expressions. Journal of
Memory & Language, 49, 201-213.
Nenkova, A., Gravano, A., & Hirschberg, J. (2008). High
frequency word entrainment in spoken dialogue. In Proc.
of the ACL (Short Papers). 169-172.
Schober, M. F., & Carstensen, L. L. (2010). Does being
together for years help comprehension? In E. Morsella
(Ed.), Expressing oneself/Expressing one's self:
Communication, cognition, language, and identity.
London: Taylor & Francis.
Stoyanchev, S. & Stent. A. (2009). Lexical and syntactic
adaptation and their impact in deployed spoken dialog
systems. In Proc. of NAACL HLT (Short Papers), 189192.

1939

