UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Even if after If then conditionals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5811h879

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ruiz-Ballesteros, Jose A.
Moreno-Rios, Sergio

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Even if after If then conditionals
José Antonio Ruiz-Ballesteros (qframe@correo.ugr.es)
Facultad de Psicología. Universidad de Granada. Campus de Cartuja S/N.
Granada 18071 (Spain)
Sergio Moreno-Ríos (semoreno@ugr.es)
Facultad de Psicología. Universidad de Granada. Campus de Cartuja S/N.
Granada 18071 (Spain)
Abstract
This study evaluates how people represent “even if”
conditionals when they have to integrate them with previous
“if then” conditionals and also make an inference. The terms
in the premises were ordered to facilitate their integration
(Figure 1: If A then B; Even if B C). In half the cases, the
“even if” conditional was expressed with a negation instead of
an affirmation (If A then B; Even if not B C). Participants had
to infer what followed, given A or C. Previous results showed
that in comprehension tasks, where information had to be
integrated, counterfactual conditionals seemed to be
represented with just one situation (B and C). By contrast,
when people had to make inferences with these conditionals,
they seemed to represent two situations. In any case,
counterfactual seem to be represented with two situations (B
and C, and not B and C). In our task, people had to do both: to
infer and to integrate. Results showed that the use of
negations and the direction in the inference had an effect on
the endorsed inferences, but the two factors did not interact.
The need to integrate premises did not block access to the two
“even if” situations in an inference task.
Keywords: semifactual conditionals; directionality; mental
models.

Introduction
Some previous results have shown that when people make
inferences with a semifactual conditional, they represent
two mental models. For example, the conditional “Even if it
had been raining she would have gone to the party”: people
seem to represent the factual case “It was not raining and
she went to the party” and the hypothetical case “It was
raining and she went to the party” (see Moreno-Ríos,
García-Madruga & Byrne, 2008). Semifactual conditionals
are similar to counterfactual conditionals, but with different
initial representations: given “If A had been the case then B
would have been the case” people think about two
possibilities from the outset, noting one as the ‘facts’ (not-A
and not-B) and the other as ‘imagined’ (A and B)
possibilities (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002). Forinstance, if
we take the above example: "If it had been sunny then she
would have gone to the party" we see that this sentence
suggests, on the one hand, the representation that really "It
was not sunny and she did not go to the party" and, on the
other hand, the possibility that "It was sunny and she went
to the party". Results with reasoning tasks are consistent
with the two initial representations proposed. However,
priming studies (Santamaría, Espino & Byrne,

2005) evidenced that when people read an “even if A B”
semifactual, they are primed to read a subsequent ‘not-A
and B’ conjunction more quickly than when they have read
a factual “if A then B” conditional, whereas they read ‘A
and B’ just as quickly after reading the semifactual as after
the factual conditional. Unexpectedly, these authors found
that “if” counterfactuals did not prime the ‘not-A and not-B’
possibility more than “even if” semifactuals. That happened
only with counterfactual conditionals and not with
semifactual conditionals (see also, Gómez-Veiga, GarcíaMadruga & Moreno-Ríos, 2010). Gómez-Veiga et al. (2010)
proposed that it is possible that the comprehension tasks
lead to a less exhaustive representation than inference tasks
with only one part of the information. One possible cause is
that in the comprehension task, the conditional information
must be integrated with the information given previously.
That is, the comprehension task could induce a simpler
strategy to avoid the working memory load using just one of
the two mental models.
In the present study, we use an inference task with a
semifactual “even if” conditional preceded by a related “if
then” conditional. We study how people make inferences
integrating the information given by the premises. We chose
the simplest way of ordering the terms in the premises:
Figure 1 (If A then B; Even if B C). Figure 1 has been
shown to be the easiest configuration of terms in premises to
facilitate integration with conditional premises (e.g., Bara,
Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 1995). Also, we include
sentences with a negation in the first term of the “even if”
conditional. If people represent only the terms, the
integration is not possible in this condition. For example,
consider “If the sky was overcast it was raining” (If A then
B), “Even if it had not been raining she would have gone to
the party” (Even if not B C). People can consider the simple
situation of “not raining” mentioned in the “even if”
conditional, or they can also think of the actual situation: “It
was raining and she went to the party”. Different responses
are expected depending on whether people manage to
consider all the representations derived from the “if then”
and “even if” conditionals (see Table 1, Complete
representation) or just a set of possible situations (some
mental models), as assumed by the mental model theory
(see Table 1, Initial representation).
Some studies on the integration of premises with different
relational statements in deduction (e.g., Oberauer, Hörnig,
Weidenfeld & Wilhelm, 2005; Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2000)

3327

have shown that the directionality in the inference is a factor
that depends on the inner directionality represented in the
mental models, and this could influence the conclusion (see
Oberauer et al., 2005). Oberauer and Wilhelm (2000), using
picture verification tasks (sentence-picture), found that “if
then" conditionals have an inherent forward directionality:
people seem to process “if A then B” in a preferred order,
from A to B. Inferences based on A or on not A are faster
and easier than those based on B or not B.

whether people are able to look for all the alternatives, just
consider one alternative from each conditional or represent
two mental models from “even if” conditionals. Table 2
shows the different predictions for each condition.

Table 1: Some possible sets of representations of the
premises. Every line represents a mental model. The symbol
¬ means “negation”. The “*” symbol for “even if”
representation is the hypothesised model (simplest
representation of “even if”).
Affirmative condition

If A then B

Even if B C

Negative condition

Initial
representation
A B

B C*
¬B C

Initial
representation

Even if not B C

Forward/
backward
inferences

Complete
representation

B C
¬B C
¬B ¬C

Complete
representation
A B
¬A B
¬A ¬B

¬B C*
B C

¬B C
B C
B ¬C

Double
represt.

Affirmative
C
Given A,
A B, B C
then C?

A B
¬A B
¬A ¬B

A B
If A then B

Table 2: Conclusions predicted for inferences after the
integration of premises. See text for description. The
inference can be endorsed when the end terms (A and C) can
be connected and lead to one unique conclusion. In other
cases, the correct conclusion is “nothing follows”.
Parentheses are used when middle terms do not match.

Predictions
We evaluate whether people create double representations to
make inferences from semifactual conditionals when they
have to integrate this information with a previous “if then”
conditional. Different predictions are obtained according to

C
A B, B C

Complete
represt.

C
A B, B C

Affirmative A
Given C,
A B, B C
then A?

A
A B, B C

Nothing
follows
A B, B C
¬A B, B C
¬ A¬B, ¬B C

Negative
Given A,
then C?

Nothing
follows
A B, (¬B C)

Nothing
follows
A B, B C
A B, B ¬C

Nothing
follows
A B, (¬B C)

Nothing
follows
¬A ¬B, ¬B C
¬A B, B C
A B, B C

Negative
Given C,
then A?

Another basic result in deductive research is that
reasoning with negative propositions is harder than with
affirmative propositions (for example, see Evans, Newstead
& Byrne, 1993). Therefore, we would expect an increase in
the number of errors and nothing follows responses for the
backward inferences than the forward ones, and the same
for inferences with negative premises. Therefore, inferences
could be influenced in an additive way by directionality and
by the negation, but they will be determined by the
predicted representations of the premises and their
integration.

Simple
represt.

C
A B, B C

A
A B, B C

There are three columns for each of the three possibilities
for representing “even if” (as shown in Table 1): two
possibilities, one possibility and all the possibilities. The
first two rows represent predictions for affirmatives and the
second two for negative “even if”. In every case, for
forward inferences (given A, what follows? C, not C or
nothing follows) and for backward inferences (given C,
what follows? A, not A or nothing follows). For example,
the first column shows the prediction if people construct a
double representation for “even if” conditionals. In the third
row we can find predictions for a negative “even if” in a
backward inference. Therefore, the structure is: If A then B;
Even if not B C; given A, what follows? People will
conclude “C”, because there is one and only one way to
connect a representation from “if then” (AB) and another

3328

from “even if” (BC) (see Table 1). However, if people
represent “even if” with just one mental model (see Table 2,
second column third row), they cannot match the terms
between the representations of the two premises (AB, not
BC) and the prediction of the conclusion is “nothing
follows”. The same conclusion, but for a different reason, is
predicted if people can access all the situations consistent
with the conditionals (see Table 2, third column, third row).
In this case, there are two possible ways to connect the
representations, which lead to different conclusions (AB,
BC and AB, B not C).
If we consider the polarity (affirmative and negative) and
the directionality (forward and backward) we can make
predictions about the endorsed inferences depending on the
set of mental models represented. In general, following
previous studies, we would expect the directionality
(inherent to conditionals) and polarity (difficulty in
processing negative propositions) to have an effect on the
difficulty in making inferences. In addition, the nature of the
representation should influence the frequency of endorsed
inferences. If people represent the two mental models for
“even if”, no interaction is predicted between polarity and
directionality. If people represent just one initial model from
every conditional, one effect of polarity will be found in the
“nothing follows” conclusion. Finally, if people were able to
represent a complete set of possibilities, we would predict
an interaction between directionality and polarity in the
inferences endorsed (more in affirmative; actually only one
in the forward direction condition) and in the “nothing
follows” conclusion.

Conclusions. Response 1. “There was an engineer”,
Response 2. “There was not an engineer”, Response 3.
“Nothing follows”.

Procedure
All the sentences were presented on a computer screen. Each
premise and the conclusion were shown on a separate screen
and participants decided by pressing the space bar when to
turn to the next statement. After the two conditionals had
been presented, a third premise was shown: A in half the
trials (and C in the backward condition trials). After that, a
screen with three options was shown, with C, not C and
nothing follows (A, not A, and nothing follows in the
backward condition trials). Participants had to press keys 1, 2,
or 3 to choose their respective responses.

Results
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) for repeated measures was
carried out by participants with the following factors:
Directionality (forward and backward) and Semifactual
polarity (affirmative and negative). The same analyses were
carried out for endorsed inferences (given A, C is accepted
and given C, A is accepted) and for nothing follows
responses. Results are shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Percentage of endorsed inferences (given A, then C
in the forward condition, and given C, then A in the backward
condition) and nothing follows responses for affirmative
“even if” and negative “even if” in the second premise.

Method

Direction
of inference

Forward

Backward

Participants
Participants were 51 students from Granada University,
enrolled in the second year of a psychology degree, who
took part for course credits. All participants were native
Spanish speakers without any previous training in logic.

Semifactual
Affirmative Negative Affirmative Negative
polarity

Materials
Thirty two syllogisms were constructed, half of them (those
of interest in this experiment) with the following structure:
Eight syllogisms with the form “If A then B; Even if there
had been B there would have been C”, and another eight
that included a negation in the second premise “If A then B;
Even if there had not been B there would have been C”.
Sixteen other fillers were included with a different structure
“If C then B; Even if there had been/not been B there would
have been A”. The sentences were about professions. For
example:
Premise 1. “If there was a biologist then there was a
lawyer”
Premise 2. “Even if there had been a lawyer there would
have been an engineer”
Premise 3. “There was a biologist, therefore…”

Endorsed
inferences

68 (3.3)

59 (4.2)

50 (4.2)

40 (3.7)

Nothing
follows
inferences

22 (3.4)

22 (3.0)

39 (4.2)

37 (3.9)

* The values in brackets show standard deviation.
The analysis of nothing follows shows only effect of
directionality but no other effects (F(1,50)=12.98; ηp2=.19;
p<.001). More inferences were endorsed for forward than for
backward conditions (F(1,50)=10.6; ηp2=.17; p<.01) and for
affirmative than negative conditions (F(1,50)=5.4; ηp2=.4;
p<.05), but again, they did not interact (F(1,50)=.01; ηp2=0;
p<.9). The lack of this interaction is consistent with the
double representation of “even if” conditionals.

3329

Discussion
The task used in this study required not only inferring from a
conditional but also integrating information before doing so.
The frequency of correct responses is low. The working
memory capacity, motivation and other factors could have
influenced this overall frequency. In any case, we were able
to contrast our prediction because the frequency of the
inferences in the different conditions varied.
The present study shows that people seem to use two
mental representations with “even if” conditionals when they
have to integrate this information with other information
given previously by a conditional. These results are obtained
when the terms in the two conditionals are arranged so that
they can be easily connected (Figure 1). A main result seems
to stand out clearly. The conclusions in the negative forward
and backward conditions (If A then B; Even if not B C) were
not blocked. In fact, no differences in the “nothing follows”
responses were obtained in this condition regarding the
affirmative control condition (If A then B; Even if B C).
Also, we could see that there was an effect of the direction
and of the negation in the acceptance of the inferences, but
not an interaction between the two factors. That is, the
representation alone cannot entirely explain the results of this
study. These effects are consistent with previous studies: the
forward directionality of “if then” conditionals (see Oberauer
et al., 2005) and the effect of negations in reducing the
endorsed inferences (Evans et al., 1993). When we introduce
a negative proposition, it becomes more difficult to
understand the sentences (higher working memory load) and
the errors will increase. For example, people could conclude
not A when actually they should conclude A. Actually, this
kind of error was more frequent for negative sentences, but no
differences were obtained for “nothing follows” conclusions.
Oberauer et al. (2005) maintain that the directionality of the
conditionals must be represented in the conditional. In our
case, only when the direction of the inference matches the
direction in the mental model is the inference easier. The
present results are consistent with this proposal.
Moreover, the present results do not imply that people
always construct a double representation when they make
inferences and integrate “if then” and “even if” conditionals.
For example, results could be different when the order of the
terms makes it more difficult to integrate the premises (for
example using a different figure). Also, the time for reading
the premises and the time for the conclusion could inform us
about the principles that are operating in the integration of
premises. For example, at this point we do not know whether
“even if” could lead to the apodosis as the “relatum” or if it is
the protasis as happens with “if then” clauses.
This is a preliminary study and we cannot prove that the
present results can be generalised to conditionals with other
content (such as advice, promises, obligations, etc.). The
content and the context of conditionals have been shown to
influence the mental representation accessed in deduction
(see Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002; Handley & Feeney,
2004). Also, we used an evaluation of conclusions task, but
not a generation of conclusions task. We do not expect that

if instead we had used, for example, a generation of
conclusion task, it would have led to different initial
representations. However, again, this question has not been
tested at this point in the research.
The present results are part of a research project that studies
how premises are integrated and how we represent
semifactual expressions.

Acknowledgments
Financial support was provided by the Ministerio de Ciencia
e Innovación (PSI2011-29504).

References
Bara, B. G., Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1995).
Development of syllogistic reasoning. American Journal
of Psychology, 108, 157–193.
Evans, J. S. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1993).
Human reasoning: The psychology of deduction. Hove,
UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd.
Gómez-Veiga, I., García-Madruga, J. A., & Moreno-Ríos, S.
(2010). The interpretation of indicative and subjunctive
concessives. Acta Psychologica, 134, 245-252
Handley, S., & Feeney, A. (2004). Reasoning and pragmatics:
The case of even-if. In I. A. Noveck & D. Sperberg (Eds.),
Experimental pragmatics. Besingstone: Palgrave.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. (2002). Conditionals: A
theory of meaning, pragmatics and inference.
Psychological Review, 109, 646–678
Moreno-Ríos, S., García-Madruga, J. A., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(2008). Inferences from semifactual ‘even if’conditionals.
Acta Psychologica, 128, 197-209.
Oberauer, K., Hörnig, R., Weidenfeld, A., & Wilhelm, O.
(2005). Effects of directionality in deductive reasoning: II.
Premise integration and conclusion evaluation. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A,
58, 1225-1247.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2000). Effects of directionality
in deductive reasoning: I. The comprehension of single
relational premises. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1702-1712.
Santamaría, C., Espino, O., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2005).
Counterfactual and semifactual conditionals prime
alternative possibilities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 31, 1149–
1154.

3330

