UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Experts’ Explanations Engage Novices in Deep-Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/03n9s694

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lachner, Andreas
Nuckles, Matthias

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Experts’ Explanations Engage Novices in Deep-Processing
Andreas Lachner (andreas.lachner@ezw.uni-freiburg.de)
Matthias Nückles (matthias.nueckles@ezw.uni-freiburg.de)
Department for Educational Science, University of Freiburg
Rempartstrasse 11, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
Experts and intermediates fundamentally differ in the ways
they explain subject matter to novices. Experts provide less
details but in a highly coherent format, whereas intermediates
provide many additional details but in a format with low
coherency. In a recent study, we found that experts’
explanations enabled novices to acquire more transferable and
flexible knowledge as opposed to explanations by
intermediates mainly due to the higher coherence of experts’
explanations. In order to investigate more directly how
experts’ and intermediates’ explanations differently triggered
novices’ processing of the explanations, we conducted a
think-aloud study. Results indicated that novices learning
with an expert’s explanation processed the explanations
deeper than novices with intermediates’ explanations. In line
with this, deep processing was significantly related to
novices’ transfer. Thus, expertise can be regarded as an
essential prerequisite for generating effective instructional
explanations that engage novices to process the subject matter
deeply and to generate transferable knowledge.
Keywords: expertise; processing; instructional explanations;
transfer.

Introduction
Experts and intermediate students fundamentally differ in
the ways they explain subject matter to novices. Figure 1
shows two propositional representations, one intermediate
student’s explanation and one expert’s explanation, taken
from a study by Lachner, Gurlitt and Nückles (2012). These
propositional representations about bacterial endocarditis,
an inflammation of the heart valves, structurally differ in
several important respects.

explanatory concepts to each other, resulting in a single very
coherent chunk of knowledge. In marked contrast, the
typical intermediate’s explanation provided many concepts
(N = 52). Although there was one interrelated chunk about
pathophysiological processes of bacterial endocarditis, the
intermediate
was less
likely to relate basic
pathophysiological concepts with advanced concepts, which
resulted in many fragmented knowledge blocks (N = 8).
These two explanations nicely illustrate well-known
differences between experts and intermediates. For instance,
research on categorization shows that experts tend to
organize their knowledge around abstract principles, which
allows them to integrate their knowledge in a more coherent
manner, whereas novices organize their knowledge around
superficial features, which results in less coherent
knowledge structures (Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981;
Rottman, Gentner, & Goldwater, 2012).
In the same vein, in the medical domain, it has been
shown that experts subsume basic medical concepts under
advanced concepts, which results in very condensed
schemata, whereas intermediates rather rely on detailed
knowledge, as they have not yet acquired these advanced
clinical principles. This subsumption process is also known
as knowledge encapsulation (Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992,
Rikers, Schmidt, & Boshuizen, 2000; 2002).
Lachner et al. (2012) found that these effects for
coherence and knowledge encapsulation also hold true for
instructional explanations, specifically explanations written
for novice medical students. Compared to intermediates,
medical experts wrote more coherent and equally more
encapsulated explanations, meaning that they omitted more
details in their explanations. However, both intermediate
students and experts used the same amount of advanced
concepts. Apparently, experts adapted their choice of words,
but not the way they would structure an explanation.

Learning from Instructional Explanations

Figure 1: Graphical representation of an intermediate’s
explanation and an expert’s explanation.
The typical expert’s explanation consisted of only a few,
mainly advanced, clinical concepts (N = 24). Beyond that,
the expert’s explanation was very coherent, as she related all

As explanations by experts and intermediates fundamentally
differed on the level of coherence and encapsulation,
explanations by experts and intermediates might also affect
student learning differently. For instance, Hinds, Patterson
and Pfeffer (2001) investigated how the instructor’s domain
expertise affected novices’ learning in the domain of
electrical engineering. More specifically, they examined
how novices studying an intermediate’s explanation differed
from novices studying an expert’s explanation with regard
to their performance on near transfer and far transfer tasks.
Results indicated an interaction effect. Although novices

2802

with an intermediate’s explanations outperformed novices
with an expert’s explanation on near transfer tasks, there
was a clear benefit for novices with experts’ explanations on
far transfer tasks. In a related study, Boekhout, van Gog,
van de Wiel, Gerards-Last, and Geraets (2010) showed that
worked examples constructed by experts led to larger
benefits for novices in transfer tasks than worked examples
constructed by intermediates. However, with regard to the
acquisition of factual knowledge, novices with experts’
worked examples did not differ from novices learning from
intermediates’ worked examples.

Beneficial Features of Instructional Explanations
Bridging findings from expertise research and tutoring
research, Lachner and Nückles (2013) investigated which
expertise-related textual features of explanations accounted
for the better transfer of novices learning with experts’
explanations. Specifically, they examined how coherence
and encapsulation of the instructors’ explanations, as
coherence and encapsulation were selective indicators for
expertise (Lachner et al., 2012; Rikers et al., 2002; Rottman
et al., 2012), affected novices’ learning outcomes. Similarly
to Hinds et al. and Boekhout et al., Lachner and Nückles
found that novices studying with experts’ explanations
significantly outperformed novices with intermediates’
explanations on transfer tasks. At the same time, in line with
Boekhout et al., they did not find a significant difference
between experts’ and intermediates’ explanations regarding
novices’ factual knowledge.
More importantly, Lachner and Nückles (2013) conducted
a mediation analysis to investigate whether encapsulation,
as measured by the omission of detailed knowledge, or
coherence, as measured by the number of isolated fragments
(see Figure 1), accounted for novices’ transfer. Results
indicated that the degree of encapsulation had no effect on
novices’ transfer, whereas explanatory coherence clearly
mediated the effect of instructors’ expertise on novices’
transfer. Therefore, the authors could show that it was the
coherence of experts’ explanations that enabled novices to
transfer their acquired knowledge to other medical tasks.
Nevertheless, although the Lachner et al. study suggests
that explanatory coherence fostered novices’ transfer, they
did not examine which learning processes were provoked by
experts’ versus intermediates’ explanations that could
explain the transfer effect.

Processing of Instructional Explanations
Bransford and Schwarz (1999) proclaimed that for flexible
transfer, learning with “understanding” is necessary. Studies
by Gilabert, Martinez and Vidal-Abarca (2005) and
Linderholm et al. (2001) support this view, as they found
that the high coherence of texts fostered students’ active
processing of the text material. As coherent explanations
highlighted important causal relations between concepts, the
coherence of explanations probably served as a valuable
scaffold to engage students’ processing.

Text processing can be regarded as the construction and
integration of multiple independent representations of a text
(Kintsch, 1988; Kintsch, 2004). First, learners construct a
text base which contains the essential meaning of the text,
mainly by translating the text into propositions, or in other
words, by paraphrasing the text and by bridging inferences
to connect information within the text (Kintsch, 1988).
Second, learners construct a situation model by doing selfexplanations to fill coherence gaps with their prior
knowledge. Kintsch (2004) argued especially processing
activities, that aim to enrich the situation model, are needed
to develop a deep understanding.
In the study by Lachner and Nückles (2013), the
mediating variable between instructors’ expertise and
novices’ transfer was explanatory coherence. In the study
described here, we examined whether the effect of expertise
on novices’ learning can be explained by novices’
processing activities. In line with text comprehension
research, (Gilabert et al., 2005; Linderholm et al., 2001), we
assumed that experts’ coherent explanations may better
promote novices’ deep processing and novices’ acquisition
of flexible knowledge compared to intermediates’ less
coherent explanations.

Research Questions and Hypotheses
To investigate novices’ processing activities while learning
with experts’ and intermediates’ explanations, we conducted
a think-aloud study. The aims of our study were twofold.
First, we wanted to replicate the findings by Lachner and
Nückles (2013) that experts’ explanations were better suited
to foster novices’ transfer compared to intermediates’
explanations. Second, as we were interested in novices’
processing activities, we examined how novices processed
explanations by intermediates and experts using a thinkaloud procedure.

Learning Hypotheses
In line with previous research (Boekhout et al., 2010; Hinds
et al., 2001; Lachner & Nückles, 2013), we hypothesized
that novices would benefit more from experts’ explanations
as opposed to intermediates’ explanations in transfer tasks.
Experts’ coherent explanations would better enable novices
to construct an appropriate situation model of bacterial
endocarditis and thus enable them to transfer their
knowledge of bacterial endocarditis to other tasks (Kintsch,
2004).
For novices’ factual knowledge gain, we refrained from
making clear predictions, as Boekhout et al. (2010) and
Lachner and Nückles (2013) did not find any significant
differences between explanations by experts and
intermediates. As coherence mainly accounted for the
construction of a rich situation model and not for the
generation of an adequate text base (Gilabert et al., 2005;
Kintsch, 2004), novices with intermediates’ explanations
could perform just as well in a factual knowledge test as
those with experts’ explanations.

2803

Processing Hypotheses
As suggested by research on text comprehension (Gilabert
et al., 2005; Linderholm et al., 2001), we assumed that
experts’ coherent explanations would encourage novices’
deep processing compared to intermediates’ explanations.
Therefore, we expected that novices with experts’
explanations would outperform novices with intermediates’
explanations with regard to the proportion of bridging
inferences and self-explanations, whereas intermediates’
explanations would trigger novices’ paraphrasing. For
negative monitoring, we refrained from making clear
predictions, as the fewer details in experts’ explanations
could trigger novices’ monitoring, as well as the lack of
coherence of intermediates’ explanations.
Beyond that, as Kintsch (2004) suggested, we assumed
that novices’ transfer was significantly related to novices’
deep processing.

Method
Participants
Sixty-eight novices from the University of Freiburg,
Germany participated in the study. They were recruited
from medicine (45 students) and biology programs (23
students). 70.60 % were female; their mean age was 20.25
(SD = 1.87). Participants were on average in their first
semester (SD = 1.24) and had not yet attended any courses
in cardiology. Participants were financially compensated
with 10 Euro for their participation.

Design
Novices were randomly assigned to one of four explanations
about bacterial endocarditis, an infection of the heart valves
(two experts’ explanations and two intermediates’
explanations). We used a pretest-posttest design with type of
explanations, that is, experts’ explanations or intermediates’
explanations, as independent variables. There were two
classes of dependent variables: We analyzed novices’
learning outcomes with both a factual knowledge test that
measured novices’ knowledge about central concepts and
interdependencies of bacterial endocarditis, and with a
transfer test that required the participants to apply their
acquired knowledge of bacterial endocarditis to other
medical phenomena. Additionally, we collected novices’
processing activities by means of think-aloud-protocols (i.e.
paraphrasing, bridging inferences, self-explanations, and
negative monitoring) while studying the explanations.

heart disease that requires deep-level knowledge about
embolisms, the structure of the heart, and the circulatory
system (Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992).
Explanations
We selected two experts’ explanations and two
intermediates’ explanations from a recent study by Lachner
et al. (2012). We selected the explanations according to their
degree of coherence, which can be regarded as the number
of fragments in the explanation (see Figure 1). We chose the
explanations of the two experts with the smallest number of
fragments (Expert A: 1 fragment; Expert B: 3 fragments)
and those of the two intermediates with the highest number
of fragments (Intermediate A: 8 fragments; Intermediate B:
8 fragments).
In the Lachner et al. study, this structural feature of
explanations mediated the effect of the instructors’ expertise
with regard to novices’ transfer. The experts in that study
were cardiologists who had at least 15 years of working
experience. Intermediates were medical students in their
fifth year of studying. The explanations were 157 words (SD
= 36.03) long on average. The explanations pointed out the
biomedical processes and causes of bacterial endocarditis,
and how the symptoms mentioned in the case description
could be related to the underlying biomedical processes.
Factual knowledge test
A factual knowledge test was used as pre- and posttest and
measured novices’ conceptual understanding of bacterial
endocarditis. It consisted of nine multiple choice items with
four answer possibilities and one correct solution (e.g.
“What is the reason for the diastolic in cases of
endocarditis?”). Participants received one point for each
correct answer, yielding a total possible score of nine points.
Transfer test
To measure novices’ transfer, we constructed two complex
questions that required novices to transfer their acquired
knowledge of bacterial endocarditis to other complex
medical phenomena (“Why can endocarditis result in a
cardiogenic shock?”, “Can endocarditis be the cause of a
stroke?”). First, participants’ written answers to these
questions were segmented into individual statements and
then compared to reference answers constructed by a
medical expert. A scorer who was blind to the participants’
treatment condition used a strict manual in which
participants received 0.5 points for each unit of the
reference answer. For each task, participants could obtain
4.5 points, which resulted in a maximum score of 9 points
for both answers.

Procedure
Materials
Case description
We provided the participants with a general case description
of a fictitious patient suffering from bacterial endocarditis. It
included central findings of laboratory data, and
descriptions of symptoms. The case description had been
used in previous classical studies on the nature of expertise,
as bacterial endocarditis can be regarded as a prototypical

Participants were tested individually in a quiet room. They
were randomly assigned to one of the four explanations. An
experimental session lasted 60 minutes. During the
experimental session, participants were not allowed to
proceed before being signaled by the experimenter (exact
time on task). First, participants answered the pretest (10
minutes). Then, in the learning phase, they received the case
description and one of the randomly assigned explanations

2804

(25 minutes). Participants were instructed to think aloud
while they studied the explanation. If participants did not
think aloud for more than 5 seconds, the experimenter
prompted them to continue talking. In the post-test phase,
participants answered the factual knowledge test (10
minutes) and accomplished the two transfer tasks (15
minutes).

Analyses and coding
For the analyses of novices’ learning processes, their think
aloud protocols were transcribed and segmented into idea
units. Based on Chi (2000), each idea unit was categorized
as paraphrasing, bridging inferences, self-explanation, and
negative monitoring (see Table 1). Thirty percent of the
protocols were co-rated by a second rater. In assigning
verbalizations to categories, inter-rater agreement was very
good (κ = .88). Thus, only one rater coded the rest of the
protocols.

an ANCOVA with type of explanation as a fixed factor,
novices’ posttest scores as dependent variable and novices’
prior knowledge as a covariate. There was no significant
difference for type of explanation regarding novices’ factual
knowledge, F(1, 65) = 1.90, p = .17, η2 = .03. Thus, we
could replicate the results from Lachner and Nückles (2013)
that novices benefited from intermediates’ and experts’
explanations to a similar extent.
With regard to the transfer hypothesis, we found that
novices learning with an expert’s explanation significantly
outperformed novices learning with an intermediate’s
explanation on the transfer tasks, F(1, 65) = 15.56, p = .00,
η2 = .19. Thus, as in the study by Lachner and Nückles,
experts’ explanations better supported novices in solving
transfer tasks as opposed to intermediates’ explanations.
Table 2: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for
the learning outcome measures.
Novices with
Intermediates’
Explanations

Novices with
Experts’
Explanations

Prior knowledge

3.29 (1.34)

3.71 (1.78)

Factual knowledge

4.18 (1.73)

4.76 (1.30)

Transfer

3.63 (1.78)

5.44 (1.84)

Table 1: Categories to rate the think-aloud protocols.
Category
Paraphrase

Bridging inferences

Self-Explanations

Negative
monitoring

Dependent variable

Description
Novice simply restated or
paraphrased a text segment from
the explanation.
Novice relates different text
passages of the explanation to
better understand relations
between sentences.
Novice connects new information
with prior knowledge by selfexplaining. Indicators are the
generation of examples or making
predictions.
Novice utters his /her noncomprehension

Processing Hypotheses

Results
We used an alpha level of .05 for all statistical analyses. As
an effect size measure, we used partial η2 qualifying values
< .06 as small effect, values in the range between .06 and
.14 as medium effect, and values > .14 as large effect (see
Cohen, 1988).
A series of ANOVAs and χ² tests revealed no significant
differences between the experimental conditions concerning
age, F(1, 66) = 1.22, p = .27; gender, χ²(1) = 2.50, p = .11;
study programs, χ²(1) = .59, p = .44; prior knowledge, F(1,
66) = 1.16, p = .29, and the number of processing activities,
F(1, 66) = .84, p = .36.

Table 3 shows the mean proportions and standard deviations
of novices’ processing activities. With regard to our
processing hypothesis, we conducted a MANCOVA with
type of processing activities (paraphrase, bridging
inferences, self-explanations and negative monitoring) as
dependent variables, type of explanation as independent
variable and novices’ prior knowledge as covariate. The
MANCOVA revealed a significant effect for type of
explanation, F(3, 63) = 3.25, p = .03, η2 = .13. Separate
ANCOVAS showed that this effect was specifically due to
the differences in the proportions of paraphrasing and selfexplanations (see Table 3).
Table 3: Mean proportions and standard deviations (in
parentheses) of novices’ processing activities

Learning Hypotheses
Table 2 provides an overview of the means and standard
deviations for the factual knowledge and the transfer test.
To investigate differences in factual knowledge between
novices who learned with an intermediate’s explanation and
novices learning with an expert’s explanation, we performed

2805

Paraphrases
Bridging
inferences
SelfExplanations
Negative
monitoring
a
df = 1, 65

Explanations by
Intermediate Expert
Fa
p
.51 (.24)
.33 (.22) 9.65 .00

η²
.13

.22 (.12)

.24 (.17) 0.25 .62

.00

.11 (.11)

.20 (.22) 4.79 .03

.07

.16 (.15)

.22 (.21) 2.17 .15

.03

As expected, novices learning with intermediates’
explanations used more shallow processing strategies
directed at the construction of the text base (i.e.
paraphrasing a text segment) as compared with novices’
learning with experts’ explanations. In contrast, regarding
the proportion of self-explanations, novices learning with
experts’ explanations used more deep-level processing
strategies (i.e. self-explanations) as opposed to novices
learning with intermediates’ explanations.
However, there was no difference for type of explanation
regarding the proportion of bridging inferences. Thus,
novices used the same amount of bridging inferences to
establish coherence within their text base regardless of
which type of explanation they received. Additionally, we
did not find any significant differences for type of
explanation regarding negative monitoring, which suggests
that intermediates’ and experts’ explanations entailed
comprehension problems to a similar extent.
To test whether novices’ transfer was associated with the
proportion of novices’ deep processing of the explanations,
we computed a Pearson’s correlation. To obtain a single
score for deep-processing of the explanations, we computed
the proportion of deep processing learning activities (i.e.
bridging inferences and self-explanations) that aimed at
constructing a sufficient situation model for each
participant. This was appropriate because the different
values were significantly inter-correlated, r(68) = .53, p =
.00. Novices’ deep processing activities were significantly
correlated with novices’ performance on transfer tasks,
r(68) = .30, p = .01. Evidently, novices’ deep processing led
novices to better transfer their knowledge to other tasks.

Discussion
The main goal of the present study was to investigate how
experts’ and intermediates’ explanations differently affected
novices’ processing and novices’ learning outcomes.
For novices’ performance on transfer tasks, we could
replicate findings of previous studies (Boekhout et al., 2010;
Hinds et al., 2001; Lachner & Nückles, 2013) that experts’
explanations more effectively enabled novices to transfer
their knowledge acquired from the explanations to other
related medical phenomena. Similar to findings by
Boekhout et al. and Lachner and Nückles, we did not find
any significant differences between experts’ and
intermediates’ explanations regarding novices’ factual
knowledge gain. Apparently, intermediates’ and experts’
explanations were comparably appropriate to establish a
solid text base. However, it must be noted that the average
factual knowledge gain was rather low (see Table 2), which
can be mainly attributed to the brief text length of our
instructional explanations.
With regard to novices’ processing of the explanations,
we can conclude that experts’ explanations engaged novices
in a deeper processing of the explanations as opposed to
explanations generated by intermediates. Novices with
experts’ explanations made significantly more selfexplanations and less paraphrasing compared to novices

with intermediates’ explanations. However, in contrast to
our assumptions, we did not find any differences for the
proportions of bridging inferences and negative monitoring.
Apparently, experts’ omissions in their explanations and the
lack of coherence in intermediates’ explanations may have
balanced each other out and therefore resulted in a trade-off
in the novices’ bridging inferences and negative monitoring.
Beyond that, we could show that novices’ performance on
transfer tasks was significantly related to novices’ deep
processing. Apparently, intermediates’ less coherent
explanations triggered shallow processing activities that
solely aimed at the construction of a solid text base. In
contrast, experts’ explanations mainly triggered novices’
deep processing, which resulted in the construction of a
better situation model and a better performance on the
transfer test. As intermediates primarily relied on shallow
processing, they probably constructed a less coherent and
therefore less effective situation model that resulted in a
lower performance on the transfer tasks (Kintsch, 2004).
However, there was only a moderate correlation between
novices’ transfer and deep-processing activities. However,
think-aloud protocols are less reliable to measure
unconscious comprehension processes (Graesser et al.,
1997). Therefore, in subsequent studies, behavioral
measures should be included as a complementary measure
to tap implicit processes of comprehension more directly
(Holmqvist et al., 2011; Kaakinen & Hyona, 2005).
What are the broader theoretical implications of our
research? First, although research on the expert-blind spot
(Hinds, 1999; Nathan & Koedinger, 2000) suggests that
experts sometimes have difficulties in taking a novice’s
perspective, their instructional explanations nevertheless
effectively support novice students in acquiring deep and
flexible knowledge due to the superior coherence of their
explanations. Compared to intermediates, experts produce
explanations that highlight central principles of the subject
matter in a very coherent manner. This supports novices in
processing the explanations deeply in order to establish
coherent and flexible representations of the subject domain.
Second, we could show that the effect of coherence on
novices’ deep-processing and on novices’ transfer
performance also holds true in more naturalistic settings,
such as in giving explanations. In our study, we used real
instructional explanations by experts and intermediates,
instead of constructing highly coherent vs. low-coherent
explanations (e.g. Ainsworth & Burcham, 2007; Gilabert et
al., 2005; Linderholm et al., 2001). Despite the promising
results of our study, there are also some limitations and
open questions. One limitation of this experiment is the use
of only one phenomenon of cardiology, namely bacterial
endocarditis, which possibly restricts the generalizability of
our experiment. However, bacterial endocarditis can be
regarded as a classic disease, which requires fundamental
knowledge about the circulatory system, the structure of the
heart, and embolisms. In a similar vein, future studies
should investigate whether the effect of the higher

2806

coherence of experts’ explanations on novices’ processing
and transfer also holds true for other subject-domains.
Overall, the present study shows that experts’
explanations are an effective means to foster novices’ deep
processing of complex contents. Due to their highcoherence, experts’ explanations prompt novices to process
the explanations deeply by focusing on central principles,
which results in more flexible knowledge structures and
subsequently in a better transfer of knowledge to other
tasks. In doing so, experts’ explanations can be considered
as a valuable scaffold for engaging novices in deep
processing and in a meaningful construction of knowledge.

References
Ainsworth, S., & Burcham, S. (2007). The impact of text
coherence on learning by self-explanation. Learning and
Instruction, 17(3), 286–303.
Boekhout, P., van Gog, T., van de Wiel, M. W., GerardsLast, D., & Geraets, J. (2010). Example-based learning:
effects of model expertise in relation to student expertise.
The British Journal of Educational Psychology, 80(4),
557-566.
Boshuizen, H. P., & Schmidt, H. G. (1992). On the role of
biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning by experts,
intermediates and novices. Cognitive Science, 16(2), 153184.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking
transfer: a simple proposal with multiple implications.
Review of Research in Education, 24, 61–100.
Chi, M.T.H. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: the
dual processes of generating inferences and repairing
mental models. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in
Instructional Psychology. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5(2), 121-152.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Graesser, A. C., Millis, K. K., & Zwaan, R. A. (1997).
Discourse comprehension. Annual Review of Psychology,
48(1), 163–189.
Gilabert, R., Martinez, G., & Vidal-Abarca, E. (2005). Some
good texts are always better: text revision to foster
inferences of readers with high and low prior background
knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 15(1), 45-68.
Hinds, P. J. (1999). The curse of expertise: The effects of
expertise and debiasing methods on predictions of novice
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 5(2), 205-221.
Hinds, P. J., Patterson, M., & Pfeffer, J. (2001). Bothered by
abstraction: the effect of expertise on knowledge transfer
and subsequent novice performance. The Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86(6), 1232-1243.
Holmqvist, K., Nyström, M., Andersson, R., Dewhurst, R.,
Jarodzka, H., & Van de Weijer, J. (2011). Eye tracking: A

comprehensive guide to methods and measures. OUP
Oxford.
Kaakinen, J. K., & Hyona, J. (2005). Perspective effects on
expository text comprehension: evidence from thinkaloud protocols, eyetracking, and recall. Discourse
Processes, 40(3), 239–257.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95(2), 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (2004). The construction–integration model of
text comprehension and its implications for instruction. In
R. B. Ruddell & N. J. Unrau (Eds.), Theoretical models
and processes of reading. Newark, DE: International
Reading Association.
Lachner, A., Gurlitt, J., & Nückles M. (2012). A graphoriented approach to measuring expertise - detecting
structural differences between experts and intermediates.
In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (653 - 658). Sapporo, Japan:
Cognitive Science Society.
Lachner, A., Gurlitt, J., & Nückles M. (2013). Why experts’
explanations foster novices’ transfer – Coherence
matters. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Linderholm, T., Everson, M. G., van den Broek, P.,
Mischinski, M., Crittenden, A., & Samuels, J.(2001).
Effects of causal text revision on more or less–skilled
readers’ comprehension of easy and difficult texts.
Cognition & Instruction, 18, 525–556.
Nathan, M. J., & Koedinger, K. R. (2000). Teachers’ and
researchers’ beliefs about the development of algebraic
reasoning. Journal for Research in Mathematics
Education 31,168-190.
Rikers, R. M. J. P., Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A.
(2000). Knowledge encapsulation and the intermediate
effect. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(2),
150-166.
Rikers, R. M. J. P., Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A.
(2002). On the constraints of encapsulated knowledge:
Clinical case representations by medical experts and
subexperts. Cognition and Instruction, 20(1), 27-45.
Rottman, B. M., Gentner, D., & Goldwater, M. B. (2012).
Causal systems categories: Differences in novice and
expert categorization of causal phenomena. Cognitive
Science, 36(5), 919–932.

2807

