UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Exploring Cognitive Diversity Across Disciplines and Cultures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9f68c24x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bender, Andrea
Beller, Sieghard
Haun, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Exploring Cognitive Diversity Across Disciplines and Cultures
Andrea Bender1 & Sieghard Beller1,2 ({bender,beller}@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
1
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Germany
2
Department of Human Sciences, University of Paderborn, Germany
Daniel Haun (haun@eva.mpg.de)
Research Group “Comparative Cognitive Anthropology”,
MPI for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, DE

Asifa Majid (Asifa.Majid@mpi.nl)
Center for Language Studies, Radboud University,
& Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL

Cristine H. Legare (legare@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin, USA

Bethany Ojalehto (bethany.ojalehto@gmail.com)
Douglas L. Medin (medin@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, USA

Since the cognitive revolution, a widely held assumption has
been that—whereas content may vary across cultures—cognitive processes would be universal, especially those on the
more basic levels. Even if scholars do not fully subscribe to
this assumption, they often conceptualize, or tend to investigate, cognition as if it were universal (Henrich, Heine, &
Norenzayan, 2010). The insight that universality must not be
presupposed but scrutinized is now gaining ground, and cognitive diversity has become one of the hot (and controversial) topics in the field (Norenzayan & Heine, 2005). We argue that, for scrutinizing the cultural dimension of cognition,
taking an anthropological perspective is invaluable, not only
for the task itself, but for attenuating the home-field disadvantages that are inescapably linked to cross-cultural research (Medin, Bennis, & Chandler, 2010).
In a recent debate on the role of anthropology in and for
cognitive science, obstacles that may hamper rapprochement
were discussed in detail (Bender, Beller, & Medin, 2012). In
this symposium, we intend to move a step forward and showcase efforts to overcome these obstacles. The contributions
to this symposium pursue a problem-driven approach to
tackle specific questions of shared interest. The symposium
brings together scholars from different disciplinary backgrounds (including cognitive and evolutionary anthropology,
psycholinguistics, and cognitive, developmental, and comparative psychology), who are among the leading scientists
in their fields. Each of them has contributed considerably to
our expanding knowledge on how culture and cognition interact (e.g., Beller & Bender, 2008; Haun et al., 2011; Legare
& Souza, 2012; Majid, Boster, & Bowerman, 2008; Medin &
Atran, 2004). They present current research on different domains, ranging from causal cognition on the physical world
through semantic categorization of olfaction and mental state
understanding to processes of cultural transmission and moral reasoning in the biological domain, thus shedding new
light on a field in cognitive science, in which recent years
have seen an upsurge of interest and controversial debates.

olfactory lexicons in Aslian languages spoken in the Malay
Peninsula (Burenhult & Majid, 2011; Wnuk & Majid, 2012).
I present new data from speakers of Jahai, showing that
Aslian language speakers show more agreement and shorter
reaction times when free naming odors than their Western
(Dutch) counterparts. This data further demonstrates that
some speakers can be astonishingly good at odor naming.
Furthermore, the Jahai data challenges current accounts of
olfactory language and cognition, which in turn has implications for the larger language-thought debate.

Weighing up physical causes in Germany and
Tonga: A cross-cultural study on causal cognition
Sieghard Beller, Annelie Rothe,
Gregory Kuhnmünch, & Andrea Bender
When people determine which of the entities involved in a
physical interaction is responsible for its outcome, they
weigh the entities differently even if the interaction is symmetric. This effect depends on various factors and also varies
cross-culturally (Bender & Beller, 2011). However, our results differ from previous research. In a replication study
with participants from Germany and Tonga we investigate
whether this is due to differences in the presentation of stimuli (visual vs. verbal) or to differences in answer mode (explanations vs. ratings of responsibility), and we test hypotheses on which cultural and/or linguistic factors may account
for the cultural differences.

Mental perspective taking
across species and cultures
Daniel Haun, Katja Liebal & Juliane Kaminski
Any trait claimed to define a species, needs not only be derived in that species, i.e. unique amongst its close phylogenetic kin, but also widespread across that species. Hence
only concerted comparisons across related species and human cultures wield the power to identify the skills that define
the human species (e.g., Haun et al., 2006). In the last years,
psychologists have claimed such definitive traits in the area
of social cognitive abilities such as the ability to understand
others’ knowledge, desires and beliefs. Here we compare individuals’ abilities to understand others’ mental states at dif-

Olfactory language and cognition
Asifa Majid
It has long been claimed “humans are astonishingly bad at
odor identification and naming” (Yeshurun & Sobel, 2010).
However, recent evidence suggests exquisite elaboration of

67

ferent levels of complexity across a selected set of human
cultures as well as across all non-human great ape species. In
a non-verbal competitive game, participants were challenged
to predict a competitor’s moves, based on his/her knowledge, beliefs and desires. While children of all three cultures
predicted with similar proficiency what their competitor
chose, the non-human apes succeeded only in interpreting
their competitor knowledge state, but showed no evidence of
interpreting beliefs and desires. This data is consistent with
the claim that reasoning about others’ beliefs and desires is
cross-culturally common and derived in humans.

that the cognitive systems supporting instrumental and conventional learning are facilitated by the differential activation of an instrumental stance (i.e., rationale based on physical causation) and a ritual stance (i.e., rationale based on cultural convention). I will present data demonstrating that (a)
conventional framing increases imitative fidelity and the detection of differences between the performances of two actors and (b) witnessing multiple actors perform an action sequence increases imitative fidelity. The ritual stance increases imitative fidelity, a process essential for understanding
cultural learning.

Communities of values: Moral reasoning about
human-plant interactions among Indigenous
Ngöbe of Panama

References
Beller, S., & Bender, A. (2008). The limits of counting: Numerical cognition between evolution and culture. Science, 319,
213-215.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2011). Causal asymmetry across cultures: Assigning causal roles in symmetric physical settings.
Frontiers in Psychology, 2:231.
Bender, A., Beller, S., & Medin, D. L. (Eds.) (2012). Does cognitive science need anthropology? Topics in Cognitive Science,
4(3).
Burenhult, N., & Majid, A. (2011). Olfaction in Aslian ideology
and language. The Senses & Society, 6, 19-29.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Király, I. (2002). Rational imitation in preverbal infants. Nature, 415, 755.
Gray, H. M., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2007). Dimensions of
mind perception. Science, 315, 619.
Haun, D. B. M., Rapold, C. J., Call, J., Janzen, G., & Levinson,
S. C. (2006). Cognitive cladistics and cultural override in
Hominid spatial cognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 17568-17573.
Haun, D. B. M., Rapold, C. J., Janzen, G., & Levinson, S. C.
(2011). Plasticity of human spatial memory: Spatial language
and cognition covary across cultures. Cognition, 119, 70-80.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest
people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 61135.
Kenward, B., Karlsson, M., & Persson, J. (2011). Over-imitation
is better explained by norm learning than by distorted causal
learning. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 278, 1239-1246.
Legare, C. H., & Souza, A. (2012). Evaluating ritual efficacy:
Evidence from the supernatural. Cognition, 124, 1-15.
Majid, A., Boster, J. S., & Bowerman, M. (2008). The cross-linguistic categorization of everyday events: A study of cutting
and breaking. Cognition, 109, 235-250.
Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (2004). The native mind: Biological
categorization, reasoning and decision making in development
across cultures. Psychological Review, 111, 960-983.
Medin, D. L., Bennis, W. M., & Chandler, M. (2010). Culture and
the home-field disadvantage. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 5, 708-713.
Norenzayan, A., & Heine, S. J. (2005). Psychological universals:
What are they and how can we know? Psychological Bulletin,
131, 763-784.
Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2012). Putting the social into social
learning: Explaining both selectivity and fidelity in children’s
copying behavior. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 126,
182-192.
Wnuk, E., & Majid, A. (2012). Olfaction in a hunter-gatherer
society: Insights from language and culture. In N. Miyake et al.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Yeshurun, Y., & Sobel, N. (2010). An odor is not worth a thousand words: From multidimensional odors to unidimensional
odor objects. Annual Review of Psychology, 16, 219-241.

Bethany Ojalehto & Douglas L. Medin
Research on sacred values often asks participants to make
tradeoffs between a sacred good (e.g. acres of forest) and an
instrumental incentive. As the external decision-maker, the
participant decides the outcome for an insentient entity. But
how might the decision-making process change if the entity
is thought to be mindful? In previous research, we found that
Indigenous Ngöbe adults of Panama are sensitive to signs of
plant and animal sentience and may consider them agents
with moral standing. Drawing on research suggesting that
mind perception is key to moral reasoning (Gray, Gray, &
Wegner, 2007), the current study investigated Ngöbe reasoning about human-plant sacred value conflicts (e.g., right to
life for plants versus humans). We find that Ngöbe treat
plants as moral subjects whose interests must be considered.
However, Ngöbe reframed tradeoffs from cases of competing interests to cases of cooperative relationships, reasoning
in terms of the need for balanced reciprocity. We propose
that Ngöbe treat sacred values not as absolute, objective
goods which are pitted against each other, but as relational
goods seen from multiple points of view (both human and
nonhuman) which ultimately converge in systems-level perspective. We discuss implications for research on sacred values and morality.

Imitative Foundations of Cultural Learning
Cristine H. Legare
Imitation is multifunctional; it is crucial not only for the
transmission of instrumental skills but also for learning social conventions such as rituals and facilitating social interaction. Thus, although children are indeed instrumental imitators (Gergely, Bekkering, & Király, 2002), high-fidelity
imitation has recently been linked to quintessentially social
concerns, including the acquisition of normative behavior
and affiliative motivations (Kenward, Karlsson, & Persson,
2011; Over & Carpenter, 2012). Despite the fact that imitation is a pervasive feature of children’s behavior, there does
not yet exist an integrated theoretical account of how children use imitation flexibly as a tool for cultural learning. Little is known about the kinds of information children use to
determine when an event provides an opportunity for learning instrumental skills versus cultural conventions. I propose

68

