UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explaining to Others Prompts Children to Favor Inductively Rich Properties

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4b3424hn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Walker, Caren M.
Lombrozo, Tania
Legare, Cristine H.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explaining to Others Prompts Children to Favor Inductively Rich Properties
Caren M. Walker1, Tania Lombrozo1, Cristine H. Legare2 & Alison Gopnik1
(caren.walker@berkeley.edu, lombrozo@berkeley.edu, legare@psy.utexas.edu, gopnik@berkeley.edu)
1
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
2
Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station #A8000, Austin, TX 78712 USA

Abstract
Three experiments test the hypothesis that engaging in explanation
prompts children to favor inductively rich properties when
generalizing to novel cases. In Experiment 1, preschoolers
prompted to explain during a causal learning task were more likely
to override a tendency to generalize according to perceptual
similarity and instead extend an internal feature to an object that
shared a causal property. In Experiment 2, we replicated this
effect of explanation in a case of label extension. Experiment 3
demonstrated that explanation improves memory for internal
features and labels, but impairs memory for superficial features.
We conclude that explaining can influence learning by prompting
children to favor inductively rich properties over surface similarity.
Keywords: Explanation; causal learning; category labels;
non-obvious properties; inductive inference

Introduction
The world has a complex structure, and the challenge of
causal learning is to discover the nature of this structure to
facilitate prediction and action. This is not a trivial task; it
is sometimes impossible to predict how an object will
behave based on its appearance. In fact, perceptually
similar objects can be endowed with very different causal
properties: Poison hemlock may look identical to wild
carrot, but it is certainly not good to eat. Learning to
override perceptual features in favor of non-obvious but
inductively rich properties is thus an important achievement.
Previous research has examined the role of obvious
(perceptual) properties versus non-obvious (internal or
abstract) properties in children’s inferences. Young children
can use both perceptual and non-perceptual properties in
categorizing objects (e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1987;
Gopnik & Sobel, 2000), but adults often group objects
according to common internal properties, labels, and causal
affordances (regardless of perceptual similarity) in cases
where young children tend to group objects based on salient
perceptual similarity.
To illustrate this shift, consider the findings from Nazzi
and Gopnik (2000). Children observed four objects placed
on a toy, one at a time. Two of these objects were shown to
be causally effective – they made the toy play music – and
two were inert. One of the causal objects was then held up
and labeled (e.g., “This is a Tib.”), and children were asked
to give the experimenter the other “Tib.” In no-conflict
trials, perceptual and causal properties were always
correlated. However, in conflict trials, the same perceptual
properties appeared across causal and inert objects. All
children were more likely to choose the causal object in the
no-conflict trials than in the conflict trials, but analyses of

conflict trials revealed a developmental shift: when
generalizing the novel label, 3.5-year-olds relied on
perceptual cues over causal cues, while 4.5-year-olds relied
on causal cues over perceptual cues.
Subsequent work has demonstrated a comparable shift in
generalizing internal parts (as opposed to a category label).
Sobel et al. (2007) used a similar procedure to demonstrate
that 4-year-olds, but not 3-year-olds, are more likely to infer
that objects have shared internal parts when they share
causal properties than when they share external appearance.
These examples – and many others (see Keil, 1989;
Gelman, 2003) – demonstrate that by 5 years of age,
children begin to favor inductively rich but subtle cues, such
as category membership and internal parts, over perceptual
similarity when generalizing from known to unknown cases.
But how is this transition achieved? Here we explore the
hypothesis that the process of generating explanations is an
important mechanism in scaffolding this transition.

Explanation and Causal Learning
Accounts of explanation from both philosophy and
psychology suggest an important relationship between
explanation and causal learning: By explaining past
observations we uncover information likely to support
future judgments and interventions (e.g., Lombrozo, 2012;
Walker, Williams, Lombrozo, & Gopnik, 2012).
Consistent with this idea, research with adults finds that
prompts to explain can improve learning (e.g., Chi et al.,
1994) and promote the discovery and application of broad
generalizations underlying what is being explained (e.g.,
Williams & Lombrozo, 2010). Prior research also suggests
that even young children’s explanations have characteristics
that make them well suited to highlighting inductively rich
properties: they often invoke broad generalizations (Walker
et al., 2012) and go beyond appearances (Legare, 2012).
For example, Walker et al. (2012) found that prompting
preschool-aged children to explain causal events made them
more likely to favor broad patterns in generalizing causal
properties to novel objects. In the first of these studies,
children were presented with evidence that was consistent
with two candidate causes (e.g., “green objects make the toy
go” versus “yellow objects make the toy go”), where one
accounted for more observations. Children who were
prompted to explain were more likely than controls to
generalize according to the candidate cause that accounted
for more of the data. In the second study, the cause that
accounted for more of the data was contrasted with an
alternative cause that was more consistent with children’s

1558

prior knowledge (e.g., “large blocks make the toy go”). In
this case, those who explained were less likely to generalize
according to the cause that accounted for more of the
evidence, and instead privileged their prior knowledge.
Additionally, young children’s explanations often appeal
to non-perceptual properties, including unobservable causes
(Legare, Wellman & Gelman, 2009) and labels (Legare,
Gelman, & Wellman, 2010), and studies find that prompting
children to explain can lead them to favor causal over
perceptual learning (Legare & Lombrozo, under review).
We therefore predict that by encouraging learners to
consider broad generalizations, explaining can encourage
learners to go beyond appearances to favor non-obvious but
inductively rich properties as a basis for generalization.
In the following experiments, we use a method similar to
Nazzi and Gopnik (2000) and Sobel et al. (2007) to examine
whether generating explanations prompts children to favor
generalizing internal parts (Experiment 1) and labels
(Experiment 2) on the basis of causal over perceptual
similarity. In Experiment 3, we examine whether the effects
of explanation derive from a special relationship between
explanation and inductively rich properties, or from a global
boost in performance, as might be expected if explaining
simply increased attention. Together, these experiments
shed light on the role of explanation in the construction of
generalizations that support causal inference.

3.7, range: 35.8 – 47.7), 36 4-year-olds (M = 53.3 months;
SD = 3.6, range: 48.5 – 59.8), and 36 5-year-olds (M = 64.4
months; SD = 3.0, range: 60.1 – 70.4). Eighteen children in
each age group were randomly assigned to each of the two
conditions (explain and control).
Materials The toy was similar to the “blicket detectors”
used in past research on causal reasoning (Sobel & Gopnik,
2000), and consisted of a 10” x 6” x 4” opaque cardboard
box containing a wireless doorbell that was not visible to the
participant. When an object “activated” the toy, the
doorbell played a melody.
The toy was in fact
surrepticiously activated by a remote control.
Twelve wooden blocks of various shapes and colors were
used (see Fig. 1). A hole was drilled into the center of each
block. Eight blocks contained a large red plastic map pin
glued inside the hole; the remaining four blocks were
empty. All of the holes were covered with a dowel cap,
which covered the opening to conceal what was inside.
Each of the four sets of blocks was composed of three
individual blocks. Two were identical in color and shape.
One of these blocks (the target object) contained a map pin.
The other of these blocks (the perceptual match) did not.
The third block (the causal match) was perceptually
dissimilar to the other two, and, like the target object, it
contained a map pin.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined whether explanation influenced
preschoolers’ extension of a hidden, internal property to
other objects that shared either perceptual or causal
properties. Children observed four sets of three objects
individually placed on a toy that played music when
“activated” (see Gopnik & Sobel, 2000). Each set contained
three objects: one that activated the toy (target object), one
that was perceptually identical to the target object, but
failed to activate the toy (perceptual match), and one that
was perceptually dissimilar to the target object, but
successfully activated the toy (causal match). After each
outcome was observed, children were asked to either
explain (explain condition) or report (control condition) that
outcome. Next, children received additional information
about the target object: an internal part was revealed.
Children were asked which one of the two other objects in
the set (i.e., the perceptual match or causal match) shared
the internal property with the target object. This method pit
highly salient perceptual similarity against shared causal
properties; children could base their generalizations on
either one, but not both. We hypothesized that children who
were asked to explain each outcome would be more likely
than children in the control condition to consider the
property with the greatest inductive richness and therefore
select the causal match over the perceptual match.

Method
Participants A total of 108 children were included in
Experiment 1, with 36 3-year-olds (M = 40.9 months; SD =

Figure 1: Sample set of objects used in Experiment 1 (top)
and Experiment 2 (bottom). Each row corresponds to a
single set of items. There were a total of four sets.
Procedure Children participated in a brief warm-up game
with the experimenter. Following this warm-up, the toy was
placed on the table. The child was told, “This is my toy.
Some things make my toy play music and some things do
not make my toy play music.” Then the first set of three
blocks was brought out and placed in a row on the table.
The order of presentation of the three blocks was
randomized. One at a time, the experimenter placed a block
on the toy. Two of the three blocks in each set (the target
object and the causal match) caused the toy to activate and

1559

play music. The perceptual match did not. After children
observed each outcome, they were asked for a verbal
response. In the explain condition, children were asked to
explain the outcome: “Why did/didn’t this block make my
toy play music?” In the control condition, children were
asked to describe the outcome (with a yes/no response):
“What happened to my toy when I put this block on it? Did
it play music?” After all three responses had been recorded,
the experimenter demonstrated each of the three blocks on
the toy a second time to facilitate recall.
Next the experimenter pointed to the set of objects and
said, “Look! They have little doors. Let’s open one up.”
The experimenter selected the target object and removed the
cap to reveal the red map pin that had been hidden inside.
The experimenter said, “Look! It has a little red thing inside
of it. Can you point to the other one that also has something
inside?” Children were then encouraged to point to one of
the two remaining objects (i.e., the perceptual match or the
causal match) to indicate which contained the same inside
part, and this selection was recorded. Children could either
select the block that was perceptually identical to the target
or the object that shared the causal property, but not both.
Following their selection, children were not provided
feedback, nor were they allowed to explore the blocks.
Instead, all blocks were removed from view, and the next
set was produced. This procedure was repeated for the three
remaining sets. Each child participated in a total of four sets.
Children were given a score of “1” for selecting the causal
match and a “0” for selecting the perceptual match;
children thus received 0-4 points across the four sets.

Results and Discussion
Data were analyzed with a 2 (condition) x 3 (age group)
ANOVA, which revealed main effects of condition, F(1,
102) = 50.70, p < .001, and age, F(2, 102) = 7.34, p < .01
(see Fig. 2), with no significant interaction. Overall,
children who were asked to explain (M = 2.98, SD = 1.23)
were more likely than controls (M = 1.61, SD = 1.58) to
generalize the internal part of the target object to the causal
match rather than the perceptual match. Pairwise
comparisons revealed no difference in performance between
3- and 4-year-olds, p = .86. However, 3- and 4-year-olds
each selected the causal match significantly less often than
5-year-olds, p < .01.
One-sample t-tests were performed to assess whether
explaining prompted children to override a preference for
perceptual similarity and select the causal match. The 3year-olds and 4-year-olds in the control condition selected
the perceptual match significantly more often than chance,
t(17) = -3.69, p < .01, and t(17) = -2.53, p < .05,
respectively. Those in the explain condition selected the
causal match significantly more often than chance, t(17) =
3.01, p < .01, and t(17) = 2.48, p < .05, respectively. Fiveyear-olds in the control condition performed no differently
from chance (M = 2.61, SD = 1.72), t(17) = 1.51, p = .15,
and 5-year-olds in the explain condition selected the causal

match significantly more often than expected by chance,
t(17) = 4.57, p < .001.
These data suggest that in the absence of an explanation
prompt, children relied primarily on information about the
target object’s salient perceptual features to predict whether
a novel object would share an internal property. However,
when children of the same age were asked to generate an
explanation for the evidence that they observed, they instead
privileged the target object’s causal efficacy in making
inferences about internal properties.

Figure 2: Average responses in explain and control
conditions for Experiment 1 (top) and Experiment 2
(bottom). Higher numbers indicate a larger number of trials
(of 4) on which an internal part (Experiment 1) or a label
(Experiment 2) was generalized in line with a shared causal
property over perceptual similarity.
Qualitative Data Explanations for the first object most
often appealed to appearance (38%), with a minority (5%)
appealing to internal properties. Explanations for the second
set of objects, which occurred after observing the first set,
appealed to appearance (33%) and internal properties (32%)
equally often. By the final set, explanations most often
appealed to internal parts (38%).1

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 examined whether the influence of
explanation on children’s inferences was restricted to
consideration of internal parts, or whether these effects
generalize to other inductively rich properties as well. A
similar method was used to examine children’s
generalization of a novel label from a target object to either
a perceptually-matched or a causally-matched object.
1

In the interest of space, we do not report the full qualitative
analyses of children’s explanations in this paper. Instead, we
provide a brief summary of these data Experiments 1-2.

1560

considered the target object’s causal efficacy significantly
more often in making inferences about shared labels.
Qualitative Data Appearance explanations were most
common overall (28%); however, there was an increase in
the proportion of explanations appealing to kind or
explicitly mentioning a label, with 7% in the first set and
19% in the final set.

Method
Participants A total of 108 children were included in
Experiment 2, with 36 3-year-olds (M = 42.1 months; SD =
3.8, range: 35.9 – 48.0), 36 4-year-olds (M = 54.0 months;
SD = 3.0, range: 48.4 – 59.9), and 36 5-year-olds (M = 65.0
months; SD = 3.8, range: 60.6 – 70.9). Eighteen children in
each age group were randomly assigned to each of the two
conditions (explain and control).

Experiment 3

Materials The same toy was used in Experiment 2. Twelve
wooden blocks of various shapes and colors were also used.
There were a total of four sets of objects, each containing
three blocks. As in Experiment 1, two of these blocks (the
target object and the perceptual match) were perceptually
identical (same color and shape) and one of these blocks
(the causal match) was distinct (see Fig. 1).
Procedure The procedure for Experiment 2 was identical to
Experiment 1, with one major exception: Instead of
revealing a hidden internal property, the experimenter held
up the target object and labeled it, saying, “See this one?
This one is a blicket! Can you point to the other one that is
also a blicket?” Again, children received a total of four sets
of objects, and could receive 0-4 points.

Results and Discussion
Data were analyzed with a 2 (condition) x 3 (age group)
ANOVA, which revealed a main effect of condition, F(1,
102) = 13.51, p < .001 (see Fig. 2), and no other significant
effects. Overall, children who were asked to explain (M =
1.91, SD = 1.83) were more likely than controls (M = .72,
SD = 1.47) to generalize the label to the causal match.
We next considered the data against chance responding.
One-sample t-tests revealed that 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds in
the control condition selected the perceptual match
significantly more often than chance, t(17) = -2.93, p < .01,
t(17) = -3.69, p < .01, and t(17) = -3.10, p < .01,
respectively. In the explanation condition, the average of
children’s selections did not differ significantly from
chance, t(17) = .12, p = .90, t(17) = -1.26, p = .23, and t(17)
= .375, p = .712, respectively. However, the data for this
condition were distributed bimodally, with approximately
half the children providing a majority of causal choices and
half perceptual choices. The percentage of children selecting
the causal match on 3 or 4 trials was 50% for 3-year-olds,
44% for 4-year-olds, and 56% for 5-year-olds. The
distribution of children’s selections did differ significantly
from that expected by chance in all age groups, χ2(4) =
84.26, p < .001, χ2(4) = 66.49, p < .001, and χ2(4) = 83.97, p
< .001, respectively.
Like the younger children in Experiment 1, children in
the control condition relied primarily on information about a
target object’s salient perceptual features to predict whether
a novel object would share a category label. However,
when children of all ages were asked to generate an
explanation for the evidence that they observed, they

The findings from Experiments 1 and 2 confirm our
prediction that explanation encourages children to favor
inductively rich properties (i.e., causality) as a basis for
generalization. However, the findings are also consistent
with an alternative explanation: that prompts to explain
increased children’s overall attention or engagement,
resulting in “better” performance. Experiment 3 tests this
alternative.
In Experiment 3, children were asked to explain or report
causal outcomes after observing four unique objects, two of
which activated the toy. Because we did not observe
relevant age differences in Experiments 1-2, Experiment 3
was restricted to 4-year olds. After each object was placed
on the toy, three properties were revealed: an internal part, a
label, and a sticker (added to the object). The internal parts
and the labels correlated with the toy’s activation (i.e., all
and only objects that activated the toy had a particular inside
part and label) while the sticker did not. Children then
completed a memory task.
The purpose of Experiment 3 was to assess whether the
effects of explanation observed in Experiments 1-2 could be
due to a global and indiscriminate boost in attention. Based
on our interpretation of Experiments 1 and 2, we predicted
that a prompt to explain would improve memory for inside
parts and labels, but not for the sticker, which was neither
correlated with other properties nor plausibly inductively
potent. If the effects of explanation can instead be attributed
to a global increase in attention or engagement, one would
predict improved memory for all features.

Method
Participants A total of 36 4-year-olds were included in
Study 3 (M = 53.8 months; SD = 3.7 months; range = 47.9 –
59.7). Eighteen children were randomly assigned to one of
two conditions (explain and control).
Materials Experiment 3 used the same toy as in the
previous experiments. Four unique wooden blocks (distinct
colors and shapes) were also used (see Table 1). As in
Experiment 1, all blocks had a hole drilled into the center.
Two of the blocks had a red, round plastic map pin glued
inside and two of the blocks had a white, square eraser
glued inside the hole. Four stickers were used during the
experiment (two heart stickers and two star stickers).
Several small cards were constructed as memory aids during
the test phase of the experiment. Half of the cards had an
image of a black music note (placed in front of the objects
that children believed activated the toy), and half of the

1561

cards had an image of a black music note crossed out with a
red “X” (placed in front of the objects that children believed
did not activate the toy). Four additional cards were
constructed: one with a red circle, one with a white square,
one with a heart sticker, and one with a star sticker. These
cards were used to facilitate the forced choice test.
Table 1. List of properties for objects used in Experiment 3.

Causal

Object 1
Yes

Object 2
No

Object 3
Yes

Object 4
No

Internal

Red

White

Red

White

Label

Toma

Fep

Toma

Fep

Sticker

Heart

Heart

Star

Star

Procedure As in Experiments 1 and 2, the experimenter
introduced the toy. The experimenter then produced a single
block and placed it on the toy. The child observed as the
block did or did not cause the toy to play music. As before,
children in the explain condition were asked to explain the
outcome for each of the blocks and children in the control
condition were asked to report the outcome (with a “yes/no”
response).
After the
response was recorded, the
experimenter repeated the demonstration a second time.
The experimenter provided three additional pieces of
information about the object: the type of internal part was
revealed (“Look! It has a little door on it! Let’s open it up.
Look, there is a [red]/[white] thing inside.”), a label was
provided (“See this one? This one here? This one is a
[Fep]/[Toma]!”), and a sticker was placed on the bottom
(“Now I am going to put a sticker on it! I am going to put a
[heart]/[star] sticker on the bottom, see?”). The
experimenter repeated each property twice, and then the
block was removed from view. The entire procedure was
repeated for the three remaining blocks, one at a time. All
children observed the causal property first. The order of the
remaining three properties was counterbalanced.
Next, the experimenter placed all four objects on the
table in front of the child in random order, and told the child
that they would now play a “memory game.” To assess
recall for the causal property of each object, the
experimenter produced two cards – one with a music note,
and one with a crossed out music note. The experimenter
asked the child to point to the card that indicated whether
the block did or did not play music. The child responded
once for each of the four objects. Depending upon the
child’s response, the experimenter would then place an
additional card (with a music note or a crossed-out music
note) in front of the object, which would remain throughout.
To assess recall for the internal part, the experimenter
produced two cards – one with a red circle and one with a
white square. The experimenter asked the child to point to
the card that indicated the type of thing inside the block.
The child responded once for each of the four objects. To
assess recall for the label, the experiment said, “Some of
these blocks were called ‘Tomas’ and some of these blocks

were called ‘Feps’. What was this one called, a ‘Toma’ or a
‘Fep’?” The child responded once for each object. The
order of presentation was counterbalanced across trials.
Finally, to assess recall for the type of sticker added to
the block, the experimenter produced two cards – one with a
heart sticker and one with a star sticker. The experimenter
asked the child to point to the card that indicated the type of
sticker added to the bottom of the block. The child
responded once for each of the four objects.
Memory for internal parts, labels, and stickers was
solicited in the same order as the corresponding properties
were presented to that child in the demonstration phase of
the experiment. For each property, children were given a
score of “1” for accurate recall and a “0” for inaccurate
recall. Because there were a total of four objects, each child
could receive between 0 and 4 points for each property.

Results and Discussion
Memory for the objects’ causal properties was analyzed
with a one-way ANOVA, which revealed that children in
the explain condition were significantly more accurate (M =
3.93) than controls (M = 3.39), F(1, 34) = 8.42, p < .01.
Next, a repeated measures ANOVA with the other object
properties (internal part, label, sticker) as the repeated
measure and condition (explain, control) as the between
subjects variable revealed a main effect of object properties,
F(2, 68) = 6.96, p < .01, and the predicted interaction
between object properties and condition, F(2, 68) = 8.30,
p<.01 (see Fig. 3). Children who were prompted to explain
were significantly more accurate than controls in reporting
the labels, F(1, 34) = 9.34, p<.01, but less accurate than
controls in recalling the sticker type, F(1, 34) = 5.16, p<.05.
4
3
Explain

2

Control

1
0
Internal

Label

Sticker

Figure 3: Average memory score (out of 4 trials) for each
property assessed in Experiment 3. Error bars correspond to
one SEM in each direction.
These data provide evidence against the possibility that
engaging in explanation simply improves overall attention
to the task. Instead, children who explained were more
likely to recall the properties that were inductively rich,
while ignoring a superficial, perceptual property that did not
correlate with other features.

General Discussion
In each of these experiments, prompting young children to
explain made them more likely to privilege inductively rich,
non-obvious properties over salient surface similarity in

1562

making novel inferences. Children in the control condition,
who were not prompted to explain, based their judgments on
perceptual similarity. These effects were not restricted to a
particular property or domain, as comparable effects were
observed across two quite different properties: internal parts
(Experiment 1) and novel labels (Experiment 2).
Although explanation led to fewer perceptual responses
in Experiment 1 than in 2, this difference parallels the
disparity in children’s baseline performance in the control
condition (see Fig. 2). In other words, children were more
willing to privilege internal parts over appearances than
labels over appearances, in line with previous research
(Gopnik & Sobel, 2000; Sobel et al., 2007). For our
purposes, the critical finding is that explanation decreased
perceptual responding in both cases.
Finally, the results of Experiment 3 provide additional
support by demonstrating improved memory for a correlated
cluster of inductively rich properties in children prompted to
explain. Importantly, Experiment 3 also provides evidence
that effects of explanation are selective: Children who
explained had impaired memory for the superficial property.
This provides evidence against the idea that explanation
produces a general benefit for learning by globally and
indiscriminately increasing engagement or motivation.
Why might explaining lead children to favor inductively
rich properties? Wellman and Liu (2007) suggest that
explaining makes an occurrence sensible by reference to a
larger framework: The explainer appeals to the interplay
between evidence and current theories to construe the
phenomenon as an instance of a larger, coherent system. In
line with this idea, recent computational approaches to
cognitive development have proposed that the formation of
generalizations at multiple levels of abstraction enables
learners to learn quickly and generalize effectively to novel
cases (Kemp, Perfors & Tenenbaum, 2007). By prompting
children to favor inductively rich regularities, explanation
could play a role in pushing children beyond immediate
observations to consider higher-order generalizations that
support abstract knowledge.
Similarly, we have argued that engaging in explanation
constrains the learner to consider an event as an instance of
a broad generalization (see also Lombrozo, 2012). Recall
that previous research found that explaining magnified
effects of prior knowledge in the service of broad
generalization (Walker et al., 2012). In the current study,
the belief that internal parts and labels are inductively rich is
itself an important instance of higher-order prior knowledge.
We propose that explaining contributes to the formation of
causal theories by constraining learners to consider
properties that are most likely to generalize to novel cases.
In the experiments presented here, this constraint improved
children’s ability to override highly salient perceptual cues.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Rosie Aboody, Dustin Bainto, Ela Banerjee,
Brynna Ledford, Donna Ni, Gabriel Poon, UC Berkeley
Early Childhood Centers, and Lawrence Hall of Science.

Research supported by the McDonnell Foundation and NSF
grant DRL-1056712 to T. Lombrozo.

References
Chi, M. T. H., DeLeeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., & LaVancher, C.
(1994).Elicitingself-explanations improves understanding.
Cog Sci, 18, 439-477.
Gelman, S. & Markman, E. (1987). Young children’s
induction from natural kinds: The role of categories and
appearances. Child Dev, 58: 1532-1541.
Gelman, S. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. Oxford: Oxford Press.
Gopnik, A. & Sobel, D. (2000). Detecting blickets: How
young children use information about novel causal powers
in categorization and induction, Child Dev, 71(5): 12051222.
Keil, F.C. (1989).
Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2007).
Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian
models. Dev Sci, 10, 307-321.
Legare, C.H. (2012). Exploring explanation: Explaining
inconsistent information guides hypothesis-testing
behavior in young children. Child Dev, 83, 173-185.
Legare, C.H., Gelman, S.A., & Wellman, H.M. (2010).
Inconsistency with prior knowledge triggers children’s
causal explanatory reasoning. Child Dev, 81, 929-944.
Legare & Lombrozo (under review). Unique and selective
benefits of explanation and exploration on learning in
early childhood.
Legare, C.H., Wellman, H.M., & Gelman, S.A. (2009).
Evidence for an explanation advantage in naïve biological
reasoning. Cog Psych, 58, 177-194.
Lombrozo, T. (2010). Explanation and abductive inference.
In K.J. Holyoak and R.G. Morrison (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning (pp. 260-276),
Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press.
Nazzi, T. & Gopnik, A. (2000). A shift in children’s use of
percetual and causal cues to categorization. Dev Sci, 3(4):
389-396.
Sobel, D.M. Yoachim, C.M. Gopnik, A. Meltzoff, A.N. &
Blumenthal, E.J. (2007).
The blicket within:
Preschoolers’ inferences about insides and causes. J. of
Cog Dev, 8(2): 159-182.
Walker, C.M., Williams, J.J., Lombrozo, T. & Gopnik, A.
(2012). Explaining influences children’s reliance on
evidence and prior knowledge in causal induction. In N.
Miyake, D. Peebles, & R.P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 34th Ann Conf of the Cog Sci Soc, pp. 1114-1119.
Austin, TX: Cog Sci Soc.
Wellman, H.M. & Liu, D. (2007). Causal reasoning as
informed by the early development of explanations. In
Causal
Learning:
Psychology,
Philosophy,
&
Computation (eds.) L. Schulz & A. Gopnik, pp. 261-279.
Williams, J.J. & Lombrozo, T. (2010). The role of
explanation in discovery and generalization: Evidence
from category learning. Cog Sci, 34: 776-806.

1563

