UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eye Movements Reveal Interplay Between Noun Capitalization and Word Class During
Reading

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3dr387w1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hohenstein, Sven
Kliegl, Reinhold

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eye Movements Reveal Interplay Between Noun Capitalization
and Word Class During Reading
Sven Hohenstein (sven.hohenstein@uni-potsdam.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Potsdam,
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24/25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany

Reinhold Kliegl (kliegl@uni-potsdam.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Potsdam,
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24/25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany
Abstract
Subjects' eye movements were recorded while they read
sentences for comprehension. Sentences were presented with
capitalized nouns—in agreement with German spelling
rules—or completely in lowercase. Overall reading speed was
not influenced by the manipulation of capitalization, but
fixation durations were affected by the interplay between
capitalization and the word classes of the fixated and the
succeeding word. As expected, fixations were shorter for
capitalized than lowercase nouns, but unexpectedly they were
longer when the upcoming word was also a noun. This
modulation was reduced when all words were printed
completely in lowercase. We interpret the results as evidence
for distributed processing across several words.
Keywords: eye movements; reading; corpus analysis;
capitalization; parafoveal processing

Introduction
The uptake of visual information is critical for the process
of reading. Most visual receptors are located in the fovea—
the central 2° of the visual field. As distance from the fixation location (and thereby from the fovea) increases, acuity
decreases across the parafoveal region. Hence, it is necessary to move our eyes to obtain visual information of the
words in a sentence. Foveal information of the currently
fixated word is most essential for word processing. There is
much evidence for the effect of, among others, orthographic,
phonological, and semantic features of the currently fixated,
foveal word as well as of the not-yet fixated, parafoveal
word on fixation durations. Some of the parafoveal effects
are still under dispute (for a recent review see Schotter, Angele, & Rayner, 2012). The resolution of such disputes is
critical for our understanding of eye-movement control
during reading, because arguably parafoveal word processing is the primary source of information for guiding the eyes
to the next fixation location.

Capitalization
Although many studies have demonstrated the relevance of
low-level orthographic features on eye movements during
reading, little is known about the role of capitalization. In
languages based on the Roman alphabet, the first words of a
sentence and proper nouns are capitalized, that is these
words are spelled with an initial capital letter. Additionally,
German script has an unusual characteristic: the capitalizat-

ion of all nouns. Therefore, the frequency of capitalized
words in German texts is relatively high, making it an ideal
language for studying the impact of initial capital letters
during natural reading.
Capitalized characters in parafoveal vision may be salient
and attract attention to the preview word. Furthermore,
German capitalization may reduce the cost of lexical processing. From the first letter alone, readers of German script
obtain the word-class information (i.e., whether the next
word is a noun vs. non-noun). Deeper lexical (e.g., semantic) processing of the word may start faster than in other
languages because of the early availability of word-class
information. Preprocessing of parafoveal words appears to
be more likely in German than in less transparent orthographies (Laubrock & Hohenstein, 2012).
There is research demonstrating a beneficial influence of
capitalization on reading rate in German (Bock, 1989; Bock,
1990; Bock, Augst, & Wegner, 1985; Bock, Hagenschneider, & Schweer, 1989; Gfroerer, Günther, & Bock,
1989). When uppercase and lowercase letters were used
improperly, the reading rate was lower than when the German capitalization rules were observed (Bock et al., 1985).
When Dutch subjects were asked to read German texts, they
showed the same pattern of reading speed despite the absence of capitalization in Dutch (Bock et al., 1989). These
effects were also reflected in eye-movement measures
(Gfroerer et al., 1989). Furthermore, German subjects' reading rates for English texts were the same whether the rules
of capitalization applied were based on German or English
spelling (Bock et al., 1989), indicating that German readers
transferred their familiar capitalization rules to text in a
different language.
The advantage of capitalization increases with reading
skill (Bock, 1990). For 10th-grade students, the effects of
violations of German capitalization rules are similar to those
obtained with adult readers. The same pattern was also present for 7th-grade children, but differences were less pronounced. Violation of the capitalization rule had no reliable
effect on the reading speed of 3rd-grade children. In addition, on the basis of several experiments, Bock (1989) argued that the function of German capitalization rules for
reading is independent of word shape, and that they allow
differentiating between nouns and non-nouns without analyzing a word's meaning.

2554

There is also evidence for the importance of capitalization
in Italian. In Italian, like in most languages based on the
Roman alphabet, proper names are spelled with an initial
capital letter, whereas common nouns are spelled in lowercase. Peressotti, Cubelli, and Job (2003) demonstrated that
reaction times in a lexical-decision task are reduced if
proper names are presented capitalized compared to noncapitalized presentation and common nouns. The authors
provide an orthographic cue hypothesis that an initial uppercase letter helps pre-activate lexical units corresponding to
proper names.
Furthermore, Müsseler, Nisslein, and Koriat (2005) reported an influence of German capitalization rules on the
missing-letter effect. Typically, when subjects are asked to
underline a certain target letter, the letter is more difficult to
detect in function words than in content words. In their
study, this missing-letter effect was eliminated when function words within a sentence were capitalized indicating that
unfamiliar orthography facilitates the extraction of single
letters.
Finally, nouns are best recognized when they are presented with an initial uppercase letter (Jacobs, Nuerk, Graf,
Braun, & Nazir, 2008). In this study, subjects had to type
single words that were presented briefly (50 ms) and then
followed by a mask. Words were presented with all letters
in lowercase, with all letters in uppercase, or with an initial
uppercase letter. Accuracy for non-nouns was best when
they were presented with an initial uppercase letter or completely in lowercase (both types of presentation are common
in German texts due to the capitalization of words at the
beginning of a sentence).
Hohenstein and Kliegl (in press; Experiment 2) manipulated capitalization in an eye-movement study of semantic
processing of parafoveal words. They asked subjects to read
single German sentences for comprehension. Employing the
gaze-contingent boundary paradigm (Rayner, 1975), the
parafoveal preview for a critical target noun (wool) was semantically either related (silk) or unrelated (soap) to the
target and was replaced with the target word during the saccade to the target location. Fixation durations on the target
noun were shorter for related compared to unrelated previews, indicating parafoveal semantic information extraction. Most importantly, this effect was not modulated by
capitalization: There was no significant difference between
sentences presented completely in lowercase and sentences
presented in agreement with the German capitalization rules
(i.e., with capitalized nouns).
Hohenstein and Kliegl (in press) also analyzed the effect
of capitalization on fixation durations on the target word,
which was always a noun, and on the pretarget word, which
was any of a number of different parts of speech, but never a
noun. Whereas the violation of German noun-capitalization
was reflected in longer target fixations, the pretarget was
fixated more briefly if the sentence was presented completely in lowercase. This inverse effect of capitalization on
pretargets and targets could not be explained by either (1) a
general reading-speed benefit associated with a presentation

in which nouns are capitalized—a common result of past
studies—or (2) a unique effect of capitalization on reading
nouns, but not words which are always presented in lowercase. We hypothesize that the obtained effect is due to an
interplay of capitalization and the word classes (nouns/nonnouns) of fixated and parafoveal words.
Here we report an eye-movement corpus analysis of German sentences, which were presented either completely in
lowercase or with capitalized nouns (following the German
spelling rules). The focus will be on the interaction between
the word class of the preceding, current, and upcoming word
and capitalization.

Method
This is a reanalysis of the study of Hohenstein and Kliegl,
(in press; Experiment 2). We describe the main features of
the experiment, judged to be relevant for an appreciation of
the present article; for further technical details we refer to
the original article.

Subjects
Thirty-two subjects (20 women, 12 men) participated in the
experiment. Their age was between 16 and 39 (M = 23, SD
= 4.8). All were native speakers of German with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision.

Apparatus
Sentences were displayed on a single line at midscreen
height on a 21-inch monitor. Subjects were seated 24 inches
in front of the screen. Sentences were presented in black,
boldface, 20-point Courier New font on a white background.
Each character was 12 pixels wide—0.45° of visual angle—
at a screen resolution of 1024 × 768 pixels. The refresh rate
of the monitor was 150 Hz.
Eyes were monitored using an EyeLink II system with a
sampling rate of 500 Hz, an instrumental spatial resolution
of 0.01°, and an average accuracy of better than 0.5°. Recording was binocular. Heads were positioned on a chin rest
to minimize head movements.

Material
We used the material developed by Hohenstein, Laubrock,
and Kliegl (2010). All sentences were constructed around a
critical target region and ranged from six to thirteen words.
In 100 sentences, the target word was a noun and the preceding word (i.e., the pretarget) was a non-noun. In 24 additional sentences, targets were non-nouns. The sentences
did not include any punctuation except the period at the end.
Word lengths ranged from two to eighteen characters.
Sentences were presented in two conditions: capitalized
and non-capitalized. In the capitalized condition, the sentence’s first word and all nouns were spelled with an initial
capital letter. In the non-capitalized condition, all words
were spelled in lowercase.

2555

Procedure
Subjects were naive concerning the purpose of the experiment. They were instructed to read single sentences for
comprehension. A random sample of one third of the sentences was followed by a three-alternative multiple-choice
question that was answered by clicking on one of the response alternatives. Ninety-five percent of all questions
were answered correctly, indicating no serious comprehension problems.
At the beginning of the experiment, subjects were instructed that the experiment consisted of two parts. One part
of the sentences was presented following the German capitalization rules and the other was presented completely in
lowercase. Each part comprised 62 sentences, preceded by
six practice sentences, which were not included in the analyses. Subjects were informed about the start of the second
part.
When a sentence was initially presented, the preview (related or unrelated) occupied the target location. An invisible
boundary located directly after the last letter of the pretarget
word was present in each sentence. When either eye crossed
the boundary, the preview word on the target position was
replaced with the target word. The sentence remained in this
final form until the end of the trial. The manipulation of the
preview has no relevance for the present study.

Measures and Selection Criteria
Data from sentences with a blink or loss of measurement
was used only until the point in time preceding the first loss
and only if the loss occurred after the target region. Saccades were detected with a binocular velocity-based algorithm (Engbert & Kliegl, 2003; Engbert & Mergenthaler,
2006). Analyses were based on right-eye fixations.
This first level of screening led to a pool of 39,646 fixations. In a second level of data screening, we excluded the
first and last fixations in sentences (7,830) and fixations on
the first or last words of sentences (9,608). We used firstpass fixations only (i.e., excluding 5,930 fixations). This
second level of screening left us with 24,302 valid withinsentence reading fixations. Our selection procedure is similar to data filtering in a large eye-movement corpus study
(Kliegl, Nuthmann, & Engbert, 2006). We included all nontraining trials. Results were not affected by the exclusion of
trials with subsequent comprehension errors.
We computed gaze durations (the sum of all first-pass
fixations), first-fixation durations, and single-fixation durations (for a definition of these measures, see Inhoff &
Radach, 1998) for each word. Additional measures included
refixation probability and relative landing position (i.e., the
position of the first fixation). Furthermore, we calculated
reading speed (words per minute) for each sentence.

Statistical analysis
Inferential statistics for effects on fixation durations are
based on linear mixed models (LMMs) specifying subjects
and sentences as crossed random factors (Baayen, Davidson,
& Bates, 2008; Kliegl, Masson, & Richter, 2010). LMMs

are much more resilient to data loss than the classical analysis of variance. Thus, these analyses are very powerful even
for datasets with differences in the number of observations
between subjects and items. Effects in models with continuous dependent variables were estimated with the lme4 package (Bates, Mächler, & Bolker, 2012) in the R environment
for statistical computing (version 2.15.2, 64-bit build; R
Development Core Team, 2012). LMMs were fitted using
the restricted maximum likelihood method.
We specified varying intercepts for both subjects and
items. Furthermore, we included varying slopes associated
with the effect of capitalization—the only experimental
factor in the present study. The full model including variance components for all terms of the experimental design is
preferred for statistical analyses (Schielzeth & Forstmeier,
2009). Coverage probability of confidence intervals associated with fixed effects is better for LMMs including random
slopes than for models including intercepts only (Schielzeth
& Forstmeier, 2009; Barr, Levy, Scheepers, Tily, 2013).
With the additional inclusion of correlation parameters,
models did not longer converge. Hence, these parameters
were excluded. In a recent simulation study, Barr et al.
(2013) demonstrated that models without random correlations are very similar to full models with respect to coverage
probability and power. The authors rank both kinds of models in the first position of desirable model designs.
The primary fixed effects in the analyses were capitalization and the interactions between capitalization and the word
classes of the preceding, the current, and the next word.
Following the work of Kliegl et al. (2006), we included several additional covariates (word frequency, word length,
saccade length, second-order polynomial of relative landing
position), which have an influence on fixation durations in
reading. The inclusion of these covariates reduced potential
confounding for the word class predictors.
Continuous predictors were centered at their mean; relative landing position was centered at .5; the factor capitalization (capitalized presentation vs. non-capitalized presentation) entered the analysis as treatment contrast with capitalization as reference category (0 vs. 1) and the factors for
word class (non-noun vs. noun) were specified as sum contrasts (−0.5 vs. +0.5).
We report regression coefficients together with p values
based on Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling with 10,000
samples (Baayen et al., 2008). Based on analyses of model
residuals, we decided to use the (natural) logarithm of all
fixation-duration measures.

Results
Global Reading Speed
The analysis of reading speed tested only the effect of
capitalization. Mean reading speed was 208 and 207 words
per minute in the capitalized and non-capitalized condition,
respectively. This difference was not significant (β = 0.85; p
= .78). The result differs from findings in earlier studies, in

2556

which subjects read reliably slower if capitalization rules
were not followed (e.g., Bock et al., 1985).

Table 1: Estimates (regression coefficients) with associated standard errors and p-values as well as random-effect
variances of a linear mixed-model corpus-analysis with log
gaze duration as dependent variable.

Fixation Durations
The analysis of gaze duration (20,768 observations), firstfixation (20,816), and single-fixation duration (17,775) revealed the same pattern of effects. We present a detailed
analysis of gaze durations only. Table 1 displays the results
of an LMM analysis with gaze duration as dependent variable. There were several significant effects associated with
word frequency, word length, landing position, and saccade
length (see Table 1 for details).
The violation of German capitalization rules did not significantly influence gaze duration as a main effect, but there
were several significant interactions associated with it. If the
capitalization rules were followed, nouns were fixated more
briefly than non-nouns. Interestingly, the word classes of the
previous and the next word also had an effect on gaze duration: If the previous word was a noun, fixation time was
shorter; if the next word was a noun, gaze duration was
longer.
Most importantly, the interaction between capitalization
and word class was significant both for the current and the
next word. Figure 1 displays these interactions. As expected,
a noun was fixated longer if the presentation was non-capitalized and thus with unfamiliar orthography. This trend was
reversed with respect to the word class of the word to the
right: Fixation duration was reduced if the next word was a
noun and presented completely in lowercase. As is apparent
from Figure 1, compared to reading under normal German
capitalization conditions, fixation durations in sentences
presented completely in lowercase are less modulated by
properties of the fixated and surrounding text. These interactions were also significant for either first-fixation duration
or single-fixation duration as dependent variable.

Fixed effects
(Intercept)
Log10 frequency
Previous word
Current word
Next word
Length−1
Previous word
Current word
Next word
Relative landing position
Linear trend
Quadratic trend
Saccade length
Incoming
Outgoing
Capitalization
(present vs. absent)
Word class
(non-noun vs. noun)
Previous word
Current word
Next word
Capitalization × word class
Previous word
Current word
Next word
Random effects
Sentences
(Intercept)
Capitalization
Subjects
(Intercept)
Capitalization
Residual

Additional Analyses of Reading Behavior
There was a small effect of capitalization on saccade
length: Saccades were shorter by 0.157 characters (p = .003)
if all words were presented in lowercase compared to the
presentation following the German capitalization rules
(means values: 6.20 vs. 6.35). The interactions between
capitalization and words class had no significant effect on
saccade length (all ps > .07). Initial landing position, skipping probability, regression probability, and refixation probability were not significantly influenced by capitalization or
the interactions between capitalization and word class (all ps
> .18).

Discussion
In the present study, subjects were asked to read sentences
for comprehension. Sentences were presented in one of two
capitalization conditions: In the capitalized condition, all
nouns were spelled with an initial capital letter (following
the German spelling rules); in the non-capitalized condition,
all words were presented completely in lowercase.

Dependent variable:
log gaze duration
SE
Estimate
p
0.026
5.43494
< .001
−0.02305
−0.07392
−0.00005

0.003
0.003
< 0.001

< .001
< .001
.100

−0.03763
−0.41590
0.01321

0.039
0.048
0.031

.334
< .001
.667

−6.78905
3.39784

0.400
0.400

< .001
< .001

0.02457
−0.02955

0.001
0.001

< .001
< .001

−0.00232

0.010

.815

−0.02092
−0.07053
0.09283

0.010
0.011
0.009

.042
< .001
< .001

0.00183
0.05577
−0.07686

0.013
0.014
0.013

.883
< .001
< .001

Variance
0.00154
0.00000
0.02003
0.00129
0.13397

Note. All continuous predictors were centred. Frequencies were log10 transformed. For length, the reciprocal was
employed. “Current”, “previous”, and “next” indicate variables associated with the fixated word, the preceding word,
and the succeeding word, respectively. The × symbol indicates an interaction.
Neither fixation times nor reading speed was significantly
affected by the violation of capitalization. This result is in
contrast to findings in earlier studies (Bock, 1989; 1990;
Bock et al., 1985; 1989). We hypothesize the different result
is due to changes in communication technology over the last
20 years. The earlier studies were conducted in the 1980s, a
time in which text messaging, e-mail, and virtual chat rooms

2557

●

Presentation

capitalized

during reading (e.g., Kliegl et al., 2006). The case of a
word’s first character is easy to extract due to the saliency
of an uppercase letter in a string of lowercase letters. The direction of the effects could be explained by a segmentation
hypothesis: The words preceding nouns are often highly
associated with those nouns (e.g., articles, adjectives). Perhaps, when a non-noun is fixated and the next word is a
noun, both words are processed during the fixation on the
non-noun (the word-group hypothesis; Kliegl, 2007;
Radach, 1996). This results in a slowdown if the next word
is a noun. Once the noun is fixated, it has already been preprocessed and hence fixation time is reduced.
When all words were presented in lowercase, the effects
of word class were significantly reduced. Reading was less
modulated by the word class and appeared to be more homogeneous. Although reading speed is comparable in both
capitalization conditions, the reading strategy is different
because salient orthographic cues are missing when capital
letters are not present. This finding is evidence for the importance of parafoveal processing in reading.
In summary, the results reveal an impact of orthographic
and visual word features on distributed processing during
reading. Furthermore, readers are very flexible in adapting
to different reading situations. That said, our results do not
generalize to older readers who might encounter problems
in the unfamiliar reading situation. Besides age differences,
future research should focus on how non-native speakers of
German use capitalization cues for their reading strategies.

non−capitalized

Previous word
240
●

230

●

Gaze duration [ms]

220

Current word
240

●

230
●

220

Next word
●

240
230

220

●

non−noun

noun

Word class

Acknowledgments

Figure 1: Gaze duration on the current word as a function
of capitalization and word class of the previous, the current, and the next word. Error bars indicate standard errors.
All random effects and all fixed effects except the intercept, capitalization, and word class (including interactions)
were removed from the data. The removal of effects was
applied to each panel separately.

This research was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grants no. KL 955/6-1) as part of Research
Group 868 “Computational Modeling of Behavioral, Cognitive, and Neural Dynamics”.

were less widely used than they are today. The use of short
text messages with cellphones, in particular, is easier when
all words are typed in lowercase. Indeed Schloblinski et al.
(2001) found that most German text messages by students
do not follow the German capitalization rules. Furthermore,
texts in lowercase could be found in e-mails and social networks too (e.g., Schnitzer, 2012). In the present study, participants were young adults. Hence, we suppose our subjects
were more proficient in reading text without capitalization
than subjects in the earlier studies.
The most important findings are the interactions between
capitalization and the word classes of the fixated and the
next word. We demonstrated that the effects in a critical
target region (Hohenstein & Kliegl, in press) generalize to
reading behavior throughout sentences. If German capitalization rules were followed, nouns were fixated more briefly
than non-nouns. Interestingly, the effect was reversed for
the upcoming word. We observed an effect of the parafoveal
word on the current fixation duration. Parafoveal-on-foveal
effects are an indicator of distributed processing of words

Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390–412.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013)
Random effects structure in mixed-effects models: Keep
it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68, 255278.
Bates, D. M., Mächler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes (R package
version 0.999999-0) [Computer software]. Available at
http://CRAN.R-project.org/web/packages/lme4/
Bock, M. (1989). Lesen in Abhängigkeit von der Groß- und
Kleinschreibung. [Reading depending on capital and
small letters]. Sprache & Kognition, 8, 133-151.
Bock, M. (1990). Zur Funktion der deutschen Groß-und
Kleinschreibung. Einflüsse von Wortform, Muttersprache,
Lesealter, Legasthenie und lautem versus leisem Lesen
[The function of capital and small letters. Influences of
word form, mother tongue, reading age, dyslexia, and
loud versus silent reading]. In: C. Stetter (Ed.), Zu einer

References

2558

Theorie der Orthographie. Interdisziplinäre Aspekte
gegenwärtiger Schrift- und Orthographieforschung (pp.
1-33). Tübingen, Germany: Niemeyer.
Bock, M., Augst, G., & Wegner, I. (1985). Groß oder klein?
Zur Funktion des Wortanfangs für den gegenwärtigen Leser. [Capital or small? The function of the beginning of a
word for the present-day reader]. Zeitschrift für Entwicklungspsychologie und Pädagogische Psychologie, 17,
191-209.
Bock, M., Hagenscheider, K., & Schweer, A. (1989). Zur
Funktion der Groß-und Kleinschreibung beim Lesen
deutscher, englischer und niederländischer Texte [The
function of capital and small letters during reading of
German, English, and Dutch texts]. In: P. Eisenberg & H.
Günther (Eds.), Schriftsystem und Orthographie (pp. 2355). Tübingen, Germany: Niemeyer.
Engbert, R., & Kliegl, R. (2003). Microsaccades uncover
the orientation of covert attention. Vision Research, 43,
1035-1045.
Engbert, R., & Mergenthaler, K. (2006). Microsaccades are
triggered by low retinal slip. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 103, 7192-7197.
Gfroerer, S., Günther, H., & Bock, M. (1989). Augenbewegungen und Substantivgroßschreibung: Eine Pilotstudie [Eye movements and noun capitalization: A pilot
study]. In: P. Eisenberg & H. Günther (Eds.), Schriftsystem und Orthographie (pp. 111-135). Tübingen, Germany: Niemeyer.
Hohenstein, S., & Kliegl, R. (in press). Semantic preview
benefit during reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Hohenstein, S., Laubrock, J., & Kliegl, R. (2010). Semantic
preview benefit in eye movements during reading: A
parafoveal fast-priming study. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36, 11501170.
Inhoff, A. W., & Radach, R. (1998). Definition and computation of oculomotor measures in the study of cognitive
processes. In: G. Underwood (Ed.), Eye Guidance in
Reading and Scene Perception (pp. 29-53). Oxford, UK:
Elsevier.
Jacobs, A. M., Nuerk, H. C., Graf, R., Braun, M., & Nazir,
T. A. (2008). The initial capitalization superiority effect
in German: Evidence for a perceptual frequency variant of
the orthographic cue hypothesis of visual word recognition. Psychological Research, 72, 657-665.
Kliegl, R. (2007). Toward a perceptual-span theory of distributed processing in reading: A reply to Rayner,
Pollatsek, Drieghe, Slattery, and Reichle (2007). Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 530-537.
Kliegl, R., Masson, M. E. J., & Richter, E. M. (2010). A
linear mixed model analysis of masked repetition priming.
Visual Cognition, 18, 655-681.
Kliegl, R., Nuthmann, A., & Engbert, R. (2006). Tracking
the mind during reading: The influence of past, present,
and future words on fixation durations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135, 12-35.

Laubrock, J., & Hohenstein, S. (2012). Orthographic consistency and parafoveal preview benefit: A resourcesharing account of language differences in processing of
phonological and semantic codes. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 35, 292-293.
Müsseler, J, Nisslein, M., & Koriat, A. (2005). German
capitalization of nouns and the detection of letters in continuous text. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 143-158.
Peressotti, F., Cubelli, R., & Job, R. (2003). On recognizing
proper names: The orthographic cue hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 87-116.
R Development Core Team. (2012). R: A language and environment for statistical computing [Computer software].
Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Radach, R. (1996). Blickbewegungen beim Lesen [Eye
movements during reading]. Münster, Germany: Waxmann.
Rayner, K. (1975). The perceptual span and peripheral cues
in reading. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 65-81.
Schielzeth, H., & Forstmeier, W. (2009). Conclusions beyond support: Overconfident estimates in mixed models.
Behavioral Ecology, 20, 416-420.
Schloblinski, P., Fortmann, N., Groß, O., Hogg, F., Horstmann, F., & Theel, R. (2001). Simsen. Eine Pilotstudie
zur sprachlichen und kommunikativen Aspekten in der
SMS-Kommunikation [Texting. A pliot study on linguistic and communicative aspects in SMS communication].
Retrieved
from
http://www.mediensprache.net/networx/networx-22.pdf
Schnitzer, C. V. (2012). Linguistische Aspekte der Kommunikation in den neueren elektronischen Medien: SMS, EMail, Facebook [Linguistic aspects of communication in
new electronic media: SMS, e-mail, Facebook]. (Doctoral
thesis, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany).
Retrieved
from
http://edoc.ub.unimuenchen.de/14779/
Schotter, E. R., Angele, B., & Rayner, K. (2012). Parafoveal
processing in reading. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 74, 5-35.

2559

