UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fairness overrides reputation: The importance of fairness considerations in altruistic
cooperation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8wp9d7v0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Guney, Sule
Newell, Ben R.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fairness overrides reputation: The importance of fairness considerations in
altruistic cooperation
Şule Güney (s.guney@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia

Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia
Abstract

underlying assumption in this prediction is that both parties
care only about how much money they get. However, the
vast majority of experimental studies has shown that the
modal offers by the Proposers lie between 40%-50% of the
total amount and the Responders frequently reject offers
below 25% (Güth et al., 1982; Roth, 1995; Henrich et al.,
2005). This pattern of results has been replicated crossculturally (Henrich et al., 2005) and shown to be robust with
large stakes (Cameron, 1999). The experiments reported
here aimed to investigate the role of several factors (i.e.,
fairness considerations vs. perceived opportunity of
reputation building and future interaction) that might
contribute to the emergence of altruistic cooperation in
experimental contexts.

Behavioural findings in several strategic games indicate that
people punish others if they think they are being treated
‘unfairly’ even at the cost of minimizing their own material
payoff. We investigated the primary driving force behind such
altruistic cooperation. In Experiment 1, we replicated
previous findings indicating that the key mechanism
contributing to the emergence of altruistic cooperation is
fairness considerations. In Experiment 2, we investigated the
effect of the opportunity for reputation building and future
interaction on altruistic cooperation and found that these
factors become effective only when fairness considerations
are removed.
Keywords: altruistic cooperation; mini ultimatum game,
fairness, reputation building, future interaction.

Altruistic cooperation as a function of fairness
considerations

Introduction
Human altruistic cooperation presents a puzzle from the
perspectives of both the standard economic models of the
‘self-interested actor’ and the evolutionary models of the
‘self-regarding individual’ because it involves some
characteristics that are difficult to reconcile with the
predictions of standard game theoretical and evolutionary
analyses. In particular, these characteristics are rewarding
the cooperators (i.e., altruistic rewarding) and punishing the
norm violators (i.e., altruistic punishment), at a personal
cost, even though the probability that this cost will be repaid
(either by third parties or by that specific agent in the future)
is very low (Gintis et al., 2003).
Evidence for the existence of altruistic cooperation
largely comes from laboratory experiments in which the
respective behavioral pattern has been observed through
economic games. One of the best-known economic games
used to demonstrate altruistic cooperation (especially,
altruistic punishment) is the Ultimatum Game (UG) (Güth,
Schmittberger, & Schwarze, 1982), in which two players are
presented with a sum of money, and one of them is assigned
to the role of Proposer while the other one to the Responder.
The Proposer is asked to offer any portion of the given
money to the Responder. If the Responder accepts the
amount offered by the Proposer, the money is distributed in
accordance with the proposal. If the Responder rejects the
offer, both get nothing. According to standard economic
theory of self-interest, a rational Proposer offers the
minimum possible amount, and a rational Responder never
rejects any amount unless it is zero (Binmore, 2007). The

Some researchers argue that the underlying mechanism of
such non self-regarding behaviors (i.e., high offers by the
Proposers and frequent rejections by the Responders) in the
UG is not to get as much money as possible, but to maintain
fairness norms among players (Gintis et al., 2003; Fehr &
Gachter, 2002). In fact, the motivation behind the
Proposers’ high offers can be explained with or without the
involvement of fairness considerations: They simply may
not want to offer an amount that can be easily turned down
by the Responder, so they are willing to distribute the
money in a relatively fair way. Thus the Proposers’ main
concern still might be getting as much as possible in the
end, rather than treating the Responders fairly (Declerck et
al., 2009). However, for Responders, the role of fairness
concerns is more apparent and must be stronger because
they seem to accept ending up with nothing rather than
being treated unfairly. Even though the Responders could
have been better off by accepting any amount offered, they
prefer to punish the Proposer’ unfairness, at a cost to
themselves. This pattern of response indicates that the
Responders engage in altruistic punishment in response to
the unfairness of the Proposer.
A special version of UG has been used to demonstrate
how much the Responders care about unfair acts of the
Proposers. The structure of the so-called Mini UG (see
Table 1) is the same as the standard UG, with an exception:
The Proposer is again asked to distribute an amount of
money but unlike the standard UG, only in one of two ways.

525

Table 1. General structure of Mini Ultimatum Games.

(5/5) Game

Mini Ultimatum Games*
(2/8) Game

(10/0) Game
(8/2) Game
Possible
(8/2)
(5/5)
(8/2)
(2/8)
(8/2)
(10/0)
(8/2)
(8/2)
distributions
Perceived
fairness of the
Unfair
Reasonably unfair **
Fair
Neutral
(8/2) distribution
* The numbers in the parentheses denote how much the Proposer could get/how much the Responder could get.
** The Proposer seems to have an excuse for offering the more inequitable distribution (8/2), because otherwise he would be
unfair to himself [i.e., by offering the (2/8) distribution, he would give 8 to the Responder, and take 2 himself].
Both players participate in four consecutive Mini UGs,
and throughout all these games one way of distribution is
always fixed while the alternative distribution is always
different across games. The fixed distribution is a
relatively inequitable one (i.e., the Proposer can take $8
for himself, and offer $2 to the Responder, see table 1).
However, the available alternative distribution varies in
terms of the outcome fairness, sometimes yielding a more
equitable outcome (i.e., the Proposer can take $5 for
himself, and offer $5 to the Responder, see table 1), and
sometimes yielding an even more unequal outcome (i.e.,
the Proposer can take $10 for himself, and offer $0 to the
Responder, see table 1). Under the standard assumptions,
rejection rates for the fixed distribution (8/2) were
expected to be the same regardless of its alternatives, as
its monetary value stays unchanged across games (Falk et
al., 2003). However, this particular distribution was
rejected much more frequently when the Proposer
intentionally ignored the more equitable alternative
distribution [i.e., the (5/5) distribution] than when he
ignored the more unequal alternative distribution [i.e., the
(10/0) distribution] (Falk et al., 2003; Sutter, 2007). Thus
the rejection decisions made by the Responders seem not
to be determined by the absolute amount of the offer (i.e.,
$2), but by whether the offer is seen as relatively unfair
[i.e., in comparison to (5/5) split] or fair [i.e., in
comparison to (10/0) split]. See table 1 for the perceived
fairness of the fixed distribution (8/2) across four games.
These findings indicate that the Responders punish the
unfairness of the Proposers by rejecting an amount of
money in one case and appreciate the fairness of the
Proposer by accepting the very same amount in another
case. It has been argued therefore that fairness
considerations must be the underlying motive behind
altruistic cooperation (Gintis et al., 2003; Fehr & Gachter,
2002).

rejection/acceptance behaviors in the UG) have been a
source of much debate (Declerck et al., 2009). As
mentioned earlier, by rejecting a non-zero offer, the
Responders seem to engage in actions that are opposite to
their self-interest, in order to maintain the fairness norms
between parties. Thus fairness considerations seem to
override the self-regarding/rational motives. Confidence
in such a conclusion mainly comes from the two critical
features of the above-mentioned experiments: The
identities of both players are kept hidden (i.e.,
anonymous) and they will never meet again in another
round (i.e., one-shot encounter). These specific features,
therefore, eliminate the possibility of reputation building
(henceforth, RB) and future interaction (henceforth, FI) as
potential sources of this seemingly fairness-driven
behavior (Fehr & Fischbacher, 2003). Any involvement
of the possibility of RB and FI would be especially
critical in this context because the altruistic behavior
obtained in these experiments then could be explained
within the boundaries of self-regarding motives: It is
rational and adaptive to reject unfair offers if the
possibility of re-encountering the same game partner in
the future is high enough or if the possibility of building a
reputation among other players is at stake. The underlying
reason for this claim is that rejecting unfair offers protects
the player from being offered with unequal distributions
by the same game partner in the future or by third parties,
and thus this behavior serves the player’s self interest
(Burnham & Johnson, 2005; Hagen & Hammerstein,
2006).
This argument goes further in the direction that people
engage in altruistic cooperation in one-shot and
anonymous encounters simply because they confuse the
experimental settings with the more familiar
environments where interactions are normally repeated
and non-anonymous (Burnham & Johnson, 2005). In fact,
the participants might still be responding to implicit cues
suggesting that future interaction is possible or that their
reputation is at stake. One finding that supports this
interpretation is that the presence of eyespots on the
computer desktop, which triggers the sense that
participants are being watched, leads to increased
generosity in another money allocation game (Haley &
Fessler, 2005). Some other studies suggest that even the

Altruistic cooperation as a function of misperceived opportunity of reputation building and
future interaction
Although the importance of fairness considerations in
such bargaining games has been widely accepted, the real
reasons for altruistic cooperation (i.e., the Responders’

526

perception of being involved in a situation where future
interaction and reputation building is possible triggers
altruistic cooperation in one-shot, and anonymously
played economic games (Kiyanori et al., 2000). Thus
behaving in an altruistically cooperative manner in the
UGs might not solely result from the concern for the
maintenance of fairness norms, but from the misperceived opportunity of reputation building and future
interaction (Haley & Fessler, 2005; Bateson, Nettle, &
Roberts, 2006).

expected to take place. Second, in the Mini UG, there is
one special game [the (8/2) game, see table 1] in which
the Proposer has no choice, but to offer the fixed amount.
This particular case would enable us to detect the sole
effect of the possibility of RB and FI on the Responders’
decisions when an unequal distribution was offered
without any (un)fair intentions of the Proposer involved.

Experiment 1
We expected the rejection rate of the (8/2) distribution to
be different across different Mini UGs. More specifically,
the highest rejection rate expected to be in the (5/5) game.
In addition we expected to find statistically significant
differences between the rejection rates of the (8/2)
distribution in the (5/5) and the (10/0) games.

Present Experiments
Previous studies have already established that the (8/2)
distribution is rejected at different levels depending on
whether the alternative distributions are perceived as fair
or not (i.e., highest rejections observed when the
alternative was more equitable). However their findings
diverge in terms of rejection rates of the (8/2) distribution
when the alternative distribution was more inequitable.
More specifically, 9% of the Responders rejected the
(8/2) distribution in the (10/0) game in Falk et al.’s (2003)
study whereas almost 28% rejected in Sutter’s (2007)
study. Considering these differences in previous findings,
we found it necessary to re-establish the basic
phenomenon observed in the Mini UG (presented in Table
1) in our own subject pool, in Experiment 1.
In Experiment 2, we aimed to understand the combined
effect of the real possibility of RB and FI in the Mini
UG1. If the real reason behind the rejections in one-shot
and anonymously played games is the misperceived
possibility of RB and FI (and thus for maximizing the
material pay-off, for the maintenance of fairness norms),
then an increase in the level of altruistic cooperation
should be expected when the actual possibility is added to
the context. Although such an additional effect of
possibility of RB and FI has not been investigated in the
Mini UG, there are two main reasons for expecting such
an increase. First, the importance given to equality is
expected to be elevated (Rottemberg, 2008) because the
fairness norm (i.e., distributing the allocated money
evenly) is strengthened in presence of the possibility of
RB and FI (Hertel et al., 2002). Second and more
importantly, the sanctions inflicted upon the unfairness of
a game partner through altruistic cooperation might be
considered as an effective tool for maximizing future
gains (Kiyanori et al., 2000). In addition, there were two
main reasons for using the Mini UG, instead of the
standard UG: First, its structure would allow us to see
how the possibility of RB and FI, along with the fairness
concerns, would contribute to the Responders’ rejections
especially when altruistic punishment (i.e., when the
alternative offer yielded a more equitable distribution) is

Method
Participants: Fifty first year psychology students (M age =
19.5, 36 female) at UNSW participated in the experiment
as a part of their course requirement, and were informed
that they would be paid, contingent on the outcome of
their choices.
Procedure: There were 10 experimental sessions in
total, and 5 participants were tested at a time in each
experimental session. Participants were seated in separate
rooms and their identities were kept hidden throughout
the whole experiment. All participants played the Mini
UG as the Responders since our main interest was to see
whether we would be able to replicate the choice pattern
of the Responders obtained in previous studies (i.e., Falk
et al., 2003). However, each participant was told that only
one participant in each group of 5 would be assigned to
the Responder role and that the rest would be playing as
Proposers. This procedure made them believe that the
offer in each game would come from an actual but
different participant (Proposer) rather than from the
computer. The offers made by the computer mimicked the
actual rate of proposals offered by real Proposers in the
study of Falk et al. (2003). For instance, in that study, the
(8/2) distribution was offered by 31% of the Proposers in
the (5/5) game, and 73% in the (2/8) game. Thus the
Responders in Experiment 1 were offered (8/2)
distribution with the probability of .31 in the (5/5) game,
and that of .73 in the (2/8) game. The participants played
the games for real money, but currency was defined as
Monetary Unit (MU), where 1 MU was equal to 0.5
AUD. The experiment was conducted and run with the
Runtime Revolution Software.
Design: The Responders participated in all four Mini
UGs presented in Table 1. They were asked to indicate
their acceptance/rejection decisions for each of the two
possible distributions in each game before hearing the
actual distribution offered [i.e., the strategy method was
used, see Falk et al., (2003) for further information
regarding this method]. For example, in the (10/0) game,
the Responders were asked whether they would accept or
reject if the Proposer offered them the (10/0) distribution

1

The reason for testing their combined effect was that these
two factors are highly interrelated (i.e., repeated encounters with
the same partner, by default, bring along the opportunity of RB
as each player would know what the other player has done so
far).

527

Table 2. Rejection rates of (8/2) distribution across games in Experiment 1 and 2.
Rejection rates of (8/2) distribution
(5/5) Game
(2/8) Game
Experiment 1
60%
42%
Experiment 2*
52%
41%
* Rejection rates reported for Experiment 2 were averaged across rounds.
instead of (8/2); and they were subsequently asked
whether they would accept or reject if the Proposer
offered the (8/2) distribution instead of (10/0). If the game
was (8/2), they were simply asked what they would do if
the Proposer had no choice but to offer the (8/2)
distribution. Once the Responders indicated their
rejection/acceptance decision for each possible
distribution, they simply moved on to the next game.
After the completion of all four games, the Responders
were informed about the overall outcomes and debriefed
about the real set-up of the experiment (i.e., the offers
were not made by actual proposers). The presentation
order of the Mini UGs and that of the possible
distributions in each game were randomized.

(10/0) Game
18%
18%

(8/2) Game
14%
50%

because it is adaptive to build the reputation that one is a
tough bargainer who rejects unfair offers, and (ii) even
lower when its alternative was the (10/0) distribution
because it is adaptive to give the message for future
interactions that one is capable to discern and will reward
fair intentions.

Method
Participants: Ninety-six first year psychology students (M
age = 19.63, 62 female) at UNSW participated in the
experiment as a part of their course requirement and were
informed that they would be paid depending on the
outcome of their choices. Four participants were tested in
each experimental session and there were 24 sessions in
total.
Instructions phase: First, the participants were
randomly allocated to their roles, (with 2 being Proposers,
and the other 2 being Responders) and warned against
revealing their allocated roles to the others. Individual
players were then given detailed verbal instructions
(along with a written instructions document) regarding the
general structure of the game play, what their roles
required them to do, and what the consequences of their
accept/reject decisions would be. They were specifically
informed that they would play the game for more than one
round with the same partner, and that their decision would
be announced to other players before they switched their
partners. However, the players were not given any
information about how many rounds they would play in
total (i.e., in order to make the ‘shadow of the future’ long
enough), when exactly they would switch partners (i.e., in
order to make the possibility of RB stronger). In order to
eliminate a potential wealth effect, the participants were
told that the overall amount that they would receive
would be determined by a coin flip at the end of the
experiment. If the coin toss came up heads, then they
would get paid the amount that they earned in the first
half of the experiment, and if tails, the amount earned in
the second half. Afterwards, the instructions documents
were collected, and the players were taken to the separate
rooms to complete a short quiz measuring whether all the
instructions were understood clearly.
Design: Each experimental session consisted of 4
consecutive rounds and in each round the participants
played a different Mini UG game [i.e., the (5/5) game in
Round 1, the (8/2) game in Round 2 and so on. Note that
the allocation of the games into particular rounds was
randomized]. Each player was matched with his/her first
game partner (i.e., Proposer 1 with Responder 1) before

Results
Table 2 (top row) shows the rejection rates of (8/2)
distribution in different games. The main pattern observed
in the previous studies (i.e., Falk et al., 2003; Sutter,
2007) was replicated. To test the overall rejection rate
differences across four games, we ran Cochran’s Q test.
The test confirmed that the rejection rates of the (8/2)
distribution were significantly different across four games
(p < .0001). The rejection rate of the (8/2) distribution in
the (5/5) game was the highest among four games.
McNemar change tests were performed for the pairwise
comparisons and it showed that the rejection rate in the
(5/5) game was significantly higher than that of the (10/0)
(p < .0001)2. These results confirmed the previous
findings that the rejections to an (unfair) offer were
indeed not determined by the absolute amount of money,
but by how fair or unfair that offer was perceived in
comparison to the other available offers.

Experiment 2
In order to test the effect of the possibility of RB and FI
we changed the structure of the Mini UG from being oneshot and anonymously played to being iterated and nonanonymously played. We predicted that the rejection rates
of the (8/2) distribution in the Mini UG should be (i) even
higher when its alternative was the (5/5) distribution
2

The rejection rates for the alternative distributions (5/5),
(2/8), and (10/0) were 2%, 6% and 82% respectively in
Experiment 1.
3
The rejection rates of the alternative distributions in the
(5/5), (2/8) and (10/0) games were as follows: Nobody rejected
the (2/8) distribution and only one participant rejected the (5/5)
distribution. Almost 96% rejected the (10/0) distribution.

528

(5/5), and did not decrease when the alternative
distribution was (10/0). However, the (8/2) distribution
was rejected in the (8/2) game much more frequently in
Experiment 2 than Experiment 1, χ²(1, N=98) = 13.12, p =
.0003. To explore the pattern of results obtained in the
(8/2) game in detail, we examined round by round
rejection rates. The rejection rates of the (8/2) distribution
were especially high in Round 1 and Round 3 in which
the first encounters with the game partners took place (see
Figure 1). Possible reasons for this special pattern are
addressed in the General Discussion section.
Rejection rates of
the (8/2) distribution

Round 1 and played two consecutive rounds (e.g., Round
1 and Round 2) with the same partner. After the
completion of Round 2, they switched their partners (i.e.,
Proposer 1 started playing with Responder 2) and played
the following 2 rounds (Round 3 and Round 4) with their
new partners. At the end of each round, decisions of both
players (and the resulting outcomes) were announced to
the players. These announcements were done privately
(i.e., only between the pairs) after Round 1 and after
Round 3; but publicly (i.e., to all players) after Round 2
and Round 4. For example, the decisions of Responder 1
and Proposer 1 were announced only to these two players
after they completed Round 1, but their overall decisions
in Round 1 and Round 2 were announced to all players
just before they switched their partners.
Game play: In all Mini UGs, the Proposer was asked to
choose one of the two available distributions (see Table
1). Simultaneously the Responder, without knowing what
the Proposer actually had chosen to offer, was asked to
indicate his/her acceptance/rejection decisions for each of
the two possible distributions. (If the Responder had
accepted the offer that the Proposer had actually chosen,
the amount was distributed in accordance with the
proposal. Otherwise, both got nothing). Both players were
informed about the outcome right after the game was
over, and then they moved on to the next game. The
currency in the experiment was defined in Monetary Units
(MU), where 1 MU equals .5 AUD. The experiment
conducted and run with z-Tree (Fischbacher, 2007). After
the game play was over, both players received a
questionnaire. The Proposers were asked to indicate why
they offered the amount they offered and the Responders
were asked why they rejected/accepted the (8/2)
distribution.

100
50
0
Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 Round 4

Figure 1. Rejection rates of (8/2) distribution
in the (8/2) game across rounds.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, we (re)established the phenomenon that
people (negatively) respond to intentional unfairness in a
Mini UG at a cost to their own material payoff. Contrary
to our predictions, results of Experiment 2 indicated that
the additional effect of possibility of RB and FI did not
lead to an increase in altruistic cooperation [i.e., rejection
rates of the (8/2) distribution did not change especially
when the Responders were expected to punish unfair
offers (i.e., the 5/5 game) or to reward fair offers (i.e., the
10/0 game)]. Two potential but competing explanations
could be made. One possibility is that the possibility of
RB and FI is indeed (mis)perceived in one-shot and
anonymously played games, and thus did not lead to any
differences in the pattern of responses when it was
explicitly incorporated into the context (Haley & Fessler,
2005; Bateson, Nettle, & Roberts, 2006). The other
possibility is that the explicit incorporation of the
possibility of RB and FI did not have any additional effect
on the responses in the presence of the influence of
fairness considerations (that are already effective enough
to determine the rates of rejection).
Unexpectedly high rejection rates observed in the (8/2)
game in Experiment 2 provide supporting evidence for the
latter explanation. The possibility of RB and FI changed
the responses only in a particular game where the
intention of the Proposer was not assessable (the 8/2
game), but not in the other games in which the intentions
were assessable (i.e., the 5/5, the 10/0, and the 2/8
games). This pattern of results supports the governing role
of fairness considerations in two ways. First, rejection
rates of the (8/2) distribution may have already reached a
maximum level in the (5/5) game or a minimum in the
(10/0) game even in one-shot and anonymously played

Results
All participants passed the quiz distributed before the
game play, thus all responses were included in the
analysis. Table 2 (the bottom row) presents the overall
rejection rates of the (8/2) distribution in different games.
The highest rejection rate was obtained in the (5/5) game
and the lowest in the (10/0) game. These rejection rates of
the (8/2) distribution were significantly different across
four groups (p = .0011, Cochran’s Q test). Interestingly,
half of the participants rejected the (8/2) distribution in
the (8/2) game. McNemar change tests indicated that the
rejection rate in the (5/5) game was significantly higher
than that in the (10/0) game, p = .0006 but not than those
in the (2/8) and the (8/2) games, p = .30, and p = .83,
respectively3.
A cross-experimental comparison demonstrated that
the rejection rates of the (8/2) distribution between
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 did not significantly
differ in the (5/5) games [χ²(1, N=98)= .62, p = .43], the
(2/8) games [χ²(1, N=98)= .00, p = .97], and the (10/0)
games [χ²(1, N=98)= .01, p = .92]. Contrary to our
expectations, the rejection rates of the (8/2) distribution
did not increase when the alternative distribution was

529

Mini UG just as a result of the perceived fairness of the
distribution. Thus there was no room for an additional
effect induced by the possibility of RB and FI. This is an
indication of how dominant the fairness concerns are in
determining the level of altruistic cooperation.
Second, finding no evidence for pronounced levels of
altruistic cooperation in respective games [i.e., the (5/5),
(2/8) and (10/0) games] might be an indication of the
effect of RB and FI being too weak to overcome the effect
of fairness considerations. The Responders might only be
taking the perceived intentions of the Proposers into
consideration as a determinant of their accept/reject
decisions for an unequal offer, and thus might not need to
have additional reasons/concerns to change those
decisions even when RB and FI are possible. However,
once the fairness consideration is weakened as a result of
the removal of the possible intentions behind an offer in
the (8/2) game, the effect of RB and FI becomes effective
in changing their responses/concerns: It makes the
Responders (negatively) react against the unfairness of
the outcome of the (8/2) distribution, most likely, in order
to increase the possibility of being treated fairly in the
future (Hertel et al., 2002; Kiyonari et al., 2000). The
round-wise analysis of the (8/2) game (see Figure 1)
confirmed that the increase in rejections (in response to
unfair distribution) was indeed resulting from the effect of
the possibility of RB and FI. Round 1 and Round 3, in
which the highest rejections were observed, were
particularly important for the Responders to convey their
message for the future encounters. The implicit message
given under such condition could be that they don’t like to
be offered an unequal distribution. The Responders’ selfreports collected after the game play also indicate that the
main purpose of the rejections in this game was indeed to
tell the Proposers that ‘I will reject again if you ever
propose such an unequal distribution’.
The current set of studies explicitly reveals the
importance of fairness considerations in determining the
level of altruistic cooperation, especially in the presence
of other dominant factors such as the possibility of RB
and FI. Demonstrating that these other factors may
become effective only in the absence of an important
aspect of the fairness concerns [i.e., (un)fairness of
intentions] provides a new avenue for the investigation of
economic behavior in interactive environments.

Burnham, T. C., & Johnson, D. D. P. (2005). The
biological and evolutionary logic of human
cooperation. Analyse & Kritik, 27, 113-135.
Cameron, L. A. (1999). Raising the stakes in the
ultimatum game: Experimental evidence from
Indonesia. Economic Inquiry, 37, 47–59.
Declerck, C. H., Kiyonari, T., & Boone, C. (2009). Why
do responders reject unequal offers in the Ultimatum
Game? An experimental study on the role of perceiving
interdependence. Journal of Economic Psychology, 30,
335-342.
Falk, A., Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2003). On the
nature of fair behavior. Economic Inquiry, 41, 20-26.
Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2003). The nature of human
altruism. Nature, 425, 785-791.
Fehr, E., & Gachter, S. (2002). Altruistic punishment in
humans. Nature, 415, 137-140.
Fischbacher, U. (2007). z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for readymade economic experiments. Experimental Economics,
10, 171-178.
Gintis, H., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., & Fehr, E. (2003).
Explaining altruistic behavior in humans. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 24, 153-172.
Güth, W., Schmittberger, B., & Schwarze, J. (1982). An
experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization, 3, 367-388.
Hagen, E. H., & Hammerstein, P. (2006). Game theory
and human evolution: A critique of some recent
interpretations of experimental games. Theoretical
Population Biology, 69, 339-348.
Haley, K. J., & Fessler, D. M. T. (2005). Nobody’s
watching? Subtle cues affect generosity in an
anonymous economic game. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 26, 245-256.
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E.,
Gintis, H. et al. (2005). “Economic man” in crosscultural perspective: Behavioral experiments in 15
small-scale societies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
28, 795-855.
Hertel, G., Aarts, H., & Zeelenberg, M. (2002). What do
you think is ‘‘fair?”: Effects of ingroup norms and
outcome control on fairness judgments. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 372–431.
Kiyonari, T., Tanida, S., & Yamagishi, T. (2000). Social
exchange and reciprocity: Confusion or a heuristic?
Evolution and Human Behavior, 21, 411–427.
Roth, A. E. (1995). Bargaining experiments. In J. H.
Kagel & A. E. Roth (Eds.), Handbook of experimental
economics (pp. 253–348). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Rottemberg, J. J. (2008). Minimally accepted altruism and
the ultimatum game. Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 66, 457–476.
Sutter, M. (2007). Outcomes versus intentions: On the
nature of fair behavior and its development with age.
Journal of Economic Psychology, 28, 69–78.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a UNSW Overseas
Postgraduate Research Scholarship awarded to the first
author and Australian Research Council grants
(DP110100797; FT110100151) to the second author.

References
Bateson, M., Nettle, D., & Roberts, G. (2006). Cues of
being watched enhance cooperation in a real world
setting. Biology Letters, 2, 412-414.
Binmore, K. (2007). Playing for real: A text on game
theory. New York: Oxford University Press.

530

