UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Foreign accent does not influence cognitive judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hd9v4ff

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Souza, Andre L.
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Foreign accent does not influence cognitive judgments
André L. Souza (andre.souza@crdh.concordia.ca)
Concordia University, Department of Psychology
7141 Sherbrooke St. W.
Montreal, QC H4V 1N3 Canada

Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
The University of Texas at Austin, Department of Psychology
1 University Station, A8000
Austin, TX 78712 USA
Abstract
A recent paper by Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010) reported that the
processing fluency associated with non-native speech causes
non-native speakers to sound less credible. The authors found
that the same trivia statements were rated as less truthful when
spoken by a non-native speaker of English. The present paper reports the results of three studies that attempted to replicate the findings of Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010) by focusing
on processing fluency manipulations other than accent. Although we used virtually the same methodology as Lev-Ari
and Keysar (2010), we failed to replicate the key finding that
foreign-accented speech is less credible than native-accented
speech. The implications of this finding is discussed.
Keywords: fluency, foreign accent, credibility.

Introduction
The U.S. Census Bureau (2010) reported that 38.5 million
people (around 12.5% of the nation’s population) have as
mother tongue a language other than English. The increasing
number of non-native speakers of English in the U.S. suggests that a significant amount of daily interactions involve a
non-native speaker communicating in English with some sort
of foreign accent.
The social psychological literature on language attitudes
has documented considerable amount of evidence showing
that, compared to their nonstandard, accented counterparts,
listeners evaluate standard, non-accented speakers more favorably across different traits, such as competence, status,
intelligence, confidence, guilt and success (Ryan & Giles,
1982).
It is not entirely clear which cognitive mechanisms underlie this phenomenon. There is research suggesting that accent serves as a signal for the speakers’ social group and that
any negative attitude towards non-native speakers is caused
by in-group biases and not by the accent itself. Alternatively, there is research showing an individual’s actions and
attitudes towards others are heavily dependent on how that
person processes the information provided by them. The subjective ease with which individuals process incoming information influences them in a variety of cognitive tasks and domains (Gilbert, 1991; Schwarz, 2004; Alter & Oppenheimer,
2009) such as estimates of familiarity (Jacoby & Whitehouse,
1989), clarity (Whittlesea, Jacoby, & Girard, 1990), riskiness
(Song & Schwarz, 2009), location and abstractness (Alter &
Oppenheimer, 2008), truthfulness (Reber & Schwarz, 1999;

Unkelbach, 2007), liking (Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001)
and even confidence (Koriat, 1993). Thus, one plausible hypothesis is that the negative impressions and judgments towards non-native speakers are triggered by the difficulty associated with processing accented speech.
A recent paper by Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010) directly explored this possibility. They asked native speakers of English
to listen to a series of trivia statements such as Ants don’t
sleep and then indicate the degree of veracity of each statement. Participants listened to statements spoken by both native and non-native speakers of American English. The accented speech varied in terms of the degree: either mildly or
heavily accented. They found that the statements spoken by
non-native speakers were reliably rated as less truthful compared to the same statements spoken by native speakers.
The authors argued that their findings could not be explained in terms of stereotypes of prejudice signaled by the
accent because participants were told that the non-native
speakers were only reciting statements provided by a native
speaker, and therefore were not displaying their own knowledge. Based on these findings, Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010)
claimed that people misattribute the processing difficulty associated with non-native accented speech with the level of
credibility they attribute to the content of the speech.
We began this project with the aim of exploring this issue further. The core idea is that if processing fluency influences people’s judgments of the veracity of statements, then
other manipulations of the speech signal such as adding background noise would also influence judgments of truth. We
hoped to explore this issue both for statements of the kind
used by Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010) as well as other kinds of
judgments like consumer preference judgments. To presage
our results, though, we were unable to replicate the initial
findings.
This paper reports results for 3 studies. Study 1 explored
the claim that inducing processing difficulty with mechanisms other than foreign accent (i.e., white background noise
– Study 1a – and speech babble noise – Study 1b) affects
judgments of truth. Studies 2 and 3 are attempts to replicate the findings of Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010). In Study 2,
we asked participants to judge the truthfulness of trivia statements spoken by native and non-native speakers of English.
In Study 3 we explore whether accent influences participant’s

1360

perception of the price of a product.

Study 1
Study 1 investigated the claim that inducing processing difficulty with mechanisms other than foreign accent affects judgments of truth.

Study 1a
Participants Twenty-six native speakers of English participated in Study 1a. Participants were undergraduate students
at The University of Texas at Austin and participated for
course credit.
Materials A female native English speaker recorded 70
trivia statements such as A rat can last longer without water
than a camel in a sound-attenuated booth. To obtain equivalent overall amplitude level for all statements, the sound files
were equated for RMS amplitude. Each sound file was mixed
with white noise at a four different Sound-to-Noise Ratios
(SNR): level 0 corresponded to +17dB SNR (68dB of speech
and 51dB of noise), level 1 corresponded to +12dB SNR, level
2 to +6dB SNR and level 3 to 0dB SNR. In the SNR notation
used in this paper, the smaller the dB SNR, the louder the
background noise. The mixed files were presented to participants using E-prime 2.0.
Procedure Study 1a used a within-subject design. Each
participant heard all 70 trivia statements (48 experimental
ones and 22 fillers) randomly mixed with one of three levels of noise (level 0, level 1 and level 2). Participants sat in
front of a computer screen with headphones and were asked
to indicate the truthfulness of each statement, using a scale
between 0 (definitely false) and 10 (definitely true). Participants were also asked to rate whether they knew for a fact
that the statement was true.
Manipulation Check To ensure that the noise manipulation made the trivia statements more difficult to process, a different group of 24 participants were asked to listen and rate
the degree of difficulty to understand the statements. Each
participant heard 25 randomly selected statements (five for
each level of noise: no noise, level 0, level 1, level 2 and level
3).
Manipulation Check Results A one-way repeated
measures ANOVA, with the difficulty level as dependent
variable and noise level as independent variable, revealed a
statistically reliable main effect of noise, F(4,80) = 60.59,
p < .0001, η2 = .75, suggesting that the overall distribution
of the mean perceived difficulty across the five different
noise levels significantly differed from each other. Post-hoc
Bonferroni-corrected t-tests showed that, except for the level
0 vs. level 1 comparison, all other pairwise comparisons
reliably differed from each other, p0 s < 0.05.
Truthfulness Ratings Results and Discussion Because we
wanted to avoid participants suspicion about the noise ma-

nipulation, we decided to present participants only with statements mixed with some level of noise, excluding therefore the
sentences with no noise. Also, because the difficulty ratings
for level 3 noise was extremely high (M = 8.30, SD = 1.89),
we decided to exclude this level, to avoid the possibility that
participants would simply be unable to hear the statements
completely.
To verify whether white noise affected the truthfulness ratings of the trivia statements, we ran a one-way repeatedmeasures ANOVA, with the truthfulness ratings as the dependent variable and the noise levels as the independent variable. Contrary to what we expected, the mean truthfulness
ratings were very similar across all three different levels of
white noise. The ANOVA showed that the means did not differ reliably from each other, F(2,50) = .81, p = .45.
The pattern of results suggests that the presence of white
noise in speech does not affect judgments about the content
of the speech. These findings go against the robust literature that shows that processing fluency affects cognitive judgments. On the other hand, because the overall truthfulness
ratings across all levels of noise was M = 4.80 (SD = 2.85),
one might claim that participants were just not engaging properly in the task, given that, in general, people are not used to
hearing speech against this particular type of noise. In fact,
Kozou et al. (2005) shows that speech competitors have a different effects on speech recognition and performance compared to non-speech competitors, such as white noise. Study
1b addresses this point by presenting the statements against a
speech competitor (i.e., babble speech) which is more common in people’s environments and is found to affect speech
differently than white noise (Kozou et al., 2005).

Study 1b
Participants Twelve native speakers of English participated in Study 1b. Again, participants were undergraduate
students of Psychology enrolled in a The University of Texas
at Austin and participated for course credit. None of the
participants from Study 1a participated in Study 1b.
Materials The materials were the same as in Study 1b,
however, each sound file was mixed with speech babble noise
at the same four different SNR’s (+17dB, +12dB, +6dB and
0dB). Similarly to Study 1a, the mixed files were presented to
participants using E-prime 2.0. The procedure was identical
to Study 1a.
Manipulation Check As we did for Study 1a, a different
group of 21 participants listened and rated the degree of
difficulty to understand the statements. The procedure for the
manipulation check was identical to Study 1a.
Manipulation Check Results A one-way repeated measures ANOVA showed a statistically significant main effect
of noise, F(4,80) = 41.14, p < .0001, η2 = .67. Slightly

1361

different from what was found for Study 1a, post-hoc
Bonferroni-corrected t-tests revealed that, level 3 significantly differed from all other levels (p0 s < 0.009). However,
level 0, level 1 and level 2 did not differ significantly from
each other.
Truthfulness Ratings Results and Discussion Similarly
to the findings from Study 1a, the mean truthfulness ratings
did not differ significantly across all three different babble
noise levels, F(2,22) = .14, p = .86. Although, the results for
Study 1a and Study 1b suggest that noise (both white and
speech babble) does not influence judgments of truth, one
might claim that the failure to show differences in truthfulness ratings in Study 1b is easily explained by the fact that
the various levels of noise were not perceived as different in
terms of difficulty. To address this point, we re-ran Study 1b,
but this time with different levels of SNR’s. This time, level
0 corresponded to +8dB SNR, level 1 corresponded to +2dB
SNR, level 2 to 0dB SNR and level 3 to -2dB SNR (negative SNR means that noise signal is louder than the speech
signal). Using the same manipulation check procedure as before, 17 participants were asked to rate the degree of difficulty
associated with listening the statements. A one-way repeated
measures ANOVA showed a significant main effect of noise,
F(4,64) = 45.21, p < .0001, η2 = .74. Post-hoc Bonferronicorrected t-tests revealed that, except for the pairs level 1 vs.
level 2 and level 2 vs. level 3, all other levels reliably differed
from each other, p0 s < 0.05.
For the truthfulness ratings of this novel noise level manipulation, a group of 13 native speakers of English were asked
to rate the degree of truthfulness of the statements (procedure
identical as before). Once again, the speech babble noise did
not influence the judgments of truth, F(2,24) = 0.43, p = ns.
More importantly, the pairwise combinations that did differ
in terms of difficulty level (i.e., level 0 vs. level 1, level 0
vs. level 3 and level 1 vs. level 3) did not show any reliable
difference in terms of truthfulness ratings.
The results of Study 1a and 1b combined suggest that
neither white noise nor speech babble noise seem to influence judgments of truth. More broadly, processing fluency
associated with these auditory stimuli does not affect judgments about the content of the sentences. These findings
go directly against Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010)’s claim that
processing fluency associated with understanding foreignaccented speech directly influences judgments of truth. Study
2 and Study 3 are direct attempts to replicate Lev-Ari and
Keysar (2010)’s findings with foreign-accented speech.

Study 2
Participants Sixty-five native speakers of English participated in Study 2. Participants were undergraduate students at
The University of Texas at Austin and participated for course
credit. None of the participants from the previous studies participated in this one.

Materials A female native English speaker, two female native speakers of Brazilian-Portuguese and two female native
speakers of Korean recorded the same 70 trivia statements
used in the previous studies. As before, all sound files were
equated for RMS amplitude. To ensure that the speech was
perceived as accented, a separate pool of 28 participants rated
the degree of foreign-accentedness of the statements (both the
native and non-native speech). A repeated-measures ANOVA
showed a main effect of language, that is, both the BrazilianPortuguese and the Korean speech were perceived as significantly more accented than the native speech, F(2,54) = 307.6,
p < 0.001, η2 = .91. Brazilian-Portuguese and Korean did
not differ from each other, although the Brazilian speakers
were perceived as slightly more accented.
Procedures To test for the effect of accent on credibility
judgments, participants sat in front of a computer and listened
to 48 trivia statements in English. Sixteen of these statements
were spoken by a native speaker of Brazilian-Portuguese, 16
by a native speaker of Korean and 16 by the native English
speaker. All statements were recited in English. After listening to each statement, participants were asked to indicate how
truthful they thought the statements were. For this, they used
a Likert scale ranging from 1 (definitely false) to 10 (definitely true). Each participant heard additional 20 fillers statements read by two additional native speakers of English.
Results and Discussion To investigate the effect of foreign
accent on the judgments of truth, we ran a repeated-measures
one-way ANOVA, with language (accented vs. native) as
independent variable and the truthfulness rating as the dependent variable. Our results failed to replicate the findings
reported by Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010). There was no
reliable main effect of language on the truthfulness ratings,
F(2,128) = .18, p = .83 (Figure 1). Contrary to what Lev-Ari
and Keysar (2010) claimed, although the foreign speech
is perceived as accented relative to the native speech, the
accent did not change people’s perceptions of truthfulness.
However, the main claim of Lev-Ari and Keysar (2010) is
that the difficulty associated with foreign-accented speech,
and not necessarily the accent itself, is what drives the
misattribution effect. It is reasonable to assume that although
the foreign speech is accented, it might not necessarily be
difficult to understand. On top of that, it might be that given
that the content of the trivia statements are too opaque,
participants in our study just did not engage in the task
properly.
To further explore these points, we ran Study 3 using a
more engaging decision-making task. We also assessed the
level of difficulty on top of the level of accentedness for the
non-native speakers. Study 3 used a design similar to (Shah
& Oppenheimer, 2007) who showed that people weigh fluent information more heavily than they weigh disfluent information. Using a similar design, we hypothesized that if
accented speech is indeeed more difficult to process (i.e., dis-

1362

Figure 2: Accentedness and Difficulty
(native vs. non-native) and valence (positive vs. negative) as
independent variable and the difficulty ratings as dependent
variables, revealed a reliable main effect of language, F(1,22)
= 91.51, p < 0.001, η2 = .98, but no statistically significant
main effect of valence or language x valence interaction. Notably, the main effect of language suggests that the non-native
speech was perceived as reliably more difficult (M = 3.54, SD
= 1.66) than the native counterpart (M = 1.05, SD = 0.23).
The same participants were also asked to rate how accented
they perceived the reviews to be. Similarly to the results for
the difficulty ratings, a repeated-measures two-way ANOVA,
with language (native vs. non-native) and valence (positive
vs. negative) as independent variable and the accent ratings
as dependent variables, showed only a statistically significant
main effect of language, F(1,22) = 260.5, p < 0.001, η2 =
.92, suggesting that the non-native speech was perceived as
significantly more accented (M = 4.86, SD = 1.44) than the
native counterpart (M = 1.04, SD = 0.2). Overall, the pattern
shows that the more accented, the more difficult to understand
(see Figure 2).

Figure 1: Credibility ratings as a function of accent.

fluent) compared to native speech, participants would weight
consumer reviews provided by non-native speakers less heavily than the same review provided by a native speaker.

Study 3
Participants Sixty native speakers of English participated
in Study 3. Participants were undergraduate students of psychology at The University of Texas at Austin and participated
in exchange for course credit. None of the participants in
Study 3 participated in the previous studies.
Materials Three female native speakers of English and
three female non-native speakers of English (a BrazilianPortuguese speaker, an Iranian speaker and a Korean speaker)
recorded both positive and negative reviews for six different
products. To obtain equivalent overall amplitude levels for
all recordings across the two speakers, the sound files were
equated for RMS amplitude.
Difficulty and Accentedness Manipulation Check To ensure that the non-native speech was indeed perceived as more
difficult to understand, a different group of 24 participants
rated the degree of difficulty of the reviews. Each participant randomly heard a review for each of the six products.
Three of these reviews were positive and three were negative.
Three were from a native speaker and three were from a nonnative speaker (one for each non-native language). Participants rated the level of difficulty using a Likert scale ranging
from 1 (easy) to 7 (difficult).
A repeated-measures two-way ANOVA, with language

Procedures Study 3 used a 2 (valence: positive vs. negative) X 2 (language: native vs. foreign) fully within-subject
design. Each participant completed a total of 12 trials (six
fillers and six experimental trials) that were presented to them
in random order. Three of the trials were negative reviews and
three were positive reviews. Language was also balanced per
participant: three native speakers and three non-native speakers.
In each trial, participants were presented with a series of
specifications about a product (e.g., this camera has 14.0
megapixels of resolution). The specifications were presented
in the written format and were the same across conditions.
After reading a product specifications they listened to a consumer review about the product. After listening to each review, participants were asked to estimate how much they

1363

Figure 3: Price Estimates as a function of Accent and Valence

think the product should cost. For each product, participants
were given a range or prices to estimate from.
Results and Discussion As the price intervals were different for each product, we standardized the estimates to be
amounts between 0 and 1. To investigate whether valence
and language affected the prices estimates, we ran a repeatedmeasures two-way ANOVA with valence and language as independent variables and the standardized price estimate as dependent variable. We found a reliable main effect of valence,
F(1,58) = 22.64, p < .001, η2 = .28, suggesting that participants were indeed attentive to the content of the reviews, providing higher price estimates for the positive reviews (M =
.44, SD = .28) than for the negative reviews (M = .17, SD
= .20). However, no reliable main effect of language or interaction of language and valence were found (see Figure 3).
Again, this pattern of results suggests that processing fluency
associated with processing foreign accented speech does not
affect cognitive judgments such as price estimation, F(1,58)
= .14, p = .71.

General Discussion
In the present paper, we ran three studies to further explore the idea that the difficulty associated with foreignaccented speech affects cognitive judgments Lev-Ari and
Keysar (2010). In both Studies 1a and 1b, the presence of
noise made the statements significantly harder to understand
than the statements spoken in quiet. This finding is consonant with several studies showing that processing speech in
adverse conditions imposes an extra cognitive burden on listeners (Lane, 1962; Munro, 1998). Yet, this manipulation did
not affect participants’ judgments of truth.
For Study 2, even though the non-native speech was perceived as accented, they did not affect judgments of truth.
This result is consonant with other research showing no rela-

tionship between degree of accent and credibility (De Meo,
Vitale, Pettorino, & Martin, 2011).
In Study 3, although the reviews spoken by non-native
speakers were perceived as accented and difficult, they did
not influence participants’ price estimations. Taken together,
these findings fail to support the claim that the processing
difficulty associated with understanding non-native accented
speech influences cognitive judgments.
The lack of effect of accent on cognitive judgment can be
explained in terms of the kinds of masking (energetic versus
informational) that accent and background noise causes to the
speech signal. Energetic masking (also known as perceptual
masking) occurs when there is a degradation of the acoustic signal in shared spectro-temporal regions. Because the
energy of a speech signal is concentrated in a few spectrotemporal regions of high informational value, if masking
takes place in other regions, little impact on speech processing will be observed (Cooke, 2006). On the other hand, informational masking (also known as conceptual masking) occurs when there is a reduction of speech intelligibility even
after any energetic masking has been accounted for (Cooke,
2006). Generally, informational masking refers to distractions that directly competes with the listener’s attentional resources when processing the speech (e.g., the presence of an
unrelated task.)
Studies on speech processing and speech segmentation
(Mattys, White, & Melhorn, 2005; Mattys, Carroll, Li, &
Chan, 2010) have demonstrated that depending on the type
of masking (energetic or informational), people will attend to
different cues to process and segment the speech. Energetic
masking (e.g. white noise) tends to favor the listener’s reliance on lexical-semantic information whereas informational
masking tends to favor the listener’s reliance on sub-lexical,
acoustic information. Related to our current findings, it might
be that the presence of white noise (i.e., energetic masking)
made our participants focus closely on the conceptual aspect
of the message other than the acoustic features. Therefore, instead of producing a metacognitive feeling of disfluency, the
presence of the white noise made it easier for people to focus
on the declarative information of the speech.
Another alternative is linked to the evidence that listeners normalize accented speech before engaging in any sort
of conceptual processing with the content of the speech
(Lahiri & Marslen-Wilson, 1991; Floccia, Goslin, Girard, &
Konopczynski, 2006). According to this view, the acoustic
signal is cleaned of all distortions and deviant information
and a “clean” signal is processed instead. This normalization
process happens after short periods of exposure to accented
speech. In fact, there is evidence that after sufficient information on the accent is gathered, comprehension strategies
return to baseline levels (Floccia et al., 2006), making people
less tuned to the acoustic properties of the signal. It is possible that the participants in our study normalized the accented
speech after a short period of exposure and then neglected to
attend to sub-lexical acoustic features of the speech.

1364

Conclusion
Our findings suggest that (Lev-Ari & Keysar, 2010) findings
might have been a case of a false positive. Although scientists
always aim at publishing accurate and replicable effects, errors are inevitable (Simmons, Nelson, & Simonsohn, 2011).
In fact, the standard alpha level widely adopted in science
(i.e., 5%) means that about 5% of the time, when scientists
look for an effect that is not there, they will find a statistically significant difference. The only way to spot such Type I
Errors is by reducing the publication bias (Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012), that is, by giving more space in the literature
for publications attempting to replicate previous findings. In
that sense, replications and failures to replicate effects play
an important role in the scientific arena (Makel, Plucker, &
Hegarty, 2012). The present paper contributes to the growing
body of research interested in unvailing and understanding
more systematically psychological phenomena.

References
Alter, A., & Oppenheimer, D. (2008). Effects of fluency on
psychological distance and mental construal (or why
new york is a large city, but new york is a civilized
jungle). Psychological Science, 19(2), 161–167.
Alter, A., & Oppenheimer, D. (2009). Uniting the tribes of
fluency to form a metacognitive nation. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 13(3), 219–235.
Cooke, M. (2006). A glimpsing model of speech perception in noise. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 119, 1562.
De Meo, A., Vitale, M., Pettorino, M., & Martin, P.
(2011). Acoustic-perceptual credibility correlates of
news reading by native and chinese speakers of italian. Proceedings of the 17th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences.
Floccia, C., Goslin, J., Girard, F., & Konopczynski, G.
(2006). Does a regional accent perturb speech processing? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 32(5), 1276.
Gilbert, D. (1991). How mental systems believe. American
psychologist, 46(2), 107.
Jacoby, L., & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of memory: False recognition influenced by unconscious perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118(2), 126.
Koriat, A. (1993). How do we know that we know? the accessibility model of the feeling of knowing. Psychological
review, 100(4), 609.
Kozou, H., Kujala, T., Shtyrov, Y., Toppila, E., Starck, J.,
Alku, P., & Näätänen, R. (2005). The effect of different noise types on the speech and non-speech elicited
mismatch negativity. Hearing research, 199(1), 31–
39.
Lahiri, A., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (1991). The mental representation of lexical form: A phonological approach to
the recognition lexicon. Cognition, 38(3), 245–294.

Lane, H. (1962). Foreign accent and speech distortion. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 34(12),
1996–1996.
Lev-Ari, S., & Keysar, B. (2010). Why don’t we believe nonnative speakers? the influence of accent on credibility. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46(6),
1093 - 1096. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2010.05.025
Makel, M., Plucker, J., & Hegarty, B. (2012). Replications
in psychology research how often do they really occur?
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 537–542.
Mattys, S., Carroll, L., Li, C., & Chan, S. (2010). Effects
of energetic and informational masking on speech segmentation by native and non-native speakers. Speech
Communication, 52(11), 887–899.
Mattys, S., White, L., & Melhorn, J. (2005). Integration
of multiple speech segmentation cues: a hierarchical
framework. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134(4), 477.
Munro, M. (1998). The effects of noise on the intelligibility of foreign-accented speech. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20(2), 139–154.
Pashler, H., & Wagenmakers, E. (2012). Editors’ introduction
to the special section on replicability in psychological
science a crisis of confidence? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 528–530.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of perceptual fluency on judgments of truth. Consciousness and cognition, 8(3), 338–342.
Ryan, E., & Giles, H. (1982). Attitudes towards language
variation: Social and applied contexts. E. Arnold.
Schwarz, N. (2004). Meta-cognitive experiences in consumer
judgment and decision making. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, September.
Shah, A., & Oppenheimer, D. (2007). Easy does it: The role
of fluency in cue weighting. Judgment and Decision
Making, 2(6), 371–379.
Simmons, J., Nelson, L., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). Falsepositive psychology undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22(11), 1359–1366.
Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (2009). If it’s difficult to pronounce,
it must be risky fluency, familiarity, and risk perception. Psychological Science, 20(2), 135–138.
Unkelbach, C. (2007). Reversing the truth effect: Learning
the interpretation of processing fluency in judgments of
truth. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33(1), 219.
Whittlesea, B., Jacoby, L., & Girard, K. (1990). Illusions of
immediate memory: Evidence of an attributional basis
for feelings of familiarity and perceptual quality. Journal of Memory and Language, 29(6), 716–732.
Winkielman, P., & Cacioppo, J. (2001). Mind at ease puts
a smile on the face: psychophysiological evidence that
processing facilitation elicits positive affect. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 81(6), 989.

1365

