UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fractal Structure of the Nested Actions of Keeping the Beat

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/13q6f8fz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Coey, Charles
Hassebrock, Justin
Kloos, Heidi
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fractal Structure of the Nested Actions in Keeping the Beat
Charles A. Coey (coeyca@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Justin Hassebrock (hassebja@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Michael J. Richardson (richamo@ucmail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Abstract
The current experiments investigated the fractal structure in
the nested actions of tapping behavior. The results revealed
that task constraints (e.g., tapping to a metronome) alter the
fractal structure of a given aspect of the behavior (e.g., intertap interval) and decouple its long-term interactions with
other aspects of the behavior (e.g., key-press duration). These
results support the idea that fractal structure reflects the
dynamical organization of complex systems.
Keywords: complex systems, fractal scaling, finger tapping

Introduction
There is certainly no shortage of complexity for the student
of human mind and behavior. The human system is at once
physical, chemical, biological, psychological, and social.
We cognitive scientists carefully design experimental tasks
and manipulations to gain an empirical purchase on the
many forces that shape human behavior. Traditionally, the
field has relied on classical techniques of linear statistics.
We take different averages or degrees of variability in
reaction time to be indicative of the cognitive processes
underlying performance in our experimental tasks. Recently,
however, researchers have turned to examining more subtle
and complex statistical facets of data to understand the
processes involved in the organization of human behavior;
namely, fractal structure.
Comprehensive review of this statistical property, the
available mathematical techniques for its assessment, and
the potential implications for theories of cognitive science is
not possible in the limited space provided here (see Brown
& Liebovitch, 2010; Delignieres & Marmelat, 2013;
Holden, 2005; Van Orden Kloos, & Wallot, 2010).
Nonetheless, a brief introduction to the topic is warranted.
The term “fractal structure” is here being used loosely to
refer to patterns of variability in repeated measurements of
human behavior. Most traditional, linear statistical

techniques operate on the assumptions that deviations from
mean performance will obey a Gaussian distribution and
that these “errors” will be uncorrelated with one another.
Data displaying fractal structure violates these assumptions.
That is, fluctuations in repeated performances exhibit “longterm dependencies” such that errors in early observations
are correlated with errors in much later observations. Fractal
data obey power-law scaling such that size of a given error
is inversely proportional to how often errors of that size
occur. Thus, like geometric fractals, these data are said to be
“self-similar” and “scale-invariant”. Fractal data entail
nested patterns of variability wherein small variations in
measurement have the same structure as large variations.
Such structure in repeated measurements is often referred to
as “pink noise”, as contrasted against the random variation
entailed in “white noise” (Holden, 2005).
In part, these patterns are important to researchers in
cognitive science as they have been discovered in a plethora
of human data from the simplest of reaction time tasks
taking place over the course of minutes (Van Orden,
Holden, & Turvey, 2003) to measurements of self-esteem
over a many months (Delignieres, Fortes, Ninot, 2004).
More importantly, experimental manipulations of the type
typically employed by cognitive scientists have been shown
to affect fractal structure. For instance, Kello et al., (2007)
demonstrated that reaction times to unpredictable cues were
not only slower, but also closer to white noise (i.e., random)
variation, than reaction times to predictable cues.
Despite their widespread occurrence, there is not yet a
unified account of how these fractal patterns get into the
data or what they imply for theories of cognitive science
(e.g., Van Orden, Holden, & Turvey, 2005; Wagenmakers,
Farrell, & Ratcliff, 2005). The current experiments are
intended to contribute to the on-going discussion by
examining the fractal structure in the nested actions in a
tapping task, their dynamical interaction with one another,
and the impact of employing different task constraints.

2076

Procedure and Design

Experiment 1
Most statistical techniques used to assess fractal structure
require very many observations made under relatively
constant task conditions. As such, research revealing these
structures in human behavior has typically preferred very
simple tasks. One frequently studied task is finger tapping
(e.g., Chen, Ding, & Kelso, 2001; Chen, Repp, & Patel,
2002; Gilden, Thorton, & Mallon, 1995; Lemoine, Torre, &
Delignieres, 2006; Madison, 2001; Musha, Katsurai, &
Teramachi, 1985; Ogden & Collier, 1999; Yamada, 1995).
Generally, studies have found evidence of fractal structure
in continuation tapping, wherein participants attempt to
keep a steady beat briefly demonstrated to them by a
metronome stimulus at the beginning of a trial. In this case,
the intervals between taps take on a “persistent” structure
(i.e., longer taps tend to be followed longer taps).
Interestingly, the fractal structure is different during
synchronization tapping, wherein participants synchronize
their taps to a constant metronome stimulus. In this case, the
intervals between taps take on an “anti-persistent” structure,
(i.e., longer taps tend to be followed by shorter taps)
whereas the asynchronies between the participant’s taps and
the metronome show a persistent fractal structure. These
findings have been interpreted and modeled as the result of
the metronome serving as a corrective feedback mechanism
for the maintenance of a given tapping interval (Torre &
Delignieres, 2008).
While these results are reasonably well-understood, to
date there have been no investigations of the nested actions
comprising finger tapping. That is, most tasks require a
behavior that consists of many “sub-actions”, all of which
may not be measured or examined. In tapping, the task
requires striking the key, holding it down for some period of
time, releasing the key, and waiting some period of time
before striking the key once more. Our first experiment was
designed to investigate the fractal structure in these nested
actions during continuation tapping, how these nested
behaviors might interact with one another across the
measured span of behavior, and what differences might be
evident during synchronization tapping.

After informed consent, participants were instructed that
they would complete two trials of tapping behavior while
being presented different auditory stimuli. They were then
shown how to produce the desired tapping behavior;
namely, by resting their right hand on the table and
producing taps with their index finger on a key marked with
a small piece of tape, being sure to depress and release the
key entirely on each tap. Each participant first completed
the continuation tapping condition. The stimulus consisted
of 10 seconds of a 2 Hz metronome (500 ms between beats)
followed by 10 minutes of silence. Participants were
instructed to synchronize their taps to the metronome for the
first 10 seconds, and then to maintain that same beat without
the metronome for the remainder of the trial. Each
participant then completed the synchronization condition. In
this trial, the stimulus simply consisted of 10 minutes and
10 seconds of a 2 Hz metronome. Participants were
instructed to synchronize their taps to the metronome for the
duration of the trial. At the conclusion of the experiment
participants were thanked and debriefed.

Data Analysis
The data output by the recording software were collated to
yield three different time-series for each trial. The first
series contained inter-tap intervals (ITI) where data signified
the time elapsed between each tap and the following tap.
The second series consisted of key-press durations (KPD)
where data signified the time the key was depressed on each
tap. The third series consisted of key-release intervals (KRI)
where data signified the time between the release of the key
of each tap and the following tap. The relationship between
these three measures of tapping behavior is depicted in
Figure 1. Note that these variables are not independent. For
any given tap, determining any two of the variables
completely determines the third as well. Thus, we consider
this data set to properly consist of only two pieces of
information. Nonetheless, we will use all three variables for
reasons that will become apparent.
KPD

Method
Participants
Sixteen undergraduate students from the University of
Cincinnati participated in the study for partial course credit.
All participants were over 18 years of age and right-handed.

Apparatus

ITI
Key On
Key Off

The participants’ tapping behavior was recorded using a
USB midi keyboard. The keyboard was connected to a PC
computer running Ableton Live (Ableton, Berlin Germany).
This software was used to simultaneously record the timeseries of the participants’ taps (with a ±5 ms error) and
present the auditory metronome stimulus to the participant
through a pair of headphones.

2077

KRI

Time

Figure 1: The figure portrays a sequence of three taps and
the three measurements collected for each tap.

Results and Discussion
Participants generally had no trouble completing the task
and there were on average only 5.5 outlier taps per trial.
Generally, there were no significant differences in either the
means or standard deviations for any of the three variables
as a function of experimental condition (all p’s > 05). The
sole exception was that the standard deviation for ITI was
smaller during synchronization (M = 26.5 ms, SD = 4.58)
than during continuation tapping (M = 31.4 ms, SD = 8.12),
t(15) = 2.57, p = .021.

PSD Analysis
The change in the fractal structure in ITI across
experimental conditions was consistent with the findings of
past research (e.g., Chen et al., 2001; Gilden et al., 1995).
Specifically, there was a significant decrease in α from
persistent structure during continuation tapping (M = .60,
SD = .20) to anti-persistent structure during synchronization
tapping (M = -.48, SD = .58), t(15) = 7.79, p < .001. Both
KPD and KRI showed different patterns of results. There
was a small but significant increase in α for KPD from
continuation (M = .71, SD = .23) to synchronization tapping
(M = .88, SD = .22), t(15) = -2.41, p = .03. Conversely,
there was no difference in α for KRI between continuation
(M = .66, SD = .18) and synchronization tapping (M = .60,
SD = .30). This pattern of effects is depicted in Figure 2.

Scaling Exponent (α)

Prior to fractal analysis, each time-series was subjected to
several pre-processing steps to eliminate outliers and linear
trends that might otherwise affect the outcome of the test
(see Eke et al., 2000; Delignieres et al., 2006). Specifically,
individual taps were removed from the data set when either
the corresponding ITI was outside the range of 300-700 ms,
or the corresponding KPD was greater than 500 ms. These
values were chosen to reflect instances in which the
participant failed to either depress or release the key entirely
or failed to keep their taps close to the prescribed tempo.
When a tap met either of these exclusion criteria, it was
removed from each of the three measurement series.
Following outlier removal, each time-series was trimmed to
1024 taps as the fractal analysis employed requires series of
a length equal to a power of two. Finally, a linear bridge
detrending was applied to each series.
The pre-processed series were submitted to a power
spectral density (PSD) analysis to assess fractal structure.
First, each series is standardized by Z-scoring each value.
Then each series is approximated by a set of sinusoids with
variable power and frequency by a Fourier transformation.
As described above, fractal data obey power-law scaling
wherein the size of each deviation is inversely proportional
to how often deviations of that size occur. This relationship
can be expressed mathematically between the power (P) and
the frequency (f) of the sinusoids generated by Fourier
transformation, where P = 1/fα. The “scaling exponent” (α)
summarizes the nature of the fractal structure evident in the
series with persistent fractal structure indicated by α ≈ 1,
with random, white noise structure indicated by α ≈ 0, and
anti-persistent structure indicated by α ≈ -1. An estimation
of α can be obtained by plotting power against frequency on
double-logarithmic axes, and finding the slope (S) of the
regression line that best fits this “spectral plot”, with α = -S.
In accordance with past research, we estimated α from only
the lowest portion (25%) of the power spectrum (Eke et al.,
2000; Delignieres et al., 2006).
We also sought to investigate the dynamical interaction of
the three measures (ITI, KPD, KRI). To this end, we used
cross-correlation analyses. Similar to auto-correlation,
cross-correlation computes the correlation between two
series across a range of time-lags. The cross-correlation
function therefore can capture dependencies between the
different tapping variables that exist across several taps.

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8

ITI

KPD
KRI

Continuation

Synchronization

Figure 2: Change in α for ITI, KPD, and KRI from the
continuation to synchronization tapping conditions.
Although the observed difference in the fractal structure
in ITI is in line with the results of the past tapping research,
the effects for KPD and KRI are new findings without
established theoretical interpretations. One proposal
endorsed by several researchers is that the fractal structure
evident in ITI during continuation tapping, and in the
asynchronies to the metronome during synchronization
tapping, is the empirical signature of the emergent behavior
of complex systems (e.g., Chen et al., 2001; Gilden, 2001;
Lemoine et al., 2006; Yamada, 1995). Briefly, this account
asserts that the structures present in the data are reflective of
the dynamical organization of the behavioral system that
produced them. The implication is thus that the observed
fractal structure does not issue from one particular cognitive
or physiological component. Rather, the variation in
behavior is the collective result of the interaction of many
interdependent processes (Holden, Van Orden, Turvey,
2009). To attempt to extend this account to the results of
KPD and KRI, we examined the cross-correlations between
the three measures of tapping behavior in hopes of revealing
the nature of their dynamical interaction.

2078

-0.1

variables are not strictly independent. As such, one might
contest that the cross-correlation between KPD and KRI
does not reflect the relationship of two separate variables,
but simply variation in the times when the key was released.
This is essentially correct. As revealed by PSD, and
explicated by cross-correlation, the persistent structure in
these sub-intervals is unaffected, or is actually stronger,
when the metronome constrains the interval between taps
(i.e., ITI). Interestingly, this structure in key release times
cannot simply be accessed by taking the difference of the
key release times (IRI). Submitting IRI to PSD reveals the
exact same pattern of effects found for the ITI variable;
persistent structure during continuation tapping (α = .55),
and slightly anti-persistent structure during synchronization
tapping (α = -.33). As such, this variable accesses the same
structure in the time between taps as does ITI. Thus, the two
independent (sub)behaviors entailed in this task might be
best construed as the “tap-to-tap” behavior and the
“between-taps” behavior, with our measurement variables
being only convenient windows into these dynamics.

-0.2

Experiment 2

-0.3

Experiment 2 was designed to further investigate the
interplay of these nested actions and how task constraints
affected their fractal structure. To our knowledge, only one
other study has investigated the fractal structure in multiple,
nested actions. Kello et al., (2007) conducted a series of
reaction time experiments in which they recorded not only
the time taken to respond to a stimulus, but also the length
of time the participants depressed the key on each response.
Taken together, these experiments suggested that reaction
times and key contact times were not correlated with one
another, and that the fractal structure in reaction times could
be affected independently of the structure in key contact
times. They did not, however, actually attempt to alter the
fractal structure of the key contact times directly. The
purpose of Experiment 2 was thus to attempt a manipulation
that might constrain the between-taps behavior (i.e., KPD)
in our tapping task and thereby investigate the relationship
between task constraints and fractal structure generally.

Cross-Correlation Analysis
The cross-correlation functions for ITI-KRI and for KPDKRI are depicted in Figure 3. As these functions were found
to be roughly symmetrical across negative and positive lags,
only the positive half of the function is shown here.
0.8

Continuation

Correlation ITI - KRI

0.6

Synchronization

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Correlation KPD – KRI

0

-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
-1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Lag

Figure 3: Cross-correlations for ITI-KRI and KPD-KRI.
As discussed above, “long-term dependencies” are
entailed in fractal variation within a single behavioral
measure. The upper panel of Figure 3 suggests that similar
long-term dependencies exist between the nested actions
involved in continuation tapping behavior. Specifically, the
full interval between taps (i.e., ITI) is moderately correlated
with the sub-interval (i.e., KRI) out to 15 taps and later.
Interestingly, all of this long-term structure is absent during
synchronization tapping. This suggests that the constraint of
the metronome effectively “decouples” these two dynamics
of the tapping behavior. The same basic pattern was evident
in the cross-correlation function for ITI and KPD, although
it was less pronounced.
In contrast, the cross-correlation function for the two subintervals (KPD and KRI) reveals a fundamentally different
pattern across task conditions (lower panel Figure 3).
During continuation tapping these variables reveal a
moderate negative long-term correlation with one another.
Most interestingly, this long-term structure is not damped
out by the advent of the metronome in synchronization
tapping, but rather grows stronger (i.e., more negative).
It is important to note that the measurement variables
analyzed in this experiment are just one window into the
processes underlying the tapping behavior. Recall, these

Method
Participants
Twenty-two undergraduate students from the University of
Cincinnati participated in the study for partial course credit.
All participants were over 18 years of age and right-handed.

Procedure and Design
The design was nearly identical to that of Experiment 1. The
primary difference was that half of the participants were
instructed not only to synchronize their taps to the
metronome during the synchronization condition, but also to
attempt to keep the key depressed for the length of the
metronome tone. So that the length of the tone would be
salient to the participants, the metronome stimulus consisted
of alternating 400 ms tones and 400 ms periods of silence.

2079

during continuation tapping are absent during
synchronization tapping. Recall, in Experiment 1 this
pattern was reversed for the KPD-KRI cross-correlation.
That is, the long-term correlations were stronger during
synchronization tapping. This same effect is evident in the
cross-correlations for the tap group (upper panel Figure 5).
For the hold group, however, this effect is largely absent
(lower panel Figure 5). As suggested by the PSD analysis,
the KPD of the hold group was constrained by the
metronome stimulus. As with ITI, this task constraint
appears to have lessened the long-term dependency between
these two aspects of the tapping dynamics.

Scaling Exponent (α)

1.5

Results and Discussion

Tap

Hold

1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

Contin

Synch
ITI

Contin
KPD

Synch
KRI

Figure 4: Change in α for ITI, KPD, and KRI across tapping
conditions by experimental group.

PSD Analysis
As depicted in Figure 4, both groups showed a significant
decrease across condition for ITI, and no significant change
across condition for KRI. The groups differed, however, in
the change in α for KPD. As in Experiment 1, the tap group
showed a (marginally) significant increase in α from
continuation (M = .59, SD = .23) to synchronization tapping
(M = .75, SD = .24), t(10) = -2.08, p = .064. Remarkably,
this effect was reversed for the hold group, showing a
significant decrease from continuation (M = .93, SD = .33)
to synchronization tapping (M = .78, SD = .27), t(10) = 2.25,
p = .05. This effect buttresses the results of Experiment 1.
The fractal structure of KPD changes in the same direction
as that of ITI when both of these aspects of tapping are
constrained by the metronome (i.e., for the hold group).

0

Tap Group KPD – KRI

As in Experiment 1, participants had little difficulty with the
task and there were on average only 9.8 outlier taps per trial.
There were, however, several effects in the linear statistics
of the tapping variables. Most importantly, there was a
significant interaction effect for mean KPD, F(1,20) = 8.84,
p = .008. Mean KPD for the hold group increased strongly
from continuation tapping (M ≈ 270 ms) to synchronization
tapping (M ≈ 440). In contrast, the tap group KPD only
slightly increased from continuation (M ≈ 250) to
synchronization tapping (M ≈ 300). This finding is
important in that it indicates that the manipulation between
groups was successful in altering their tapping behavior.
There were other significant effects in the linear statistics,
but as their theoretical import is less germane to the
discussion at hand they are not reported.

-0.2

-0.4

Continuation
-0.6

Synchronization

-0.8
-1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

-1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

0

Hold Group KPD – KRI

Prior to this additional manipulation, each participant first
completed the continuation tapping condition. In this trial,
participants were played the metronome for 10 seconds, and
then attempted to maintain the same beat for 8 minutes.
Each participant was then given task instructions according
to their experimental group and completed the
synchronization condition. Participants in the “hold” group
both synchronized their taps with the metronome and held
the key down for the length of the tone, while participants in
the “tap” group simply synchronized with the metronome.
Due to the change in the prescribed tempo of the tapping
behavior, the criteria for outlier taps changed. Here, taps
were discarded from the data set when either the
corresponding ITI was outside the range of 600-1000 ms, or
the corresponding KPD was greater than 800 ms. Also, as
this frequency of tapping yielded approximately 600 taps
within each trial, the time-series were trimmed to 512 points
rather than 1024. The final, pre-processed time-series were
submitted to PSD and cross-correlation analyses as before.

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

Lag

Cross-Correlation Analysis
The results of the cross-correlation analysis compliment the
findings of the PSD analysis. As in Experiment 1, the longterm dependencies between ITI and KPD or KRI evident

2080

Figure 5: KPD-KRI cross-correlation function by
experimental group.

General Discussion
The current experiments support and extend the previous
findings on the fractal structure of finger tapping behavior.
Although the measurement variables used in these analyses
(i.e., outputs of the MIDI keyboard) might prove only a
convenient window into the dynamics of finger tapping
behavior, the results do reveal a consistent relationship
between the long-term interplay between the different parts
of the tapping behavior and how changes in task constraints
affected this long-term structure. Specifically, these
experiments suggest that when control of any (sub)behavior
can be sustained with the aid of task constraints that
behavior is effectively decoupled from other parts of the
action and shows a reliable shift in its fractal structure.
Though superficially finger tapping may not seem to bear
weightily on the issues of interest to the cognitive sciences,
these findings do speak to larger theoretical questions about
the organization of human mind and behavior. In particular,
several researchers have proposed that fractal structure in
human behavior reveals the “interaction-dominant” nature
of the human system (see Van Orden et al., 2010). That is,
these findings suggest that the behavioral in question is not
the result of one dominant process (e.g., an internal timer),
but instead is organized by many interdependent processes.
Whereas more traditional views promote a modular,
disembodied impression of the cognitive process, these
findings suggest that a behavior as simple as keeping the
beat is the product of non-linear interactions across the
participant-task system. In short, these ideas invite
reconsideration of the nature of the cognitive process and
hold promise for addressing the vast complexity inherent in
the complete human system.

Acknowledgments
We thank Guy Van Orden and Christopher Kello for their
kind and insightful contributions to this research.

References
Brown, C., & Liebovitch, L. (2010). Fractal Analysis.
London: Sage.
Chen, Y., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2001). Origins of
timing errors in human sensorimotor coordination.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 33, 3-8.
Chen, Y., Repp, B. R., & Patel, A. D. (2002). Spectral
decomposition of variability in synchronization and
continuation tapping: Comparisons between auditory and
visual pacing and feedback conditions. Human Movement
Science, 21, 515-532.
Delignieres, D., Fortes, M., & Ninot, G. (2004). The fractal
dynamics of self-esteem and physical self. Nonlinear
Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences, 8, 481-510.
Delignieres, D., & Marmelat, V. (2013). Theoretical and
methodological issues in serial correlation analysis. In M.
J. Richardson, M. A. Riley, & K. Shockley (Eds.),
Progress in Motor Control: Neural, computational, and
Dynamics Approaches. New York: Springer.

Delignieres, D., Ramdani, S., Lemoine, L., Torre, K.,
Fortes, M., & Ninot, G. (2006). Fractal analyses for
‘short’ time series: A re-assessment of classical methods.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 50, 525-544.
Eke, A., Herman, P., Bassingthwaigthe, J. B., Raymond, G.
M., Percival, D. B., Cannon, M., Balla, I., & Ikrenyi, C.
(2000). Physiological time series: Distinguishing fractal
noises from motions. European Journal of Physiology,
439, 403-415.
Gilden, D. L. (2001). Cognitive emissions of 1/f noise.
Psychological Review, 108, 33-56.
Gilden, D. L., Thornton, T., Mallon, M. W. (1995). 1/f noise
in human cognition. Science, 267, 1837-1839.
Holden, J. G. (2005). Gauging the fractal dimension of
response times from cognitive tasks. In M. A. Riley & G.
C. Van Orden (Eds.), Tutorials in Contemporary
Nonlinear Methods for Behavioral Scientists. Retrieved
from http:/www.nsf.gov.
Kello, C. T., Beltz, B. C., Holden, J. G., & Van Orden, G.
C. (2007). The emergent coordination of cognitive
function. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
136, 551-568.
Lemoine, L., Torre, K., & Delignieres, D., (2006). Testing
for the presence of 1/f noise in continuation tapping data.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 247257.
Madison, G. (2001). Variability in isochronous tapping:
higher order dependencies as a function of intertap
interval. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 27, 411-422.
Musha, T., Katsurai, K., & Teramachi, Y. (1985).
Fluctuations of human tapping intervals. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 32, 578-582.
Ogden, R. T., & Collier, G. L., (1999). On detecting and
modeling deterministic drift in long run sequences of
tapping data. Communications in Statistics – Theory and
Methods, 28, 977-987.
Torre, K., & Delignieres, D. (2008). Unraveling the finding
of 1/f noise in self-paced and synchronized tapping: A
unifying mechanistic model. Biological Cybernetics, 99,
159-170.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2003).
Self-organization of cognitive performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 331-350.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2005).
Human cognition and 1/f scaling. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 134, 117-123.
Van Orden, G. C., Kloos, H., & Wallot, S. (2010). Living in
the pink: Intentionality, wellbeing, and complexity. In C.
Hooker (Ed.), Philosophy of Complex Systems: Handbook
of the Philosophy of Science. London: Elsevier.
Wagenmakers, E. J., Farrell, S., & Ratcliff, R. (2005).
Human cognition and a pile of sand: A discussion on
serial correlations and self-organized criticality. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 108-116.
Yamada, N. (1995). Nature of variability in rhythmical
movement. Human Movement Science, 14, 371-384.

2081

