UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
From individual minds to social ones. Cooperation and the structure of animal and human
societies.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pc1r884

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Cardella, Valentina
Falzone, Alessandra
Pennisi, Antonino

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

From individual minds to social ones.
Cooperation and the structure of animal and human societies.
Valentina Cardella (vcardella@unime.it)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 6 via Concezione
Messina, Italy

Alessandra Falzone
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 6 via Concezione
Messina, Italy

Antonino Pennisi
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 6 via Concezione
Messina, Italy

cooperation can modify, and even reverse, the genetic
dominances. Our examination of the role played by
social influence in these non human primates will
bring us to look to the interaction between society and
biology in a different way, both in animals and
humans.

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to highlight the role of the social factors
among the different forces which influence natural selection. To do
this, we’ll start analyzing an example of highly complex society,
like that of the baboons, in order to show that the building-up of a
society depends on extremely flexible and continually negotiated
social relationships, rather than on features that are genetically
determined. However, in our view, when we shift from animal
societies to the human ones, we have to recognize the central role
of language. In fact, even if the role of social influence appears to
be relevant in other animal species, in humans it was language that
provided the way to make this social influence much more
important, to redefine the roles, to reverse the genetic dominances
even more, and to make human cooperation something unique.
Keywords:
language.

cooperation;

social

influence;

The survival of the fittest. Or not?
The law of evolution is that the strongest survives.
This seems to be what Darwin (1859) has taught us.
The fittest do survive, and produce offspring, the
others simply don’t. At first glance, baboon males,
with their aggressive anatomy, seem to be the perfect
image of the law of the strongest, and the perfect
match between anatomy and behavior (Washburn and
DeVore, 1961; DeVore and Hall, 1965): remarkable
canines, big mantle of hair, large body size, all seem to
suggest that the social rank, and therefore the
reproductive success, is determined by the males’
fighting ability. But then, why, on a closer inspection,
the social structure turns up to be matrilinear, where
females have political functions (besides motherhood)
that are not defined in terms of their relationships with
males? Why the male hierarchies, based on the
physical structure, can’t predict the priority of access
to resources (including the females), and not even the
winner in a fight?
Clearly, in Darwinian (and also in NeoDarwinian)
terms fittest is not necessarily the strongest, but often
the smartest, the swiftest, the most patient, and so on.
Darwin would agree that not always the strongest
survives (as claimed by hyperdarwinism). Various
authors recently focus on a more general “multilevel
selection” theory, and on the compatibility between
individual selection, kin selection and group selection
(Pievani in press). They identify the level of the
population structure as the key factor, offering a

evolution;

Introduction
The concept of cooperation can be particularly useful
to throw a new light into the building-up of societies
both in animals and humans. A more in-depth analysis
of the ways in which cooperation works in different
animal societies, can allow us to assign the right role,
in the evolutionary perspective, to social influences
and non-deterministic factors like chance, history and
the single choices of the individuals belonging to one
group. Our framework is the one suggested by Weiss
and Buchanan, which provides “an alternative view of
natural selection in which there is more slippage and
tolerance, multiple solutions with larger acceptability
spaces, and the possibility that an adaptive fit will be
‘good enough’ rather than seamless” (Weiss and
Buchanan 2009, p. 305). In this perspective, we’ll start
analyzing an example of highly complex society, like
that of the baboons, in order to show that the buildingup of a society depends on extremely flexible and
continually negotiated social relations, rather than on
features that are genetically determined. Baboons’
society seems to be a good example of the way

275

pluralistic perspective within the theory of evolution.
Here, we suggest to focus on the relationship among
individuals (including the echological constraints)
rather than on the single member of a species. And, in
the case in question, if we want not to miss these
factors, we must take into account something else,
apart from the role of competition; we have to refer to
the role played by cooperation if we want to have a
clearer idea of the way the baboons’ society works.
Baboons have some alternatives to aggression, social
strategies that are less risky and that settle competition
and defense. These alternatives are based on “special
relationships”. For example, a potential loser can come
back to the aggressor with a baby on his belly, and
thus leading the aggressor to back off. In order to be
successful, however, a special relationship between the
male and the baby is needed, and this relation must be
grounded on trust. Thanks to this special relationship,
thus, the infant will start screaming when becoming
closer to the aggressor, making him the object of
mobbing by the group. But without trust, the infant
could scream at “the false friend” rather than at the
opponent, and the male could run the risk of himself
becoming the object of mobbing.
Baboons use their social abilities in other different
ways. For example, an older baboon can get
copulation thanks to his social skills; he can monitor a
male from a distance, manipulate aggression between
this male and his closer followers, and then, while he’s
engaged on a fight, he can dash to his consort,
copulate with her and become her new partner. In
general, one can notice the same trajectory through a
male’s life history, “from socially unskilled maturing
male with growing physical powers (using aggressive
strategies) to the socially skillful mature male whose
success depends entirely on social expertise when he is
old (using social strategies of competition and
defense)” (Strum 2012, p. 6). The possibility to use
different alternatives to aggression makes baboons’
society more complex and less predictable. Among
baboons, it is not always that the strongest wins.

ever there was a situation where survival of the fittest
should operate, where competition should have had an
upper hand, this was it. Instead […] the translocation,
pointed out how evolutionary principles get embedded
in a specific time and place and why context matters.
Each group’s ‘natural history’ illustrated a variety of
different paths” (Strum 2012, p. 8).
The process of adaptation was actually much more
complicated than expected, and chance and
individuals’ social abilities played an important role.
Relationships between the immigrants and the
indigenous troops were also crucial for survival, for
examples an immigrant baboon could follow an
indigenous one in order to “adjust” his diet or to find
water.
The possibility to observe the process of adaptation in
action allows us to take a hard look at the natural
selection, which can’t be reduced to the survival of the
fittest. More precisely, when observing the behavior of
a group, one can notice the large amount of flexibility
(including the possibility of mistakes that don’t lead to
extinction) depending on the group’s social
complexity. Thus, we agree with Strum, when she
claims that “evolutionary time speculations of cause
and effect assume rather than clarify how evolutionary
principles are situated by chance, contingency, and
history. This is because they either lack the
information or ignore the importance of context and
‘black-box’ the relationships between real behaviors
and evolutionary outcomes” (Strum 2012, p. 10).

Natural selection is not enough
The idea according to which the survival of the fittest
is not the unique force to guide evolution is not a new
one. There are in fact many elements, coming from
different fields of studies, which contribute to “soften”
the adaptationist aspect that Darwin’s theory
(especially in some of its contemporary versions) risk
to endorse.
For example, the evo-devo researchers highlighted the
role of structural constraints. As a matter of fact, some
forms are not present in nature even if their absence
can’t be explained through natural selection, because
they seem to be very small variations of other forms
that are actually produced. These unexpected absences
seem to suggest that natural selection can’t help but
choose among the possible variations, for it can’t
interfere with the fixed ways that are prescribed by the
laws of development (Minelli 2009). The modern
molecular biology, from its corner, seems to confirm
the fundamental role played by the constraints,
because the properties of very different living beings

Evolution in action
Strum (1987; 2012) had the opportunity to “test”
natural selection. Because of the increasing encounters
with humans, Strum and his colleagues had to
translocate three groups of baboons to the arid savanna
of Eastern Laikipia Plateau. This was a unique
opportunity to test the baboons’ adaptability and to
look at the moment where a behavior becomes crucial
for survival and reproductive success, rather than infer
it ex-post, as scientists usually do. Strum notes that “if

276

male” (Darwin, 1871, pp. 272-3). Males would fight
over the possession of females, and females would be
agents of selection, choosing only the most virile and
showy males, because these features would guarantee
many healthy descendants.
Evolutionary psychology, that applies sexual selection
also to humans, gave us a very simplified (and quite
grotesque) picture of the relationship between male
and female (and therefore between man and woman).
Males would be more promiscuous because sperm are
supposed to be cheap and they would therefore spend
all the time looking for females to fertilize. Females,
on the other hand, would be more “choosy” because
pregnancy is expensive and they would have to guard
themselves from wrong investments into “bad” genes.
But, as explained by Roughgarden in her book
Rainbow (2004), what actually happens in nature
proves these theories wrong. Males are not always
passionate and females are far from being always coy.
Once again, baboons’ society shows us that females
often present to males, but are refused by them. Why
should males refuse females in heat when sperm is
supposed to be cheap? Moreover, females don’t select
always the best genes. They can prefer mating with
males who turn out to be good fathers (e.g., in
protecting the eggs) rather than males that are
dominant in competition with other males. For
example, whether a male of sand gobies is dominant in
competition for nests does not correlate with whether
he is a good father in protecting the eggs. And the
goby female knows it; in fact, an experiment reported
by Roughgarden (2004) showed that the females of
this species regularly select the males that would
protect the eggs, and that they don’t care if the male
they preferred won some fights against other males.
These cases show us that male success rests on more
than the male dominance hierarchy, and that it depends
on different factors, including the relationships based
on collaboration that he is able to build (as baboons
have taught us). So, it seems that, as Strum says in her
paper (2012, p. 15): “there are multiple ways for
individuals to succeed, not just one optimal
evolutionary path”.

are grounded on the same mechanism of molecular
conservation. Genes involved in behavior are highly
conserved during evolution (Gehring and Ikeo 1999,
Carroll 2000) and one can find genetic and behavioral
homologies even between traits that evolved
convergentely (i.e. not from an immediate common
ancestor, cf. Shubin et al. 1997). As claimed by Gould
(1997, p. 36) “most biologists feel that such stability
acts primarily as a constraint upon the range and
potentiality of adaptation, for if organisms of such
different function and ecology must build bodies along
the same basic pathways, then limitation of
possibilities rather than adaptive honing to perfection
becomes a dominant theme in evolution. At a
minimum, in explaining evolutionary pathways
through time, the constraints imposed by history rise to
equal prominence with the immediate advantages of
adaptation”.
Moreover, we must look at the role of adaptations
from the perspective of long-term evolutionary trends.
These trends show that evolution can’t be described as
a gradual accumulation of adaptations within a
population. The actual picture is much more similar to
the punctuated equilibrium described by Gould and
Eldredge (1977), long periods of stability (even
million years of stasis) punctuated by the brunching of
new species, that only in limited cases can be
described as
adaptative improvements of some
individuals within a species.
In this long-term perspective, the adaptations with
immediate effect can even play no role in survival. In
the North American Pleistocene megafauna extinctions
the species that went extinct did not have
characteristics that set them apart from those that
survived; so these processes are not deterministic but
they are contingent and complex because the
individual’s behavioral responses are often
unpredictable (cf. Gilbert and Epel, 2009 and their
eco-evo-devo).
But what we want to stress here is that, among the
different forces which influence natural selection, the
social factors have to be taken into account. Thus, to
come back to this influence, we have to mention
another kind of selection, the sexual one.
The idea that the stronger the male is, the more
reproductive success he has, comes from Darwin’s
theory of sexual selection. According to this theory,
males and females obey to different behavioral
patterns: the former would be passionate, the latter
coy. “Males of almost all animals have stronger
passions than females […] The female, on the other
hand, with the rarest exception is less eager than the

From a complex society to a complicated one.
Language and cooperation
Nature provides us with various examples of strongest
males that are not successful. But we would like to
stress above all that it provides us also with examples
of extremely complex societies, with constant
negotiations about roles, where the strongest doesn’t
always win over the weaker, and where a large amount

277

of intertwined relationships reverses the genetic
hierarchy. These data show that society is nature, and
that there’s no opposition between the two terms.
But there is no difference in complexity between the
baboon’s society and the human one, then? We could
say that baboons are pretty much human? It is evident
that we won’t find, in the animal kingdom, something
that compares to the social and technological
complexity of Homo sapiens. Nevertheless, baboons’
society reveals the shared roots of social complexity
which, in our continuistic framework, found our
society, too. But what made human sociality all the
more complex than baboons’ one?
We believe that what makes our sociality so complex
is the presence of language. First of all, the faculty of
language seems to be one of the variables that allowed
that jump which 40.000 years ago gave rise to the first
symbolic uses and to the sudden and explosive
variation of human tools. As claimed by Spelke
(2009), the technological abilities specific to humans
probably descend from the possibility to combine
representations of objects and representation of actions
in a rapid and flexible way, and this ability depends on
the combinatoriality typical of human language.
Moreover, language gave us the opportunity to shift
from a linear transmission to a cumulative one. Horner
and coll. (2006) described in an experiment that
chimpanzees are able to spread learned techniques in a
linear way. The authors examined a diffusion chain
paradigm, whereby a behavior is passed from one
individual to the next in a linear sequence: different
methods used to obtain food were accurately
transmitted along two chains of chimpanzees, with a
remarkable fidelity of transmission within each chain.
Faithful transmission is not therefore a distinctive
feature of human species. But there is a significant
difference between linear and cumulative transmission
(Tomasello, 1999; Richerson and Boyd, 2008). If
humans had only the possibility to faithfully spread a
technique across multiple generations, the different
practices of tool making would have been almost
unchanged through the hominids’ evolution. Humans,
on the contrary, are able to refine the acquired
techniques and to transmit these improvements, so that
we won’t have to start all over each time. According to
our vision the cumulative transmission, which is
possible thanks to the cognitive abilities specific to
humans, changed its nature with the emergence of
language. And this doesn’t mean that language simply
“helped” to transmit the traditions and made this
transmission more rapid. The simple fact that, thanks
to language, it is possible to learn how to use a tool in

its absence, inaugurated a completely new way to
transmit knowledge. Moreover, a real technology
implies the ability to plan and design combination of
tools that are more and more complex, and it is also
language that develops and improves this planning
ability in a significant way.
At the end of her paper, Strum asked herself what
would happen to baboons’ society if they wore hats
(Strum 2012). If they had the possibility to symbolize
their roles this way, these roles would be stable in time
and space and baboons wouldn’t need to point them
out or continually negotiate them. But baboons don’t
use these kinds of symbols, and therefore they can’t
simplify their negotiations and they have to spend a lot
of time making them evident and visible. In other
words, they can’t manage more complexity and they
can’t build a complicated large-scale society, which
we sapiens can do thanks to language.
But, in our view, language isn’t just a set of labels that
gave us the opportunity to spare time. Or, in other
words, it is not just a tool of communication, as
claimed by the vast majority of evolutionary linguistic
theories (cf. e.g. Dunbar 1998, Bickerton 1990).
Language is a kind of technology, that manages the
manipulation
of
perceived
elements
into
representations and can conversely express inner needs
by linking them to the external world (Pennisi and
Falzone, 2011). Language is species-specific to
sapiens for it is an auditory-vocal technology (speech
making) applied to symbolic needs and highly
specialized, just like the manual technology (tool
making). We don’t need to refer to a human specialty
or uniqueness: the auditory-vocal technology relies on
the evolution of structures and functions which come
from a long evolutionary history, but that in nonhuman primates acquired an adaptive role thanks to
the social organization (and to other aspects like
passage to bipedalism, parental care or social
learning).
The thesis according to which language is a modality
to represent the world rather than just a tool of
communication doesn’t belong only to the
philosophical and phenomenological framework today.
PET and ERP studies showed that language is heavily
involved in the building-up of our knowledge about
the world, that kind of knowledge which we build
because we belong to a social and linguistic specific
community. Hagoort (2005) found in the Broca’s area
the neural locus where the “checking” between
linguistic expressions and social reality would occur.
These data seem to confirm our hypothesis according
to which language is a technology that serves to

278

represent reality.
Since we have language, it’s not possible for us to
choose another technological modality to express our
symbolic needs, apart from the auditory-vocal
technology. Humans can’t help but use language to
represent the world. So the possibilities that modern
sapiens’ biological features gave us granted the
development and use of a function which worked as a
catalyst for the others that were already present and
phylogenetically inherited. These abilities have been
improved thanks to the interaction with the
possibilities of segmentation which language gave us.
Finally, language provides a cue to social preferences,
which in turn have an effect on cooperation.
Experiments with children from five months to five
years provided evidence for an early developing social
preference for members of one’s native language
group; even infants who have not begun to produce or
understand speech show this preference. This implies
that children prefer to play or work together with
people of their native language, and that “infants and
young children are selective social learners and
cooperators, and language provides one basis for this
selectivity” (Kinzler et al., 2012, p. 2). Thus, language
isn’t simple a way to improve communication skills,
but it conditions the way we perceive the others
(familiar or not, friend or not) and the possibility to
collaborate with them. This is a clear example of how
language can have a cognitive function in humans,
rather than simply a communicative one. In our view,
this cognitive role is linked to the articulated nature
(speech-making technology) of our language (Pennisi,
in press).
Moreover, linguistic development seems to have an
effect on the ability to cooperate with peers: children
who are more skilled in talking about their own and
others’ actions and internal states and who refer to
themselves and others using personal pronouns are
also better at cooperating with their peers (Brownell et
al. 2006).
Thus, language seems to be the key factor of human
sociality. Even if we can’t underestimate the role of
social influence in other animal species, because it
appears to be huge also without language, we have to
consider that, in our species, language provided the
way to make this social influence much more
important, to redefine the roles, to reverse the genetic
dominances even more, to create societies grounded
on values, like money or institutions, which have been
negotiated once for all, and, finally, it was language
that made human cooperation something unique.

References
Bickerton, D. (1990). Language and species. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Brownell, C. A., Ramani, G. B., Zerwas, S. (2006).
Becoming a social partner with peers: cooperation and
social understanding in one- and two-year-olds. Child
Development, 77, 4, 803-821.
Carroll, S. B. (2000). Endless forms: the evolution of gene
regulation and morphological diversity. Cell, 101, 577580.
Darwin, C. R. (1871). The descent of man, and selection in
relation to sex. London: John Murray. Vol. 1.
DeVore, I., Hall, K. R. L. (1965). Baboon ecology. In:
DeVore I, editor. Primate behavior: field studies of
monkeys and apes. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Dumbar, R. (1998). Grooming, gossip and the evolution of
language. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Gehring, W. J., Ikeo, K. (1999). Pax 6: mastering eye
morphogenesis and eye evolution. Trends in Genetics, 15,
371-377.
Gilbert, S., Epel, D. (2009). Ecological developmental
biology: integrating epigenetics, medicine, and evolution.
Sunderland: Sinauer Associates.
Gould, S. J., Eldredge, N. (1977). Punctuated equilibria: the
tempo and mode of evolution reconsidered.
Paleobiology, 3 (2), 115-151.
Gould, S. J. (1997). Darwinian fundamentalism. The New
York Review of Books, june 12, 34-37.
Hagoort, P. (2005). On Broca, brain, and binding: a new
framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences vol.9,n.9.
Horner, V., Whiten, A., Flynn, E., de Waal, F. B. M. (2006).
Faithful replication of foraging techniques along cultural
transmission chains by chimpanzees and children.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol.103, n.37.
Kinzler, K. D., Dupoux, E., Spelke, E. S. (2012). “Native”
objects and collaborators: infants’ object choices and acts
of giving reflect favour for native over foreign speakers.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 3:1, 67-81.
Minelli, A. (2009). Forms of becoming: the evolutionary
biology of development. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Pennisi, A., Falzone, A. (2010) Il prezzo del linguaggio.
Bologna: Il Mulino.
Pennisi, A. (in press) Per una tecnologia dello speech
making: scienze cognitive e specie-specificità del
linguaggio umano. Atti del I Convegno SLI (nuova serie).
Pievani, D. (in press). Individuals and groups in evolution:
Darwinian pluralism and the multilevel selection debate.
Journal of biosciences.
Richerson, P. J., Boyd, R. (2008). Not by genes alone.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Roughgarden, J. (2004). Evolution’s rainbow. Berkeley-Los
Angeles-London: University of California Press.
Shubin, N. H., Tabin C., Carroll S. (1997). Fossils, genes,
and the evolution of animal limbs. Nature, 388, 639-648.

279

Spelke, E. S. (2009). Forum: Elizabeth S. Spelke. In M.
Tomasello, Why we cooperate. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Strum, S. C. (1987). Almost human. New York: Norton &
Company.
Strum, S. C. (2012). Darwin’s monkey: why baboons can’t
become human. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 55,
3-23.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Washburn, S. L., DeVore, I. (1961). Social behavior of
baboons and early man. In Washburn S.L., editor. The
social life of early man. New York: Wenner-Gren
Foundation for Anthropological Research.
Weiss, K. M., Buchanan, A. V. (2009). The mermaid’s tale:
four billion years of cooperation in the making of living
things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

280

