UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fusiform Face Area in Chess Expertise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6n67v2vw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Bilalic, Merim

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fusiform Face Area in Chess Expertise
Merim Bilalić (merim.bilalic@med.uni-tuebingen.de)

Department of Neuroradiology, Hoppe-Seyler Str. 2
Tübingen, 72076, Germany

Abstract
The ability to recognize faces is arguably one of the most
important and most practiced skills. The possible functions of
the fusiform face area (FFA), generally believed to be
responsible for face recognition, also feature these two
characteristics. On the one hand, there are claims that the FFA
has evolved into a face specific module due to great
importance of face processing. On the other, the FFA is seen
as a general visual expertise module that distinguishes
between individual examples within a single category. The
previous studies used experts and novices on stimuli such as
cars, birds or butterflies with ambiguous results. Here this
research stream is extended to the game of chess, which does
not share visible features with faces. The first study shows
that chess expertise modulates the FFA activation when
complex multi-object chess positions were presented. In
contrast, isolated single chess objects did not produce
different activation patterns among experts and novices. The
second study confirmed that even a couple of isolated objects
do not differently engage the FFA among experts and
novices. The two studies provide support for the general
expertise view of the FFA function, but also extend the scope
of our understanding about the function of the FFA. The FFA
does not merely distinguish between different exemplars. It
also seems to engage into parsing complex multi-object
stimuli that contain numerous functional and spatial relations.
Keywords: face perception; expertise; pattern cognition; chess;
fMRI.

Introduction
Faces are arguably the most important and most practiced
stimuli. We start practicing face perception from our early
moments and we are highly dependent on correctly
distinguishing individual faces. It is fitting that the proposed
functions of the fusiform face area (FFA), possibly the most
important brain area in face perception, center on these two
characteristics: importance and practice. On the one side, we
have researchers who believe the FFA, due to, among other
things, its importance in our lives, has evolved into a brain
module exclusively specialized for perception of faces
(Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997; Kanwisher &
Yovel, 2006). On the other side, in contrast to this facespecificity hypothesis, we have researchers that advance the
claim that the FFA is a general expertise module (Gauthier,
Skudlarski, Gore, & Anderson, 2000; Gauthier, Tarr,
Anderson, Skudlarski, & Gore, 1999). According to the
expertise hypothesis, the FFA is responsible for perceptual
processes associated with differentiating among different
objects within a single category stimulus (e.g., visual
individuation), without regard of the type of stimuli. We

investigated the expertise hypotheses using the game of
chess as a model for visual expertise.
The neural basis of face perception has been extensively
investigated (for a review, see Kanwisher & Yovel, 2006).
Different category types have been used to investigate the
expertise hypothesis, ranging from birds (Gauthier et al.,
2000), cars (Gauthier et al., 2000; Gilaie-Dotan, Harel,
Bentin, Kanai, & Rees, 2012; Grill-Spector, Knouf, &
Kanwisher, 2004; McGugin, Gatenby, Gore, & Gauthier,
2012; Xu, 2005), butterflies (Rhodes, Byatt, Michie, &
Puce, 2004), to novel object types (Gauthier et al., 1999).
The results are mixed and their interpretation has been the
focus of an extensive debate (Bukach, Gauthier, & Tarr,
2006; Nancy Kanwisher & Yovel, 2006; Op de Beeck &
Baker, 2010). Among factors complicating the interpretation
is the visual similarity between faces and other categories
employed – cars, birds, and even butterflies all have facelike features (Kanwisher & Yovel, 2006).
The game of chess offers a way around the resemblance
problem. Chess entails both individual objects and complex
“chess positions” made out of individual objects. None of
chess objects resemble faces and chess positions do not have
much in common with face, at least not at the superficial
perceptual level. Individual chess objects can be, however,
differentiated just like individual faces. Expert chess players
have accumulated extensive knowledge about chess objects
and are quicker in recognizing them as well as their
relations than novice chess players (Bilalić, Kiesel, Pohl,
Erb, & Grodd, 2011; Kiesel, Kunde, Pohl, Berner, &
Hoffmann, 2009; Saariluoma, 1995). The real (chess)
expertise lies, however, in using knowledge to quickly size
the gist of chess positions (Bilalić, Langner, Erb, & Grodd,
2010; Bilalić, Turella, Campitelli, Erb, & Grodd, 2012;
Gobet & Simon, 1996). This expertise process of
automatically parsing complex multi-object environment
bears similarity to that found in face perception. Both
processes are automatic, quick, and efficient in binding
individual features into meaningful units.
These characteristics make chess a suitable domain for
investigation of the FFA expertise hypothesis. A recent
study showed that expertise in chess is negatively correlated
with the performance on face perception (Boggan, Bartlett,
& Krawczyk, 2012). One possible interpretation would be
that both skills engage similar processes that compete for
the resources in the same brain areas. Indeed, we (Bilalić,
Langner, Ulrich, & Grodd, 2011) recently showed that chess
expertise mediates the activation in the FFA regardless of
the task (domain specific or not) as long as the stimuli

203

feature naturalistic chess positions (but see Krawczyk,
Boggan, McClelland, & Bartlett, 2011). However, it is
unclear how the FFA will behave with individual chess
objects instead of multi-object positions. Here I present two
studies that test the FFA responses with individual chess
objects and complex chess positions. In the first study we
presented participants with single isolated chess objects and
chess positions during a 1-back task. In the second study we
used only a couple of isolated chess objects in chess specific
tasks (see Bilalić et al., 2011).

Study 1
Method
The first study involved a 1-back task where participants
indicated whether the current stimulus was the same as the
previous one.
Participants Table 1 presents the information about the
number of experts and novices, their mean age (with SD),
and their chess ability score [mean Elo rating with SD;
available only for experts] in both studies. All participants
were male and right-handed. The sample size is relatively
small, but it reflects the rarity of the studied group and is
comparable to recent behavioural studies using chess
experts (e.g., Bilalić et al., 2008a, 2008b, 2009; Brockmole
et al., 2008; Kiesel et al., 2009). The small sample size is
offset by the large differences between experts and novices.
We also used exclusively male participants as they
outnumber female chess players and we were not interested
in gender differences. Written informed consent was
obtained in line with the study protocol as approved by the
Ethics Committee of Tübingen University.

each category were blocked in 12 second units that featured
6 individual stimuli (each stimuli taking 1.75s with a break
of 0.25s between them). There were ten blocks of each
category spread over two different runs. Baseline (18s of
black screen with a cross in the middle) was presented
between the blocks of stimuli.
MRI acquisition and data analysis fMRI data were
acquired using a 3-T scanner (Siemens Trio) with a 12channel head coil. All measurements covered the whole
brain using a standard echo-planar-imaging (EPI) sequence
with the following parameters: TR, 2 s; FOV, 192 x 192;
TE, 30 ms; matrix size, 64 x 64; 32 slices with thickness of
3.2 and 0.8 mm gap resulting in voxels with the resolution
of 3 x 3 x 3.2 mm3. Finally, anatomical images covering
whole brain with 176 sagittal slices were obtained after the
functional runs using an MP-RAGE sequence with a voxel
resolution of 1 x 1 x 1 mm3 (TR, 2.3 s; TI, 1.1 s; TE, 2.92
ms). SPM software package was used for analysis. All
functional data were first preprocessed using standard SPM
routines for realignment, coregistration, normalization and
smoothing (8mm). Blocks of individual stimulus categories
as conditions of interest were then modeled using the
standard canonical response function. The ROI analysis was
performed on the mean percentage signal change extracted
using Marsbar SPM Toolbox from all the voxels within the
selected region – FFA and pSTS.

Table 1: Participants – Overview
Study Group

Age±SD

Elo±SD

n

1

Expert
Novice

24±8
27±6

2116±125
----

12
14

2

Expert
Novice

29±7
29±5

2130±147
----

8
8

Localizer Participants first passively watched pictures of
faces and objects to localize face related areas (for more
details, see Bilalic et al., 2011). The area used in further
analysis, the right FFA and the right posterior superior
temporal sulcus (pSTS) were then identified (contrast faces
vs. objects; p < .0001 uncorr.) and isolated for the use in
Study 1 and 2 – see Figure 1.
Stimuli and procedure The 1-back task in Study 1
featured the following stimuli: faces, isolated chess objects
(pieces), and chess positions (see Figure 2). The stimuli of

Figure 1: FFA (upper picture – inferior view) and pSTS
(lower picture – lateral view) used as regions of interest
(ROI) in the studies.

Results and discussion
The faces unsurprisingly activated the FFA more than the
two chess categories, but chess positions also elicited more
activation than chess objects (ANOVA for main effect of
stimulus category – F(2, 48) = 79, p = .001) – see Figure 2.

204

There was no overall effect of expertise (F(1, 24) = 0.3, ns.)
but the expertise modulated activation depending on the
stimulus category (ANOVA for interaction expertise x
stimulus category – F(2, 48) = 4.5, p = .016). While there
were no differences between experts and novices on chess
objects and faces, experts’ FFA was more activated on the
chess positions than the FFA of novices (t(24) = 2.2, p =
0.039).

Figure 3: pSTS activation pattern among experts (blue)
and novices (red) on faces, chess positions, and chess
objects in Study 1.

Figure 2: FFA activation pattern among experts (blue)
and novices (red) on faces, chess positions, and chess
objects in Study 1.
Unlike with the FFA, in the pSTS there were no expertise
effects (F(1, 24) = 1.6, ns) nor there was interaction
between expertise and stimulus categories (F(2, 48) = 0.2,
ns) – see Figure 3. Faces again elicited most activation,
which resulted in the significant main effect of stimulus
categories (F(2, 48) = 11.6, p = .001).
This is the first time both isolated and complex chess
stimuli were used in a single study. The results confirm the
previous study on chess expertise (Bilalic et. al., 2011) and
its finding of FFA sensitivity to expertise on complex chess
positions. Here it is shown that the same pattern of
activation does not generalize to single isolated objects.
When isolated chess pieces were presented, expertise did
not modulate the FFA activity.

Study 2
Method
The second study again used chess stimuli in chess specific
tasks but this time they were neither completely isolated –
they always featured two objects. The study has been
published (Bilalić et al., 2011) but here we use the
unpublished ROI analysis on the FFA and pSTS.
Participants Information about participants is presented in
Table 1.
Task, stimuli and procedure There were three tasks
(Figure 4). In the check task, participants had to indicate if

the white king is given check (one of the most important
aspects in the game of chess) by the present black piece. In
the identity task, the participants were presented with the
same stimuli as in the check task, but this time they had to
identify the black piece presented. In the control task, chess
pieces were changed for geometrical shapes and the
participants had to indicate the identity of the shape
(diamond or square). We again used block design (for more
details, see (Bilalić et al., 2011) with blocks of 13.5s
containing 4 trials.
MRI acquisition and data analysis This part of the
study was the same as the previous study, except that this
time a different EPI sequence was used: TR, 2.5 s; FOV,
192 x 192; TE, 35 ms; matrix size, 64 x 64; 36 slices with
thickness of 3.2 0.8 mm gap resulting in voxels with the
resolution of 3 x 3 x 4 mm3. We again specified condition
of interest as blocks, convolved it with HRF and analyzed
responses in the selected ROIs using MarsBar toolbox.

Results and discussion
Unlike in the previous study, there were no differences
among experts and novices in the FFA activity in none of
the three tasks (ANOVA for expertise, F(1, 14) = 0.1, ns) –
see Figure 4. There were no differences between the tasks
(ANOVA for task, F(2, 28) = 1.1, ns) nor there were
differences between the task among the groups (ANOVA
for task x expertise interaction, F(2, 28) = 0.9, ns).
Similarly, the pSTS also did not produce different
responses among experts and novices in all three tasks (F(1,
14) = 1.8, ns) and there was no main effect of task (F(2, 28)
= 5.1, ns) nor interaction with expertise (F(2, 28) = 0.04,
ns).

205

Figure 4: FFA activation pattern among experts (blue)
and novices (red) on control task (identifying geometrical
shapes), identity task (identifying chess objects), and check
task (identifying check relations among objects) in Study 2.

Figure 5: pSTS activation pattern among experts (blue) and
novices (red) on control task (identifying geometrical
shapes), identity task (identifying chess objects), and check
task (identifying check relations among objects) in Study 2.

General Discussion
Our previous study (Bilalić et al., 2011) showed that the
FFA is sensitive to expertise as long as chess positions were
present, even when the task at hand did not require specific
chess activity. Here this result is extended to other kind of
chess stimuli – isolated chess objects. Study 1 showed that
chess positions, stimuli featuring several chess objects,
produced an expertise effect, confirming our previous study.
There were no, however differences when isolated chess
objects were presented. The lack of expertise modulation
with isolated chess objects was further confirmed in Study
2. Even when two objects formed a relation, the FFA was
not responding differently in experts and novices.
Chess objects (as featured in Study 1) and chess relations
(as featured in Study 2) are main building blocks of chess
positions and the very same stimuli that consistently elicit

expertise effects in the FFA. It is thus surprising to find a
lack of expertise effect in the FFA when it comes to isolated
chess objects and their relations. One reason could be that
Study 1 did not use explicit individuation between chess
objects. Study 2, however, did use the differentiation
between chess objects (based on which the tasks could be
only done), not to mention that individuation processes are
assumed to be implicit and automatic. It is, of course,
possible that the lack of expertise effects in the FFA was
due to low power of the studies. After all, the studies
featured dozen participants in each group at most and the
non-significant results should not be confused with a
complete absence of effects. It is nevertheless the case that
chess positions produced significant expertise effects in
FFA in this and previous study, although both studies did
not have large samples.
The FFA seems to be the only face area involved in chess
perception. Here it was again shown that the pSTS does not
differentiate between experts and novices on chess stimuli.
As with the previous non-significant effect, one needs to be
careful with conclusions. It seems reasonable, however, to
conclude that the role of pSTS in chess expertise is arguably
not as pronounced as that of FFA.
Although visually different, chess positions are essentially
rather similar to faces. They are also made out of different
individual parts (chess objects and relations between them).
These parts are perceived as such only by beginners.
Experienced chess players perceive chess positions rather as
meaningful units, not unlike most of us perceive faces. The
stored knowledge structures in memory (Gobet & Simon,
1996) that enable them to quickly recognize situations on
the board. In that sense, processes involved into parsing
chess positions are much closer to those involved in face
perception that are the processes involved in recognition of
chess individual objects.
The exact role of FFA in chess expertise remains to be
determined. Our previous study (Bilalic et al., 2011)
demonstrated that experts’ FFA reacts to chess positions
without regard of the executed task. Even task that were not
chess related (e.g., counting the number of all chess objects
on the board) elicited expertise effects in the FFA. This
indicates that the chess related processes in the FFA are
automatic and stimulus, not task, dependent. In contrast, the
other chess areas identified in our studies (Bilalić et. al.,
2010; 2012), such as a part of the collateral sulcus and
retrosplenial cortex, are also sensitive to task demands in
addition to stimuli. How these regions are connected and
how and to what extend they enable chess expertise remains
an important question for future research.
The results also revise the expertise hypothesis by
providing evidence against individuation as the primary
function of the FFA. Study 1 did not involve explicit
individuation as the individual chess objects were only
passively observed. Study 2, however, involved explicit
identification of a single chess objects (Identity task) and
there were still no expertise-modulated response in the FFA.
Only chess positions, consisting of numerous chess objects

206

and relations between those objects, produced different
activation in the FFA of experts and novices. These results
support previous studies demonstrating the importance of
holistic parsing of individual parts of faces as the main FFA
function (Arcurio, Gold, & James, 2012; Gold, Mundy, &
Tjan, 2012), and put under questions is role in individuation.
They also revise the expertise hypothesis by providing
evidence that complexity of stimuli and the processes that
enable their fast and efficient perception are at the heart of
the FFA function, and not only individuation.
These two chess studies, together with the previous work
on the similarities between face and chess perception
(Bilalić, et al., 2011; Boggan, 2012), underline the
suitability of chess as an exploration vehicle in cognitive
neuroscience.

Acknowledgments
This
work
was
supported
by
the
Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG BI 1450/1-2). I am grateful
for the help of all expert and novice chess players, I would
also like to thank to Robert Langner, Michael Erb,
Wolfgang Grodd and Rolf Ulrich for the help with the
presented project.

References
Arcurio, L. R., Gold, J. M., & James, T. W. (2012). The
response of face-selective cortex with single face parts and
part combinations. Neuropsychologia, 50, 2458- 2459
Bilalić, M., Kiesel, A., Pohl, C., Erb, M., & Grodd, W.
(2011). It Takes Two–Skilled Recognition of Objects
Engages Lateral Areas in Both Hemispheres. PLoS ONE,
6(1), e16202.
Bilalić, M., McLeod. P., & Gobet, F. (2008a). Why good
thoughts block better ones: the mechanism of the
pernicious Einstellung (set) effect. Cognition, 108, 652–
661.
Bilalić, M., McLeod. P., & Gobet, F. (2008b). Inflexibility
of experts: reality or myth? Quantifying the Einstellung
effect in chess masters. Cognitive Psychology, 56, 73–
102.
Bilalić, M., McLeod. P., & Gobet, F. (2009). Specialization
effect and its influence on memory and problem solving in
expert chess players. Cognitive Science, 33, 1117–1143.
Bilalić, M., Langner, R., Erb, M., & Grodd, W. (2010).
Mechanisms and neural basis of object and pattern
recognition: A study with chess experts. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139(4), 728–742.
Bilalic, M., Langner, R., Ulrich, R., & Grodd, W. (2011).
Many Faces of Expertise: Fusiform Face Area in Chess
Experts and Novices. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(28),
10206–10214.
Bilalić, M., Turella, L., Campitelli, G., Erb, M., & Grodd,
W. (2012). Expertise modulates the neural basis of context
dependent recognition of objects and their relations.
Human Brain Mapping, 33(11), 2728–2740.

Boggan, A. L., Bartlett, J. C., & Krawczyk, D. C. (2012).
Chess masters show a hallmark of face processing with
chess. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
141(1), 37.
Brockmole, J. R., Hambrick, D. Z., Windisch, D. J., &
Henderson, J. M. (2008). The role of meaning in
contextual cueing: evidence from chess expertise.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psycholology, 61, 1886
–1896.
Bukach, C. M., Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. J. (2006). Beyond
faces and modularity: the power of an expertise
framework. Trends in cognitive sciences, 10(4), 159–166.
Gauthier, I., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. C., & Anderson, A. W.
(2000). Expertise for cars and birds recruits brain areas
involved in face recognition. Nature Neuroscience, 3(2),
191–7.
Gauthier, I., Tarr, M. J., Anderson, A. W., Skudlarski, P., &
Gore, J. C. (1999). Activation of the middle fusiform “face
area” increases with expertise in recognizing novel
objects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(6), 568–73.
Gilaie-Dotan, S., Harel, A., Bentin, S., Kanai, R., & Rees,
G. (2012). Neuroanatomical correlates of visual car
expertise. NeuroImage, 62(1), 147–153.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Templates in Chess
Memory: A Mechanism for Recalling Several Boards.
Cognitive Psychology, 31(1), 1–40.
Gold, J. M., Mundy, P. J., & Tjan, B. S. (2012). The
perception of a face is no more than the sum of its parts.
Psychological Science 23, 427–434.
Grill-Spector, K., Knouf, N., & Kanwisher, N. (2004). The
fusiform face area subserves face perception, not generic
within-category identification. Nature neuroscience, 7(5),
555–562.
Kanwisher, N, McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. (1997). The
fusiform face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex
specialized for face perception. The Journal of
Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for
Neuroscience, 17(11), 4302–11.
Kanwisher, Nancy, & Yovel, G. (2006). The fusiform face
area: a cortical region specialized for the perception of
faces. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 361(1476), 2109–
28.
Kiesel, A., Kunde, W., Pohl, C., Berner, M. P., &
Hoffmann, J. (2009). Playing chess unconsciously. Journal
of experimental psychology. Learning, memory, and
cognition, 35(1), 292–298.
Krawczyk, D. C., Boggan, A. L., McClelland, M. M., &
Bartlett, J. C. (2011). The neural organization of
perception in chess experts. Neuroscience letters, 499(2),
64–69.
McGugin, R. W., Gatenby, J. C., Gore, J. C., & Gauthier, I.
(2012). High-resolution imaging of expertise reveals
reliable object selectivity in the fusiform face area related
to perceptual performance. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 109(42), 17063–17068.

207

Op de Beeck, H. P., & Baker, C. I. (2010). The neural basis
of visual object learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
14(1), 22–30.
Rhodes, G., Byatt, G., Michie, P. T., & Puce, A. (2004). Is
the fusiform face area specialized for faces, individuation,
or expert individuation? Journal of cognitive neuroscience,
16(2), 189–203.
Saariluoma, P. (1995). Chess Players’ Thinking: A
Cognitive Psychological Approach. Routledge.
Xu, Y. (2005). Revisiting the role of the fusiform face area
in visual expertise. Cerebral cortex (New York, N.Y.:
1991), 15(8), 1234–1242.

208

