UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Global Change and Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3s4051qm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lewandowsky, Stephan
Lombrozo, Tania
Brown, Gordon
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Symposium: Global Change and Cognition
Moderator: Stephan Lewandowsky (stephan.lewandowsky@bristol.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol,
12a Priory Road, Bristol BS8 1TU, and
School of Psychology, University of Western Australia,
Crawley, WA 6009

Contributors

with an egalitarian-communitarian outlook (Dunlap & McCright, 2008; Hamilton, 2011; Heath & Gifford, 2006; Kahan, Jenkins-Smith, & Braman, 2011; McCright & Dunlap,
2011).
In light of the fundamental importance of science to the
solution of global problems, the rejection of well-established
scientific facts by large segments of the population must be of
concern. How can this rejection be overcome? Even putting
aside ideological barriers, how can people’s reasoning about
the future become better calibrated with the actual risks from
global change?
This symposium surveys a broad range of research that addresses these questions and related issues. Tania Lombrozo
will highlight the fragile relationship between understanding
particular scientific claims and accepting them as true; John
Cook will analyze the multi-faceted role of perceived scientific consensus (i.e., what the public believes scientists are
thinking) and how that impacts attitudes; Gordon Brown will
be presenting an agent-based simulation that is built around
consensus-detection and will show how that explains attitude
polarization; Ben Newell will report on how people judge
temporal distances when considering future gains and losses;
and Ullrich Ecker will explain how best to deal with the dissemination of misinformation that characterizes much contemporary public debate.

Tania Lombrozo (University of California, Berkeley)
John Cook (University of Queensland)
Gordon D. A. Brown (University of Warwick)
Ben R. Newell (University of New South Wales)
Ullrich K. H. Ecker (University of Western Australia)

Abstract
We are living in a period of considerable global change. From
climate change to peak oil we are facing multiple challenging
problems that need to be managed carefully and wisely. Cognitive science has much to say about how people are likely to
view those problems and how they will respond to them. This
symposium will shed some light on those cognitive processes
and how they can help—or indeed hinder—the problems we
are facing.
Keywords: Global change; cognition of climate change; public acceptance of science; complex reasoning

Summary of Symposium
There can be little doubt that human societies are facing numerous serious problems, ranging from food insecurity to
resource depletion and, perhaps most serious of all, climate
change. Although technological solutions to those problems
arguably exist, to date there has been little enthusiasm among
politicians and the public to tackle those problems. At least
in part, this inaction has resulted from political factors. However, the inaction may also reflect factors related to the limitations of human cognition: People’s reasoning is known to
be subject to numerous biases and limitations, and our cognitive apparatus may be ill-matched to the magnitude of current
global problems.
Nowhere is this mismatch more apparent than with respect
to climate change, which challenges numerous cognitive and
psychological processes. At a basic cognitive level, people
have difficulty understanding that emissions are cumulative
and that greenhouse gases remain in the atmosphere even if
emissions are reduced (Sterman & Sweeney, 2007). At a
more abstract level, the public in some countries—in particular the U.S. but also in Australia—has become increasingly
polarized in their attitudes towards science. Since the 1970’s,
Conservatives—unlike Liberals or Moderates—have become
increasingly skeptical and distrustful of science (Gauchat,
2012), and people who embrace a laissez-faire vision of the
free market are less likely to accept that anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions are warming the planet than people

Contributions
Understanding science vs. accepting it
Tania Lombrozo (University of California, Berkeley)
Addressing many contemporary challenges—such as climate change and increasing resistance to antibiotics—will require more than scientific and technological advances; it will
also require changes in people’s attitudes and behaviors. To
what extent are people’s attitudes towards science and particular scientific claims shaped by their understanding of the
science? There is a relatively fragile relationship between understanding particular scientific claims and accepting them as
true. Nonetheless, there does seem to be a relationship between people’s understanding of the nature of science in general, on the one hand, and their acceptance of specific scientific claims, on the other. Tania Lombrozo will present data
for the case of evolution and consider implications for education, science communication, and policy.

How does perceived consensus reduce the biasing
influence of worldview on climate change attitudes?
John Cook (University of Queensland)

89

Misinformation, disinformation, and the need for
debiasing

It is well established that political ideology has a strong influence on public opinion about climate change, and on how
people update their beliefs in the light of new climate information. Specifically, people who endorse an extreme view of
free-market economics tend to reject findings from climate
science. Providing people with information about the scientific consensus has been shown to partially neutralise this
ideological bias (Lewandowsky, Gignac, & Vaughan, 2012).
Paradoxically, this is despite the fact that those most sceptical
about climate change are also most distrustful of the scientific
community. Data from several experiments are presented that
explore the psychological mechanisms underlying the effectiveness of consensus information. The results are modeled
within a Bayesian belief network.

Ullrich K. H. Ecker (University of Western Australia)
The dissemination of misleading information presents an
obstacle for the success of science communication, public
education, and evidence-based policy. Of particular concern
is the resilience of misinformation: Even in the presence of
clear corrections, misinformation often continues to influence
people’s memory and reasoning. Misinformation is particularly difficult to correct when it supports existing attitudes and
when corrections counter those attitudes. Refutations of incorrect beliefs hence need to be well-designed to be efficient.
Ullrich Ecker will discuss the effects of attitudes on the processing of misinformation and retractions, and highlight the
important factors in the design of refutations.

Social norms and polarization of attitudes
Gordon D. A. Brown (University of Warwick)
Gordon Brown will describe an agent-based model of social norm effects and polarisation. The model will be applied to understanding attitudes towards climate change. The
model assumes that agents located within a social network
observe the behavior of neighbours and infer from that behavior the social distribution of particular attitudes (e.g. towards
climate change). Agents are assumed to dislike behaviours
that are extreme within their neighbourhood (social extremeness aversion), and hence have a tendency to conform. However, agents are also assumed to prefer choices that are consistent with their own true beliefs (authenticity preference).
Behavioural choice—and expression of attitudes towards climate change—reflects a compromise between these opposing
principles. The model sheds light on the role of perceived
rather than actual scientific consensus, and “balanced” media
coverage, on attitudes to climate change.

References
Dunlap, R. E., & McCright, A. M. (2008). A widening
gap: Republican and Democratic views on climate change.
Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 50, 26–35.
Gauchat, G. (2012). Politicization of science in the public
sphere: A study of public trust in the United States, 1974
to 2010. American Sociological Review, 77, 167–187.
Hamilton, L. C. (2011). Education, politics and opinions
about climate change evidence for interaction effects. Climatic Change, 104, 231–242. doi: 10.1007/s10584-0109957-8
Heath, Y., & Gifford, R. (2006). Free-market ideology and
environmental degradation: The case of belief in global climate change. Environment and Behavior, 38, 48–71.
Kahan, D. M., Jenkins-Smith, H., & Braman, D. (2011). Cultural cognition of scientific consensus. Journal of Risk Research, 14, 147–174.
Lewandowsky, S., Gignac, G. E., & Vaughan, S. (2012). The
pivotal role of perceived scientific consensus in acceptance
of science. Nature Climate Change.
Malkoc, S. A., & Zauberman, G. (2006). Deferring versus
expediting consumption: The effect of outcome concreteness on sensitivity to time horizon. Journal of Marketing
Research, 43, 618–627.
McCright, A. M., & Dunlap, R. E. (2011). Cool dudes: The
denial of climate change among conservative white males
in the United States. Global Environmental Change, 21,
1163–1172.
Sterman, J. D., & Sweeney, L. B. (2007). Understanding
public complacency about climate change: adults’ mental
models of climate change violate conservation of matter.
Climatic Change, 80, 213–238.
Zauberman, G., Kim, B. K., Makoc, S. A., & Bettman, J. R.
(2009). Discounting time and time discounting: Subjective
time perception and intertemporal preferences. Journal of
Marketing Research, 46, 543–556.

How to weigh your options with the passage of time:
Subjective and objective time preferences
Ben R. Newell (University of New South Wales)
Many global challenges are difficult precisely because they
involve trade-offs between immediate certain costs—e.g., increase in electricity prices to reduce carbon emissions—and
uncertain future benefits—e.g., avoiding the worst and costliest effects of climate change. It has long been known that
people discount the future very steeply; that is, they consider
present monetary amounts to be more salient and valuable
than when they are delayed into the future, even if those future amounts are objectively far greater. The functional form
of people’s discounting, however, is not well understood.
This talk presents work on inter-temporal choice that sheds
light on how people deal with trade-offs that involve a future cost. A particular focus is the difference between subjective and objective time estimates (cf. Malkoc & Zauberman,
2006; Zauberman, Kim, Makoc, & Bettman, 2009) and their
implications for hyperbolic and exponential discount functions.

90

