UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grounded Spatial Belief Revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15m0k56z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Nejasmic, Jelica
Bucher, Leandra
Knauff, Markus

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grounded Spatial Belief Revision
Jelica Nejasmic (jelica.nejasmic@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Leandra Bucher (leandra.bucher@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus-Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany

Abstract
Beliefs frequently undergo revisions, especially when new
pieces of information are true but inconsistent with current
beliefs. In previous studies, we showed that spatial belief
revision is often guided by the functional asymmetry between
the reference object and the located objects of the spatial
relation. Here we first draw a connection between spatial
belief revision and grounded cognition. In two experiments,
we explored whether imagined physical properties of objects
influence which object is relocated and which remains at its
initial position. Participants mentally revised beliefs about the
arrangement of objects which could be envisaged as small and
large (Experiment 1) or easy to move and difficult to move
(Experiment 2). The results show that (1) small objects are
more often relocated than larger objects and (2) easy to move
objects are faster relocated than difficult to move objects. The
findings are in line with the idea of grounded cognition.
Keywords: Spatial cognition, grounded cognition, mental
models, belief revision, spatial reasoning

Introduction
Imagine you have a date with a friend in a foreign city. He
described to you how to come to the meeting point: “When
you get off the train, you will see the kiosk to the left of
you, and an ice cart to the right of you. To the left of the
kiosk, I will wait for you.” This description is compatible
with the following mental model:
Kiosk – I – ice cart
Almost arriving you get a call from your friend who tells
you: “I made a mistake. The kiosk is to the right of the ice
cart.” On which side is your friend waiting for you? In fact
there are two possibilities:
(1)
(2)

description was wrong; your partner describes where he
parked your car, but it is parked somewhere different, and
so on.
All this has to do with the field of “belief revision”.
Researchers in this field explore how people change their
mind in the light of new contradicting information. The
experimental studies mostly used conditional reasoning
problems in which an inconsistency arises between a fact,
contradicting a valid conclusion, and the conditional and
categorical premises. Within this research, psychologists
were able to show that belief revision is affected by many
factors, including asymmetries between particular facts and
general laws (Revlis, Lipkin, & Hayes, 1971), conditional
and categorical premises (Elio & Pelletier, 1997; Dieussaert,
Schaeken, De Neys, & d’Ydewalle, 2000; Girotto, JohnsonLaird, Legrenzi, & Sonino, 2000; Revlin, Cate, & Rouss,
2001), major and minor premises (Politzer & Carles, 2001),
and reliable and unreliable information sources (Wolf,
Rieger, & Knauff, 2012).
The present work is part of our current attempt to extend
the cognitive research on human belief revision to the area
of spatial reasoning. Our main motivation is that (1) spatial
inferences are ubiquitous in our daily life (Goodwin &
Johnson-Laird, 2005; Knauff, 2013), (2) reasoning with
spatial relations is often easier than reasoning with
conditionals (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Knauff, 2007),
and that space is one of the most fundamental dimensions of
our physical and psychological reality (Gattis, 2001; Knauff,
1999, 2013). In our previous work, we have identified three
main principle of spatial belief revision (Knauff, Bucher,
Krumnack, & Nejasmic, 2013):
1.

Spatial reasoning relies on mental models. A mental
model is a unified representation of what is true if the
premises are true. Reasoners use the meaning of
assertions and general knowledge to construct single
models of possibilities compatible with these
assertions. Spatial relations are not represented
explicitly in a propositional format but rather they are
inherent in the model and thus can be (and must be)
‘‘read off’’ from the model by mental inspection
processes (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Polk &
Newell, 1995; Goodwin & Johnson-Laird, 2005).

2.

Spatial belief revision relies on the revision of mental
models. If newly available information is inconsistent

I – ice cart – kiosk
Ice cart – kiosk – I

In everyday life, we are often confronted with such
problems. People describe how to find certain objects and
then realize that the description is wrong ("I left your key on
the kitchen table, but it is actually on the table in the living
room"); someone describes how to find a certain place in a
foreign city and on your way, you realize that his

1067

with the current model (and new information must be
taken for granted), a model revision is necessary to
establish consistency. The revision process relies on
local transformations in which tokens in the model
are moved to new positions. If not all available
information can be true at the same time, people
‘‘decide’’ which of the information to retain and
which one to discard (Bucher, Krumnack, Nejasmic,
& Knauff, 2011; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, &
Knauff, 2011; Bucher & Nejasmic, 2012).
3.

Two experiments of spatial belief revision
and grounded cognition

The model revision process is sensitive to the
functional asymmetry between the “reference object”
(RO) and the “located object” (LO). For instance, in
the statement ‘‘A is to the right of C’’, the C is the
RO and the A the object that is located in relation to
the RO. To regain consistency the LO of the
inconsistent statement seems to be relocated within
the initial constructed mental model (Bucher et al.,
2011; Krumnack et al., 2011; Bucher & Nejasmic,
2012; Knauff et al., 2013). The distinction has been
made by several psychologists and linguists (Miller
& Johnson-Laird, 1972; Talmy, 1983; Landau &
Jackendoff, 1993). The common idea of all these
theories is that a spatial relation refers to the position
of a particular object in focus relative to another
object or area (Tenbrink, Andonova, & Coventry,
2011).

In the present work we mainly focus on the third principle
(LO-RO-asymmetry) and combine it with the idea that
cognitive processes are not only abstract symbolic
manipulations but grounded in perceptual, motoric, or
emotional experience (for an overview, see de Vega,
Glenberg, & Graesser, 2008). Imagine, for instance, you are
helping a friend to move into a new apartment. You have to
carry many things (sofas, tables, books, porcelain, washing
machine, hopefully no piano, etc.) from his old apartment to
the furniture truck and then later from the furniture truck
into the new apartment. If you do that, it is very likely that
you try to avoid carrying heavy objects and prefer to move
objects which are less heavy. But, does this heaviness also
affect how you think about the location and relocation of
objects? In principle, the weight of objects should not matter
if we just mentally move objects in a mental model from
one position to another. We do not have to carry the objects
physically; so why should their weight matter? On the other
hand, the theory of grounded cognition claims that such
physical properties have an effect on how we think. The
process of thought is a mental simulation of bodily
experiences and therefore the weight of objects should
affect how we mentally process the information from a
spatial reasoning problem (Glenberg & Robertson, 1999;
Kaschak & Glenberg, 2000; Kaschak & Glenberg, 2002;
Rinck & Bower, 2004; Bergen & Chan, 2005; Pulvermüller,
2005).

In the following, we present two experiments on
grounded spatial belief revision. In the experiments,
participants received spatial information about the location
of small or large objects (Experiment 1) or easy to move or
difficult to move objects (Experiment 2), and then have to
revise their initial model in the light of new contradicting
information. Is this revision process affected by the size or
movability of the objects that can be relocated? Do people
prefer to relocate the smaller and easy to move object as the
theory of grounded cognition suggests? We present a pilot
study, because we did not want to use the actual physical
mass and size of objects but rather how they are
psychologically perceived and represented (although that
should highly correlate). Then we report two experiments:
in experiment 1, the size of the objects was varied; in
experiment 2 the movability was varied. These factors were
combined with the role of the objects as being the RO or LO
of the relation in the newly available information. In our
previous experiments, we found a strong preference of
relocation the LO because the RO is considered less
flexible. Can the size or movability of the envisaged objects
overwrite this general preference? In the last part of the
paper we discuss our findings and draw some general
conclusion about grounded cognition and spatial belief
revision.

Pilot study
Our first task was to define the set of objects to use in our
experiments. To select the set of “large” and “small”
objects, we developed a questionnaire with 64 objects. 46
participants rated the size of the objects on a five-point scale
with the poles “very small” and “very large”. Then they
rated the same objects regarding movability on a five-pointscale from “easy to move” to “difficult to move”. The order
of objects was randomized. For the analysis, we computed
the means over the group of participants and selected the
objects with the lowest and highest mean ratings for size
and movability. The objects are presented in Table 1. These
objects were used for the following experiments.
Table 1: Objects used in the experiment according to their
property
small
large
easy to
difficult to
move
move
screen
power mast
wheelchair
pillar
vase
bridge
bicycle
counter
printer
railway station
carriage
gravestone
post
high rise
scooter
oven
lamp
spire
barrow
hydrant

1068

(1) premise: “The vase is to the left of you.”
(2) premise: “You are to the left of the spire.”

Experiment 1: Small vs. large objects
Method

Initial model: Vase – you – spire

Participants. 21 students from the University of Giessen (9
male; age: M = 22.86; SD = 5.27) were tested individually.
They gave written informed consent and received course
credits for their participation.

Inconsistent fact: “The spire is to the left of the vase.”
Examples of revised orders:

Materials, design, and procedure. Each participant solved
48 revision problems. Six practice trials (not analyzed)
preceded the experimental trials. All stimuli were generated
and presented using Superlab 4.0 (Cedrus Corporation, San
Pedro, CA, 1999) with a RB-530, on a standard personal
computer with a 19” monitor. Number of correct decisions
and corresponding revision times were recorded.
The structure of the problems was as follows: First,
participants received sequentially two statements, also
called premises (1, 2), which described the spatial relation
between three objects, for example:
(1)
(2)

“A is to the left of B”
“B is to the left of C”

From these two premises the participants inferred that the
three objects are in the arrangement A – B – C. They did
that by choosing one of two arrangements (correct
arrangement/correct arrangement mirrored) that were
presented on the screen.
In the next step, participants were confronted with an
additional statement, e.g., ‘‘A is to the right of C’’. This is
the critical point in time where participants in our
experiments had to realize that something must be wrong
with their initial model about the layout of the three objects.
Not all three statements can be true at the same time because
the third statement contradicts the logical inference from the
first two premises. Participants were told that the third
statement is irrefutably true so they could not ignore the
third statement. The only option was to decide which one of
the first two premises may be abandoned. If the first premise
is discarded this results in the arrangement B – C – A; if the
second premise is discarded this results in the arrangement
C – A – B. It is essential to see that the first revision
strategy corresponds to the LO-Relocation, whereas the
second revision strategy corresponds to the RO-Relocation.
All statements used the relation “left of” and “right of” and
were presented sequentially. Positions of the arrangements
as well as the relations were counterbalanced across the
experiment.
To study the effect of object size the terms, A, B, C were
instantiated with the small and large objects from Table 1.
To boost the possible effect of object properties we
integrated a “you” into the problems. We expected that this
would foster the perspective taking and that the participants
are therefore even more sensitive to the object properties.

Spire – vase – you (“relocation of the large object”) vs.
You – spire – vase (“relocation of the small object”)
Participants received instructions on the computer screen.
They were instructed to imagine an arrangement determined
by the premises and subsequently to choose the respective
arrangement (on the screen) by pressing the corresponding
button. Afterwards participants had to decide whether or not
the presented fact is consistent with this model. For the
problems with a fact contradicting the initial model (which
was the case in half of the problems), participants were
asked to revise the arrangement and to define the revised
arrangement by pressing the corresponding button.

Results and discussion
Mean percentage rate of correctly constructed models was
98% (SD = 2.15) and in 94% (SD = 8.54) of the inconsistent
problems participants correctly identified the inconsistency
between the initial model and the contradictory fact.
Erroneous trials were excluded from further analysis.
An ANOVA with the factors object size (small vs. large)
× person´s position (leftmost, middle, rightmost) was
conducted for the revision choice and the revision times.
Level of significance was 5%.
This ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of object
property for revision choices [F(1, 20) = 8.21; p < .05; ƞ2 =
.29]. The main effect of person´s position and the interaction
were non-significant (p > .87).
T-tests revealed that choosing of revised arrangements
were based significantly more often on relocations of small
objects (M = 56%, SD = 8.95) compared to large objects (M
= 44%, SD = 8.95; t(20) = 3.09; p < .01) (see Fig. 1).
Results of the ANOVA for revision times were nonsignificant (all ps > .53). Implicitly, the analyses also
showed that the differences between LO and RO were less
important than the differences between small and large
objects.

Here is an example problem:

1069

1. The only difference between experiment 1 and 2 was the
object property. Again, we manipulated two factors: object
mobility (easy and difficult to move objects) and person´s
position (“you”) in the spatial arrangement (leftmost,
middle, and rightmost) as the independent within subject
factors. Again, the dependent variables are revision choice
and revision times.

Results and discussion

Figure 1: Relative frequency (in %) of model selections
based on the relocation of small and large objects. Error bars
show standard errors.

Our results show that physical properties of objects have
an effect on how people revise their existing belief about the
arrangement of objects in space. People have a strong
tendency to relocate those objects that would also be easier
to move physically. This finding agrees with the grounded
cognition approach and is more difficult to explain based on
purely symbolic cognitive theories. The finding also agrees
with the mental model theory of reasoning, in which people
reason spatially by constructing, inspecting and varying
spatial mental models that mirror the situation described in
the premises (Knauff, Rauh, & Schlieder, 1995; Ragni,
Knauff, & Nebel, 2005; Rauh, Hagen, Kuss, Knauff,
Schlieder, & Strube, 2005; Nejasmic, Krumnack, Bucher, &
Knauff, 2011). If such a model is then contradicted by a new
fact, people try to revise the model by local transformations.
In fact, they move the objects in the model around to obtain
a model consistent with the newly available information.
We could show these mental operations are affected by the
imagined physical properties of the objects. With the next
experiment, we tried to replicate this effect with objects
which are easy or difficult to move. The question is again:
does object property affect reasoning and belief revision? Is
the physical challenge related to a difficult movable object
somehow reflected when we manipulate it mentally?

As in experiment 1, participants selected correct
arrangements in more than 95% (M = 97%, SD = 3.70) of
the cases. They detected inconsistencies between the initial
constructed arrangements and the contradictory facts in 94%
(SD = 4.97), correctly. Erroneous trials were excluded from
further analysis.
An ANOVA with the factors object property (easy and
difficult to move objects) × person´s position (“you”) in the
spatial arrangement (leftmost, middle, and rightmost) was
conducted for the revision choice and the respective revision
times. Level of significance was 5%.
The ANOVA for revision times revealed a significant
main effect of object property [F(1, 16) = 4.76; p < .05; ƞ2 =
.23]. The main effect of person´s position and the interaction
were non-significant (ps >.23). One-tailed t-tests revealed
that participants needed less time for a revision based on a
relocation of an easy to move object (M = 2956.04 ms, SD =
1257.80) compared to a difficult to move object (M =
4189.31 ms, SD = 714.77; t(22) = 1.93; p < .05) (see Fig. 2).
In this experiment, the ANOVA for revision choices were
non-significant (p > .41). Although participants did not
show a clear preference for a relocation of an easy to move
object compared to a difficult to move object, they needed
more time to establish consistency, when the revision was
based on a relocation of a difficult to move object.

Experiment 2: Easy and difficult to move
objects
Figure 2: Revision times (in ms) based on the relocation
of the respective object. Error bars show standard errors.

Method
Participants. 24 students from the University of Giessen (5
male; age: M = 22.71; SD = 6.60) were tested individually.
They gave written informed consent and received course
credit for their participation. Data from one participant were
excluded from the analysis due to a technical problem.
Materials, procedure, and design. The instructions on the
computer and the procedure were the same as in experiment

General discussion
We reported two experiments on the connection of spatial
belief revision and grounded cognition. We showed that (1)
small objects are more often relocated than larger objects

1070

and (2) easy to move objects are faster relocated than
objects which are difficult movable. The findings are in line
with the idea of grounded cognition. According to this
approach, the mind is embodied, and thus cognitive
processes must be grounded in perceptual, motoric, or
emotional experience (for an overview, see de Vega et
al.,2008). From this point of view, human thought is almost
exclusively based on perceptual simulations and modalityspecific representations (Barsalou, 2008, 2010).
Our results suggest that object properties effect spatial
belief revision. The (imagined) properties of objects can
overwrite the general preference for LO-relocation
(experiment 1) and the time it takes to revise a mental model
can be modulated by different object properties (experiment
2). These findings indicate that the physical effort that
would be necessary when an object is actually relocated is
reflected in revision preferences and revision speed.
Moreover, the effort for different object properties (like size
and movability) was reflected by different psychological
measures in our experiment. On the one hand, size affected
the frequency with which objects were mentally relocated.
Participants preferably changed the position of small
objects. Large objects were preferably left in the same
position. What happens when we transfer this result to the
physical world? It basically means that a vase is relocated
preferably to a house. That makes sense, given that we
indeed relocate vases more often and more easily than
houses. On the other hand, movability modulated the time
individuals needed for the revision process. This also agrees
with real actions in the physical world. We might not have
preferences in relocating ovens compared to wheelchairs,
but it is more time consuming to move an oven than a
wheelchair. Consequently, participants needed more time
relocating heavy ovens than mentally “pushing” the
wheelchair.
Of course, often size and movability (and many more
properties of objects) are confounded. That was also the
case in our experiments. However, we made an attempt to
disentangle size and movability. Our results suggest that we
were successful in doing so. An important corollary from
our studies is that different properties affect different
dependent measurements. This might be of concern in
further experiments in this field.
We are aware that our findings are too weak to make a
strong case for the grounded cognition approach in
reasoning and belief revision. This is in particular important
with regard to findings suggesting that effects of grounded
cognition are more based on experimental demand
characteristics considering the work of During et al. (2009).
Another critical point is that, for instance, research on wayfinding and navigation shows that some kind of spatial
representations have an amodal representational format,
which does not agree with the embodied cognition approach
(Giudice, Klatzky, & Loomis, 2009). In that sense, our
experiments can only be a very first step to draw a new
connection between two fields that still work in isolation.
However, another corollary from our findings is that the

theory of grounded cognition and the theory of mental
models fit well together. The theory of mental models also
assumes that we reason by mentally simulating what might
be the case. However, the model theory so far has focused
on the simulation of spatial relations between objects.
Today, the vast majority of researchers consider the model
theory to be the empirically best supported theory of human
spatial inference (Vandierendonck, Dierckx, & de Vooght,
2004; Goodwin & Johnson-Laird, 2005; Knauff, 2009,
2013; for an exception see: van der Henst, 2002). The
present work shows that the idea of a mental simulation in
mental models can also incorporate other physical features.
We will continue to investigate this connection between
mental models and grounded cognition in future
experiments.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) to M. Knauff and B. Nebel
KN 465/6-1 and KN 465/6-2. We thank Isabell Tapia-Leon
for assistance with the experiments.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617–645.
Barsalou, L. W. (2010). Grounded Cognition: Past, Present,
and Future. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2, 716–724.
Bergen, B., & Chang, N. (2005). Embodied Construction
Grammar in simulation-based language understanding. In
Östman, J.-O. & Fried, M. (eds.), Construction
Grammar(s): Cognitive and Cross-Language Dimensions.
Johns Benjamins.
Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 3477-3483). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Bucher, L., & Nejasmic, J. (2012). Relocating multiple
objects during belief revision. In C. Stachniss, K. Schill,
& D. Uttal (Eds.), Lecture notes in artiﬁcial intelligence:
Spatial cognition (pp. 476-491). Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
De Vega, M., Graesser, A. C., & Glenberg, A. M. (2008).
Reflecting on the debate. In M. de Vega, A. M. Glenberg,
& A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Symbols and embodiment:
Debates on meaning and cognition (pp. 397-440). Oxford,
U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., De Neys, W., & d’Ydewalle,
G. (2000). Initial belief state as a predictor of belief
revision. Current Psychology of Cognition, 19, 277-286.
Durgin, F. H., Baird, J., Greenburg, M., Russell, R.,
Shaughnessy, K., & Waymouth, S. (2009). Who is Being
Deceived? The Experimental Demands of Wearing a
Backpack. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 16 (5): 964968.

1071

Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21, 419-460.
Gattis, M. (Ed.). (2001). Spatial schema and abstract
thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Girotto, V., Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., & Sonino,
M. (2000). Reasoning to consistency: How people resolve
logical inconsistencies. In J. Garcia-Madruga, M.
Carriedo, & M. J. Gonzalez-Labra (Eds.), Mental models
in reasoning (pp. 83-97). Madrid, Spain: Universidad
Nacional de Educatio´n a Distancia.
Giudice, N. A., Klatzky, R. L., & Loomis, J. M. (2009).
Evidence for amodal representations after bimodal
learning: Integration of haptic-visual layouts into a
common spatial image. Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 9, 287-304.
Glenberg, A. M., & Robertson, D. A. (1999). Indexical
Understanding of instructions. Discourse Processes, 28,
1–26.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005). Reasoning
with relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468–493.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove,
UK: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., & Girotto, V. (2004).
How we detect logical inconsistencies. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 41–45.
Kaschak, M. P., & Glenberg, A. M. (2000).Constructing
meaning: The role of affordances in grammatical
constructions in sentence comprehension. Journal of
Memory and Language, 43, 508-529.
Kaschak, M. P., & Glenberg, A. M. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Knauff, M. (1999). The cognitive adequacy of Allen’s
interval calculus for qualitative spatial representation and
reasoning. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 1, 261290.
Knauff, M. (2007). How our brains reason logically. Topio,
26, 19-36.
Knauff, M. (2009). A neuro-cognitive theory of deductive
relational reasoning with mental models and visual
images. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 9, 109-137.
Knauff, M. (2013). Space to reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Knauff, M., Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., & Nejasmic, J.
(2013). Spatial belief revision. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 1, 1-10.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen's calculus. In Proceedings
of the 17th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Efﬁciency and minimal change in spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2270-2275). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). ‘‘What’’ and
‘‘where’’ in spatial language and spatial cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nejasmic, J., Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying the continuity
effect in spatial reasoning. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, &
T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 11271132). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Politzer, G., & Carles, L. (2001). Belief revision and
uncertain reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 7, 217-234.
Polk, T. A., & Newell, A. (1995). Deduction as verbal
reasoning. Psychological Review, 102, 533–566.
Pulvermüller, F. (2005). Brain mechanisms linking
language and action. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6,
576–582.
Ragni, M., Knauff, M., & Nebel, B. (2005). A
Computational Model for Spatial Reasoning with Mental
Models. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 1797-1802). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rauh, R., Hagen, C., Kuss, T., Knauff, M., Schlieder, C., &
Strube, G. (2005). Preferred and alternative mental
models in spatial reasoning. Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 5(2&3), 239–269.
Revlin, R., Cate, C. L., & Rouss, T. S. (2001). Reasoning
counterfactually: Combining and rending. Memory and
Cognition, 29, 1196-1208.
Revlis, R., Lipkin, S. G., & Hayes, J. R. (1971). The
importance of universal quantiﬁers in a hypothetical
reasoning task. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 10, 86-91.
Rinck, M., & Bower, G H. (2004). Goal-based accessibility
of entities within situation models. In The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and
Theory, 44, ed. BH Ross, pp. 1–33. New York: Elsevier
Sci.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. L.
Pick & L. P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: Theory,
research and application (pp. 225-282). London, UK:
Plenum.
Tenbrink, T., Andonova, E., & Coventry, K. R. (2011).
Spatial strategies in the description of complex
conﬁgurations. Discourse Processes, 48, 237-266.
Van der Henst, J.-B. (2002). Mental model theory versus the
inference rule approach in relational reasoning, Thinking
& Reasoning, 8(3), 193 — 203
Vandierendonck, A., Dierckx, V., & De Vooght, G. (2004).
Mental model construction in linear reasoning: Evidence
for the construction of initial annotated models. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57, 1369-1391.
Wolf, A. G., Rieger, S., & Knauff, M. (2012). The effects of
source trustworthiness and inference type on human belief
revision. Thinking and Reasoning, 18, 417-440.

1072

