UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hemispheric Asymmetry in Nonconscious Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3gt4b9rc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Chen, Jing
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hemispheric Asymmetry in Nonconscious Processing
Jing Chen (jinghku@hku.hk)
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
691 The Jockey Club Tower, Centennial Campus, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR

Abstract
Here we investigated whether hemispheric asymmetry effects
can be observed in nonconscious processing with a basiclevel animal categorization (cat/dog) task. We found a
significant nonconscious congruency priming effect when the
prime was presented in the right visual field/left hemisphere
but not when it was presented in the left visual field/right
hemisphere when the prime duration was only 10 ms; the leftlateralized congruency priming effect was consistent with the
left hemisphere superiority in processing abstract category
information reported in the literature (e.g., Marsolek, 1999).
This result thus showed that nonconscious processing can go
beyond the sensory level to influence hemispheric asymmetry
in the processing of category information. In contrast, this
hemispheric difference was not observed when the prime was
presented for 50 ms (nonconscious) or 150 ms (conscious).
This effect may be because 10 ms subliminal information was
insufficient to allow inter-hemispheric transfer/processing,
allowing the hemispheric difference to emerge. It also
suggests that hemispheric asymmetry may be better observed
at subliminal level.
Keywords: subliminal priming; hemispheric asymmetry;
attention; nonconscious processing;

Introduction
It has been well established in the literature that subliminal
stimuli are able to elicit subsequent cognitive and behavioral
influences (see Kouider & Dehaene, 2007 for a review). It
remains unclear, however, how a subliminally presented
stimulus is processed. Here we aim to examine whether a
subliminally presented stimulus can induce hemispheric
asymmetry effects.
In the literature of hemispheric asymmetry in perception,
hemispheric asymmetry effects typically did not emerge
until a late perceptual stage (Fendrich & Gazzaniga, 1990;
Hsiao., Cipollini., & Cottrell., accepted; Sergent, 1982).
More specifically, hemispheric asymmetry effects were
typically observed in tasks involving high-level perception
such as face recognition (e.g., Keenan, Whitman, & Pepe,
1989), but not in tasks more relevant to early perceptual
processes such as grating detection (e.g., Fendrich &
Gazzaniga, 1990). Based on these findings, it has been
argued that hemispheric asymmetry effects “must result
from processing taking place beyond the sensory level"
(Sergent, 1982). Thus, examining hemispheric asymmetry
effects in subliminal priming can help us understand
whether nonconscious processing can go beyond early

perceptual processes to induce hemispheric asymmetry
effects.
Nevertheless, in the literature on subliminal priming,
whether hemispheric asymmetry effects can be observed in
the processing of subliminal stimuli was rarely studied.
Marzouki, Grainger, and Theeuwes (2007) examined
subliminal priming effects in a letter/pseudo-letter judgment
task. In their experiment, the target stimulus always
appeared at the center, while the preceding 45-ms prime (the
same letter as the target) could be in the left visual field
(LVF) or the right visual field (RVF). The results showed
that in the trials with a letter target, a robust priming effect
was found, however, only when the prime was presented in
the RVF/left hemisphere (LH), but not when it was
presented in the LVF/right hemisphere (RH). While
Marzouki et al. (2009) interpreted the results as an
attentional bias in favor of the RVF, their results may
suggest a hemispheric asymmetry effect in subliminal letter
processing as well. However, it is also possible that the RVF
priming effect Marzouki et al. (2007) observed was due to
perception-response compatibility, as participants always
used their right hand to respond to the letter targets. Thus, it
remains unclear whether hemispheric asymmetry effects can
be observed in subliminal priming.
Using a supraliminal priming paradigm, Marsoleck (1999)
found hemispheric asymmetry effects in processing
category-related information. In Marsoleck (1999)’s study,
participants were asked to name pictures of objects
presented for 17 ms in either the LVF or the RVF. Before
the target presentation, the same object or another object
from the same basic category as the target object was
presented centrally for 3 seconds as the prime. While a
same-object priming effect was found for both LVF and
RVF targets, the same-category different-object priming
effect was only observed in the RVF/LH. This result
suggested that the LH may be biased towards abstractcategory representations whereas the RH is biased towards
exemplar-specific representations. This hemispheric
asymmetry in the representation of category knowledge was
further supported by several follow-up studies using various
stimuli (Laeng, Zarrinpar, & Kosslyn, 2003; Studer &
Hübner, 2008).
Thus, in the present study, we aimed to examine whether
this hemispheric asymmetry in the representation of
category knowledge can be induced with subliminal stimuli
in a category judgment task (Marsolek, 1999), with
perception-response compatibility controlled (cf. Marzouki

2022

et al., 2007). The results of this examination can shed light
on whether subliminal information can go beyond the
sensory level to influence late perceptual processes.
In the representation of object category information, there
are multiple levels of abstraction. A cat can be identified as
“cat” (the basic level), or “animal” (the superordinate level),
or “Sam” (a specific cat, the subordinate level). The current
study focuses on the processing of basic-level category
information (i.e., a cat/dog classification task). In a previous
study (Finkbeiner & Palermo, 2009), the authors
investigated nonconscious congruency priming effects in an
animal/tool classification task (experiment 1a; or an
animal/vegetable classification task in experiment 2a),
which was at the superordinate level. In their study, the
prime was always at the top location and the target was
always at the button location. And the top prime can be
spatially cued or not. The results showed that a
nonconscious congruency priming effect was found only in
the condition when the prime was cued. This effect suggests
that nonconscious processing of superordinate-level
category information relies on the engagement of spatial
attention.
Thus, the other aim of the current study was to examine
whether nonconscious processing of basic-level category
information also relied on spatial attention. Previous studies
showed that, compared with superordinate-level category
information, basic-level information was more accessible
(e.g., Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976),
basic-level terms were preferred in naming objects (e.g.,
Jolicoeur, Gluck, & Kosslyn, 1984; Rosch et al., 1976) and
recognizing objects at the basic level required less reaction
time (e.g., Tanaka, 2001). Thus, it is possible that
nonconscious processing of basic-level category information
is more automatic than that of superordinate-level category
information and does not require attention.
Therefore, in the current study, we aimed to 1) examine
whether there is a hemispheric asymmetry in the subliminal
priming effect by presenting the prime in either the LVF or
the RVF, and 2) investigate whether nonconscious
processing of basic-level category information relies on the
engagement of spatial attention. In addition, we manipulated
the duration of the prime (150-, 50-, and 10-ms) in order to
compare hemispheric asymmetry and attentional modulation
effects across conditions with different levels of
consciousness.

in exchange for course credits or payment. All were Asian,
with normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli Dog and cat images, all frontal-view or close to
frontal-view, were selected from the Oxford-IIT Pet Dataset
(Parkhi, Vedaldi, Zisserman, & Jawahar, 2012), with cat
images from the species of British Shorthair and dog images
from that of Shiba Inu. Only the head parts of the animal
images were used and were converted to grayscale, and
were further cropped to fit within a black oval. They all had
equal size, luminance, and contrast.
Two types of black and white noise images were used as
masks. The random noise mask was generated by assigning
a random value between 155 and 255 to each pixel, while
the animal mask was created by, firstly, combining a cat and
a dog image, and then scrambling the combined image. The
animal mask was used as a backward mask for the prime as
well as the target.
Each stimulus, including both animal images and masks,
spanned 4°visual angle vertically and 2.5°horizontally
with a 60-cm viewing distance.
Design and Procedure The experiment used a 2 (spatial
attention: prime-cued vs. uncued) × 2 (congruence between
the prime and target: congruent vs. incongruent) × 2 (visual
field: LVF vs. RVF for the location of the prime) withinparticipant design. Participants were instructed to judge the
category of the target pictures, i.e., a dog/cat judgment.
They made the binary choice by pressing two buttons (“F”
and “J”) on a keyboard with their two index fingers
simultaneously, or another two buttons (“D” and “K”) with
their middle fingers simultaneously. The response buttons
were counterbalanced across participants.

Experiment 1
In experiment 1, the prime (150-ms duration) was visible in
order to: 1) examine whether the congruency priming effect
can be found at the supraliminal level, and 2) investigate
whether this congruency priming effect can be modulated
by hemispheric asymmetry and spatial attention.

Method
Participants 20 students (13 females, age mean = 20.7,
range = 18-24) at the University of Hong Kong participated

Figure 1: Sequence of stimuli in a single trial
The basic trial structure was similar to Marzouki,
Grainger and Theeuwes (2007)’s study (Figure 1). After a
forward mask with a duration randomly selected among 400,
500, 600, and 700 ms, a yellow box cue was presented

2023

either at the left or the right side for 150 ms, followed by the
150-ms prime image at either the same (Prime-cued) or the
opposite (Prime-uncued) side of the cue. Then, the target
image appeared for 200 ms at the center together with two
animal backward masks at both the left and right sides.
Following the target, another animal mask appeared at the
center for 1500 ms (See Figure 1). Participants were
instructed to make their judgment as quickly and as
accurately as possible after they saw the target.
Before the main experiment, a practice section with 20
trials was performed. The procedure of the practice was the
same as the main experiment. The images used in the
practice never appeared in the main experiment. After the
main experiment, in order to confirm that the prime images
were visible, participants were instructed to do a primediscrimination task, i.e., to judge the category of the prime
images. The procedure was identical to the main experiment
except that participants were to make judgments on the
prime instead of the target stimulus, and that the backward
masks at the end of each trial stayed until participants made
their response.
40 images (20 cat and 20 dog images) were used as the
target as well as the prime stimuli in all four conditions
(congruent with prime cued, congruent with prime uncued,
incongruent with prime cued, incongruent with prime
uncued), with the constraint that the prime and the target
could not be the same image. In each condition, all 40
images appeared once as the target, resulting in 160 trials in
total. Trials were presented in a random order, with the
limits that the same target did not appear in succession, that
no more than 3 trials in a row elicited the same response,
and that no more than 3 trials in a row were in the same
condition. In the prime-discrimination task, there were also
160 trials.

Results
In analyzing the response times (RTs), null responses and
incorrect responses (6.47%) were excluded. And any RT
outside 2.5 standard deviations from the mean, for each
participant, was treated as outliers (2.78%). In analyzing the
accuracy data, only null responses (0.75%) were excluded.
The result of the prime-discrimination task confirmed that
the 150-ms prime was visible. The mean accuracy reached
77.7%, significant higher than the 50% chance level, t (19)
= 9.57, p < .001.
A 2 (spatial attention) × 2 (congruency) × 2 (visual field)
repeated measures ANOVA on the RTs revealed a
significant main effect of congruency, F (1, 19) = 4.90, p
< .039, with faster RTs for congruent trials (Mean = 638 ms)
than incongruent trials (Mean = 648 ms). No significant
main effects of spatial attention or visual field (both p > .10)
were found. There was no interaction between spatial
attention and congruency (p > .70) or between visual field
and congruency (p > .29), suggesting that spatial attention
and visual field did not modulate the priming effect under
this supraliminal condition.

The same 2 × 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA was
conducted on the accuracy data; no reliable effects or
interactions were observed (all p > .10).

Discussion
The 150-ms prime was long enough for conscious
processing of category information, as participants had well
above-chance performance in the prime-discrimination task.
At the conscious level, a robust congruency priming effect
was observed, both when the prime was cued or uncued.
This result was consistent with the results of Lachter,
Forster and Ruthruff (2004)’s study (experiment 1). In a
lexical decision task, Lachter et al. (2004) observed a
significant repetition priming effect in conditions where a
supraliminal prime (110 or 165 ms) was at a task-relevant or
task-irrelevant position. At supraliminal level with a long
prime duration, participants were typically able to shift their
attention to the prime even when the prime was at an
irrelevant location (Lachter, Forster, & Ruthruff, 2004) or
uncued. Thus, no attentional modulation effect was
observed.

Experiment 2
In experiment 2, the prime duration was changed to 50 ms
in order to be rendered invisible, as was in the previous
studies (Finkbeiner & Palermo, 2009; Harry, Davis, & Kim,
2012). In contrast to the superordinate level recognition task
(animal vs. tool; or animal vs. vegetable) used in Finkbeiner
and Palermo (2009)’s study (the animal condition);
participants in the current study were to categorize images at
the basic level (cat vs. dog). Finkbeiner and Palermo (2009)
found that nonconscious processing of superordinate-level
category information relies on the engagement of spatial
attention. Here we aimed to examine whether a similar
effect can be found in the processing of basic-level category
information.

Method
Participants 16 students (9 females, age mean = 21.8, range
= 18-27) at the University of Hong Kong participated in
exchange for course credits or payment. All were Asian,
with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. None of them
participated in experiment 1.
Stimuli, Design and Procedure All settings in experiment
2 were exactly the same as those in the experiment 1, except
that the prime duration was changed from 150 ms to 50 ms.

Results
In analyzing the RTs, null responses and incorrect responses
(6.8%) were excluded. And any RT outside 2.5 standard
deviations from the mean, for each participant, was treated
as outliers (3.7%). In analyzing the accuracy data, only null
responses (1.5%) were excluded.
The result of the prime-discrimination task confirmed that
the 50-ms prime was invisible, with the mean accuracy of

2024

51.6% being not significantly different from the 50% chance
level, t (15) = 1.64, p > .10.
A 2 (spatial attention) × 2 (congruency) × 2 (visual field)
repeated measures ANOVA on the RTs showed a
significant main effect of congruency, F (1, 15) = 4.88, p
< .043, with faster RTs for congruent trials (668 ms) than
incongruent trials (680 ms). In contrast to the results of
Finkbeiner and Palermo (2009), however, we did not find
evidence of attentional modulation on the congruency
priming effect, F (1, 15) = 0.65, p = .43. In addition, followup analysis revealed a significant priming effect when the
prime was uncued, F (1, 15) = 6.91, p < .019; but the
priming effect when the prime was cued failed to reach
significance, p > .50. There was no main effect of visual
field (p > .40) or interaction between visual field and
congruency (p > .60).
The same 2 × 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA on the
accuracy data revealed a main effect of congruency, F (1, 15)
= 6.74, p < .02, with lower accuracy in congruent trials
(93.5%) than incongruent trials (95.7%). No modulation
effects of attention (p > .70) or visual field (p > .50) were
found.
Table 1: Mean RTs (SE) in experiment 1 and 2
Condition
150-ms prime
Congruent
Incongruent
Priming
50-ms prime
Congruent
Incongruent
Priming

RTs (ms)
Prime-cued
Prime-un-cued
635(14)
647(14)
12

670(17)
676(19)
6

could be semantically related to the foveal prime or the
parafoveal prime. The results showed that similar, reliable
priming effects were found for both the foveal and
parafoveal prime. It was argued that semantic
representations stored in the long-term memory were ready
to be activated even when no attention was drawn to the
nonconscious prime word (Kiefer & Brendel, 2006). Thus,
similar to semantic information, basic-level category
information may also be readily accessible even when no
attention was drawn to the nonconscious prime picture.

Experiment 3
In experiment 3, the prime duration was further changed to
10 ms. As no modulation from attention or VF was
observed in experiment 1 and 2, experiment 3 aimed to
explore it further by testing the condition where the
awareness of the prime was extremely low.

Method
Participants 18 students (14 females, age mean = 22.9,
range = 18-29) at the University of Hong Kong participated
in exchange for payment. All were Asian, with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. None of them participated in
experiment 1 or 2.
Stimuli, Design and Procedures All settings were exactly
the same as those in experiment 1, except that the prime
duration was changed to 10 ms and that there was a 40-ms
inter-mask between the prime and the target.

641(15)
648(13)
7

Results

666(18)
685(18)
19

Discussion
The results in experiment 2 showed no evidence suggesting
attentional modulation on the nonconscious priming effect
in the basic-level categorization task; in addition, a
significant nonconscious priming effect was observed when
the prime was not cued. This effect suggests that
nonconscious processing of basic-level category information
does not rely on spatial attention, in contrast to the finding
that nonconscious processing of superordinate-level
category information depends on spatial attention
(Finkbeiner & Palermo, 2009).
Results in some earlier studies examining nonconscious
priming effects with visual word stimuli (Fuentes, Carmona,
Agis, & Catena, 1994; Kiefer & Brendel, 2006) were
consistent with this finding. In Fuentes et al. (1994)’s study,
for instance, a lexical decision task was used. In experiment
2, the two nonconscious prime words, one presented in the
foveal and the other in the parafoveal vision, were presented
at the same time, followed by masks. The center target

In analyzing the RTs, null responses and incorrect responses
(4.8%) were excluded. And any RT outside 2.5 standard
deviations from the mean, for each participant, was treated
as outliers (3.3%). In analyzing the accuracy data, only null
responses (1.0%) were excluded.
The results of the prime-discrimination task confirmed
that the 10-ms prime was invisible, with the mean accuracy
of 50.5% being not significantly different from the 50%
chance level, t (17) = 0.69, p > .50.
A 2 (spatial attention) × 2 (congruency) × 2 (visual field)
repeated measures ANOVA on the RTs did not find any
reliable effect or interaction (all p > .10).
The same 2 × 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA on the
accuracy data, however, showed a significant interaction
between VF and congruency, F (1, 17) = 5.64, p < .03, but
no main effect of congruency, p > .15, or interaction
between attention and congruency, p > .70. Follow-up
analysis revealed a significant congruency priming effect
when the prime was presented in the RVF, F (1, 17) = 9.19,
p < .01, with a higher accuracy in the congruent trials
(97.3%) than that in the incongruent trials (95.2%); in
contrast, no congruency priming effect was observed in the
LVF, p > .60. This priming effect in the RVF did not
interact with spatial attention, F (1, 17) = 1.41, p > .25. Also,
there was no significant interaction between congruency and
spatial attention overall, F (1, 17) = 0.15, p > .70.

2025

Discussion
With extremely low awareness of the prime (with only 10ms duration), a significant congruency priming effect was
obtained on accuracy in the RVF/LH, but not when the
prime was presented in the LVF/RH. Marzouki et al. (2007)
found similar results using a 45-ms prime with letter/pseudo
letter stimuli. One potential concern in Marzonki et al.
(2007)’s study was that, participants always used their right
hand to respond to letter targets. Thus it was possible that
the RVF superiority effect was due to the compatibility
between prime location and response hand. In the present
study,
the
location-response
compatibility
was
counterbalanced across participants, and a strong RVF (LH)
advantage was still observed.
The finding of the RVF/LH superiority in congruency
priming in the basic-level categorization task here is
consistent with Marsolek’s (1999) results, which suggested
that the LH was biased towards abstract-category
representations whereas the RH was biased towards
exemplar-specific representations (e.g., Laeng et al., 2003;
Marsolek, 1995, 1999; Studer & Hübner, 2008). Here our
participants were required to make a basic-level category
judgment on the target, with a prime presented in either the
LVF or the RVF. The target and the prime were always
different exemplars from the same category or from
different categories. Since the prime was always different
from the target, the abstract category representation in the
LH activated by the prime was able to facilitate the
categorization of the target. Thus, the priming effect was
only observed with a RVF prime but not a LVF prime.
A critical difference between the present study and the
earlier studies was that visual information projected to the
LH and the RH was rendered nonconscious by masks and
brief duration. Our findings suggested that the processing of
nonconscious information could go beyond the sensory
level to induce hemispheric asymmetry effects

General Discussion
In the current study, we aimed to examine whether there is
hemispheric asymmetry in the processing of nonconscious
information. We observed a nonconscious congruency
priming effect on accuracy when the prime was presented in
the RVF/LH, but not when the prime was presented in the
LVF/RH, with a 10-ms prime, in a basic-level object
categorization task.
Previous studies have shown that hemispheric asymmetry
effects typically do not emerge at an early visual processing
stage, such as findings in grating detection tasks (e.g.,
Fendrich & Gazzaniga, 1990). In contrast, hemispheric
specialization can typically be observed in high-level
perception tasks such as face recognition (e.g., Keenan et al.,
1989). Our results of hemispheric asymmetry in subliminal
priming suggest that the processing of subliminal
information can go beyond the sensory level to influence
high-level perceptual processes. It is consistent with
previous findings that nonconscious information could

influence semantic processing (e.g., Yeh, He, & Cavanagh,
2012).
The LH advantage in the present study was in accordance
with the abstract-specific representation account of
hemisphere asymmetry in the representation of category
knowledge proposed by Marsolek (1999). However,
surprisingly, this effect was not found under the 50-ms
(nonconscious) and 150-ms (conscious) prime conditions.
The effect that longer prime presentation duration
diminished hemispheric asymmetry effects in subliminal
priming may be due to interhemispheric communications. It
is possible that for a prime appeared in the LVF/RH, 50 ms
or longer was long enough for the information to reach the
LH through the corpus callosum, and to consequently
activate the abstract representation of the corresponding
category, resulting in a similar level of priming as compared
with a prime presented in the RVF/LH. 10 ms duration,
however, might be insufficient for a LVF/RH subliminal
prime to reach the LH. Without the activation of abstract
representations stored in the LH (Marsolek, 1999), a prime
in the LVF/RH failed to facilitate the processing of the
target in the basic-level categorization task; consequently, a
significant priming effect was observed only with a RVF
prime. This effect also suggests that hemispheric asymmetry
may be better observed at subliminal level.
Note that in the present study, the prime was followed by
a mask. Previous studies have revealed that a backward
mask is able to block brain processing of stimuli (BaconMacé, Macé, Fabre-Thorpe, & Thorpe, 2005). In BaconMacéet al.’s (2005) study, an image (with 6.25 ms duration)
was followed by a 100-ms mask. The SOA between the
image and the mask was manipulated, raning from 6 ms to
106 ms. Participants were asked to judge whether there was
an animal in the image. The behavirol accuracy decreased as
the SOA became shorter, reaching the chance level when
the SOA was 6 ms. In addition, brain activities trigerred by
the image decreased rapidly with shorter SOAs, indicating
that brain processing was impaired significantly by the
backward mask. These findings further suggest that in our
study the 10-ms LVF/RVF subliminal prime with a
backward mask was too fragile to reach the other side of the
brain, allowing hemispheric difference to emerge.
Another major finding in the current study was that no
attentional modulation on the nonconscious congruency
priming effect in the basic-level categorization task was
observed across the 3 experiments with different prime
durations; in particular, we observed a significant priming
effect when attention was not drawn to the 50-ms, invisible
prime (experiment 2). This result was in contrast to the
superordinate-level categorization task used in Finkbeiner
and Palermo (2009)’s study, in which the nonconscious
priming effect depended on attention. Our results provided
evidence for the influence from levels of abstraction in a
categorization task in nonconscious processing. This is
consistent with previous findings that basic-level category
information was accessed first in the perception of visual
objects and named first by children (Rosch et al., 1976).

2026

Why is basic level information special? It is possible that in
the human evolution, people had to recognize “tiger” as a
tiger (i.e., the basic level), rather than as an animal (i.e., the
superordinate level), in order to detect and escape from
potential dangers in the environment. The basic-level
categorization was crucial for survival, and thus through
evolution we developed the ability to process basic-level
category information both nonconsciously and without
attention.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code HKU 745210H to J.H. Hsiao) and the
HKU Seed Funding Program for Basic Research (project
code 201011159124 to J.H. Hsiao).

References
Bacon-Macé, N., Macé, M.J.M., Fabre-Thorpe, M., &
Thorpe, S.J. (2005). The time course of visual processing:
Backward masking and natural scene categorisation.
Vision research, 45(11), 1459-1469.
Fendrich, R., & Gazzaniga, M. (1990). Hemispheric
processing of spatial frequencies in two commissurotomy
patients. Neuropsychologia, 28(7), 657-663.
Finkbeiner, M., & Palermo, R. (2009). The Role of Spatial
Attention in Nonconscious Processing A Comparison of
Face and Nonface Stimuli. Psychological Science, 20(1),
42-51.
Fuentes, L.J., Carmona, E., Agis, I.F., & Catena, A. (1994).
The role of the anterior attention system in semantic
processing of both foveal and parafoveal words. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(1), 17-25.
Harry, B., Davis, C., & Kim, J. (2012). Subliminal access to
abstract face representations does not rely on attention.
Consciousness and cognition, 21, 573-583.
Hsiao., Janet H., Cipollini., Ben, & Cottrell., Garrison W.
(accepted). Hemispheric asymmetry in perception: A
differential encoding account. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience.
Jolicoeur, P., Gluck, M.A., & Kosslyn, S.M. (1984).
Pictures and names: Making the connection. Cognitive
psychology, 16(2), 243-275.
Keenan, P.A., Whitman, RD, & Pepe, J. (1989).
Hemispheric asymmetry in the processing of high and low
spatial frequencies: A facial recognition task. Brain and
cognition, 11(2), 229-237.
Kiefer, M., & Brendel, D. (2006). Attentional modulation of
unconscious “automatic” processes: evidence from eventrelated potentials in a masked priming paradigm. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(2), 184-198.
Kouider, S., & Dehaene, S. (2007). Levels of processing
during non-conscious perception: a critical review of
visual masking. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481), 857-875.

Lachter, J., Forster, K.I., & Ruthruff, E. (2004). Forty-five
years after Broadbent (1958): still no identification
without attention. Psychological review, 111(4), 880-913.
Laeng, B., Zarrinpar, A., & Kosslyn, S.M. (2003). Do
separate processes identify objects as exemplars versus
members of basic-level categories? Evidence from
hemispheric specialization. Brain and Cognition, 53(1),
15-27.
Marsolek, C.J. (1995). Abstract visual-form representations
in the left cerebral hemisphere. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21(2),
375-386.
Marsolek, C.J. (1999). Dissociable neural subsystems
underlie abstract and specific object recognition.
Psychological Science, 10(2), 111-118.
Marzouki, Y., Grainger, J., & Theeuwes, J. (2007).
Exogenous spatial cueing modulates subliminal masked
priming. Acta psychologica, 126(1), 34-45.
Parkhi, O.M., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A., & Jawahar, CV.
(2012). Cats and dogs. Paper presented at the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2012 IEEE
Conference on.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C.B., Gray, W.D., Johnson, D.M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive psychology, 8(3), 382-439.
Sergent, J. (1982). The cerebral balance of power:
Confrontation or cooperation? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8(2),
253-272.
Studer, T., & Hübner, R. (2008). The direction of
hemispheric asymmetries for object categorization at
different levels of abstraction depends on the task. Brain
and cognition, 67(2), 197-211.
Tanaka, J.W. (2001). The entry point of face recognition:
evidence for face expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130(3), 534-543.
Yeh, S.L., He, S., & Cavanagh, P. (2012). Semantic priming
from crowded words. Psychological science, 23(6), 608616.

2027

