UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How big is the BFG? The impact of redundant size adjectives on size perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5vg260qq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Krahmer, Emiel
Noordewier, Marret
Goudbeek, Martijn
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How big is the BFG? The impact of redundant size adjectives on size perception
Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities,
Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Marret K. Noordewier (M.K.Noordewier@fsw.leidenuniv.nl)
Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Social and Organizational Psychology,
Leiden University, The Netherlands

Martijn Goudbeek (M.B.Goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities,
Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Ruud Koolen (R.M.F.Koolen@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities,
Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Abstract
In two experiments we study how redundant size modifiers
influence the perceived size of objects. We show that when
objects are referred to with overspecified descriptions (for
example, using a description like “the large red chair” in a
situation where all chairs are equally large but different in
color), participants subsequently estimate the object to be
larger than when objects are referred to using minimally
distinguishing descriptions (e.g., “the red chair”). In
Experiment 1, we show this effect with adult language users
and different kinds of size modifiers. In Experiment 2, the
same effect is shown for children of two different age groups
(7- and 10-year olds), and for different kinds of visual size
contrasts. Interestingly, we observe an inversely proportional
relation between the age of our child participants and the
difference in size estimates for minimal and overspecified
descriptions, suggesting that language users gradually become
better at avoiding false pragmatic inferences from redundant
adjectives as they grow older.
Keywords:
Reference,
Overspecification,
Development, Conversational Implicature

Language

Introduction
Arguably, referring to a giant as “big” is somewhat
excessive, certainly when there is only one giant in sight.
But would calling a giant “big” and “friendly” (as Roald
Dahl, 1982, does in his well-known children’s novel The
BFG; short for Big Friendly Giant), nevertheless have an
impact on the perceived size (or friendliness) of said giant?
And would this effect be the same for younger children as
for older ones or even for adults? These are essentially the
questions we address in this paper.

Background
Speakers frequently produce definite descriptions such as
“the big friendly giant”, “the red chair” and “the large ball”,

since they allow them to link their utterances to the physical
world surrounding them. One central problem that a speaker
has to solve when planning such a referring expression is to
decide which properties to include in the reference. A chair
can be red, but also large, plush, modern, with or without
cushions and armrests, cheap or expensive, etc. So which
properties to select? A successful reference includes
sufficiently many properties to allow the addressee to
determine which chair the speaker has in mind, but not too
many, as Dale and Reiter (1995) propose in their
computational interpretation of Grice’s (1975) maxims for
reference production.
One prima facie plausible option would be to opt for the
smallest set of properties that distinguish the target object
from the other objects in the context (Dale 1989). However,
it has been repeatedly found that this is not necessarily what
speakers do (e.g., Olson, 1970; Pechmann, 1989; Belke &
Meyer, 2002; Engelhardt et al., 2006; Koolen et al., 2011).
In many cases, speakers produce overspecified descriptions,
which contain one or more redundant modifiers. For
example, they produce a description such as “the large red
chair”, in a situation where “the red chair” would have been
sufficient to single out the target. A number of speakerinternal factors have been shown to influence the likelihood
of speakers producing an overspecified description, ranging
from the pressures of incremental speech production
(speakers may start producing a referring expression before
scanning of a visual scene is complete; Pechmann, 1989) to
scene complexity (more overspecification in complex visual
scenes; Koolen et al., 2012) and conversational setting
(more overspecification when misunderstandings are costly;
Arts et al., 2011), suggesting that overspecification does not
have a single distinct cause.
However, in this paper we focus on the impact of
overspecification on language understanding, and here the
picture is less clear. Some researchers have suggested that

2772

overspecification can help addressees with identifying an
intended target (e.g., Arts et al., 2011; Paraboni et al., 2007),
while others argued that they slow down identification (e.g.,
Engelhardt et al., 2006; 2011). Importantly, all these studies
focus only on object identification. In this paper, we argue
that overspecification in referring expressions may also
have other important side effects for addressees.
A prominent view in language understanding is based on
the assumption that “utterances convey only relevant
information” (Frank & Goodman, 2012). This assumption
can be traced back at least to the work of Grice (1975), who
postulates among other things that speakers should not make
their contribution more informative than is required (this is
half of his well-known Maxim of Quantity). A speaker that
violates (“flouts”) this maxim, by providing more
information than needed, thereby triggers a conversational
implicature, suggesting to the listener that the additional
material is meaningful after all. Imagine, for instance, that a
speaker tells you to “sit by the newly-painted table” (Dale &
Reiter, 1995), while there is only one table in the room. In
that case, you may think the modifier “newly-painted” is
redundant (since it is more informative than required for the
purpose of identification), and this might cause you to infer
the conversational implicature, intended by the speaker, that
it is best not to rest your arms on this table in order to keep
your clothes unstained.
However, one can also think of situations where an
addressee may reason that the redundant information is
somehow relevant, even when the speaker did not intend it
in this way (Grice would call this a false conversational
implicature). After all, as we argued above, speakers may
overspecify for a variety of reasons. Our first hypothesis
therefore is that if an object is described redundantly as
“large” or “small” this will influence how the size of this
object is perceived. Redundantly referring to a target object
as large (small) may cause people to perceive or remember
the target as larger (smaller) than when such a redundant
size modifier is not included in a description. Even though
we focus on redundant size adjectives here, we conjectured
that other redundant adjectives (e.g., referring to color)
could have similar effects (a possibility we discuss below).
Moreover, it has been argued that children are more
likely to derive false conversational implicatures than adults
(Siegal & Surian, 2004). On the one hand, we know from
earlier research that children have a general tendency to
regularly produce underspecified or ambiguous referring
expressions until they are about seven years old (Deutsch &
Pechmann, 1982; Matthews, Lieven, & Tomasello, 2007),
and before that age only marginally benefit from redundant
information in target identification (Sonnenschein, 1982;
Ackerman, Szymansi & Silver, 1990; Davies & Katsos,
2010). Indeed, one could argue that it requires relatively
sophisticated pragmatic reasoning to understand the
implications of redundant information in descriptions.
Therefore our second hypothesis is that children are more
susceptible to redundant size modifiers than adults when
making size estimates. Given that earlier work suggests that

the relevant pragmatic reasoning is under development until
children are about 7 years old, we test this both with child
participants of on average 7 years (Group 3 in the Dutch
elementary school system) and 10 years old (Group 6) in the
experiment.

The current studies
We test these two hypotheses in two experiments (one with
adults, one with children of two age groups), which rely on
the same basic idea: participants hear descriptions referring
to objects in a visual scene. Descriptions can either be
minimally specified or overspecified (containing a
redundant size modifier). After participants have processed
a description, the objects in the visual scene disappear from
view, and participants are asked to indicate how large they
think the target object (which no longer is visible) was.

Experiment 1: Adults
Method
Participants Participants were 68 undergraduate students
from Tilburg University (49 female) who participated for
partial course credits. Their mean age was 21.5 years (SD =
2.4). All were native speakers of Dutch, the language of the
experiment.

Figure 1: Example scene consisting of two same size chairs,
with different colors (may not be visible in a black and
white print). In the minimal condition, the target would be
referred to as “the red chair”, while in the overspecified
condition it would be “the large red chair”.
Materials Stimuli were created using pictures of furniture
items from the Object Databank, created by Michael Tarr
and colleagues, and often used in research on reference
(e.g., van Deemter, Gatt, van der Sluis & Power, 2012).
Three furniture items were selected for the current
experiment (chair, couch, desk), and manipulated for color
(either red or blue) and size (either large or small). Each
stimulus consisted of two objects, one target (the object
being referred to) and one distractor. There were 12
different targets (3 object types x 2 colors x 2 sizes), and the
left-right position of the target with respect to the distractor
was counterbalanced. In the critical stimuli, the distractor
was always of the same type and size as the target and only
differed in color (see Figure 1 for an example). Each target
was referred to once with a minimal description (e.g., “the
red chair”) and once with an overspecified description
containing a redundant size adjective (e.g., “the large red
chair” or “the small red chair”, depending on the size of the
target). This created a total of 12 x 2 = 24 critical trials. The

2773

Results and discussion

experiment also contained 24 filler trials, in which the visual
objects consisted of different types, sizes and colors.
Procedure During the experiment, individual participants
were seated in front of a computer screen, on which pairs of
objects were presented as in Figure 1, together with a prerecorded spoken description (e.g., “the [large] red chair”),
produced by a female speaker with neutral intonation (i.e.,
with nuclear stress on the noun and no pitch accent on the
adjective) and presented to participants over headphones.
After a fixed interval, both objects disappeared from the
screen and a horizontal slider appeared, together with the
question “How large was the _____?”, where the gap in this
question was filled by the type of the target (e.g., “chair”)
The slider had the shape of an elongated, isosceles triangle
with the tip (“small”) on the left- and the base (“large”) on
the right-hand side (see Figure 2). Upon appearance, the
slider handle was positioned in the middle; the handle had to
be moved before the participant could proceed to the next
stimulus. For analysis, the position after being set by the
participant was mapped to a score between 0 and 100 (with
higher number indicating larger size estimates).
In addition to the size question, participants were also
asked to indicate the color of each object referred to on a
one-dimensional saturation scale, ranging from lighter to
darker, again with the handle initially positioned in the
middle, on the assumption that a redundant mention of color
(like “red”) would cause participants to perceive an object
as “redder” than when color was not mentioned in a
description. However, no reliable effects of redundant color
adjectives were found, and we will not describe the results
of this measure further. In the general discussion we do
return to this issue.
Experiment 1 had a within-participants design: all
participants produced a size estimate for all targets. Stimuli
were presented in a random order. Before the actual
experiment started, a three trial training session (with a fan
as target object type) was presented, to make participants
familiar with the experimental set-up. After the training
session there was no further interaction between participants
and experimenter.

Figure 2: Slider used in Experiment 1 for size estimates.
Statistical analysis To test for significance, we conducted a
2 x 2 repeated measures Analysis of Variance (ANOVA),
with Size (levels: large, small) and Description (levels:
minimal, overspecified) as independent variables and
average size estimate as the dependent variable.

Figure 3 summarizes the results. First of all, a main effect of
Size was found, F(1,67) = 461.94, p < .001, η2 = .87. Large
targets were estimated to be larger (M = 60.45, 95% CI =
(57.83, 63.07)) than small ones (M = 23.17, 95% CI = (20,
26.34)). This serves as a manipulation check and indicates
that the slider worked exactly as intended. In addition, a
main effect of Description was found, F(1,67) = 5.30, p <
.05, η2 = .07. Targets that were referred to using an
overspecified description were estimated to be larger than
targets that were referred to using minimal descriptions.
Importantly, this main effect was qualified by an interaction
between Size and Description, F(1,67) = 15.16, p < .001, η2
= .18. This interaction can be explained by inspection of
Figure 3: large targets that are referred to redundantly are
estimated to be larger (M = 62.81, 95% CI = (59.85, 65.76)
than ones that are referred to minimally (M = 58.1, 95% CI
= (55.34, 60.85)), while small targets that are referred to
redundantly are estimated to be smaller (M = 22.10, 95% CI
= (18.88, 25.33)) than ones that are referred to minimally
(M = 24.24, 95% CI = (20.86, 27.62)).

Figure 3: Mean size estimates in millimeters (range 1-100)
for large and small objects for minimally specified
descriptions (e.g., “the red chair”) or overspecified ones
(“the large/small red chair”).
Experiment 1 clearly showed that adults are sensitive to
redundant size modifiers in distinguishing descriptions. In
Experiment 2, we conduct a comparable experiment with
child language users in two different age categories, to see
whether younger and older children are similarly sensitive
to redundant modifiers. In addition, in this experiment we
also vary the visual size of the target, to see whether size
differences between target and distractor influence any
effects of redundant size modifiers.

Experiment 2: Children
Method
Participants Sixty normally developing children were
included in the study, in two age groups: 30 younger
children (13 girls, 17 boys), with an average age of 7.1 years
(range: 6.6-8.3), all in Group 3 of the Dutch elementary

2774

school system; and 30 older ones (15 girls, 15 boys), with
an average age of 10.2 years (range: 8.7-11.5), all in Group
6. The children participating in this experiment were native
speakers of Dutch, the language of the experiment. All
children came from the Mgr. Zwijsenschool in Kerkdriel
(Gelderland, The Netherlands). Parental consent for
participation in the experiment was obtained for all children
prior to the experiment.
Materials Pictures of eight different photorealistic
children's toys (football, teddy bear, train, slide, rubber
duck, doll, boat, spin top) were used as targets in this
experiment (see Figure 4 for two representative examples).
Each target was presented together with one distractor toy.
Four different conditions were created for each of the eight
targets by varying the size of the distractor (which could
either be depicted as large as or smaller than the target) and
by varying the reference to the target (which could either
include a redundant size modifier or not), resulting in 8 x 4
= 32 critical trials. Note that in this experiment each target
could uniquely be identified by its type (“the football”), so
including a size adjective always resulted in an
overspecified description. In addition, eight control trials
were included, one for each target type, in which the target
was combined with a smaller object of the same type (e.g., a
small football), so that the size adjective in a description
such as “the large football” was informative and not
redundant. This allowed us to check whether any differences
in size-estimates for non-redundant adjectives between age
groups could be observed. In all 40 stimuli the left-right
position of the target with respect to the distractor was
counterbalanced.

was used, who realized each question with a neutral
intonation. Since the experiment was conducted in Dutch,
this implies that the nuclear stress always occurred on the
noun and the adjective was produced without a pitch accent.
Children were asked to indicate their size estimate on a
magnitude estimation scale of 100 millimeters (consisting of
a horizontal line without units of length added), with on the
left-hand side a picture of the target reduced by a factor of
1.5, and on the right hand side the same picture enlarged by
a factor of 1.5, in such a way that the real value was exactly
in between (remember that the target figure was not visible
to the child during the size estimation phase of the
experiment, so children could not directly map the
perceived size onto the scale). Children could indicate the
estimates on paper, using a booklet that was positioned in
front of them. After completing one trial, the next pair of
toys appeared on the screen. The entire experiment lasted
approximately 10 minutes. After the experiment, size
estimates were manually measured in millimeters, with
higher numbers indicating larger sizes. Measurements were
done blind for condition.
Design and analyses The experiment had a 2 x 2 x 2 mixed
design, with Description (minimal, overspecified) and Size
(target and distractor equally large, target larger than
distractor) as within-participant factors, Age group
(younger, older) as a between-participant factor and average
size estimate as the dependent variable. Tests for
significance were conducted using a repeated measures
ANOVA.

Figure 4: Examples of visual stimuli used in Experiment 2,
with two different children’s toys. Again the target could
either be referred to in a minimal way (“the ball”) or an
overspecified one (“the large ball”).
Procedure Children performed the experiment individually,
and were seated in front of a computer monitor in a quiet
room in the school building. The procedure for younger and
older children was exactly the same and went as follows:
after a brief training session, in which the magnitude
estimation scale was practiced, stimulus presentation started
with a pair of toys presented on a white background for 4
seconds. After this a white screen appeared for 8 seconds,
during which children were asked to answer a pre-recorded
question “How large was _____?” The gap in this question
was filled by a description of the target, which could either
be minimal (“the football”) or overspecified (“the large
football”). For the audio recordings, a male adult speaker

Figure 5: Mean size estimates in millimeters (range 1-100)
of younger (avg. 7.1 years) and older (avg. 10.2 years)
children for targets that were minimally specified (e.g., “the
ball”) or overspecified (“the large ball”).

Results and discussion
The results showed that Size had a significant impact on
children’s size estimates. If the distractor was smaller than
the target, children perceived the target as larger (M = 47.3,
95% CI = (42.39, 52.22)) than when both target and
distractor had the same size (M = 44.2, 95% CI = (39,6,
49.6)), F(1,58) = 5.22, p < .05, η2 = .08. In other words, size

2775

estimates are relative, even though the target always had the
same size. Crucially, we also found a significant effect of
Description on size estimates. If a target was referred to
with a redundant size modifier, children perceived it as
larger (M = 50.5, 95% CI = (44.99, 56.01)) than when the
reference did not include such a modifier (M = 41.43, 95%
CI = (36.98, 45.88)), F(1,58) = 47.03, p < .001, η2 = .45.
This effect was independent of whether the target was
visually larger than the distractor (no significant interaction
between Description and Size was found).
Interestingly, we did find a significant interaction
between Description and Age, revealing that older children
are less sensitive to redundant size modifiers than younger
ones, F(1,58) = 5.02, p < .05, η2 = .08. This interaction is
illustrated in Figure 5, showing that when the target is
minimally referred to (“the football”) the size estimates of
younger children (M = 41.7, 95% CI = (35.4, 48.0)) were
almost the same as those of older ones (M = 41.2, 95% CI =
(34.86, 47.45)), while overspecified descriptions (“the large
football”) caused younger children to make larger estimates
(M = 53.74, 95% CI = (45.94, 61.54)) than older ones (M =
47.26, 95% CI = (39.48, 55.06)). When we conducted a
separate analysis over the eight additional items which were
referred to using non-redundant modifiers, no significant
age differences in size estimates were found either,
suggesting that it is indeed only redundant size modifiers for
which younger children are more sensitive.
No further significant main effects or interactions were
found.

Figure 6: Average difference in size estimate in
millimeters for redundant and minimal description (“the
large X” minus “the X”) as a function of age (comparing
younger children, older children and adults).

General discussion
In two experiments we have shown that when target objects
are referred to using descriptions containing redundant size
modifiers (e.g., “the large red chair” in a situation where
two chairs are equally large but different in color),
participants subsequently estimate the object to be larger

than when objects are referred to using minimally
distinguishing descriptions (e.g., “the red chair”). In
Experiment 1, we showed this effect with adult language
users and with two different size modifiers (“large” and
“small”). In Experiment 2, the same effect is shown for
children of two different age groups (7- and 10-year olds),
but this time with descriptions for object of different types
(e.g., a ball and a teddy bear). Interestingly, this effect was
found to be independent of whether the target was actually
larger than the distractor or not; in both cases, a redundant
size modifier had a comparable effect.
Even though the two experiments were slightly different
in the way they were conducted (e.g., furniture targets and
digital size estimates in Experiment 1 versus children’s toys
and size estimates on paper in Experiment 2), the essential
idea was the same: participants had to process object
description which were either overspecified or minimal, and
after the objects had disappeared from view, they were
asked to estimate the perceived size of the target object that
had just been referred to on a scale from 1 to 100.
Therefore, it is interesting to plot the difference in size
estimates for overspecified and minimal description as a
function of age, as is done in Figure 6. Inspection of this
figure reveals a clear trend. We already saw in Experiment 2
that 7-year olds were more sensitive to redundant
information than 10-year olds, but the pattern for the 10
years olds seems comparable to that of the adults in
Experiment 1. A univariate ANOVA confirms this: overall,
there is a significant effect of age on the difference in size
estimates, F(2, 125) = 5.91, p < .01, η2 = .09, but pairwise
comparisons using the Bonferroni method showed that only
the younger children differ significantly from the other two
age groups. This appears to be consistent with the earlier
work (cited in the introduction) showing that children
younger than 8 still regularly produce referring expressions
that may be underspecified and do not benefit from
overspecified descriptions in target identification.
In this study we concentrated on redundant size modifiers,
and the question naturally arises whether different kinds of
adjectives could have similar effects. Our experiences with
color adjectives in Experiment 1 suggest that this may not
be the case. In particular, hearing a redundant description of
a target as “the large red chair” (when both chairs are red)
did not cause participants’ to perceive the target as ‘redder’
than when hearing a minimal description (“the large chair”).
Potentially, this could be due to the one-dimensional
saturation slider that was used (after all, colors differ along
multiple dimensions, also including lightness and hue, and it
is not entirely clear which corresponds to, say, ‘redness’).
Alternatively, it could be due to the fact that color is an
absolute property, while size is a relative one (e.g., Rips &
Turnbull, 1980). An adjective like “large” implies a
comparison (an object is only large compared to another
object), which may explain why participants are more likely
to modify a size than a color estimate. We leave this as an
issue for future research.

2776

Our current results suggest that including redundant
modifiers in a referring expression can be used strategically.
If a speaker subtly wants to emphasize a property of a
target, she can just mention it in a distinguishing
description, irrespective of whether it rules out any
distractors. In fact, mentioning any redundant property may
help in attracting attention to a particular target. Koolen,
Krahmer and Swerts (2012), in a study with children from
two age groups similar to the ones under study here, found
that when children were offered a choice between two
identical looking sweets, they opted significantly more often
for the one which was referred to in a redundant way (“this
red sweet”) than for the one that was minimally described
(“this sweet”), and even thought the former would taste
better than the latter. Interestingly, this effect was found to
be stronger for younger than for older children, confirming
that as they grow older, and their pragmatic skills increase,
children are less likely to be influenced by
overspecification.

Conclusion
Wrapping up, we can state that calling a giant both “big”
and “friendly” will make him seem larger than merely
calling him “friendly”, although the size of this effect is
presumably inversely proportional to the age of the
addressee.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Ellen Evers for her help with setting up
Experiment 1, and Maud Broekmeulen for her help with
conducting Experiment 2. We received financial support
from The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research,
(NWO, Vici grant 277-70-007), which is gratefully
acknowledged.

References
Ackermann, B., Szymanski, J. & Silver, D. (1990).
Children’s use of common ground in interpreting
ambiguous
referential
utterances.
Developmental
Psychology 26, 234-245.
Arts, A., Maes, A., Noordman, L. & Jansen, C. (2011).
Overspecification facilitates object identification. Journal
of Pragmatics, 43, 361-374.
Belke, E., & Meyer, A. (2002). Tracking the time course of
multidimensional stimulus discrimination: Analysis of
viewing patterns and processing times during “same”“different” decisions. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 237-266.
Dahl, R. (1982). The BFG. London: Jonathan Cape.
Dale, R. (1989). Cooking up referring expressions. In:
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 68–
75.
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretations
of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring
expressions. Cognitive Science, 18, 233–263.

Davies, C., & Katsos, N. (2010). Over-informative children:
Production/comprehension asymmetry or tolerance to
pragmatic violations? Lingua, 120, 1956-1972.
van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van der Sluis, I. & Power, R.
(2012). Generation of referring expressions: assessing the
Incremental Algorithm. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 799836.
van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van Gompel, R., & Krahmer, E.
(2012). Towards a computational psycholinguistics of
reference production. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(2),
166-183.
Deutsch, W. & Pechmann, T. (1982). Social interaction and
the development of definite descriptions. Cognition, 11,
159-184.
Engelhardt, P., Bailey, K. & Ferreira, F. (2006). Do
speakers and listeners observe the Gricean maxim of
quantity? Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 554-573.
Engelhardt, P.E., Demiral, S.B., & Ferreira, F. (2011).
Over-specified
referential
expressions
impair
comprehension: An ERP study. Brain and Cognition, 77,
304-314.
Frank, M., & Goodman, N. (2012). Predicting Pragmatic
Reasoning in Language Games. Science, 336, 998.
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation. In: Cole, P. &
Morgan, J. L. (Eds.), Speech Acts. Academic Press, New
York, 41-58.
Koolen, R., Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2011).
Factors causing overspecification in definite descriptions.
Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 3231-3250.
Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2012). The
effect of scene variation on the redundant use of color in
definite reference. Cognitive Science, to appear.
Koolen, R., Krahmer, E., & Swerts, M. (2012).
Developmental changes in children’s processing of
redundant information in definite object descriptions,
submitted.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (2007). How
toddlers and preschoolers learn to uniquely identify
objects for others: a training study. Child Development,
78, 1744-1759.
Olson, D.R. 1970. Language and thought: Aspects of a
cognitive theory of semantics. Psychological Review, 77,
257–273.
Paraboni, I., van Deemter, K. & Masthoff, J. (2007).
Making referents easy to identify. Computational
Linguistics, 33, 229-254.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 89-110.
Rips, L. & Turnbull, W. (1980). How big is big? Relative
and absolute properties in memory. Cognition, 8, 145174.
Siegal M. & Surian, L. (2004). Conceptual development and
conversational understanding. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, 534-538.
Sonnenschein, S. (1982). The effects of redundant
communication on listeners – when more is less. Child
Development, 53, 717-729.

2777

