UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Does Prospect Theory Reflect Heuristics’ Probability Sensitivity in Risky Choice?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1cc2r7sn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Suter, Renata
Pachur, Thorsten
Hertwig, Ralph

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Does Prospect Theory Reflect Heuristics’ Probability Sensitivity in
Risky Choice?
Renata S. Suter (suter@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Thorsten Pachur (pachur@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Ralph Hertwig (hertwig@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Abstract
Two prominent approaches to describing how people make
decisions between risky options are algebraic models and
heuristics. The two approaches are based on fundamentally
different algorithms and are thus usually treated as
antithetical, suggesting that they may be incommensurable.
Using cumulative prospect theory (CPT; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992) as an illustrative case of an algebraic
model, we demonstrate how algebraic models and
heuristics can mutually inform each other. Specifically, we
highlight that CPT describes decisions in terms of
psychophysical characteristics, such as diminishing
sensitivity to probabilities, and we show that this holds
even when the underlying process is heuristic in nature.
Our results suggest that algebraic models and heuristics
might offer complementary rather than rival modeling
frameworks and highlight the potential role of heuristic
principles in information processing for prominent
descriptive constructs in risky choice.
Keywords: cumulative prospect theory; probability
sensitivity; computational modeling; heuristics; risky
choice.

Introduction
How can risky decision making—in which people have
to choose between options offering different outcomes
with certain probabilities—best be modeled? Two
prominent approaches in decision research are algebraic
models and heuristics (e.g., Brandstätter, Gigerenzer, &
Hertwig, 2006; Payne, 1973; Payne, Bettman, & Johnson,
1993). Algebraic models follow the principle of
expectation maximization and use an algorithm that
integrates (some function of) probability and outcome
information multiplicatively to describe people’s risky
choices. Arguably the most prominent model in this
tradition is cumulative prospect theory (CPT; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992). According to CPT, options are
evaluated independently of each other. The model
invokes psychophysical constructs such as probability
sensitivity and loss aversion to account for characteristic
phenomena in choice, and quantifies them using
adjustable parameters. Heuristics, by contrast, are based
on simple principles of information processing, such as

sequential and limited search, dimensional comparison,
and aspiration levels; in contrast to algebraic models,
heuristics often go without integrating information, and
ignore part of the information (e.g., Payne et al., 1993;
Thorngate, 1980). Models of heuristics for risky choice
include the semiorder rule (Luce, 1956), the similarity
heuristic (Leland, 1994; Rubinstein, 1988), eliminationby-aspects (Tversky, 1972), and the priority heuristic
(Brandstätter et al., 2006).
Algebraic models and heuristics are often treated as
antithetical (e.g., Brandstätter et al., 2006; Payne, 1973;
Svenson, 1979). As pointed out by Lopes (1995),
however, this opposition may be unnecessary: “Some
models focus on the algebraic pattern of people’s risk
preferences, others on the content of their choice
processes [models of heuristics]. Although one might
suppose that these two kinds of accounts are alternate
ways of describing the same thing—indeed, that one kind
of model might eventually be reducible to the other—the
approaches have tended to be disjoint” (p. 177). To date,
however, the relationship between algebraic models and
heuristics has yet to be elaborated.
To close that gap, we use CPT (Tversky & Kahneman,
1992) as an illustrative case highlighting that algebraic
models offer a tool for describing characteristics of the
decision process in psychophysical terms; here, we focus
on the sensitivity to differences in probabilities. We
argue that diminished sensitivity to probability
information—as captured in CPT’s weighting
functions—can
result
from
lexicographic
and
noncompensatory processing of heuristics. As such, CPT
may offer a useful framework to represent heuristic
decision making in terms of established constructs such
as sensitivity to probability information. Conversely, as
heuristics are explicit with regard to the informationprocessing steps underlying a decision, elaborating the
relationship between heuristics and CPT might contribute
to a better understanding of the cognitive mechanisms
potentially underlying the characteristic shapes of CPT’s
weighting and value functions (cf. Hogarth & Einhorn,
1990). Overall, we thus suggest that the relationship
between the algebraic and heuristic models of risky
choice is complementary rather than adversarial.

	  
1408

In the following, we first briefly describe CPT’s
parametric framework and how its weighting functions
reflect sensitivity to probability information. Second, we
elaborate for one specific heuristic, the priority heuristic
(Brandstätter et al., 2006), how heuristic choices may be
reflected in CPT’s parameters. Specifically, we take
advantage of the fact that the degree to which the priority
heuristic attends to probability information depends on
the choice environment; using computer simulations, we
examine how this translates into differences in CPT’s
weighting function.

Probability Sensitivity in CPT
CPT assumes that decisions are made to maximize
expected return. More specifically, choices between risky
options are based on a person’s subjective valuation of
these options and then maximization. In CPT, the overall
valuation V of an option A is defined as
k

n

V (A) = ∑ v(x j )π −j + ∑ v(xi )π i+ .
j=1

(1)

i=k+1

v(x) is the value function, describing how an objective
outcome x is translated into a subjective value, and π+
(π−) is the weight given to a positive (negative) outcome
x (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) and depends on the
probability of the outcome.
CPT assumes a rank-dependent transformation of the
outcomes’ probabilities into decision weights.
Specifically, with outcomes x1 ≤ … ≤ xk ≤ 0 ≤ xk+1 ≤ … ≤
xn, the weight π+ (π−) given to a positive (negative)
outcome x is the difference between the probability of
receiving an outcome at least as good (bad) as x and the
probability of receiving an outcome better (worse) than x:

π i+ = w+ ( pi + ... + pn ) − w+ ( pi +1 + ... + pn ) for k < i < n
π −j = w_ ( p1 + ... + p j ) − w_ ( p1 + ... + p j −1 ) for 1 < j ≤ k

. (2)
w and w are the probability weighting functions for
gains and losses, respectively. They are assumed to have
an inverse S-shaped curvature. Different types of
weighting functions have been proposed (for an
overview, see Stott, 2006). We use the following twoparameter version that separates the curvature of the
weighting function from its elevation (e.g., Goldstein &
Einhorn, 1987; Gonzalez & Wu, 1999):
+

w + ( p) =
w − ( p) =

−

δ + pγ

+

γ+

+

δ + pγ + (1− p)
δ − pγ
−

.

(3)

−

γ−

δ − pγ + (1− p)

The parameters γ+ and γ− (both varying between 0 and
1) govern the amount of curvature of the function in the
gain and loss domains, respectively, and indicate how
sensitive decisions are to differences in probabilities
(with smaller values of γ < 1 resulting in more S-shaped
weighting functions, reflecting lower sensitivity to

differences in probabilities). The elevation of the
weighting functions for gains and losses is controlled by
the parameters δ+ and δ− (both > 0), respectively.
CPT has repeatedly been shown to be highly
successful in describing risky choices between monetary
gamble problems (e.g., Glöckner & Pachur, 2012; but see
Birnbaum, 2004; Brandstätter et al., 2006). As a
description of the underlying cognitive process, however,
CPT’s implied algebraic calculus and its commitment to
a multiplicative framework have not been unchallenged
(e.g., Brandstätter et al., 2006; Lopes, 1995). One such
challenge has been put forth by proponents of heuristics.
We turn to this modeling approach next.

Probability Sensitivity Resulting From Heuristic
Information Processing
In contrast to the integrative approach of CPT, heuristics
often ignore part of the information and do not integrate
information. They are based on simple principles of
information processing, such as sequential and limited
search, dimensional comparison, and aspiration levels
(e.g., Payne et al., 1993; Thorngate, 1980). Lexicographic
strategies, for instance, proceed through several
dimensions sequentially and stop at the first dimension
that enables a decision to be made (Fishburn, 1974;
Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC Research Group, 1999;
Thorngate, 1980). The priority heuristic (Brandstätter et
al., 2006), which is related to lexicographic semi-orders
(Luce, 1956; Tversky, 1969), belongs to this class. Its
architecture is based on established principles of bounded
rationality (e.g., Simon, 1955), such as sequential search,
stopping rules, and aspiration levels, and it assumes that
probabilities and outcomes are compared between
gambles, rather than integrated within gambles (as
assumed by CPT). For choices between two-outcome
gambles involving gains, the priority heuristic entails the
following steps:
1. Priority rule. Go through dimensions in the order
of minimum gain, probability of minimum gain, and
maximum gain.
2. Stopping rule. Stop examination if the minimum
gains differ by 1/10 (or more) of the maximum gain;
otherwise, stop examination if probabilities differ by 1/10
(or more) of the probability scale.
3. Decision rule. Choose the gamble with the more
attractive gain (probability).
(For losses, “gains” are replaced by “losses”; for
mixed gambles, “gains” are replaced by “outcomes.”)
Due to its stopping rule, the priority heuristic
considers probability information depending on the
structure of a gamble problem. The heuristic first
examines the (minimum) outcomes of the gambles. If this
reason discriminates, then probabilities will not be
examined. If, however, the outcomes fail to discriminate,
probabilities will be examined. That is, the priority
heuristic attends to probability information only when the
minimum outcomes do not differ. The heuristic’s

	  
1409

sensitivity to probability information is thus dependent
on the structure of the choice environment.

Heuristics’ Probability Sensitivity as Captured in
CPT’s Parametric Framework
These two approaches to model risky choice—CPT and
heuristics—are based on fundamentally different
algorithms. Whereas CPT considers all outcome and all
probability information, the priority heuristic considers
the reasons sequentially, and stops information search as
soon as a reason discriminates. Moreover, although CPT
may be a relatively flexible model due to its several
adjustable parameters (e.g., Gonzalez & Wu, 1999), it
still has important constraints: both the value and the
weighting function are restricted to be monotonic, the
value function is concave for gains and convex for losses,
and the weighting function is constrained to have an
inverse S-shaped curvature. Can CPT, given these
constraints and given its starkly different algorithmic
structure, nevertheless accommodate choices generated
by the priority heuristic and accurately reflect the degree
to which the heuristic attends to probability information?
In addressing this question, we strive to contribute to a
better understanding of the relationship between
algebraic models and heuristics. One crucial aspect of our
argument is that diminished sensitivity to probability
information may be due not only to psychophysical
regularities in magnitude evaluation, but also to the
limited attention that a heuristic devotes to probabilities.
More specifically, the weighting function’s γ parameter
(Equation 3), which reflects sensitivity to probabilities,
should differ systematically as a function of whether the
heuristic makes a choice based on the first reason
(outcome) or the second reason (probability). The less
frequently the priority heuristic considers probabilities in
a set of gamble problems, the lower the resulting value of
the γ parameter should be. Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968)
made a similar proposal more than 40 years ago,
suggesting that “increases [in] the saliency of the money
dimensions and decreases [in] the relative importance of
the probabilities” should lead to “relatively flat [i.e.,
more strongly S-shaped] subjective probability
functions” (p. 16). Next, we test this suggestion using a
computer simulation.

Computer Simulation
We created three sets of two-outcome gamble problems,
each including 180 randomly generated problems with
similar expected values: 60 gain, 60 loss, and 60 mixed
problems (cf. Rieskamp, 2008). Across the three sets, we
varied the percentage of problems in which the minimum
gains (losses) discriminated between the gambles (i.e.,
that differed by at least 10% of the highest gain or loss).
In the first set, the minimum gains (losses) discriminated
in 75% of the cases, and the priority heuristic therefore
only proceeded to the second reason—the probability of
the minimum gains (losses)—in 25% of the cases; in the

second set, the minimum gains (losses) discriminated in
50% of the gamble problems, and the heuristic therefore
proceeded to the probability information in the remaining
50% of the cases; in the third set, the minimum gains
(losses) differed in only 25% of the cases, and the
heuristic therefore proceeded to the probabilities in 75%
of the cases. The gambles were constructed such that if
the heuristic proceeded to the probability information,
this reason always discriminated. We predicted that
CPT’s probability sensitivity parameter γ fitted to the
priority heuristic’s choices would increase across the
problem sets.
We simulated the choices of the priority heuristic in all
three problem sets and subsequently fitted CPT’s
weighting functions and value functions, respectively, to
these choices, separately for each set. Our
implementation of CPT had six adjustable parameters: α
(= β) and λ for the value function, γ, δ+ and δ− for the
weighting function, and φ for the choice rule necessary to
derive predicted choice probabilities (see below). 1 To
reflect CPT’s main assumptions (e.g., an inversely Sshaped probability weighting function, a concave value
function for gains, and a convex value function for
losses; see Tversky & Kahneman, 1992), in the parameter
estimation procedure the parameter values were restricted
as follows (see Rieskamp, 2008): 0 < α ≤ 1; 0 < λ ≤ 5; 0 <
γ ≤ 1; 0 < δ± ≤ 4; 0 < φ ≤ 5. The deviation between CPT’s
predictions and the heuristic’s choices was quantified
using the likelihood measure G2 (e.g., Sokal & Rohlf,
1994), with a smaller G2 indicating a better fit:
N

G 2 = −2∑i =1 ln[ f i ( y θ )]

,

(4)

where N refers to the total number of choices, and f(y|θ)
refers to the probability with which CPT, given a
particular set of parameter values θ, predicts an
individual choice y. If gamble A was chosen, then f(y|θ)
= pi(A,B), where pi(A,B) is the predicted probability that
gamble A is chosen over gamble B; if gamble B was
chosen, then f(y|θ) = 1 – pi(A,B). To determine pi(A,B),
we applied an exponential version of Luce’s (1956)
choice rule (also known as softmax):

pi (A, B) =

eϕV ( A)
eϕV ( A) + eϕV (B) ,

(5)
where V(A) and V(B) represent the subjective valuation
of the gambles A and B according to CPT, and φ > 0
specifies how sensitively the predicted choice probability
reacts to differences between the gambles’ subjective
valuations V(A) and V(B), with higher values indicating
higher sensitivity. In the fitting procedure, we first

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

We set α = β, as Nilsson, Rieskamp, and Wagenmakers (2011)
have shown that estimating separate exponents of the value
function for gains and losses (i.e., α and β) can lead to
unreliable estimates of λ (see also Wakker, 2010). We set
−
γ+ = γ , as the priority heuristic treats probabilities equally
across gains and losses.

	  
1410

Table 1: Parameter estimates obtained when fitting CPT
to the choices of the priority heuristic where the decision
was made on the first reason (minimum gain/loss) in
25%, 50%, or 75% of the cases, respectively, and on the
second reason (probability of the minimum gain/loss)
otherwise.
%
Decisions
on first
reason

Parameter estimates
γ

δ+

δ−

α

λ

φ

G2

75%

0.32

0.01

0.15

1.0

2.06

0.34

84.25

50%

0.50

0.05

0.49

1.0

1.30

0.15

153.45

1.00

0.13

0.45

1.0

1.18

0.21

108.54

25%
2

Note. G assuming random choice is 249.53.

implemented a grid search to identify the parameter
values that minimize G2; the 20 best-fitting combinations
of grid values were then used as starting points for
subsequent optimization using the simplex method
(Nelder & Mead, 1965), as implemented in MATLAB.

Results
Table 1 shows the best-fitting CPT parameters when
fitted to the simulated choices of the priority heuristic in
gamble problems where the decision was made on the
minimum gain (loss) in 75%, 50%, or 25% of the cases,
respectively, and on the probability of the minimum gain
(loss) otherwise. As can be seen—and as predicted—the
probability sensitivity parameter γ increased across the
sets; it was lowest in the set where the priority heuristic
decided on the first reason (minimum outcome) in the
majority of cases and it was highest in the set where the
heuristic decided on the second reason (probability of the
minimum outcome) in the majority of cases. In other

A

B

Gains
1

25%

Decision Weight

Decision Weight

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Probability

0.8

1

Discussion
CPT models decisions based on a compensatory
algorithm where outcomes and probabilities are
integrated multiplicatively and summed up separately
within each option. The priority heuristic, in contrast,
models decisions based on sequential information

C

Losses
1

75%
50%

0.8

words, CPT accurately reflected the different degrees to
which the priority heuristic attended to probability
information across the three sets.
Panels A and B of Figure 1 plot the weighting
functions based on the best-fitting parameters, separately
for the gain and loss domains. Irrespective of domain, for
choices that only considered probabilities in 25% of the
cases, the weighting function was most strongly Sshaped, indicating low sensitivity to probability
information; for choices that considered probabilities in
half of the cases, it was comparatively less S-shaped; and
for choices that considered probabilities in 75% of the
cases, it was least S-shaped. (Note that the differences in
shapes of the weighting function between the gain and
loss domains were due to differences in the elevation
parameters; i.e., δ+ and δ−).
The best-fitting parameter values of the priority
heuristic’s choices in the three problem sets are
summarized in the parameter profiles in Panel C in
Figure 1.
Interestingly, CPT did not fit equally well to the
choices across the three problem sets (see G2 in Table 1).
Specifically, the fit was best when most choices (75%)
were made on the first reason, worsened when 50%
considered probabilities, and improved again when only
25% of the choices were made on the first reason. CPT is
thus apparently better able to fit choice sets where a
substantial proportion of choices stop examination on the
same reason than when choices are based on different
reasons (as in the 50% choice set).

γ"
+

0.8

δ+"

0.6

δ-"

0.4

α"

0.2

λ"

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Probability

0.8

1

ϕ"

75% on first reason
50% on first reason
25% on first reason

−

Low
Low

High
High

Parameter values

Figure 1: Panels A (gains) and B (losses) plot the weighting functions obtained when fitting cumulative prospect theory
to the choices of the priority heuristic in gambles where the decision was made on the minimum gain (loss) in 75%,
50%, or 25%, respectively, and on the probability of the minimum gain (loss) otherwise. Panel C shows the parameter
profiles of CPT’s value and weighting function parameters fitted to the choices of the priority heuristic in the three
gamble sets (as the parameters differed in their scale, they were normalized for this graph; for the exact parameter
values, see Table 1).

	  
1411

processing and compares outcomes and probabilities
between the options. Despite these stark differences, our
result is that CPT is able to represent choices generated
by the priority heuristic in a psychologically meaningful
manner: the weighting function’s curvature reflects
differences in the heuristic’s sensitivity to probability
information between the three choice environments that
differed in how frequently choices were decided based on
the probability dimension.
Taken together, our results thus demonstrate that
although CPT is based on a different algorithmic
architecture than heuristics, its parametric framework
might offer a useful tool for characterizing heuristic
processes in terms of prominent descriptive constructs
such as probability sensitivity (for a discussion of other
constructs of CPT, such as risk aversion, loss aversion,
and outcome sensitivity, see Suter, Pachur, & Hertwig,
2013a). Conversely, the integration of the two
approaches might enable hypotheses to be derived about
the processes generating the characteristic shapes of
CPT’s functions.
Our finding that specific values of CPT’s γ parameter
can reflect the processing steps of a lexicographic
heuristic—that is, whether probability information was
called upon or not—has important implications for the
use of CPT in empirical investigations of risky choice:
CPT’s parameters might help to identify the interaction
of a heuristic with its environment; moreover, they might
help to identify the use of different heuristics by different
individuals within the same environment, or of different
heuristics by the same individual across different
environments.
The demonstrated relationship between CPT, the
information processing architecture of a heuristic, and the
structure of the environment could explain apparent
inconsistencies in empirical investigations (see also
Hertwig & Gigerenzer, 2011)—for instance, why the
same person’s sensitivity to probability information
appears low at some times and high at others. Such
observations of variability need not mean that CPT’s
parameters cannot be measured reliably, or that different
heuristics are used. They could arise from the interaction
of a heuristic’s lexicographic architecture with various
choice environments. If decision problems are
constructed such that a user of the priority heuristic is
always able to terminate search after examining the
options’ minimum outcomes, the person’s probability
sensitivity will appear low. If they are constructed such
that the same person must always move beyond the
minimum outcomes and examine their probabilities, the
person will seem to be highly sensitive to probabilities.
Relatedly, the elaborated relationship between CPT
and heuristic processing not only allows the interactions
of a heuristic to be tracked across different environments,
but it may also allow differences in strategy selection
between individuals within the same environment to be
identified. It therefore suggests an alternative
interpretation of the observed link between CPT’s

parameters and variables that influence risky choice, such
as gender. Fehr-Duda, De Gennaro, and Schubert (2006),
for instance, concluded that women tend to be less
sensitive to probability changes than men (see also Booij
& van de Kuilen, 2009). To the extent that CPT reflects
differences in terms of probability sensitivity also
between strategies, this finding might indicate that men
and women rely on different strategies that differ with
regard to their probability sensitivity.
Moreover, CPT’s parameters might not only reveal
differences between individuals, but also within an
individual. For instance, a decision maker might use
different strategies for different contexts. In a study on
the difference between affect-rich and affect-poor risky
choice, Suter, Pachur, and Hertwig (2013b) found that
people’s choices in affect-rich tasks were consistent with
a more strongly inverse S-shaped weighting function
relative to choices in affect-poor tasks. However, in a
model comparison, they found that in affect-rich choices
the majority of the participants were better described by
the minimax heuristic, a choice strategy that neglects
probabilities and only decides based on the minimum
outcomes, than by CPT; in affect-poor tasks, in contrast,
participants were better described by a strategy that is
sensitive to probabilities. Thus, the differences apparent
on the weighting function could indicate the selection of
a different strategy. Similarly, Abdellaoui, Diecidue, and
Öncüler (2011) reported that, relative to lotteries with
immediate outcomes, people’s responses to lotteries with
delayed outcomes are consistent with a less inverse Sshaped curvature (indicating higher probability
sensitivity). The authors hypothesized that this difference
might be due to a decreased anticipated emotional
reaction the more delayed lotteries are (cf. Rottenstreich
& Hsee, 2001). Again, the impact observed on the
weighting function might thus reflect the use of different
strategies.
Thus, rather than merely describing contextual or
individual differences in prospect theory’s concepts, such
as differences in probability sensitivity, one could go one
step further and use differences on CPT’s parameters to
hypothesize about individual differences in terms of
information processing and strategy use. By better
understanding how information processing as embodied
in heuristics manifests in CPT’s parameters, we can gain
a more cognitive perspective on CPT and its parametric
framework (for an ecological account of the shape of
CPT’s functions, see Stewart, Chater, & Brown, 2006).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Swiss National Science
Foundation grants to Thorsten Pachur (100014 125047/2)
and Ralph Hertwig (100014 126558/1), and by a grant
from the German Research Foundation (DFG) as part of
the priority program “New Frameworks of Rationality”
(SPP 1516) to Ralph Hertwig and Thorsten Pachur (HE
2768/7-1).

	  
1412

References
Abdellaoui, M., Decidue, E., & Öncüler, A. (2011). Risk
preferences at different time periods: An experimental
investigation. Management Science, 57, 975–987.
Birnbaum, M. H. (2004). Tests of rank-dependent utility
and cumulative prospect theory in gambles represented
by natural frequencies: Effects of format, event
framing, and branch splitting. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 95, 40–65.
Booij, A. S., & van de Kuilen, G. (2009). A parameterfree analysis of the utility of money for the general
population under prospect theory. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 30, 651–666.
Brandstätter, E., Gigerenzer, G., & Hertwig, R. (2006).
The priority heuristic: Making choices without tradeoffs. Psychological Review, 113, 409–432.
Fehr-Duda, H., De Gennaro, M., & Schubert, R. (2006).
Gender, financial risk, and probability weights. Theory
and Decision, 60, 283–313.
Fishburn, P. C. (1974). Lexicographic orders, utilities and
decision rules: A survey. Management Science, 20,
1442–1471.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research
Group. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Glöckner, A., & Pachur, T. (2012). Cognitive models of
risky choice: Parameter stability and predictive
accuracy of prospect theory. Cognition, 123, 21–32.
Goldstein, W. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1987). Expression
theory and the preference reversal phenomena.
Psychological Review, 94, 236–254.
Gonzalez, R., & Wu, G. (1999). On the shape of the
probability weighting function. Cognitive Psychology,
38, 129–166.
Hertwig, R., & Gigerenzer, G. (2011). Behavioral
inconsistencies do not imply inconsistent strategies.
Frontiers in Cognition, 2:292.
Hogarth, R. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1990). Venture theory:
A model of decision weights. Management Science, 36,
780–803.
Leland, J. W. (1994). Generalized similarity judgments:
An alternative explanation for choice anomalies.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 9, 151–172.
Lopes, L. L. (1995). Algebra and the process in the
modeling of risky choice. The Psychology of Learning
and Motivation, 32, 177–220.
Luce, R. D. (1956). Semiorders and a theory of utility
discrimination. Econometrica, 24, 178–191.
Nelder, J. A., & Mead, R. (1965). A simplex method for
function minimization. Computer Journal, 7, 308–313.
Nilsson, H., Rieskamp, J., & Wagenmakers, E. (2011).
Hierarchical Bayesian parameter estimation for
cumulative prospect theory. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 55, 84–93.
Payne, J. W. (1973). Alternative approaches to decision
making under risk: Moments versus risk dimensions.
Psychological Bulletin, 80, 439–453.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993).

The adaptive decision maker. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Rieskamp, J. (2008). The probabilistic nature of
preferential choice. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34,
1446–1465.
Rottenstreich, Y., & Hsee, C. K. (2001). Money, kisses,
and electric shocks: An affective psychology of risk.
Psychological Science, 12, 185–190.
Rubinstein, A. (1988). Similarity and decision-making
under risk (Is there a utility theory resolution to the
Allais-paradox?). Journal of Economic Theory, 46,
145–153.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational
choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99–118.
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1968). Relative importance
of probabilities and payoffs in risk taking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Monograph, 78, 1–18.
Sokal, R. R., & Rohlf, F. J. (1994). Biometry: The
principles and practice of statistics in biological
research. New York, NY: Freeman.
Stewart, N., Chater, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2006).
Decision by sampling. Cognitive Psychology, 53, 1–26.
Stott, H. P. (2006). Cumulative prospect theory’s
functional menagerie. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
32, 101–130.
Suter, R. S., Pachur, T., & Hertwig, R. (2013a).
Heuristics of risky choice and cumulative prospect
theory: Toward a theory integration. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Suter, R. S., Pachur, T., & Hertwig, R. (2013b). How to
model the impact of affect on risky choice: Distorted
probability weighting or probability neglect?
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Svenson, O. (1979). Process descriptions of decision
making. Organizational Behaviour and Human
Performance, 23, 86–112.
Thorngate, W. (1980). Efficient decision heuristics.
Behavioral Science, 25, 219–225.
Tversky, A. (1969). Intransitivity of preferences.
Psychological Review, 76, 31–48.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of
choice. Psychological Review, 79, 281–299.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–
323.
Wakker, P. P. (2010). Prospect theory for risk and
ambiguity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.

	  
1413

