UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Do Readers Explain the Occurrence of Conflicts in Science Texts? Effects of
Presentation Format and Source Expertise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8nm135sb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Stadtler, Marc
Scharrer, Lisa
Bromme, Rainer

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Do Readers Explain the Occurrence of Conflicts in Science Texts? Effects of
Presentation Format and Source Expertise
Marc Stadtler (marc.stadtler@uni-muenster.de)
Lisa Scharrer (lisa.scharrer@uni-muenster.de)
Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21, 48149 Münster, Germany

Abstract
The present study set out to investigate the influence of two
metatextual features-presentation format and source expertiseon lay readers’ explanation of conflicts in scientific
information. Secondary school students read partly conflicting
information about a medical topic, which was either presented
in one single document or in four different documents, and
which was purportedly authored by lay or expert sources.
Results show that readers deemed deficits in source expertise
(source explanations) more likely to account for conflicts in
information written by lay authors than for conflicts reported
by experts. In addition, conflicts presented by experts and
conflicts in multiple documents were explained more strongly
by referring to the nature of knowledge and knowledge
production
(epistemic
explanations).
Our
findings
demonstrate that readers are sensitive to situational variations
when considering the most likely explanations for scientific
conflicts. Implications for readers’ adequate understanding
and subjective resolution of scientific controversies are
discussed.
Keywords: multiple document comprehension; science
understanding; folk philosophy/sociology of science.

Introduction
Generating explanations is key to comprehending
scientific texts, be it in school or in settings of informal
learning (Otero & Graesser, 2001). Explanations help
readers to understand why phenomena mentioned in a text
occur and how they relate to one another. Furthermore,
readers may adapt their further text processing depending on
whether they manage to generate satisfactory explanations
and thus develop a coherent mental model of the described
situation. Given the important role of explanations in lay
readers’ handling of scientific texts, the present study sheds
light on factors that influence readers’ generation of
explanations, specifically, their explanations for conflict in
science texts.
In generating explanations, readers draw on their folk
science, that is, their own fragmentary understanding of the
ontological world (Keil, 2010). Graesser and Bertus (1998),
for example, demonstrated that science text readers use their
prior knowledge to produce an especially high number of
inferences about the causal antecedents of an event.
Moreover, Costa, Caldeira, Gallástegui, and Otero (2000)
report that secondary-school students reading science texts
asked a high number of questions of which the vast majority

pertained to causal explanations for the described
phenomena.
An especially important catalyst for reader-generated
explanations is the occurrence of conflicts in text (Otero &
Graesser, 2001). Clashes of knowledge claims potentially
stand in the way of attaining unambiguous knowledge about
the world and thus call for the reader’s attention. That said,
developing an explanation for why two authors disagree
potentially helps readers to restore coherence and eventually
take a personal stance on a controversy.
However, conflicting stances on a scientific issue cannot
be explained by a reader’s folk science alone. Instead
readers may draw on their assumptions about how
knowledge in the given discipline is structured and
produced. In addition, readers may draw on assumptions
about how knowledge is distributed between individuals and
how knowledge communication is tied to individuals’
personal interests. Following Keil’s notion of folk science,
one might term the former assumptions as belonging to an
individual’s folk philosophy of science1 whereas the latter
assumptions belong to a folk sociology of science.
Bromme, Thomm, and Wolf (2013) report an interview
study demonstrating how laypersons spontaneously generate
a rich set of explanations drawing on these assumptions.
Based on a sample controversy on the causation of a
medical condition, laypersons (undergraduates from nonmedical subjects) and intermediates (advanced medical
students) were asked how they would generally explain the
occurrence of conflicts in medical knowledge. Participants
provided a rich variety of possible explanations. These fell
into two major categories, of which the first one related to
the nature of knowledge and knowledge production. The
category reflects the structural complexity of scientific
knowledge and the discursive nature of knowledge
production with differences in methodology or research
questions leading to incompatible research results. The
highest number of explanations provided by laypersons and
intermediates fell into this category. A second set of
1
We refer to laypeople’s assumptions about scientific
knowledge and knowledge production as folk philosophy of
science in reference to Keil’s (2010) terminology. In other
approaches, such assumptions are conceptualized as
epistemological beliefs or nature of science beliefs. While these
conceptualizations originate from different research traditions, they
nevertheless overlap in terms of their reference to individual’s
beliefs about what scientific knowledge is and how it is justified.

3448

explanations provided by both groups of participants
focused on the source of information as the reason for
conflicts. Participants explained conflicts with differences in
the training and expertise of sources, or, to a lesser extent,
with differences in the sources’ interest or motivation. The
study by Bromme et al. may be taken as tentative evidence
that laypersons, at least those with a higher educational
background, successfully draw on their folk philosophy and
folk sociology of science to explain the occurrence of
conflicts. What is currently essentially lacking, however, are
empirical insights into the situational factors that determine
which type of explanation readers prefer. Insights into these
mechanisms could possibly inform research on public
understanding of science and text comprehension.
The present study
With our present study we set out to research whether
readers’ preferred conflict explanations depend on
metatextual information about the sources providing the
information and its presentation format. Our approach was
informed by a recent study that examined how metatextual
information impacts lay readers’ understanding of a
controversial
scientific
issue
(Stadtler,
Scharrer,
Brummernhenrich, & Bromme, 2013). Stadtler et al.
presented participants with partly conflicting information on
a medical issue. Presentation format and source expertise
were systematically varied. The information was either
presented in one single document by a single author or
spread across four documents presented by different
authors. In addition, the information was either purportedly
written by expert sources (medical doctors) or lay sources
(high school students). Results revealed that readers of
multiple documents exhibited better memory for conflicts
and were more likely to acknowledge the controversial
nature of information in a subsequent knowledge
communication task. How readers reported conflicting
information also depended on source expertise. The
variation of presentation format only mattered for expert
information, which readers deemed worthy of effortful
processing. The study by Stadtler et al. thus demonstrates
that readers are sensitive to metatextual information in terms
of memory for and use of conflicting scientific information.
However, it deserves further clarification whether variations
in presentation format and source expertise also effect on
readers’ preferred explanations for the occurrence of
scientific conflicts.
The conceptual link behind this assumption is that
metatextual information may differentially activate readers’
tacit assumptions about how knowledge is structured and
produced (i.e. their folk philosophy of science) and how it is
distributed between individuals (i.e. their folk sociology of
science). Presenting science information in multiple
documents, for instance, may particularly highlight its
complexity and the discursive nature of knowledge
production (Britt & Aglinskas, 2002; Wiley & Voss, 1999).
As a result readers of multiple documents may prefer
epistemic explanations for the occurrence of conflicts. A

presentation of the same information in a single document,
in contrast, may rather downplay the discursive nature of
scientific knowledge production stimulating readers to a
lesser degree to forward conflict explanations of an
epistemic kind.
The degree to which readers prefer epistemic explanations
may also depend on variations of source information.
Conflicts in expert information should be regarded as
particularly representative of the underlying scientific
discipline, thus stimulating epistemic conflict explanations.
In contrast, when scientific conflicts are presented by lay
authors, this may not activate readers’ folk philosophy of
science to the same degree resulting in fewer epistemic
explanations.
Both metatextual factors are also likely to influence
readers’ preference for source explanations as the reason for
conflicting information. Since readers should consider
laypeople more prone to mistakes than experts, information
authored by lay sources should more strongly stimulate
readers to explain conflicts with deficits of source expertise.
Moreover, readers might interpret unresolved conflicts
presented by a single author in a single text as indicative of
the author’s lack of understanding of the subject matter. As
a result deficits in source expertise should appear more
appropriate for explaining conflicts if contradictions occur
within a single text rather than between multiple documents.
In spite of this reasoning, whether or not lay readers’
explanation of conflicting science information is in fact
determined by source expertise and presentation format is
by no means a trivial question. So far, it is not clear whether
readers are at all sensitive to situational factors when
explaining encountered conflicts, or whether they have
preconceived ideas of which conflict explanation is most
relevant, irrespective of situational variations. Moreover, it
is unclear whether lay readers use the provided author and
document information (student vs. doctor; single vs.
multiple documents) to draw conclusions about the most
appropriate conflict explanations. Readers’ reliance on
source expertise is particularly uncertain in light of previous
findings showing a notorious lack of spontaneous attention
to source information (e.g., Bråten, Strømsø & Salmerón,
2011; Britt & Aglinskas, 2002; Kammerer, Gerjets, &
Werner, 2011; Wineburg, 1991).
Assuming that lay readers are sensitive to metatextual
information when determining the most likely explanation
for encountered conflicts, we formulate the following
hypotheses:
Epistemic explanations: We expected an epistemic
explanations to be deemed more likely by those reading
multiple documents compared to participants encountering a
a single document (H1a). Similarly, we hypothesized that
readers consider epistemic explanations more appropriate
for conflicts encountered in expert texts compared to
conflicts in lay texts (H1b).
Source explanations: Furthermore, we expected that
readers deem source explanations to better account for
conflicts encountered in lay texts than conflicts encountered

3449

in expert texts (H2a). In addition, reading a conflict in a
single document should be explained more strongly with a
lacking ability of the author than a conflict that exists
between different sources (H2b).
It should be noted that readers might also explain
perceived contradictions with their own lacking competence
to correctly understand the provided information. In this
case, they would blame themselves for the inability to form
a coherent mental representation rather than interpreting the
perceived inconsistency as an objective conflict. Our focus
was on situations in which readers can be rather certain of
the objective existence of conflicts, and we therefore did not
expect any impact of metatextual factors on such selfrelated explanations. However, it is important to account for
the possibility of self-related explanations when
investigating readers’ conflict explanations, particularly
when focusing on laypeople confronted with expert
information.

Method
Participants, design, and task
A total of 244 German secondary school students were
recruited randomly during an open day at a German
university. Students participated voluntarily and without
payment. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
four experimental groups following a 2 (text presentation
format: single document vs. multiple documents) × 2
(source expertise: high vs. low) factorial design. Participants
worked on a scenario developed in previous research
(Stadtler & Bromme, 2008) in which a fictitious friend, who
has been diagnosed as having a high cholesterol level, is
having to decide whether to take action to lower it.
Participants were asked to support an informed decision by
reading conflicting texts about the topic cholesterol. After
reading participants provided explanations for the conflict
they read. Forty-two students (18%) were not analyzed
further because they failed to identify the conflict in the
reading task. The data of another four students were
dropped from analyses because they judged their medical
knowledge to be good or very good on a five-point Likert
scale ranging from very poor to very good. All other
students provided lower self-assessments of their medical
knowledge and therefore can be regarded as laypersons with
regards to medicine. Hence, our final sample contained 194
participants (85% female, mean age = 17.76; SD = .92).

Materials
The materials used in this study consisted of two
controversial medical issues on the topic of cholesterol that
were described in four text passages. Each controversial
issue consisted of two opposing standpoints. Each
standpoint was mentioned in only one text passage. Claims
were not marked as conflicting; hence conflicts had to be
inferred by the reader. For instance, one text passage stated
that a diet with low-cholesterol products is an effective
means to lower one’s level of cholesterol whereas another

text passage contained contradictory information. The
second conflict addressed the threshold level of blood
cholesterol beyond which there is a high risk of
arteriosclerosis. Whereas one text passage argued for a
universal threshold value of 200 mg/dl, another text passage
claimed that the threshold value for cholesterol varies
individually. The amount of filler information was
minimalized to ensure that readers succeeded in recognizing
the textual conflicts. The whole text information comprised
202 words in the case of the nutrition conflict and 227
words in the case of the threshold value conflict,
respectively. Note that participants read only one conflict,
i.e., either the text passages presenting the nutrition conflict
or the text passages presenting threshold value conflict. This
was done to unambiguously link readers’ conflict
explanations to a specific conflict. Text passages were
displayed on a computer screen and depending on the
experimental condition were presented either as two
separate web sites by two different authors (in the multiple
documents condition) or as one web site by a single author
(in the single document condition). In addition, source
information was varied by introducing the information as
stemming from one or two medical doctors (in the expert
source condition) or from one or two high school students
(in the lay source condition). To control for contingency
effects (Mayer, 2005), participants reading a single
document worked with a similar navigation structure to
those reading multiple documents. Participants could access
the four text nodes via a table of contents linking to the
nodes within the web site.

Dependent variables
Explanation of textual conflicts Participants who had
indicated that they noticed the conflict in the text materials
were then asked to rate “to what degree do the following
statements explain the occurrence of the conflict you have
just found?” on 6-point Likert scales. Statements were
constructed to measure preference of epistemic explanations
(5 items relating to the nature of knowledge and knowledge
production), source explanations (5 items relating to the
expertise and motivation of sources), and self-related
explanations (5 items relating to one’s own ability to
comprehend the conflicting information). For example, the
statement “There are no clear answers to many medical
questions,” was intended to measure epistemic explanations;
the statement “The author made a mistake,” to measure
source explanations; and “I don’t have enough topic
knowledge to solve the conflict, but an expert could” selfrelated explanations. Psychometric properties of the
inventory are reported in the results section along with the
empirical examination of the factorial structure.
Procedure After first providing information on
demographic variables and assessing their own medical
knowledge, participants were instructed to read the text
materials and take notes of any conflict they encounter. The
instructions for this reading task gave participants a
definition and example of contradictory information. Only

3450

Table 1: Mean ratings of explanations (standard deviations in parentheses) as a function of presentation format and source
expertise.
Single Document
Multiple Documents
Type of explanation
Lay source
Expert source
Lay source
Expert source
n = 43
n = 50
n = 48
n = 53
Epistemic explanation
2.68 (.96)
2.81 (1.14)
3.01 (1.20)
3.64 (1.16)
Source explanation
3.89 (.93)
2.97 (.83)
3.81 (.97)
3.37 (.92)
Self-related explanation

1.95 (.80)

when participants noticed textual conflicts had they to report
their explanations regarding these contradictions on the
rating scale. Finally, participants were debriefed. The whole
session lasted an average of 20 min.

Results
Because similar patterns of results were obtained for the two
conflict topics (nutrition conflict and threshold value
conflict), all analyses reported hereafter were conducted on
data that were aggregated across conflict topics.

Explanation dimensions
To validate the factorial structure of the explanation
inventory on empirical grounds, we subjected the 15 items
to an exploratory factor analysis (ML-extraction, oblimin
rotation). Three different analyses were run, in which we
requested a forced two-, three, and four factor solution,
respectively. An inspection of the screeplot confirmed that
the best solution was the expected three-factor structure
(KMO = .78; Bartlett’s test χ2(105) = 900.97, p < .001;
share of explained variance = 42.20%). This solution also
revealed the lowest number of double loadings and hence
offered a maximum of conceptual clarity. All items had
their highest loading on the factor they were intended to
contribute to; hence, the theoretically motivated factor
labels (epistemic, source, and self-related explanation) were
retained. Internal consistencies for the explanation
dimension ranged from good (epistemic explanations:
Cronbach’s alpha = .87) to acceptable (self-related
explanations: Cronbach’s alpha = .74; source explanations:
Cronbach’s alpha = .62).

Influence of conflict type and source expertise on
attribution
Table 1 reports mean ratings of conflict explanations and
standard deviations as a function of presentation format and
source expertise. To test the assumption that presentation
format and source expertise influenced conflict explanation,
we computed a mixed ANOVA with type of explanation as
within-subject factor and presentation format and source
expertise as between-subject factors. Results showed a
strong effect of type of explanation, F(1.84, 349.5) =
103.18, p < .001, part. η² = .352. An inspection of means
indicates that this effect was due to readers deeming source
explanations to best account for conflicts (M = 3.40; SD =

2.21 (.86)

2.10 (1.03)

2.11 (.82)

.99), followed by epistemic explanations (M = 3.06; SD =
1.18) and finally by self-related explanations (M = 2.10; SD
= .88). However, this effect was qualified by the two
possible two-way interactions (the three-way interaction, in
contrast, did not reach significance). Firstly, there was an
interaction between presentation format and type of
explanation, F(1.84, 349.5) = 4.15, p = .019, part. η² = .021.
Moreover, the interaction between source expertise and type
of explanation was significant, F(1.84, 349.5) = 15.27, p <
.001, part. η² = .074. To further examine the nature of these
interactions, separate univariate follow-up analyses for each
type of explanation were conducted.
Epistemic explanations: In line with our first hypothesis
(H1a), we obtained a main effect of presentation format on
epistemic explanations. Those who read multiple documents
explained the occurrence of conflict to a greater degree with
the nature of knowledge and knowledge production
compared to participants who encountered a conflict in a
single document, F(1, 190) = 12.72, p < .001, part. η² =
.063. In addition, and in line with H1b, epistemic
explanations were considered more appropriate for conflicts
encountered in expert texts compared to conflicts in lay
texts, F(1, 190) = 5.42, p = .021, part. η² = .028. The
interaction between presentation format and source
expertise was not significant, F(1, 190) = 2.44, p = .120, ns.
Source explanations: In addition, participants considered
source explanations to better account for conflicts in lay
texts than for conflicts encountered in expert texts, lending
support to H2a, F(1, 190) = 26.96, p < .001, part. η² = .124.
Moreover, the interaction between presentation format and
source expertise reached marginal significance, F(1, 190) =
3.25, p = .073, part. η² = .017. This interaction was due to
readers of a single expert source deeming source
explanations less appropriate than readers in any other
condition. Different from what has been expected in H2b,
reading a conflict in a single document was not explained
more strongly with reference to the author than were
conflicts between different sources, F(1, 190) = 1.42, p =
.235, ns.
Self-related explanations: Finally and as expected, no
effects of our manipulation were observed with regards to
self-attributions (all Fs(1, 190) < 1.11, ns).

3451

Discussion
Previous research on text comprehension has shown that
readers have a strong tendency to formulate explanations
when reading conflicting scientific materials (e.g., Graesser
& Bertus, 1998; Millis & Graesser, 1994; Otero & Graesser,
2001). The aim of this study was to add to the literature by
examining which explanations lay readers deem acceptable
for the occurrence of conflicts. Readers’ preferences were
examined as a function of presentation format (multiple vs.
single document) and source expertise (expert vs.
layperson). It was argued that lay readers possess naïve
theories relating to the nature of knowledge and knowledge
production (folk philosophy of science) and to the
distribution of knowledge between individuals and their
motives in communicating scientific knowledge (folk
sociology of science). Metatextual information on
presentation format and source expertise should
differentially activate these theories and result in
corresponding explanations that either focus on the
epistemic nature of knowledge or on the source of
information. The results widely support our expectations.
The strongest effect we obtained was the one of varying
source expertise on source explanations. Source
explanations were considered more appropriate for conflicts
in information that was purportedly written by high-school
students than the same conflict being purportedly produced
by experts. A marginally significant interaction between
presentation format and source expertise revealed that this
effect was slightly more pronounced for conflicts that were
included in a single document. Readers of a single expert
document were obviously particularly hesitant to blame the
expert for the occurrence of discrepant information and in
turn chose other explanations to a similar degree. In contrast
to our expectations, we did not observe that readers of a
single document explained the occurrence of a conflict more
strongly with a mistake of the author compared to those
reading multiple documents. Note that in line with our
expectations, conflicts in single documents were indeed
predominantly explained with reference to the source.
However, this was also true for those reading multiple
documents, which we had not expected. Although
unexpected, this result is in line with the results of Bromme,
Thomm and Wolf (2013). In their study, laypersons
regarded the source as a central cause of conflicts in science.
This heuristic may be so salient in laypersons that it is
applied regardless of presentation format when explaining
conflicts.
Our results regarding epistemic explanations provide full
support for our hypotheses. Conflicts presented by experts
and conflicts between documents were explained more
strongly by referring to the nature of knowledge and
knowledge production. As for the expert-lay author
variation, it may be argued that knowledge claims presented
by experts are conceived as more indicative of the
underlying scientific discipline in terms of the certainty it
provides. Moreover, conflicts between different sources

may be seen as directly pointing to the discursive nature of
scientific knowledge production. As suggested by the results
of the interviews conducted by Bromme et al. (2013), young
adults show awareness that conflicts among both medical
scientists and medical practitioners are commonplace. This
insight reflects some epistemic sophistication and it may
help readers to find adequate explanations when they
encounter conflicts in science texts.
It is notable that we found sensitivity for metatextual
information among high-school students. This result extends
previous research (Stadtler et al., 2013) which has
demonstrated sensitivity for metatextual information in
terms of memory for and use of conflicting information
among university undergraduates. Our results suggest that at
least advanced high-school students seem to possess
cognitive resources that enable them to assess the
appropriateness of different conflict explanations without a
great amount of elaboration.
Finally, it may be seen as a limitation of our study that
our results are based on presenting high-school students
with predefined explanations. Thus, future research will
have to show whether a similar pattern of explanation
preferences will be obtained when laypersons have to
generate conflict explanations from scratch. With this goal
in mind, interview studies, such as the one by Bromme et al.
(2013), could be conducted with younger and less educated
populations.
Another important topic for future research will be to
assess the implications of different conflict explanations for
the processing of science texts. A triangulation of data
gained with think-aloud or eye-tracking procedures might be
especially helpful to examine whether readers translate their
subjective conflict explanations into actual reading
behaviors. This could include an intensified elaboration of
source information if conflicts are primarily explained with
deficits in source competence, or corroborating information
between sources (Wineburg, 1991). Readers’ conflict
explanations may also influence their inclination to engage
in further information search. For example, explaining a
conflict with lacking competence of the author(s) may
prompt readers to obtain additional topic information from
more reliable sources. In contrast, readers who explain a
conflict with the nature of knowledge may refrain from
looking up any further information, because they do not
consider the encountered conflict as indicative of lacking
information quality. It will also be an important task to
examine whether readers use their preferred conflict
explanation to develop a personal stance towards the
conflict. Especially when readers explain a conflict with a
lack of author competence, they might also use this
explanation to decide which of the opposing stances they
should include in their referential representation of the
world. This way, conflict explanations might serve lay
readers to harness scientific information for their goals of
making informed decisions on everyday problems.

3452

Acknowledgments
This research was supported with a grant from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

References
Bråten, I., Strømsø, H. I., & Salmerón, L. (2011). Trust and
mistrust when students read multiple information sources
about climate change. Learning and Instruction Special
Section I: Solving information-based problems:
Evaluating sources and information, 21, 180-192.
Britt, M. A., & Aglinskas, C. (2002). Improving student's
ability to identify and use source information. Cognition
and instruction, 20, 485-522.
Bromme, R., Thomm, E., & Wolf, V. (2013). From
understanding to deference: Laypersons’ and medical
students’ views on conflicts within medicine. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Costa, J., Caldeira, M. H., Gallastegui, J. R., & Otero, J.
(2000). An analysis of question asking on scientific texts
explaining natural phenomena. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 37, 602-614.
Graesser, A. C., & Bertus, E. L. (1998). The construction of
causal inferences while reading expository texts on
science and technology. Scientific Studies of Reading, 2,
247-269.
Gerjets, P., Kammerer, Y., & Werner, B. (2011). Measuring
spontaneous and instructed evaluation processes during
web search: Integrating concurrent thinking-aloud
protocols and eye-tracking data. Learning and Instruction,
21, 220-231.
Keil, F. C. (2010). The feasibility of folk science. Cognitive
Science, 34, 826-862.
Mayer, R. E. (Ed.). (2005). The Cambridge handbook of
multimedia learning. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Millis, K. K., & Graesser, A. C. (1994). The time-course of
constructing knowledge-based inferences for scientific
texts. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 583-599.
Otero, J. C., & Graesser, A. C. (2001). PREG: Elements of a
model of question asking. Cognition and Instruction, 19,
143-175.
Stadtler, M., Scharrer, L., Brummernhenrich, B., &
Bromme, R. (2013). Dealing with uncertainty: Readers’
memory for and use of conflicting information from
science texts as function of presentation format and
source expertise. Cognition and Instruction, 32, 130-150.
Wiley, J., & Voss, J. F. (1999). Constructing arguments
from multiple sources: Tasks that promote understanding
and not just memory for text. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 91, 301-311.
Wineburg, S. S. (1991). Historical problem solving: A study
of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation of
documentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 83, 79.

3453

