UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to present exemplars of several categories? Interleave during active learning and block
during passive learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8db429kf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Carvalho, Paulo
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How to present exemplars of several categories?
Interleave during active learning and block during passive learning
Paulo F. Carvalho (pcarvalh@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth St., Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth St., Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Research on how information should be presented during
inductive category learning has identified both interleaving of
categories and blocking by category as beneficial for learning.
Previous work suggests that this mixed evidence can be
reconciled by taking into account within- and betweencategory similarity relations. In this paper we present a new
moderating factor. One group of participants studied
categories actively, either interleaved or blocked. Another
group studied the same categories passively. Results from a
subsequent generalization task show that active learning
benefits from interleaved presentation while passive learning
benefits from blocked presentation.
Keywords: interleaving; blocking; learning; comparison

Introduction
Can the method with which information is presented
substantially affect learning? The answer seems to be “yes.”
Changing the way with which information is presented not
only changes what is learned (Schyns, Goldstone, &
Thibaut, 1998) but also how well it is learned (Goldstone,
1996). One example is the order in which instances are
presented in a study session and the effect this has for
inductive learning. Kornell and Bjork (2008) demonstrated
that if participants are given study examples of paintings
from several artists’ interleaved, participants’ later memory
and generalization is substantially improved when compared
to presenting each artist in a separate block.
The advantage of interleaving over blocking for inductive
learning has been repeatedly shown in recent years.
Interleaving of categories has been shown to improve
learning of naturalistic materials for both young and older
adults (Kornell, Castel, Eich, & Bjork, 2010; Wahlheim,
Dunlosky, & Jacoby, 2011), as well as flashcard learning
(Kornell, 2009). It has also been demonstrated in children
(Vlach, Sandhofer, & Kornell, 2008; Vlach & Sandhofer,
2012).
Notwithstanding the clear benefit of interleaving in some
situations, there have also been demonstrations of the
advantage of blocking for category learning. For example,
Goldstone (1996) presented participants with complex
images consisting of 20 line segments. There were two
conditions: frequent alternation of categories (interleaving)
and infrequent alternation (blocking). The results showed
that participants were better at learning the categories in the

infrequent alternation condition. The author associates this
advantage with the relative difficulty in finding the common
features shared by members of each category (for further
evidence of blocking advantages using different kinds of
tasks and stimuli see Kurtz & Hovland, 1956; Whitman &
Garner, 1963).
Given this mixed evidence about the best way to
sequentially present information for optimal learning, an
important question is: what conditions yield an advantage
for interleaving compared to blocking?
This question has received some attention in recent years.
For instance, Carvalho and Goldstone (2012) showed that
when studying low similarity categories, blocked
presentation resulted in improved subsequent generalization
performance. This pattern was reversed for high similarity
categories (for similar results with category discriminability,
see Zulkiply & Burt, 2013).
Carvalho and Goldstone (2012; see also Goldstone, 1996)
have proposed that interleaving categories allows
participants to identify the features that distinguish between
the categories, while blocked presentation promotes the
identification of features that are characteristic among
stimuli within a single category. This dichotomy is the result
of the same principle: the selective emphasis of
categorization-relevant features during comparison of
sequentially presented objects.
In the case of interleaved presentation, differences
between objects belonging to different categories will be
emphasized while for blocked presentation, similarities
among objects belong to the same category will be
emphasized. This same process will result in improved or
hindered learning depending on whether similarities or
differences need to be learned. One possible way in which
category learning could move from an emphasis on
differences towards an emphasis on similarities is by
changing the similarity relations within and between
categories (Carvalho & Goldstone, 2012; Zulkiply and Burt,
2013).
However, the characteristics of the categories being
studied are not the only factors that can have an influence on
how sequential comparison impacts learning. In theory, any
property of the learning situation that changes attentional
constraints could have similar impact by changing the task

1982

demands from an emphasis on similarities to an emphasis
on differences.
Inductive learning can take place in several ways. One
such way is active category learning. In this kind of learning
task, participants actively try to categorize never-beforeseen stimuli into one of the categories provided. Participants
are then given feedback on the accuracy of their responses.
Learning takes place via feedback-informed update of
perceptual, attentional and decisional processes.
Another kind of inductive learning task can be referred to
as passive learning. In this kind of situation, participants
study category exemplars along with their correct category
assignment. This task can be considered ‘passive’ in the
sense that participants do not actively make responses
during learning, and no feedback is provided via which a
participant could adjust their judgments.
These two tasks differ in a number of educationally
relevant aspects (e.g., motivation, engagement, etc.) but also
in their cognitive aspects. It could be argued that if
participants actively study the categories, emphasis will be
placed on finding the differences between the categories.
This is perhaps the most obvious way one can learn to
discriminate As from Bs and achieve good performance. By
contrast, in passive learning, participants are not tasked with
learning how to discriminate between the categories. They
are explicitly given the category assignments for the stimuli.
Instead participants may search for features that characterize
each category or the similarity amongst objects in each
category.
Put another way, if participants passively study the
stimuli along with their correct category assignments, their
self-imposed task may be to identify the features that
characterize that category (e.g., that all the ‘Zups’ have a
similar nose shape). By contrast, if participants are not given
the category assignment but instead have to try to categorize
the stimulus and only then receive feedback, they may focus
on finding differences between objects of different
categories (e.g., that ‘Zups’ are round and ‘Rikes’ are
squares; see Markman & Ross, 2003; Yamauchi &
Markman, 2000).
Following Carvalho and Goldstone’s (2012) proposal,
combining interleaved study with active study will be
beneficial for category learning because they are both
compatible with focusing on features that differentiate
between the categories being acquired. Likewise, combining
blocked study with passive learning should be beneficial
because they are consistent in leading participants to find
similarities that are useful for successfully learning each
category in isolation.
In this paper we aim to extend previous evidence for a
comparison and attentional mechanism as the unifying
processes behind both blocked and interleaved study, by
manipulating the properties of the study session that affect
attention allocation. One group of participants completed a
passive study session associated with both interleaved and
blocked presentations. The other group of participants

completed an active study session, while keeping all other
aspects of the task constant between the two groups.

An Experiment
In this experiment, participants studied a set of six
categories, three presented interleaved and the remaining
three presented blocked. Critically, for one group of
participants, the study session was set up as a passive
learning task. Participants studied each object for a short
period of time during which the correct category assignment
was also presented on the screen. For the other group of
participants, the categories were studied in an active
learning task. Both groups completed the same
generalization task afterwards.

Method
Participants Eighty-one undergraduate students at Indiana
University volunteered to participate in return for partial
course credit. Data from seven participants in the passive
learning group were excluded from analyses due to failure
to repeat the label of the object just presented on more than
half of the total number of study trials (see bellow for
details). All participants in the active learning group reached
the criterion of 34% correct responses during study and their
data were kept for analyses.

Figure 1: Examples of one exemplar of each of the 6
categories used. The top row constitutes one group of
categories and the bottom row another group.
Apparatus and Stimuli In this experiment, stimuli were
“Fribble” objects (Williams, 1998). Three of the categories
were composed of very similar objects differing
diagnostically only in one of their parts (see top panel in
Figure 1). The other three categories were also very similar
and differed diagnostically from each other only in one of
their parts, however, they were substantially different from
the other three categories (see bottom panel in Figure 1).
Random variation existed in each of the categories but was
the same across the three categories in each group.
Each category was given a unique label that perfectly
predicted the presence of the unique feature that defined that
category. At the start of the experiment, one label was

1983

randomly picked for each category from the pool: beme,
kipe, vune, coge, zade, and tyfe (Hendrickson, et al., 2012).
Design and procedure This experiment had two conditions
manipulated within-subjects (schedule of presentation:
blocked category learning and interleaved category
learning), and two conditions manipulated between-subjects
(study type: active vs. passive). Each of these four
conditions was composed of a study and test phase.
Study phase For the passive study group, during this study
phase, participants were presented with a stimulus in the
center of the screen along with the correct category
assignment above the object for 2.5 s. Immediately after the
presentation of the stimulus, three buttons were shown on
the screen corresponding to the three possible category
names for that study session. The participants’ task was to
press the button corresponding to the category of the object
they just saw. This task was introduced to ensure
participants’ attention to the task and to equate the active
and passive learning situations for the presence of a motor
response. However, note that in this condition, participants
simply needed to repeat the category they had just seen.
There was no need for participants to learn a categorization
rule. The mapping between the position of the buttons on
the screen and the label was randomly shifted each trial.
For the active learning group, participants were presented
with a stimulus for 500 ms. without its label. After the
stimulus was removed, three buttons were shown on the
screen and the participant had to choose the category
assignment for that stimulus. After the participant’s
response, the stimulus along with the correct category
assignment was shown on the screen for 2 s. The mapping
between the position of the buttons on the screen and the
label was also randomly shifted each trial.
For both groups, a 1000 ms inter-trial interval followed
the trial and then the next trial began. In the blocked
condition, the categories presented alternated 25% of the
time while in the interleaved condition they alternated 75%
of the time. That is, in the interleaved condition, the
probability of an object being followed by an object of the
same category was low, whereas for the blocked condition
this probability was high. We used this probabilistic
approach rather than creating purely interleaved or blocked
conditions in order to diminish the possibility that
participants noticed the pattern of alternation in responses,
which would affect categorization accuracy. Furthermore, if
a purely blocked condition had been used there would be no
way to guarantee participants’ attention to the task, as there
would be no uncertainty as to the correct categorization.
This approach has been used before in similar tasks with
successful results (Carvalho & Goldstone, 2012; Goldstone,
1996).
Each study phase was composed of 4 blocks for both
groups of participants and the entire study phase took
approximately the same amount of time for each group.
Each block had 24 trials (4 exemplars of each category

repeated 2 times each). After the 4th block of study a new
set of instructions was presented on the screen and the
second phase began. Each participant completed two sets of
study and test phases (one for each schedule of
presentation).
The two schedule conditions (blocked vs. interleaved)
differed only in the frequency of category change during
study and the species labels. Which condition was presented
first was counterbalanced across participants and the
allocation of the stimuli to each category and condition was
randomized across participants.
Test Phase This second phase was a generalization task
during which 36 stimuli were shown in random order – the
12 blobs participants studied during the learning task and 24
new stimuli. The new stimuli were similar to the studied
stimuli, with new instantiations of the unique features. Each
stimulus was presented in the center of the screen for 500
ms, after which participants were asked to classify it into
one of the species just learned, by pressing a key on the
screen. After a 1000 ms inter-trial interval, a new trial
would begin. No feedback was provided during this phase.
Each test phase followed the respective study phase.

Results
We started by analyzing participants’ performance during
the study phase in the active learning group. As can be seen
from Figure 2, participants’ performance improves across
the task for both the interleaved and blocked conditions.

Figure 2: Results from the Study Phase for the Active
Learning group. Error bars indicate standard errors of the
mean.
A within-subjects ANOVA with Block (1 vs. 2 vs. 3 vs.
4) and schedule of presentation (interleaved vs. blocked) as
factors confirmed this interpretation. There is a main effect
of Block, F (3, 111) = 139.93, p < .0001, 𝜂!! = 0.36. No

1984

main effect of schedule of presentation, F (1, 37) < 1 was
found but the interaction between the two variables was also
significant, F (3, 111) = 4.15, p = 0.008, 𝜂!! = 0.03,
indicating a larger improvement for the interleaved
condition compared to the blocked condition.
However, the result of greater interest is how well
participants are able to generalize this learning to new
stimuli. These analyses will not only allow us to test the
effect of interleaving vs. blocking and of passive vs. active
learning but, more importantly, the interaction between the
two.

However, the interaction between the two variables was
reliable, F (1, 73) = 7.30, p = .04, 𝜂!!   = 0.03.
Performance results for each group and schedule of
presentation, sub-divided by studied and novel stimulus, are
presented in Table 1. As can be seen, no differences in
performance between novel and studied stimuli were found.
We repeated the ANOVA analyses with stimulus type
(studied vs. novel) as another within-subject factor. These
analyses revealed the same critical interaction between
schedule of presentation and study type, but no differences
in performance for novel and studied stimuli or interaction
with any of the other variables.
Table 1: Categorization accuracy in the test phase for both
groups and schedule conditions, broken down by type of
item (novel vs. studied). Standard deviations are presented
in parentheses.
Active

Novel
Studied

Passive

Interleaved

Blocked

Interleaved

Blocked

0.96
(0.13)
0.96
(0.13)

0.90
(0.21)
0.91
(0.18)

0.91
(0.20)
0.89
(0.26)

0.96
(0.13)
0.97
(0.11)

Discussion
Figure 3: Main results of the Test Phase for both the Active
and Passive groups and for each of the schedule of
presentation conditions. Error bars indicate standard errors
of the mean
The graph depicted in Figure 3 shows performance in the
generalization task for participants in the active and passive
study conditions and for each study presentation format.
Given the overall high level of performance we began by
analyzing possible differences in response time. No main
effect or interaction between any of the variables was found
for RT.
We then proceeded to analyze performance differences.
The most obvious result is an interaction between the study
condition and the presentation format. While for participants
studying the stimuli actively, interleaving presentation of
the objects results in better generalization performance,
blocking is better for participants in the passive learning
condition.
A mixed ANOVA with presentation schedule (blocked vs.
interleaved) as a within-subject factor and study type
(passive vs. active) as a between-subjects factor confirms
this analysis. There is no main effect of presentation
schedule, F (1, 73) < 1 or study type, F (1, 73) < 1.

Determining how to order information so that learners can
achieve the best learning outcomes is crucial for effective
training. In this work we present further evidence that the
way information is ordered impacts learning and that this
influence is modulated by whether learning is active or
passive.
The results of the experiment presented here show that
whether interleaving examples of several concepts or
blocking examples by category is beneficial is a function of
the training task’s implicit demands. More specifically, in a
task involving discrimination of the concepts being studied
by identifying their differences (the active learning
situation), interleaved study results in better performance in
a subsequent generalization task. However, if the learning
situation involves creating a positive, stand-alone
representation of the concepts by identifying the similarities
among the instances within each category (the passive
learning situation), blocked study benefits performance in
the generalization task.
Interestingly, both study conditions result in similar
performance during the learning task in the active learning
condition. This eliminates the possibility that one study
condition is more difficult and results in greater cognitive
effort, which is a known important factor contributing to
improved learning (Bjork, 1994).
In the generalization task, the interaction between the type
of study situation and the schedule of presentation of the

1985

exemplars had an effect for both studied stimuli and novel
ones. This is an interesting result, suggesting that study
benefits go beyond memorization of the whole exemplars.
Very likely, participants succeeded at the categorization task
by identifying the single defining parts for each category.
These defining parts were instantiated identically for studied
and novel objects, explaining why novel objects were not
more difficult to categorize. Future research will be needed
to assure that the interaction between learning activity and
presentation schedule generalizes to other category
structures.
Overall these results are consistent with the framework
proposed by Carvalho and Goldstone (2012; see also
Goldstone, 1996) hypothesizing that participants compare
successive objects and update attention to stimulus features
as a result of these comparisons.
The role of allocating one’s attention during category
learning has been highlighted before in different models
(Kruschke, 1992; Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004; Minda &
Smith, 2002; Nosofsky, 1986) and the use of eye tracking
technology has made it possible to study the patterns of
overt trial-by-trial, or even within-trial, attention. For
example, Blair, Watson, Walshe, and Maj (2009) have
demonstrated that in a categorization task, different stimuli
can elicit different patterns of attention allocation to their
features. Additionally, previous research has also
demonstrated that during category learning, participants
often take into account information from only the previous
few trials to decide whether a stimulus belongs in one
category or another (Jones, Love, & Maddox, 2006; Jones &
Sieck, 2003; Stewart, Brown, & Chater, 2002; Stewart &
Brown, 2004; Stewart & Chater, 2002).
Carvalho and Goldstone (2012) propose that when
studying a new exemplar in an inductive learning task,
participants compare the properties of that object with the
properties they recall from the previous ones. However,
learners do not remember all the features from all the
objects presented. Instead, when studying a new exemplar,
learners weight more heavily the information presented in
the immediately preceding instances. If the previous trial
consisted of an object in one category and the current trial
consists of another object in a different category,
participants’ attention will be directed towards the
differences between the two objects. Conversely, if the two
objects come from the same category, learners will attend to
similarities between the objects.
This framework can aptly account for the results
presented here: passive learning requires attending to
similarities, while active learning requires attending to
differences. When the presentation order also emphasizes
those factors, learning will be facilitated.
Finally, although our results do not directly speak to the
importance of active vs. passive learning, it is worth noting
that this interaction should be taken into account when
deciding whether learners should be given worked examples
to study or not.

Indeed, we think one of the most important contributions
of the present work is the proposal that when deciding how
to structure learning, one needs to take into account the
entire learning situation and possible interactions between
situational factors. So far, we have demonstrated this for
interleaving/blocking benefits relative to the training
activity (passive vs. active) and the similarity structure of
the categories being studied (similar vs. dissimilar; Carvalho
& Goldstone, 2012).

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by National Science
Foundation REESE grant 0910218 and Department of
Education IES grant R305A1100060. PFC was also
supported by Graduate Training Fellowship SFRH
/BD/78083/2011 from the Portuguese Foundation for
Science and Technology (FCT). The authors would like to
thank the Percepts and Concepts Lab members for
discussion and Spenser Benge for his help with data
collection. Stimulus images courtesy of Michael J. Tarr,
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition and Department of
Psychology,
Carnegie
Mellon
University,
http://www.tarrlab.org/

References
Blair, M., Watson, M. R., Walshe, R. C., & Maj, F. (2009).
Extremely selective attention: Eye-tracking studies of the
dynamic allocation of attention to stimulus features in
categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35(5), 1196–1206.
Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalfe & A. P. Shimamura (Eds.), Metacognition:
Knowing about knowing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carvalho, P., & Goldstone, R. (2012). Category structure
modulates interleaving and blocking advantage in
inductive category acquisition. In C. R. P. Miyake N,
Peebles D (Ed.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and interrelated concepts.
Memory & cognition, 24(5), 608–28.
Hendrickson, A. T., Kachergis, G., Fausey, C. M., &
Goldstone, R. L. (2012). Re-learning labeled categories
reveals structured representations. In N. Miyake, D.
Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Jones, M., Love, B. C., & Maddox, W. T. (2006). Recency
effects as a window to generalization: separating
decisional and perceptual sequential effects in category
learning. Journal of experimental psychology. Learning,
memory, and cognition, 32(2), 316–32.
Jones, M., & Sieck, W. R. (2003). Learning myopia: An
adaptive recency effect in category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29(4), 626–640.

1986

Kornell, N. (2009). Optimizing learning using flashcards:
Spacing is more effective than cramming. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 23(9), 1297–1317.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: is spacing the “enemy of induction”?
Psychological science, 19(6), 585–92.
Kornell, N., Castel, A. D., Eich, T. S., & Bjork, R. A.
(2010). Spacing as the friend of both memory and
induction in young and older adults. Psychology and
aging, 25(2), 498–503.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
review, 99(1), 22.
Kurtz, K. H., & Hovland, C. I. (1956). Concept learning
with differing sequences of instances. Journal of
experimental psychology, 51(4), 239.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A Network Model of Category Learning.
Psychological Review, 111(2), 309–332.
Markman, A.B., & Ross, B.H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4), 592613.
Minda, J. P., & Smith, J. D. (2002). Comparing prototypebased and exemplar-based accounts of category learning
and attentional allocation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(2),
275–292.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
experimental psychology. General, 115(1), 39–61.
Schyns, P. G., Goldstone, R. L., & Thibaut, J. P. (1998).
The development of features in object concepts. The
Behavioral and brain sciences, 21(1), 1–17; discussion
17–54.
Stewart, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2004). Sequence effects in
the categorization of tones varying in frequency. Journal
of experimental psychology. Learning, memory, and
cognition, 30(2), 416–30.
Stewart, N., Brown, G. D. A., & Chater, N. (2002).
Sequence effects in categorization of simple perceptual
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28(1), 3–11.
Stewart, N., & Chater, N. (2002). The effect of category
variability in perceptual categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28(5), 893.
Vlach, H. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2012). Distributing
Learning Over Time: The Spacing Effect in Children‘s
Acquisition and Generalization of Science Concepts.
Child development, 83, 1137–1144.
Vlach, H. A., Sandhofer, C. M., & Kornell, N. (2008). The
spacing effect in children’s memory and category
induction. Cognition, 109(1), 163–7.
Wahlheim, C. N., Dunlosky, J., & Jacoby, L. L. (2011).
Spacing enhances the learning of natural concepts: an
investigation of mechanisms, metacognition, and aging.
Memory & cognition, 39(5), 750-763.

Whitman, J. R., & Garner, W. R. (1963). Concept Learning
as a Function of Form of Internal Structure. Journal Of
Verbal Learning And Verbal Behavior, 2(2), 195–202.
Williams, P. (1997). Prototypes, exemplars, and object
recognition. New Haven, CT: Yale.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A.B. (2000). Inference using
categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(3), 776-795.
Zulkiply, N., & Burt, J. S. (2013). The exemplar
interleaving effect in inductive learning: Moderation by
the difficulty of category discriminations. Memory &
Cognition, 41(1), 16-27.

1987

