UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit transfer of mirrored spatial structure in visuomotor sequence learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sg8t7c9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tanaka, Kanji
Watanabe, Katsumi

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit transfer of mirrored spatial structure
in visuomotor sequence learning
Kanji Tanaka (kanji@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)

1

Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
2
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science

1

Katsumi Watanabe (kw@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)

Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
Abstract

Implicit transfer in sequential learning can occur with some spatiotemporal structures but not with others. Here, we investigated
whether the consistent mirror-reversal of visuomotor sequences
would lead to implicit transfer. A "set" comprised three sequential
button presses and seven consecutive sets comprised a "hyperset."
Participants learned hypersets by trial and error with their right
hand. Then, they learned another hyperset, in which each set was
vertically mirrored, horizontally mirrored, or randomly generated.
Even when the participants did not notice the mirrored rule, the
mirrored hypersets led to implicit transfer in terms of accuracy for
both vertical and horizontal reversals. Furthermore, the vertical
reserval also led to implicit transfer of performance speed. Taken
together, the present results suggest that people can implicitly
apply their learned representations to the mirrored visuomotor
sequences.
Keywords: Implicit learning; Sequential learning; Transfer;
Mirror symmetry; Speed, Accuracy

Introduction
Implicit learning of behavioral sequences play an important
role in our daily life. Our cognitive abilities such as
language usage, playing the piano, and driving a car can be
improved by implicit acquisition or learning of skills (see
reviews for implicit learning; Abrahamse, Jiménez, Verwey,
& Clegg, 2010; Perruchet & Pacton, 2006). In fields of
cognitive science, cognitive psychology, or experimental
psychology, several implicit learning paradigms have been
proposed (e.g., Serial Reaction Time (SRT) task, Nissen &
Bullemer, 1987; artificial grammar learning (AGL), Reber,
1967; visuomotor button press task, Hikosaka, Rand,
Miyachi, & Miyashita, 1995). Most studies have
investigated whether people implicitly learn a sequence. In
particular, some have insisted that people can learn both
elements and a higher-order structure of a sequence. For
example, Stadler and Neely (1997) showed that the structure
of a sequence had a larger influence on learning in the SRT
task than the length of that sequence, indicating that some
structures tend to be easier to learn than others (see also
Cohen, Ivry, & Keele, 1990). Some studies adopting the
AGL task suggested that people might implicitly learn
fragments or chunks of two, three, or four letters (ServanSchreiber & Anderson, 1990; Perruchet & Pacteau, 1990).
In the visuomotor button press task, Hikosaka et al. (1995)

observed that participants performed slowly and
inaccurately when a higher-order sequence was reversed,
but individual elements remained identical. Thus, the
previous studies pointed to the possibility that people
learned certain levels of higher-order structure of a sequence.
Transfer of motor learning refers that some
movement controls are learned in one situation and
transferred to another situation (e.g., Schmidt & Young,
1987). Experiments with key-pressing tasks have
demonstrated transfer between sequences that require
different arm or finger movements, suggesting that abstract
representations underlie sequence production (e.g., Bapi et
al., 2006; Kovacs et al., 2009). Namely, this implies that
some representations used for motor execution appear to be
independent of the effectors producing the action. Cohen et
al. (1990), for example, found that transfer of speed occurs
when participants learned a tapping task with their three
fingers and then, the same tapping task with their index
finger (they were not aware that the learning and transfer
tasks were identical sequences due to a distraction task).
Previous studies have reported that people
implicitly detect reversed or mirrored structures of musical
melodies, even when they are unaware of the structure (e.g.,
Dienes, Kuhn, Guo, & Jones, 2012). For example, Dienes
and Longuet-Higgings (2004) used sequences comprised of
twelve musical tones, where the first six tones were
randomly generated and the second six tones were altered
from the first tones with some specific alternations. During
the learning phase, participants were told that the musical
melody obeyed some specific rules and in the test phase,
they required to answer whether the musical melody
followed the rules or not. Results showed that participants
who had background experience with atonal music could
implicitly detect altered melodies (e.g., reversals and
mirrors). Similarly, Kuhn and Dienes (2005) observed that
trained participants preferred mirrored melodic structures to
non-mirrored structures. Collectively, these results indicate
that people could implicitly use the mirror symmetries of
learned sequences.
As well as the study of musical melody (e.g.,
Dienes & Longuet-Higgings, 2004), in the present study, we
were interested in whether implicit transfer of visuomotor
sequence learning occurred when learned sequences (i.e.,
visual configuration and finger movement of the sequence)

3504

became mirror symmetries in transfer. In order to
investigate the effects of the mirrored structure on implicit
transfer in sequential learning, we employed a sequential
button press task (e.g., Hikosaka et al., 1995, 1996, 2002;
Watanabe et al., 2006, 2010). Hikosaka et al. (1999)
summarized that in the visuomotor learning task paradigm,
the early trial-and-error stage was controlled and explicit
processes and those in the late learning stage were automatic
and implicit. The experimental device consisted of 16 lightemitting diode (LED) buttons mounted in a 4 × 4 matrix
while in most studies of the SRT tasks, the device was
composed of three or four aligned buttons, which enables us
to examine two types of mirror transfer: Vertically mirrored
and Horizontally mirrored. In the present study, a fixed
visuomotor sequence (which constituted the “hyperset”) of
seven triads of button presses (hereafter called “sets”) was
generated for each participant. After participants learned the
hyperset by trial-and-error, they were required to perform
another hyperset, in which the sets were generated by a
specific alternation rule. Here, we prepared three alternation
rules, with which a visual configuration of the set was
vertically mirrored (hereafter called “vertically mirrored
rule”), horizontally mirrored (hereafter called “horizontally
mirrored rule”), or randomly generated (hereafter called
“random rule”).

pressed the wrong button in all the sets and successful when
participants completed a hyperset, and For example, if
participants press the wrong button in Set 5, they would
need to start over from the home key. The same hyperset
was repeated until participants completed it successfully for
20 trials (called a “block”). Participants were asked to
perform the task as quickly and accurately as possible.
We prepared four types of hypersets: “Original,”
“Vertically mirrored,” “Horizontally mirrored,” and
“Random”. The Original hyperset was randomly generated
for each participant. In the Vertically mirrored hyperset, the
spatial configurations of the sets were reversed by the
vertical axis from the Original hyperset. In the Horizontally
mirrored hyperset, the spatial configurations of the sets were
reversed by the horizontal axis from the Original hyperset.
In the Random hyperset, the new spatial configurations
were randomly generated.

Method
Participants
120 right-handed participants (68 males, 52 females; mean
age = 21.19 years, standard deviation = 2.31) participated in
the experiment. All participants had normal or corrected-tonormal visual acuity, normal motor functions, and were
naïve to the purpose of this study. All procedures were
conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Procedure
We adopted a basic experimental paradigm used in previous
studies (e.g., Hikosaka et al., 1995; Watanabe et al., 2010;
Figure1). The experimental device consisted of 16 LED
buttons mounted in a 4 × 4 matrix and another LED button
(called the “home key”) at the bottom. Participants used
their right index fingers to press the buttons. When
participants pressed the home key for 500 ms, three buttons
(“set”) turned on simultaneously. Participants were required
to press the illuminated buttons in the correct order, which
they needed to uncover through trial-and-error. If
participants were successful, the LEDs turned off, one by
one, and a different set was illuminated, for which the
participants were again required to discover the correct
order. When participants pressed the wrong button, all
LEDs were briefly illuminated, and participants then had to
restart from the home key. Seven sets were presented in a
fixed order, which we called a “hyperset,” to complete a
trial. A trial was considered an error when participants

Figure 1. Experimental device and schematic flow of the present

study. Participants were instructed to learn the correct order by
trial-and-error. The LED buttons were square in shape (10 mm ×
10 mm) and 8 mm apart. Participants were required to discover a
correct order by trial-and-error. A trial was considered successful
when participants completed a hyperset, and a trial was considered
an error when participants pressed the wrong button in all the sets.
For example, if participants press the wrong button in Set 2, they
would re-start from the home key. A block is finished when
participants successfully completed a hyperset 20 times. The
Original hyperset was randomly generated for each participant. For
each set, the three buttons were defined in ascending order of
[1][2][3]. In the Vertically mirrored and Horizontally mirrored

3505

hypersets, all the sets were spatially mirrored with white dashed
line, resulting in the Vertically mirrored and Horizontal mirrored
sets, respectively from the Original hyperset. The Random
hyperset was randomly generated again for each participant, which
is different from the Original hyperset. Note that the number
shown on the LED button was not displayed during operation.

All participants first performed a block with the
Original hyperset and then a block with the Vertically
mirrored, Horizontally mirrored, or Random hypersets,
which were randomly assigned. The two blocks were
separated by a 5-min break. No information was given
regarding the alternation rule and, in the second block,
participants were instructed that a new hyperset was
randomly generated. In order to specifically examine the
implicit form of transfer, participants were interviewed after
the experiment. In the interview, they were asked how they
performed and whether they noticed anything peculiar in the
second block. If participants spontaneously reported the
mirrored rule, they were excluded from our main analyses.
Next, the experimenter explained the mirrored rule to the
participants and those who recognized the mirrored rule
were also excluded from our main data analyses. Methods
for distinguishing explicit knowledge and implicit
knowledge are still under debate. Several studies have used
subjective measures based on confidence ratings (e.g., Ziori
& Dienes, 2006, 2008). Conversely, some studies defined
implicit learning that participants were unable to verbalize
what they acquired (e.g., Ashby, Alfonso-Reese, Turken, &
Waldron, 1998). In this study, we only focused on whether
participants noticed the mirrored rule and, therefore, we
defined explicit knowledge that participants were able to
recognize the mirrored rule.

Data Analysis
As a measure of accuracy, we counted the number of error
trials before completing one trial. In order to evaluate speed,
we measured the time that had elapsed from the moment the
home key was pressed to the moment the third button of the
final (7th) set was pressed for each successful trial. Similar
parameters have been employed in previous studies and
verified (e.g., Watanabe et al., 2006, 2010). We divided the
20 correct trials into five trial sections and calculated mean
performance times within each trial section. We defined
mean performance times during the fifth section (i.e., 17th
to 20th trials) of the first block as a baseline for each
individual participant so that we compared the magnitude of
transfer among participants who differed on initial
performance. We then calculated adjusted performance by
subtracting the baseline from performance times during the
second block (the Vertically mirrored, Horizontally
mirrored, or Random hypersets) and divided by the baseline.
This adjusted performance time [Psecond block / Pbaseline]
represents the transfer magnitude of participants’
performance times. A value more than 1 indicates that the
performance time in the second block is faster than that of

the final trial section in the first block (i.e., baseline). Any
difference in adjusted performance times indicates a
difference in magnitude of transfer among different
hypersets in the second block.

Results
Forty participants were assigned for each of the Vertically
mirrored, Horizontally mirrored, and Random hypersets.
Since nineteen participants in the Vertically mirrored
hyperset and seven in the Horizontally mirrored hyperset
noticed the mirrored rules, they were excluded from our
main analysis. Next, we excluded six participants whose
performances in the first block were slower than two
standard deviations from each group’s average (three
participants in Vertically mirrored, two in Horizontally
mirrored, and one in Random hypersets). Similarly, we
additionally excluded four participants whose performances
in the second block were slower than two standard
deviations from each group’s average (one in Vertically
mirrored, one in Horizontally mirrored, and two in Random
hypersets). The selection procedure resulted in 17, 30, and
37 unaware participants with acceptable performance, for
the Vertically mirrored, Horizontally mirrored, and Random
groups, respectively.
We mainly conducted two-way mixed ANOVAs with
the five trial sections as a within-subjects factor and the
three hypersets as a between-subjects factor, which was
called simply “ANOVA” hereafter, and post-hoc tests with
the Shaffer’s method when performed (called “post-hoc
test”). For all hyperset groups, a significant decrease was
found in both accuracy and speed measures in the first block,
indicating that non-specific learning had occurred
(ANOVA; F(4, 324) > 81.45, p < 0.0001; for both
measures) and there were no differences among the hyperset
groups (ANOVA; F(2, 81) < 0.24, p > 0.78; for both
measures; Figure 2a and 2b). No significant interaction
between experimental groups and successful trial sections
(ANOVA; F(8, 324) < 1.24, p > 0.27; for both measures).
These results were accord with those in previous works; the
accuracy measure decreased rapidly in the first few
completed trials, while the speed measure decreased more
gradually (e.g., Watanabe et al., 2006, 2010).
In the second block (transfer block), mean adjusted
performance times (i.e., speed) were generally faster (i.e.,
more transfer was found) in the Vertically mirrored group
compared with the Random group (Figure 2c). The
ANOVA revealed significant main effects of experimental
group (F(2, 81) = 3.34, p < 0.05; post-hoc test, Vertically
mirrored < Random, p < 0.05) and successful trial section
(F(4, 324) = 75.03, p < 0.001; post-hoc test, 1st > 2nd > 3rd
= 4th = 5th section, p < 0.01). The interaction between
experimental group and successful trial section was not
significant (F(8, 324) = 1.38, p = 0.20). As for accuracy, the
ANOVA revealed significant main effects of experimental
group (F(2, 81) = 12.38, p < 0.0001; post-hoc test,
Vertically mirrored = Horizontally mirrored < Random, p <

3506

0.001; Figure 2d) and successful trial section (F(4, 324) =
361.4, p < 0.0001; post-hoc test, 1st > the other sections, p <
0.01). The interaction between experimental group and
successful trial section was also significant (F(8, 324) =
14.61, p < 0.0001) and this interaction shows that in the first
trial section, the accuracy was higher in the Vertically
mirrored and Horizontally mirrored hypersets than in the
Random hyperset (F(2, 81) = 15. 06, p < 0.0001; post-hoc
tests, Vertically mirrored = Horizontally mirrored >
Random, p < 0.001) while in the other trial sections, the
accuracy was not different among the experimental groups
(F(2, 81) < 2.09, p > 0.13; for the other sections).

the first block, we confirmed that performance did not differ
between the groups (F(1, 32) < 2.53, p > 0.12; for speed and
accuracy measures; Figure 3a and 3b). In the second block
(transfer block), we found that the accuracy was higher
when participants were aware of the alternation rule (Figure
3d). For speed, a two-way mixed ANOVA did not reveal
significant main effects of awareness (F(1, 32) = 2.49, p =
0.12; Figure 3c) while we observed the significant main
effects of successful trial section (F(4, 128) = 79.63, p <
0.0001; post-hoc tests, 1st > 2nd > 3rd = 4th = 5th , p < 0.05).
No significant interaction between group in terms of
awareness and successful trial section was not observed
(F(4, 128) = 2.29, p = 0.06). For accuracy, a two-way mixed
ANOVA revealed significant main effects of awareness
(F(1, 32) = 15.74, p < 0.001; Unaware > Aware) and trial
section (F(4, 128) = 199.73, p < 0.0001; post-hoc test, 1st >
the other sections, p < 0.0001), as well as a significant
interaction (F(4, 128) = 18.18, p < 0.0001). This interaction
shows that in the first trial section, the accuracy was higher
in the aware group than in the unaware (F(1, 32) = 19. 87, p
< 0.001) while in the other trial sections, the accuracy was
not different among the sorted groups (F(1, 32) < 1.19, p >
0.28; for the other sections). These results confirmed that
once participants obtained the alternation rule (i.e., explicit
knowledge), they could clearly perform the hyperset with
fewer errors (e.g., Watanabe et al., 2006).

Figure 2. Performance in the first and second blocks. Error bars
show the standard errors of the mean. All participants performed
the Original hyperset in the first block. (a) Average performance
time for successful trials in the first block. (b) Average number of
errors before the successful completion of each trial in the first
block. (c) Average adjusted performance time for successful trials
in the second block. The adjusted performance was computed as
follows: [Psecond block / Pbaseline]. (d) Average number of errors before
the successful completion of each trial in the second block.
A Pearson’s chi-squared test revealed a significant
difference in the proportion of participants who noticed the
alternation rule between the Vertically mirrored and
Horizontally mirrored groups (χ2 = 6.89, p < 0.01; Vertically
mirrored > Horizontally mirrored). Therefore, we
additionally examined whether the performances of those
groups (aware vs. unaware) in the Vertically mirrored
hyperset were different. We excluded two participants in the
aware group whose performances in the first block were
slower than two standard deviations from the group average
(i.e., resulting in 17 aware and 17 unaware participants). In

Figure 3. Performance of participants who noticed the vertically
mirrored rule (“Aware”) and who did not (“Unaware”) in the
second block. Error bars indicate standard errors of the mean. The
adjusted performance was computed as follows: [Psecond block /
Pbaseline]. (a) Average performance time for successful trials in the
first block. (b) Average number of errors before the successful
completion of each trial in the first block. (c) Average adjusted
performance times in the second block. (d) Average number of

3507

errors before the successful completion of each trial in the second
block.

Discussion
In the present study, we investigated whether a spatially
mirrored sequence in visuomotor sequence support implicit
transfer of performance in accuracy and speed. We found
that (1) both vertically and horizontally mirrored sequence
led to transfer of learning in terms of accuracy even when
participants did not notice the mirrored rules; (2) vertically
mirrored sequence, in addition, led to transfer in terms of
performance speed; (3) the proportion of participants who
noticed the vertically mirrored rules were significantly
higher than the horizontally mirrored rules; and (4) accuracy
in the transfer session was significantly higher for the aware
group than the unaware group with the vertically mirrored
rule.
Previous studies discussed that people who have an
experience of playing the piano implicitly discriminated
reversed or mirrored structures of musical melodies (e.g.,
Dienes et al., 2004, 2012), indicating that people can
implicitly understand relationships between original and
reversed or mirrored sequences of musical tones. In the
literature of intermanual transfer (Grafton, Hazeltine, & Ivry,
2002), participants conducted the SRT task with the
counting tone task (i.e., this distractor task usually makes
participants unaware of the hidden repetition of the
sequence) with their left hands in the learning block and
subsequently they performed the transfer task with their
right hands with the original and mirrored ordered sequence
(original sequence, both stimulus sequence and order of
response locations remained, but the finger movements were
different; mirrored sequence, finger movements in transfer
block were identical to those in learning block, but the
stimulus location was visually mirrored). Seven out of eight
participants were not aware of the repetition of the sequence
and the results showed that performance of the original and
mirror sequence was significantly better than that of the
random sequence. In the present study, the Vertically and
Horizontally mirrored hypersets produced the better transfer
in terms of accuracy than the Random hyperset. Moreover,
the Vertically mirrored hyperset led to better transfer in
terms of speed than the Random hyperset. The present study
is the first empirical study to show that implicit transfer
occurs even when the visual configuration and finger
movements of a sequence were consistently vertically or
horizontally mirrored. The present results indicate that
people implicitly apply their learned representation to the
mirrored hypersets.
Most procedural and sequential learning in our daily
life possess two stages of processing: the controlled
exploration of patterns and the process of automatization
after a pattern has been discovered (Anderson, 1982). How
sequential learning should be done in order to induce
implicit transfer likely has two possibilities; less learning
(i.e., remain controlled process) or much learning (i.e., reach

automatic process) leads to implicit transfer. These two
possibilities probably depend on whether the automatic
process of the learning interferes with transfer; once an
automatic process is established, the process can be
interference when performing a transfer task because
different sequence from learning is required and then, the
less learning phase might be better to induce implicit
transfer. Conversely, as the automatic process does not
require much allocation of attention, the process might give
allocation of attention when performing transfer, resulting in
implicit transfer. Taken together with previous work (Dienes
& Longuet-Higgings, 2004), the results that people could
implicitly understand the mirror symmetry might be
associated with their automaticity of performance. In the
study of music melody, only participants who had played
the piano could use the mirrored structure of the music
melody, indicating that implicit transfer can occur when
cognitive skills (i.e., playing the piano) became automatic
process. In the present study, in the first block, the
participants completed the hyperset 20 times without errors
and in the later learning phase, their performance probably
reached at the automatic level (Hikosaka et al., 1999). Thus,
these automatic operations likely made an allocation of
attention of participants for the transfer task available. For
example, Shanks, Rowland and Ranger (2005) showed that
performances in the SRT tasks are degraded under doubletask conditions, which indicated that implicit learning
depends on availability and allocation of attention and is
susceptible to the double-task conditions while the learning
process was not automatic. Collectively, once a process of
task performance reached automatic, the allocation of
attention for the learning task is alleviated, resulting in that
the allocation of attention for a transfer task became
available, which probably made participants possible to
implicitly use the mirrored relationship and transfer their
obtained representation to the mirrored sequence.
Next, we discuss the differential results between the
Vertically and Horizontally mirrored hypersets. We
observed implicit transfer of speed only in the Vertically
mirrored hyperset, indicating that the vertically mirrored
rule might be easier than the horizontally mirrored rule.
However, this differs from the Fitt’s law (speed-accuracy
trade-off; Fitts, 1954) because distances of finger
movements were the same between Vertically and
Horizontally mirrored hypersets. Then, the present result
might pertain to the residual or subthreshold awareness of
the mirrored rules. We observed significantly different
proportions of participants who noticed the vertically and
horizontally mirrored rules. This indicated that the vertically
mirrored rule might be easier to notice than the horizontally
mirrored rule; sub-threshold awareness of the vertically
mirrored order might prime performance within the
consistently vertically mirrored sets. The relationship
between awareness and difficulty of the task requires to be
investigated, but a task of which most people can notice an
alternation rule might be easily transferred.

3508

In Watanabe et al. (2006), after a first hyperset was
learned, new hypersets were generated by rotating the sets
(i.e., entire stimulus configuration) by 0°, 90°, 180°, and
270° (clockwise). Participants were not instructed that the
new hypersets were based on the first learned hyperset.
Through the experiment, half of the participants
spontaneously noticed the regularity of the rotation while
the other half did not. Watanabe et al. (2006), then,
compared the performances of the participants who were
aware and unaware of the regularity and found that those
who noticed the regularity could perform the new hyperset
more accurately than those who did not notice it while the
different performance of speed was not observed. We found
that performances of participants who noticed the vertically
mirrored rule were more accurate than those who did not
notice it. This result was basically accord with Watanabe et
al. (2006). Once participants obtained explicit knowledge
(i.e., were aware of the hidden rule), they performed the test
sequence with fewer errors.
In addition, we compared the performance of the
participants who were not aware of the regularity of the
Vertically mirrored hyperset and those in the Random
hyperset, and found implicit transfer of speed. This point
differs from the previous study where no effect of explicit
knowledge was found for performance speed with the
rotated hypersets. Therefore, the vertical reversal might be a
special case in terms of spatial transformation of visuomotor
sequences.
In conclusion, in the present study, we investigated
whether people could implicitly transfer learned sequence
with accuracy and speed to a spatially mirrored sequence.
We found that even when participants did not notice the
mirrored rules, they showed transfer of learning to the
vertically or horizontally mirrored sequence. This result
indicates that people could implicitly use the relationship
between the learning block and transfer block.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows
and Japan Science and Technology Agency (CREST).

References
Abrahamse, E. L., Jiménez, L., Verwey, W. B., & Clegg, B. A. (2010).
Representing serial action and perception. Psychonomic bulletin &
review, 17(5), 603–23. doi:10.3758/PBR.17.5.603
Anderson JR (1982) Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review,
89, 369-406.
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L., Turken, A., & Waldron, E. (1998). A
neuropsychological theory of multiple-systems in category learning.
Psychological Review, 105, 442-481.
Bapi, R. S., Miyapuram, K. P., Graydon, F. X., & Doya, K. (2006). fMRI
investigation of cortical and subcortical networks in the learning of
abstract and effector-specific representations of motor sequences.
Neuroimage, 32(2), 714–27.
Cohen, A., Ivry, R. I., & Keele, S. W. (1990). Attention and structure in
sequence learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 16, 17–30.

Dienes, Z., Kuhn, G., Guo, X. Y., & Jones, C. (2012). Communicating
structure, affect and movement: Commentary on Bharucha, Curtis &
Paroo. In Rebuschat, P., Rohrmeier, M., Cross, I., Hawkins (Eds),
Language and Music as Cognitive Systems. Oxford University Press
(pp 156-168).
Dienes, Z. & Longuet-Higgins, H. C. (2004). Can musical transformations
be implicitly learned? Cognitive Science, 28, 531-558.
Fitts, P. M. (1954). The information capacity of the human motor system in
controlling the amplitude of movement. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 47, 381–391.
Grafton, S. T., Hazeltine, E., & Ivry, R. B. (2002). Motor sequence learning
with the nondominant left hand: a PET functional imaging study.
Experimental Brain Research, 146, 369–378.
Hikosaka, O., Rand, M. K., Miyachi, S., & Miyashita, K. (1995). Learning
of sequential movements in the monkey: process of learning and
retention of memory. Journal of Neurophysiology, 74, 1652-1661.
Hikosaka, O., Sakai, K., Miyauchi, S., Takino, R., Sasaki, Y., & Putz, B.
(1996). Activation of human presupplementary motor area in learning
of sequential procedures: a functional MRI study. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 76, 617-621.
Hikosaka, O., Nakamura, K., Sakai, K., Nakahara, H. (2002). Central
mechanisms of motor skill learning. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
12, 217-222.
Jiang, S., Zhu, L., Guo, X., Ma, W., Yang, Z., & Dienes, Z. (2012).
Unconscious structural knowledge of tonal symmetry: Tang poetry
redefines limits of implicit learning. Consciousness & Cognition, 21,
476-486.
Kovacs, A. J., Mühlbauer, T., & Shea, C. H. (2009). The coding and
effector transfer of movement sequences. Journal of experimental
psychology. Human perception and performance, 35(2), 390–407.
Kuhn, G., & Dienes, Z. (2005). Implicit learning of non-local musical rules.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition,
31, 1417-1432.
Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional requirements of learning:
evidence from performance measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Perruchet, P., & Pacteau, C. (1990). Synthetic grammar learning: Implicit
rule abstraction or explicit fragmentary knowledge? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 119 (3), 264-275.
Perruchet, P., & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and statistical learning:
one phenomenon, two approaches. Trends in cognitive sciences, 10(5),
233-8.
Reber, A.S. ( 1967 ). Implicit learning of artificial grammars. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 6 , 317-327.
Schmidt, R. A., & Young, D. E. (1987). Transfer of Move- ment Control in
Motor Skill Learning. In S. M. Cormier & J. D. Hagman, (Ed.),
Transfer of learning: Contemporary research and applications (pp.
47–79).San Diego,CA:Academic Press.
Servan-Schreiber, E., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Learning artificial
grammars with competitive chunking. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16 (4), 592-608.
Shanks, D. R., Rowland, L. a, & Ranger, M. S. (2005). Attentional load
and implicit sequence learning. Psychological research, 69(5-6), 369–
82.
Stadler, M. A., & Neely, C. B. (1997). Effects of sequence length and
structure on implicit serial learning. Psychological Research, 60, 14–
23.
Watanabe, K., Ikeda, H., Hikosaka, O. (2006). Effects of explicit
knowledge of workspace rotation in visuomotor sequence learning,
Experimental Brain Research, 174, 673-678.
Watanabe, K., Ikeda, H., Miyao, M. (2010) Learning efficacy of explicit
visuomotor sequences in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and Asperger syndrome, Experimental Brain Research, 203,
233-239.
Ziori, E., & Dienes, Z. (2006). Subjective measures of unconscious
knowledge of concepts. Mind & Society, 5, 105-122.
Ziori, E. & Dienes, Z. (2008). How does prior knowledge affect implicit
and explicit concept learning? Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 61, 601-624.

3509

