UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Impulsivity and Overall Similarity Classification

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3gx427cs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Wills, Andy
Longmore, Chris
Milton, Fraser

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Impulsivity and Overall Similarity Classification
Andy J. Wills (andy.wills@plymouth.ac.uk), Chris A. Longmore
Department of Psychology, Plymouth University, UK.

Fraser Milton
Department of Psychology, Exeter University, UK.
Abstract

Ward (1983) that highly impulsive individuals are more
likely to classify on the basis of overall similarity than
individuals with low impulsivity. This result appears to
support the less-is-more hypothesis because, presumably,
impulsive individuals devote fewer cognitive resources to
the categorization task than do reflective individuals.
We had two concerns about Ward’s demonstration—
the validity of the measure of impulsivity, and the validity of the measure of overall similarity classification.
Below, we outline those concerns, and describe how we
addressed them in the current study.

It is sometimes argued that implementation of an overall
similarity classification is less effortful than implementation of a single-dimension classification. One piece of
evidence taken to be in support of this argument is that
highly impulsive individuals appear to be more likely to
sort on the basis of overall similarity than individuals
with low impulsivity (Ward, 1983); presumably, higher
impulsivity results in lower effort. In the current article, we identify some limitations in Ward’s procedure
and, using a more standard measure of impulsivity and
a less ambiguous measure of overall similarity classification, re-investigate the relationship between impulsivity
and overall similarity classification. Using a match-tostandard procedure, the current experiment finds that
overall similarity classification is less prevalent in highly
impulsive individuals. The implications of this result,
which is opposite to that reported by Ward (1983), are
discussed.
Keywords: impulsivity; categorization; overall similarity; family resemblance.

Impulsivity

In a seminal article, Brooks (1978) argued for two different processes of categorization. In analytic categorization, the participant separates aspects of the stimulus and evaluates their ability to predict category membership. This process of analysis, Brooks assumed, will
typically lead to a subset of the stimulus attributes controlling responding. In contrast, nonanalytic categorization is the process of predicting category membership
on the basis of overall similarity to known examples—
a process that results in all stimulus attributes having
some control over responding. Brooks hypothesized that
nonanalytic categorization would be more likely to occur
where cognitive resources were limited.
Brooks’s hypothesis is striking because it assumes that
a categorization process that employs all the information in the stimulus (overall similarity) is less effortful
than a categorization process that employs a subset of
that information (analytic, or “rule-based”, categorization). Following Wills, Milton, Longmore, Hester, and
Robinson (2013), we describe this as the less-is-more
hypothesis—for example, less time spent categorizing
objects results in more information from those objects
having control over responding (Smith & Kemler Nelson, 1984). We contrast this with the more-is-more
hypothesis—for example, more time spent categorizing
objects results in more information from those objects
having control over responding (Milton, Longmore, &
Wills, 2008).
The current paper revisits one particular plank in the
less-is-more argument; namely, the result reported by

Ward used the Matching Familiar Figures measure of
impulsivity (Kagan, 1965), a measure whose validity has
been questioned (e.g. Block, Block, & Harrington, 1974)
and which appears to be largely uncorrelated with better
validated measures of impulsivity (Helmers, Young, &
Pihl, 1995). In the current study, we employed the Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS-11), which is the most widely
used measure of impulsivity (Stanford et al., 2009). It
has high reliability and good external validity (Patton,
Stanford, & Barratt, 1995). The Barratt Impulsivity
Scale is a self-report measure that includes statements
such as, “I concentrate easily” and “I am happy-golucky”.

Overall similarity classification
Ward employed the triad procedure as a measure of the
prevalence of overall similarity classification. In this procedure three stimuli, whose relationship to each other
is illustrated in Figure 1, are presented simultaneously
and participants are asked to decide which two stimuli
go together best. Stimuli B and C are similar on both
stimulus dimensions, but not identical on either, while
stimuli A and B are identical on one stimulus dimension
but quite dissimilar on the other. Three responses are
possible—an AB response (A and B go together best), a
BC response or an AC response. Time pressure, concurrent load, impulsivity, and instructions to respond impressionistically, all increase BC responses and decrease
AB responses (Smith & Kemler Nelson, 1984; Ward,
1983; Ward, Foley, & Cole, 1986). AB responding is
typically described as “dimensional” responding and BC
responding is typically described as “overall similarity”
responding, hence leading to the claim that overall similarity (BC) responding increases as cognitive resources

3783

Figure 1: Abstract structure of the triad task. Typically, on half of trials A and B are identical on dimension 1
(Panel b), and on the other half of trials A and B are identical on dimension 2 (Panel a).
decrease.
One reason that the triad procedure is ill suited to
testing a less-is-more hypothesis is that consistent AB
(“dimensional”) responding requires that the participant
consider both stimulus dimensions on every trial. This
is because the dimension on which A and B are identical
varies unpredictably from trial to trial (see Figure 1),
and so a consistent AB responder cannot decide in advance of stimulus onset to only attend to one of the stimulus dimensions. Consistent BC responding also requires
consideration of both stimulus dimensions on every trial
(irrespective of whether one believes that consideration
to take the form of an analytic strategy or direct access
to similarity relations through holistic “blobs”). Hence
both consistent “overall similarity” (BC) responding and
consistent “dimensional” (AB) responding requires consideration of all the relevant stimulus information on
every trial. It is therefore not the case that overall
similarity responding requires consideration of more of
the available stimulus information than dimensional responding in the triad task, and hence the triad task is
not well suited to testing a less-is-more hypothesis.
In the current study, we employed the match-tostandards procedure, which is perhaps best considered
as an interpretatively less ambiguous version of the triad
procedure. The procedure was introduced by Regehr and
Brooks (1995) as a means of increasing the prevalence of
overall similarity classification of novel stimuli, relative
to the more commonly employed array sort procedure, in
which single-dimension classification dominates (Medin,
Wattenmaker, & Hampson, 1987). In line with the findings of Milton et al. (2008), Regehr and Brooks observed
that reaction times were longer for overall similarity classification than single-dimension classification in this procedure, although they did not publish these observations
(Brooks, personal communication, 20 October 2009).
In the match-to-standards procedure, participants sequentially free classify each of a series of target stimuli
as belonging to one of two categories. The two cate-

gories are represented by two standards—that is, two
stimuli that appear on each trial. The two standards
differ from each other on all variable stimulus dimensions. For example, in the current study, the two standards are as shown in Figure 2. In the current experiments, there are 10 distinct to-be-classified stimuli, with
the abstract structure shown in Table 1. In some respects, the match-to-standards procedure is similar to
the triad procedure, because each trial involves deciding which two of the three stimuli go together best (although, unlike the triad task, the option of saying that
the two least similar stimuli—the two standards in the
match-to-standards procedure—go together is not available). Also, in the match-to-standards procedure, each
participant’s classification strategy for a particular block
is determined over 10 trials (rather than independently
for each trial, as in the triad task).

Experiment
In summary, the current experiment re-investigates the
relationship between impulsivity and overall similarity
classification, first reported by Ward (1983), but using
improved measures of both impulsivity and of overall
similarity classification.

Method
Participants and apparatus Thirty-six participants
from the University of Exeter took part in the experiment in return for course credit or payment. The stimuli
were presented on a 17-inch CRT monitor, set to a resolution of 800 × 600 pixels and a color depth of 16-bits
per pixel. The participants sat in front of the computer
screen at a distance of approximately 50 cms. Responses
were made using a standard keyboard.
Stimuli The abstract stimulus structure can be seen
in Table 1. The stimulus set consisted of four binaryvalued dimensions (D1-D4) and the stimuli were organized around two prototypes, each representative of the
two categories. These prototypes were constructed by

3784

taking all the positive values on the dimensions for one
of the stimuli (1, 1, 1, 1) and all of the zero values on the
dimensions (0, 0, 0, 0) for the other category. The rest
of the stimuli (one-aways) were mild distortions of the
two prototypes in that they had three features characteristic of their category and one atypical feature more
characteristic of the other category. In total there were
10 stimuli in the set. Sorting the stimuli by overall similarity, as shown in Table 1, maximizes within-group similarities and minimizes between-group similarities. The
stimuli were one of the lamp stimulus sets used by Milton
and Wills (2004). Each lamp had four variable features;
lampshade (with either 5 or 10 dots), width of stand
(wide or narrow), color of bar (light or dark blue) and
size of base (long or short). See Figure 2 for the prototypes of each category.

Table 1: Abstract stimulus set
D1
1
1
1
1
0

Category A
D2 D3
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1

D4
1
0
1
1
1

D1
0
0
0
0
1

Category B
D2 D3
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0

D4
0
1
0
0
0

Procedure We used the match-to-standards task introduced by Regehr and Brooks (1995), and developed
by our lab (Milton & Wills, 2004; Milton et al., 2008;
Wills et al., 2013). Each trial began with a blank screen
that was presented for 1000 ms, followed by three lamps
in a triangular arrangement. There were two lamps at
the top of the screen that depicted the prototypes for
category A and B with the to-be-classified lamp presented below the prototypes. Each stimulus array remained on the screen until the participant placed the
to-be-classified lamp into either category A (by pressing
the ‘c’ key on the keyboard) or category B (by pressing
the ‘m’ key). After the participant made a response the
next trial began.
There was no feedback; participants were simply instructed at the beginning of the experiment to sort the
stimuli in the way they thought most appropriate. At
the end of each block, participants were asked to write
down the sorting strategy they used before moving onto
the next block. Participants were presented with a total
of 60 trials, in 6 blocks of 10 trials. In each block, each
of the stimuli shown in Table 1 was presented once as
the to-be-classified stimulus. The order of presentation
within a block was random.
Immediately after the 6 blocks of classifiation, participants’ impulsivity was assessed using the Barratt Impulsivity Scale BIS-11 (Stanford & Barratt, 1995).

Figure 2: Stimulus prototypes

Classification measure Each participant was classified as having produced one of the sort types described
below in each of the six blocks of the experiment. These
sort types are identical to those used previously by our
lab (Milton & Wills, 2004; Milton et al., 2008; Milton,
Wills, & Hodgson, 2009; Wills et al., 2013).
A uni-dimensional sort is based on a single dimension
of the stimulus. It does not matter which dimension is
used as the basis of sorting, so long as all of the positive
values for the chosen dimension were in one category
and all of the zero values for that dimension were in
the other category. Additionally, in order to receive this
classification, the participant has to describe their sort
as being based on a single dimension.
Participants were considered to have produced a oneaway uni-dimensional sort if they described their sorting
as being driven by a single dimension but there was a
solitary error in their classification. This means that
nine of the items were classified on the basis of a single
dimension but the other item was placed into the wrong
category.
An overall similarity sort, also commonly known as
a “family resemblance” sort (Medin et al., 1987), has
a structure identical to that shown in Table 1. In order to receive this classification, the participant had to
place each of the prototypes, along with their derived
one-aways, into separate categories without error. Additionally, they have to describe their strategy as being
based either on general similarity or on placing each item
into the category with which it had more features in common.
A one-away overall similarity sort is similar to the
one-away uni-dimensional sort with the exception that
the error occurred in a sort that was otherwise overall
similarity.
Any classifications produced by a participant other
than those described above were classified as other sorts,
even if the description given by the participant fitted one
of the sorts described above. The correspondence between the classification produced by a participant and
their verbal description of the sort they have produced
is very high in this procedure, approximately 0.99. The
verbal descriptions were classified by the authors.
Impulsivity measure Participants were classified as
high impulsivity if their score on BIS-11 was greater than

3785

the sample median (64.5), and as low impulsivity otherwise (cf. Martin & Potts, 2009).

Results
For every block, each participant’s sorting strategy was
classified according to the sort types described above.
As in previous studies, one-away uni-dimensional and
one-away overall similarity sorts were classified as unidimensional and overall similarity sorts respectively
(Milton & Wills, 2004; Milton et al., 2008; Wills et al.,
2013). The total number of sorts for each strategy was
calculated and the mean proportions of overall similarity, uni-dimensional and other sorts produced by high
impulsivity and low impulsivity participants are shown
in Figure 3.
Participants with high impulsivity produced significantly more uni-dimensional sorts than those with low
impulsivity, t(34) = 2.203, p < .05. Conversely, participants with high impulsivity produced significantly fewer
overall similarity sorts than those with low impulsivity,
t(34) = −2.382, p < .025. There was no difference in the
prevalence of Other sorts, t(34) = .206, p = .838. Correlations of the raw impulsivity scores with the prevalence
of unidimensional, overall similarity and other sorts reveal the same ordinal pattern, albeit with slightly higher
p-values (unidimensional τ = .22, p = .09; overall similarity τ = −.20, p = .13; other, τ = −.06, p = .68).

Discussion
Ward (1983) reported that participants with high impulsivity were more likely to classify on the basis of overall
similarity than participants with low impulsivity. This
is one of a number of results taken to support the idea
that overall similarity classification is a low-effort, “fallback” mode of classification that people employ when
cognitive resources are limited. However, a close examination of Ward’s study reveals that both the measure
of impulsivity, and the measure of overall similarity, employed are sub-optimal. The measure of impulsivity (Kagan’s Matching Familiar Figures task) is of questionable
validity, and does not correlate with other more valid
measures of impulsivity. The triad task, employed by
Ward as a measure of overall similarity responding, is
also interpretatively ambiguous because both consistent
overall similarity responding, and consistent dimensional
responding, require consideration of both stimulus dimensions on every trial.
In the current study, we employed a more standard
measure of impulsivity (the Barratt Impulsivity Scale),
and measured overall similarity responding with the
match-to-standards task. The match-to-standards task
is a variant of the triad procedure that overcomes the
interpretive ambiguities in the standard procedure. One
of the ways it achieves this is by considering the participants’ responses to a series of ten stimuli, rather than

considering the response to each stimulus as an independent data point.
Our refinement of Ward’s procedures seems to have led
to a reversal of his conclusions. In the current study, high
impulsivity is associated with single-dimension responding, whilst low impulsivity is associated with overall similarity responding. Thus, our data seem to support a
conclusion opposite to Ward’s—overall similarity classification is more requiring of cognitive resources than
dimensional responding. Such a conclusion is consistent
with previous results employing the match-to-standards
procedure. For example, Milton et al. (2008) found that
time pressure generally reduces the prevalence of overall
similarity responding, Milton et al. (2009) found greater
frontal lobe involvement for overall similarity classification than single-dimension classification, and Wills et al.
(2013) found that concurrent load, and a small working memory capacity, reduces the prevalence of overall similarity classification, and that instructions to respond meticulously increased overall similarity responding. Milton and Wills (2009) found that overall similarity classification takes longer, and involves more, widely
distributed, eye movements than single-dimension classification. Taken together with the results of the current
study, a consistent picture is emerging—overall similarity classification is more effortful than single-dimension
classification.
One key question, not satisfactorily answered by this
study, or by any other published study, is whether the
consistent pattern of results emerging from the match-tostandards procedure is specific to that procedure. Perhaps the match-to-standards procedure is the exception,
with other procedures pointing consistently to the opposite conclusion? In our view, there is currently insufficient data to answer this question adequately. The triad
procedure, at least as typically analysed, is interpretatively ambiguous, but this problem could be overcome
with larger samples and more sophisticated model-based
analyses (e.g. Thompson, 1994).
Two other procedures that are sometimes taken to
support the less-is-more view (that overall similarity
classification is lower effort than single-dimension classification) are the Ashby-Maddox procedure (Ashby &
Maddox, 2005) and the criterial-attribute procedure
(Kemler Nelson, 1984; Smith & Shapiro, 1989). As
discussed by Wills et al. (2013), these procedures seem
likely to be addressing slightly different questions to the
one posed here.
The Ashby-Maddox procedure seems, predominately,
to be an investigation of the effects of having an easy-toverbalize category structure versus a hard-to-verbalize
structure. As single-dimension structures are typically
easy to verbalize, and some multi-dimensional structures are not, the two issues are not unrelated. However, recent work by Ashby, Maddox and colleagues sug-

3786

Figure 3: Proportion of other, uni-dimensional and overall similarity sorts, by impulsivity. Error bars represent one
standard error
gests that it is verbalizability, rather than dimensionality, that underlies their reported effects, because the
effects are still observed when one compares two multidimensional classification problems that differ in verbalizability (Filoteo, Lauritzen, & Maddox, 2010; Maddox,
Pacheco, Reeves, Zhu, & Schnyer, 2010). There are also
an increasing number of studies that suggest that some of
the results from the Ashby-Maddox procedure are a consequence of subtle problems with the design or analysis
of these studies (Newell, Dunn, & Kalish, 2010; Newell,
Moore, Wills, & Milton, 2013).
The criterial-attribute procedure, like the AshbyMaddox procedure, seems to be addressing a slightly
different question to the one posed here. Specifically,
the criterial-attribute procedure may provide evidence
that it is effortful to detect the one dimension that
permits above-criterion performance in a context where
all dimensions individually support at least 75% accuracy. Studies using the criterial-attribute procedure
(Kemler Nelson, 1984; Smith & Shapiro, 1989) support
the idea that this is effortful, but they are also consistent with the idea that implementing an overall similarity classification is more effortful than implementing a
single-dimension classification (Smith, Tracy, & Murray,
1993). It was the implementation of overall similarity
classification that was the topic of the current study.
Why did the current study and Ward’s study produce apparently opposite results regarding impulsivity
and overall similarity classification? There are a number
of possibilities. One possibility, as previously discussed,
is that Ward’s measure of impulsivity has low validity.
If Ward did not measure impulsivity adequately, then
contrasting the current result (using a more valid measure) with Ward’s findings is largely irrelevant, as Ward’s
results would not validly concern impulsivity. Another

possibility is that a less ambiguous analysis of the triad
task using model-based methods might reveal that high
impulsivity was in fact associated with uni-dimensional
classification, rather than overall similarity classification,
even in the triad task. We are currently investigating
this possibility.
One way in which the match-to-standards task differs
from other procedures is that the participants’ written
descriptions of their sorts are combined with the sorts
they actually produce in order to classify their behavior. It seems likely that impulsivity affects the content
of those written reports. A more critical possibility is
that impulsivity might affect the written reports differently to the objective sorts, and hence the results of the
current study might have been different if we had only
looked at the objective sorts (or only looked at the written reports). However, if impulsivity does affect written
reports differently to the objective sorts, then the consequence should be a difference in the prevalence of Other
sorts as a function of impulsivity (because Other sorts
occur under our classification procedure when the written report and objective sort do not agree). As can be
seen in Figure 3, the proportion of Other sorts is low and
does not vary by impulsivity. It therefore seems unlikely
that our results would have been substantively different
if we had considered just the objective sorts or just the
written descriptions.
In conclusion, in the current study highly impulsive individuals were more likely to produce singledimension classifications than low-impulsivity individuals (who were more likely to produce overall similarity
classifications). The opposite conclusion, suggested by
Ward (1983), seems likely to be due to limitations of the
procedures employed in that study, although it remains
a possibility that both results are valid, but specific to

3787

the procedure employed.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ESRC grant RES-00022-1779 awarded to Andy J. Wills and ESRC grant PTA026-27-1256 and a Great Western Research Fellowship
awarded to Fraser Milton.

References
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Human category
learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 105 , 442–481.
Block, J., Block, J., & Harrington, D. (1974). Some misgivings about the matching familiar figures test as a
measure of reflection-impulsivity. Developmental Psychology, 10 , 611–632.
Brooks, L. R. (1978). Nonanalytic concept formation
and memory for instances. In E. Rosch & B. Lloyd
(Eds.), Cognition and categorization (pp. 169–211).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Filoteo, J., Lauritzen, S., & Maddox, W. T. (2010).
Removing the frontal lobes: The effects of engaging
executive functions on perceptual category learning.
Psychological Science, 21 , 415–423.
Helmers, K., Young, S., & Pihl, R. (1995). Assessment
of measures of impulsivity in healthy male volunteers.
Personality and Individual Differences, 19 , 927–935.
Kagan, J. (1965). Impulsive and reflective children: Significance of conceptual tempo. In J. Krumboltz (Ed.),
Learning and the educational process. Chicago: Rand
McNally.
Kemler Nelson, D. (1984). The effect of intention on
what concepts are acquired. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 23 , 734–759.
Maddox, W. T., Pacheco, J., Reeves, M., Zhu, B., &
Schnyer, D. M. (2010). Rule-based and informationintegration category learning in normal aging. Neuropsychologia, 48 , 2998–3008.
Martin, R., & Potts, G. (2009). Impulsivity in decision making: An event-related potential investigation.
Personality and Individual Differences, 46 , 303–308.
Medin, D. L., Wattenmaker, W. D., & Hampson, S. E.
(1987). Family resemblance, conceptual cohesiveness,
and category construction. Cognitive Psychology, 19 ,
242–279.
Milton, F., Longmore, C. A., & Wills, A. J. (2008).
Processes of overall similarity sorting in free classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 30 , 407–415.
Milton, F., & Wills, A. J. (2004). The influence of
stimulus properties on category construction. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 30 , 407–415.
Milton, F., & Wills, A. J. (2009). Eye movements in
overall similarity and single-dimension sorting. In Proceedings of the thirty-first annual conference of the cog-

nitive science society (pp. 1512–1517). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Milton, F., Wills, A. J., & Hodgson, T. L. (2009). The
neural basis of overall similarity and single-dimension
sorting. NeuroImage, 46 , 319–326.
Newell, B. R., Dunn, J. C., & Kalish, M. (2010). The dimensionality of perceptual category learning: a statetrace analysis. Memory and Cognition, 38 , 563–581.
Newell, B. R., Moore, C. P., Wills, A. J., & Milton, F.
(2013). Reinstating the frontal lobes? Having more
time to think improves “implicit” perceptual categorization. a comment on Filoteo, Lauritzen and Maddox, 2010. Psychological Science, 24 , 386–3389.
Patton, J., Stanford, M. S., & Barratt, E. S. (1995).
Factor structure of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale.
Journal of Clinical Neuroscience, 51 , 768–774.
Regehr, G., & Brooks, L. R. (1995). Category organization in free classification: The organizing effect of an
array of stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General , 122 , 92–114.
Smith, J. D., & Kemler Nelson, D. (1984). Overall similarity in adults’ classification: The child in all of us.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 113 ,
137–159.
Smith, J. D., & Shapiro, J. (1989). The occurrence of
holistic categorization. Journal of Memory and Language, 28 , 386–399.
Smith, J. D., Tracy, J. I., & Murray, M. J. (1993). Depression and category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 122 , 331-346.
Stanford, M. S., & Barratt, E. S. (1995). Factor structure
of the Barratt Impulsivity Scale. Journal of Clinical
Neuroscience, 51 , 768–774.
Stanford, M. S., Mathias, C. W., Dougherty, D., Lake,
S., Anderson, N., & Patton, J. (2009). Fifty years
of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale: An update and
review. Personality and Individual Differences, 47 ,
385–395.
Thompson, L. (1994). Dimensional strategies dominate perceptual classification. Child Development, 65 ,
1627–1645.
Ward, T. B. (1983). Response tempo and separableintegral responding: Evidence for an integral-toseparable processing sequence in visual perception.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9 , 103-112.
Ward, T. B., Foley, C., & Cole, J. (1986). Classifying
multidimensional stimuli: Stimulus, task, and observer
factors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 12 , 211–225.
Wills, A. J., Milton, F., Longmore, C. A., Hester, S.,
& Robinson, J. (2013). Is overall similarity classification less effortful than single-dimension classification? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
66 , 299–318.

3788

