UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Incidental and Non-Incidental Processing of Biological Motion: Orientation, Attention and Life
Detection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bv82406

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Veto, Peter
Thill, Serge
Hemeren, Paul

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Incidental and Non-Incidental Processing of Biological Motion: Orientation,
Attention and Life Detection
Peter Veto (peter.veto@univr.it),
Department of Neurological, Neuropsychological, Morphological and Movement Sciences
Section of Physiology and Psychology University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie, 8, 37143 Verona – Italy

Serge Thill (serge.thill@his.se) and Paul Hemeren (paul.hemeren@his.se)
Interaction Lab, Informatics Research Centre
University of Skövde
541 28 Skövde, Sweden

Abstract
Based on the unique traits of biological motion perception,
the existence of a “life detector”, a special sensitivity to
perceiving motion patterns typical for animals, seems to be
plausible (Johnson, 2006). Showing motion displays upsidedown or with changes in global structure is known to disturb
processing in different ways, but not much is known yet about
how inversion affects attention and incidental processing. To
examine the perception of upright and inverted point-light
walkers regarding incidental processing, we used a flanker
paradigm (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974) adapted for biological
motion (Thornton & Vuong, 2004), and extended it to include
inverted and scrambled figures. Results show that inverted
walkers do not evoke incidental processing and they allow
high accuracy in performance only when attentional
capacities are not diminished. An asymmetrical interaction
between upright and inverted figures is found which alludes
to qualitatively different pathways of processing.
Keywords: biological motion perception; point-light walker;
incidental processing; inversion effect; life detector

Introduction
An important feature of the visual processing of the
dynamic human gestalt in point-light displays is the
“automatic” nature of the perceptions. As Johansson (1973)
points out, “… we have found that it seems to be a highly
mechanical, automatic type of visual data treatment that is
most important.” While Johansson‟s use of the term
“automatic” points more to the early processes involved in
establishing hierarchies of locally rigid perceptual units,
there is a case to be made for the automatic processing of
biological motion at a higher cognitive level under favorable
circumstances, i.e., given an appropriate task.
Phenomenally, Johansson‟s own demonstrations point to the
immediateness and vividness of viewing point-light displays
of biological motion. Observers are fast and accurate in their
identifications when not disrupted by dynamic masking.
They appear to have direct access to a level of meaning that
facilitates the identification and recognition of actions
depicted in the point-light displays. In contrast to upright
displays, inverted point-light displays lead to impaired
recognition, identification, detection and priming (e.g.,

Bertenthal & Pinto, 1994; Daems & Verfaillie, 1999;
Hemeren, 2008; Shiffrar & Pinto, 2002; Troje, 2003).
Previous results have also shown that point-light walkers
(PLWs) trigger attention mechanisms (Thornton & Vuong,
2004). Using a flanker paradigm, Thornton and Vuong
(2004) demonstrated incidental processing of upright
oriented PLW flankers during judgments of the walking
direction of the displays. Upright point-light walkers can
elicit incidental processing while static, scrambled or
chimeric ones cannot, but in these studies they did not
address the question of inversion. Incidental processing was
indicated by an increase in the time it took to make direction
judgments when the direction of the flankers was
incongruent with the direction of the target. The task
irrelevant flankers interfered with the visual processing of
the target.
Recently, Shi et al. (2010) reported effects of upright
PLWs on the accuracy of reporting the perceived direction
of a Gabor patch. Accuracy was significantly lower when
the walking direction of an upright PLW was incongruent
with the orientation of the Gabor patch. Importantly, no
such effect was found for inverted PLWs. This suggests the
existence of a perceptual cue that triggers reflexive
attentional orienting for upright, but not for inverted, PLWs.
This is consistent with previous results regarding a general
inversion effect and evidence for a “life detector” (see e.g.,
Johnson, 2006; Troje & Westhoff, 2006).
In our study, we investigate the differential effects of the
orientation of PLWs within the framework of Hochstein and
Ahissar‟s Reverse Hierarchy Theory (2002). The idea here
is that the visual quality of biological motion perception for
upright displays is indicative of global processing as well as
quick access to semantic level representations. Consistent
with Hochstein and Ahissar (2002), the perception of
inverted displays could be characterized as an example of
illusory conjunctions. The perception of inverted displays
could be said to demonstrate the effects of top-down
processing in the sense that the default value is an upright
orientation and this creates false conjunctions in the
perception of inverted displays.
This line of reasoning is consistent with the reasoning in
Shiffrar, Lichtey & Heptulla Chatterjee (1997) where they
show that global processes are involved in the perception of

1528

upright biological motion displays across apertures but that
this global processing is impaired when inverted biological
motion displays are viewed across apertures. Their findings
show that global processing is associated with viewing
upright displays and that local processing is associated with
viewing inverted displays.
Given this, we suggest that upright PLWs are incidentally
processed on the basis of initial explicit perception as
„vision at a glance,‟ and it also reflects the activity of large
receptive fields of high cortical areas and spread attention of
initial perception (Hochstein & Ahissar, 2002). At the other
(low-level) end of the processing continuum, inverted PLWs
constitute „vision with scrutiny‟ which involves focused
attention and the activation of small receptive fields in
lower cortical areas.
By extending the flanker paradigm in Thornton and
Vuong (2004) to include inverted walkers, we can further
address the issue of incidental processing of flankers while
performing a direct visual task on a central target. It may be
the case that inverted walkers can be incidentally processed
when the target is also an inverted walker. This condition
can be directly contrasted with upright flankers and an
upright target, for which there is already evidence of
incidental processing (Thornton & Vuong, 2004). This
study will therefore include a replication of those results.
Directional congruence will also be included in this study in
order to assess the potential interference or facilitation
effects of similar or different walking directions of the
targets and flankers.
Here we can investigate the orthogonal pattern of
interaction between upright and inverted displays under
conditions of orientation congruence and direction
congruence. This allows us to potentially see asymmetrical
interactions in the way upright and inverted flankers
modulate the visual processing of upright and inverted
targets.
One obvious prediction from previous findings of the
inversion effect is that inverted flankers will have no effect
on reaction time or accuracy in detecting the walking
direction of an upright target. This is due to the relatively
fast and automatic processing of an upright and biologically
relevant moving human. The structure of the information in
the inverted flankers is not sufficient to modulate the
processing of an upright target.
The potential effect of inverted flankers on inverted
targets is less obvious to predict. Previous evidence
(Hemeren, 2008) shows that inverted PLWs can prime
(repetition priming) themselves as well as other inverted
point-light actions. Given this evidence, inverted flankers
may be incidentally processed because the visual system is
active in scanning the available information for clues to
resolve the conflicts (false conjunctions) in the inverted
targets. This, however, entails that the information in the
inverted flankers is relevant. If there is no relevant
information, then there will be no incidental processing of
inverted displays.

Since upright flankers convey biologically relevant
information and are visually processed relatively
automatically, we expect them to be incidentally processed
when presented with an inverted target. This incidental
processing will likely lead to significant interference when
judging the walking direction of an inverted target.
The effect of upright flankers on upright targets will
likely depend on the congruence of walking direction for the
target. Based on results from Thornton and Vuong (2004)
we expect the incidental processing of upright flankers to
interfere with upright targets when they are walking in
different directions (directional incongruence). When they
are walking in the same direction (directional congruence),
the question is whether the incidental processing of upright
flankers will speed up (facilitate) the ability to correctly
detect the walking direction of the target in relation to
inverted flankers or whether there will be no difference
between the effects of upright and inverted flanker on
detection time for upright targets.

Methods
Participants
Ten right-handed subjects (5 male and 5 female, aged 20
to 49 years, M = 28.9, with normal or corrected-to-normal
vision) participated in the experiment. Participants were
selected from colleagues and the student population of the
University of Skövde. All participants were naive to the
purpose of the experiment and only the students received
monetary compensation (approximately $15). Participants
provided written informed consent. Experiment protocol
conformed to Swedish law and the World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki.

Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of the target walker (1.26° x 0.74°)
displayed in the center surrounded by five distractors evenly
placed at a fixed distance from the target (1.89°) with a
randomly defined angular offset for the five flankers
together. To compensate for the smaller cortical
representation of peripheral stimuli, flankers were scaled by
a cortical magnification factor (Goolkasian, 1997), thus
having the size of 2° x 1.17°. The total size for the whole
display was 5.78°. Figures were depicted in profile by 13
dots based on the 3-dimensional coordinates of the action
”Walk” from a stimulus set of human point-light actions
created by Vanrie & Verfaillie (2004). For presentation of
the stimuli and recording of the answers MatLab R2010a
was used on an HP EliteBook 8440p laptop computer. An
HP L2245wg monitor (1440 x 900 pixels, 60 Hz) displayed
the stimuli at 100 cm viewing distance.
In every condition the same figure was mirrored so that
there were two possible directions of translation (left and
right) and two possible orientations (right-side-up and
upside-down). In addition to these four variations,
scrambled flankers were created for control by mixing dots
randomly chosen from the four conditions and displaying

1529

them with random starting positions, while the total size of
the figure was kept equal to the regular flankers. This way,
scrambled flankers as a whole did not contain directional or
orientation information, while the local motion patterns of
the dots remained the same as in the globally intact figures.
The four variations of the target and five variations of the
flankers resulted in twenty conditions in total (see examples
in Figure 1).

Results
Reaction Times

B

Figure 1: Upright target with translation to left and inverted
flankers with translation to right (panel A); Inverted target
with translation to right and scrambled flankers (panel B).

Procedure
Participants were informed about that they would see a
centrally located PLW (target) either upright or inverted and
that flankers would surround the target. They were
instructed to just focus on the target and to indicate the
walking direction of the target by pressing one of two keys.
Left or right responses were given by key presses with the
corresponding index fingers, indicating the direction of
translation of the target regardless of its orientation.
Participants were instructed as to the importance of the
speed and accuracy of their responses. Stimuli were played
from a randomly chosen starting frame (randomized
between figures as well) in a continuous loop at 30 FPS
(stride frequency: 2/s) until the participant responded. Every
trial was preceded by an ISI of 500-800 ms, during which a
fixation cross (0.23°) marked the center of the display.
Each participant started with a training session of 32
trials. After that, 1440 trials were recorded, divided by
arbitrary breaks into three sessions of 480 trials. In one
session out of the three, 50 % of the trials contained the
scrambled conditions, while the other two sessions were
made up of only non-scrambled trials. The order of the
sessions varied between participants. This design was
necessary to avoid a possible novelty effect of scrambled
trials, since their total number was less than the total
number of non-scrambled trials. Altogether, 1200 nonscrambled and 240 scrambled trials were completed by each
subject, which means 75 trials per each non-scrambled
condition and 60 trials per each scrambled condition.
The design of this experiment consisted of four
independent variables; Target orientation (upright vs.

Reaction time (RT) data were analyzed only for correct
responses, with all outliers exceeding 2 SDs above and
below the mean eliminated. Errors (accounting for 2.42 %
of all answers) were analyzed separately. Means generated
for each condition and subject were used in a repeatedmeasures ANOVA analysis. Individual conditions in
relevant cases were compared with t-tests.
Since the task of the participants was to respond to targets
and to ignore the flankers, the amount of influence of the
flankers on RTs and accuracy can be accounted for
incidental processing of these figures. This is expressed in
the walker congruency effect (WCE, Thornton & Vuong,
2004) which in our case is positive for upright flankers but
missing when flankers are inverted, i.e., responses to all
targets are faster (t(9) = 5.46, p = 0.000) when upright
flankers have congruent direction of translation (M = 644.2
ms, SD = 79.10) compared to responses on incongruent
trials with upright flankers (M = 683.75 ms, SD = 76.61),
while this difference cannot be found (MCongruent= 650.05,
SD = 78.98; MIncongruent= 650.55, SD = 78.38; t(9) = 0.15, p =
0.886) when flankers are inverted (Figure 2).

1530

800
Congruent direction
Incongruent direction
750
Mean Reaction Time (ms)

A

inverted), Flanker orientation (upright vs. inverted), Target
direction (left vs. right) and Flanker direction (left vs. right).
In addition, four conditions of scrambled flankers were
created by pairing scrambled flankers with levels of target
orientation and direction. Dependent variables are reaction
time and accuracy.

700

650

*

*

*
600

550

RSU

INV
Flanker Orientation

Figure 2: Walker congruency effect. (RSU = right-side-up,
INV = inverted. Asterisks indicate significant differences at
p<0.05, error bars show 95% confidence intervals.)

800
Congruent direction
Incongruent direction

Right-side-up target
Inverted target

Mean Reaction Time (ms)

750

*

700

*
650

*
600

550

RSU

INV

RSU

INV

Sc

Flanker Orientation

Figure 3: Conditions across orientation and direction of
translation. (RSU = right-side-up, INV = inverted, Sc =
scrambled. Asterisks indicate significant differences at
p<0.05, error bars show 95% confidence intervals.)
10
9

Congruent direction
Incongruent direction

Right-side-up target
Inverted target

8
7
Mean Error (%)

Regarding the interaction between the processing of
upright and inverted biological motion, the RT means for
direction judgments as a function of direction congruence
and orientation congruence between flankers and targets are
presented in Figure 3.
The pattern of results shows that inverted flankers have
no effect on reaction times to the target and that these
responses are also similar to conditions where the target was
surrounded by scrambled flankers (Figure 3).
A 2x2x2x2 repeated measures ANOVA was carried out
on the means. The relevant differences here are between
right-side-up and inverted targets, where the inversion effect
leads to a significant increase in RTs. The main effect for
target inversion was significant, F(1,9) = 40.90, partial η2 =
0.82, p < 0.001. In relation to the error rates displayed in
Figure 4, this main effect was not accompanied by a
difference in accuracy. Upright flankers had no effect on the
accuracy of judging the direction of upright or inverted
targets. The difference of flanker influence in this case is
restricted to reaction time, not accuracy.
The effect of flanker orientation on reaction time is
limited to upright flankers. These distractors show a highly
significant interference on inverted targets when their
directions are incongruent (M = 728.30, SD = 86.82; t(9) =
6.51, p < 0.001) compared to the effect of inverted flankers
in the respective condition (M = 669.45, SD = 81.10). This
effect is smaller but still significant when comparing the
same conditions (MRSU flankers= 682.90, SD = 88.41; MINV
flankers= 670.25, SD = 82.10) with congruent direction (t(9) =
2.42, p = 0.039).
The effect of upright flankers is different when targets are
also upright. In this case we do not see any increase in
reaction times even with incongruent directions (MRSU
flankers= 639.20, SD = 69.60; MINV flankers= 631.65, SD = 78.00;
t(9) = 1.55, p = 0.156), although the higher error rates show
that flankers are processed and they affect the accuracy of
responses (MRSU flankers= 3.71, SD = 3.49; MINV flankers= 1.89,
SD = 2.87; t(9) = 2.29, p = 0.047). When directions are
congruent however, the effect of upright flankers on upright
targets becomes facilitative: RTs are significantly lowered
compared to the corresponding condition with inverted
flankers (MRSU flankers= 605.50, SD = 72.92; MINV flankers=
629.85, SD = 79.21; t(9) = 7.90, p = 0.000). This relative
facilitation however does not appear when compared to the
effect of scrambled flankers (MScrambled flankers= 624.45, SD =
76.14; t(9) = 1.45, p = 0.182). This shows that upright
flankers are processed to an extent that seems to occur in
parallel to the upright targets. This is only the case when the
direction of upright flankers and targets is congruent.
In contrast to the reaction times, the error rates in the case
of relative facilitation stayed unchanged (MRSU flankers= 1.24,
SD = 1.79), compared to conditions either with inverted (M
= 1.29, SD = 2.52; t(9) = 0.14, p = 0.89) or scrambled
flankers (M = 1.58, SD = 2.31; t(9) = 0.65, p = 0.533).
Accuracy is therefore not affected by flankers when
directions are congruent, only in incongruent conditions and
with upright flankers.

6
5

*

4

*

3
2
1
0
RSU

INV

RSU

INV

Sc

Flanker Orientation

Figure 4: Errors. (RSU = right-side-up, INV = inverted, Sc
= scrambled. Asterisks indicate significant differences at
p<0.05, error bars show 95% confidence intervals.)

Discussion
Our results show that inverted biological motion does not
elicit incidental processing and even more importantly,
upright and inverted point-light walkers have substantially
different attention demands. Subjects are only required to
respond to targets, and thus the processing of flankers
happens without active top-down control. Nevertheless,
upright flankers have significant effects on the responses to
targets, the effect of which is different depending on the

1531

orientation of the target. When both the target and the
flankers are upright, reflexive attention seems to be drawn
to both, thus resulting in either a relative facilitation in RTs
(seen in the case of congruent directions) or in interference
leading to higher error rates (incongruent directions). This
interference shows the processing of both the target and
flankers reach the level of subtracting directional
information by the starting of the response. However, this
does not lead to higher RTs – which may be due to the
reflexive manner of the response to the target as well,
allowing the two processes to run in a parallel manner.
When targets are inverted, they require more top-down
control, and there is no incidental processing which
indicates that attention is directed to them in a reflexive
manner. The amount of attention incidentally drawn by the
upright flankers leads to faster processing of the distractors,
thus always interfering with the processing of inverted
targets and leading to higher RTs. Furthermore when the
two processes involve handling incongruent direction
between flankers and targets, error rates become higher as
well.
In terms of Hochstein and Ahissar‟s RHT (2002), these
results suggest that the visual processing of upright human
point-light walkers is consistent with vision at a glance
since upright flankers not only interfere with the visual
processing of inverted displays but that they can also
modulate the visual processing of upright centrally
displayed targets. In addition to the results for the speed of
visual processing (RT-results), this interpretation is
strengthened by the increase in the error rate for upright
targets when the direction of upright flankers is in conflict
with the target.
It is important to emphasize that RHT is not restricted to
perceptual learning as such but applies to perception in
general (Ahissar & Hochstein, 2004). PLWs are salient
examples of dynamic gestalt figures, which also include
other action categories (e.g., Hemeren, 2008). The original
findings from Johansson (1973) demonstrate that when
presented with a static form, people have difficulty in
identifying the figure and action. However, once the figure
starts to move, people see the action that the person is
performing. Much previous research (see e.g., Shiffrar &
Pinto, 2002) demonstrates the holistic/global processing
involved in the visual perception of point-light displays of
biological motion. From a perceptual learning perspective,
biological motion perception is an example of the Eureka
effect (Ahissar & Hochstein, 2004), in which learning is
governed by top-down control and single exposures and has
long-lasting effects.
In contrast to upright targets and flankers, the results for
inverted flankers in relation to inverted and upright targets
indicate visual processing consistent with vision with
scrutiny. There appears to be no access to high-level
perceptual meaning that would trigger reflexive attention
and lead to incidental processing. Although there is
evidence of perceptual learning for inverted displays of
biological motion (Grossman, Blake & Kim, 2004), learning

is relatively difficult in terms of time taken and the ability to
discriminate between different action categories depicted in
the point-light displays (Hemeren, 2008). Inverted displays
are perceptually difficult to resolve, i.e., they have no
perceptually obvious ecological relevance. When confronted
with this situation, visual processing is guided down the
processing hierarchy where more local processing of the
stimulus is carried out in order to find a solution to the
perceptual problem. This requires the activation of small
receptive fields in lower cortical areas. This takes additional
time and is also prone to an increase in perceptual errors. If
incidental processing of upright PLWs is evidence of a life
detector (Johnson, 2006; Troje & Westhoff, 2006), then it
also shows that it also occurs at a high cortical level.
Recently, Ikeda, Watanabe and Cavanagh (2013) used a
horizontal flanking paradigm to investigate the effect of the
distance of upright PLWs and scrambled PLWs to upright
PLW targets. Consistent with our results, they found that
direction discrimination became more difficult with smaller
distances between the flankers and the target. It is important
to note that the conditions in their experiment were all
directionally incongruent between flankers and targets.
Ikeda et al. (2013) assert that their results show that the
“crowding” effect occurs at a high-level of motion
perception since the effect was absent when scrambled
flankers were used.
An additional perspective on our results can be seen in the
work of Vicario and Kiritani (1999) where the issue can be
described as a matter of a vertical organization of visual
events, i.e., determining what rules apply if simultaneous
stimuli are perceived as one object (integration) or as
different objects (segregation). In our case the relevant traits
of the point-lights influencing this judgment seem to be: the
amount and direction of displacement, speed and
acceleration patterns and the variability in distance from
neighboring dots. These traits are comparable with the
Gestalt principles; however, it is not clear how they can
unequivocally explain the inversion effect. One possibility
is through the congruency or incongruency between
acceleration patterns of the dots presented and acceleration
patterns normally determined by gravity (this approach is
discussed in detail by Chang and Troje, 2009). Another
possibility is that an additional Gestalt principle is playing a
role here, which leads to an effortless and fast form-frommotion perception of human figures, when the emerging
form matches the usual human body configuration (i.e. it is
walking with the right side up). Presumably both
mechanisms are important in the inversion effect with pointlight walkers (Hirai, Chang, Saunders & Troje, 2011).
Our results suggest that people have implicit access to
initial high-level meaning for upright PLWs and that this
access can be reflexively triggered when a visual target is
difficult to perceptually resolve or when simultaneously
presented PLWs are incongruent with regard to a relevant
visual task.

1532

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the ERASMUS Student Mobility for Placement
program for financing the stay of Peter Veto at the
University of Skövde.

References
Ahissar, M. & Hochstein, S. (2004) The reverse hierarchy
theory of visual perceptual learning. TICS, 8(10), 457464.
Bertenthal, B. I. & Pinto, J. (1994) Global processing of
biological motions. Psychological Science, 5, 221-225.
Chang, D. H. F. & Troje, N. F. (2009) Acceleration carries
the local inversion effect in biological motion perception.
Journal of Vision, 9(1):19, 1-17.
Daems, A. & Verfaillie, K. (1999) Viewpoint-dependent
priming effects in theperception of human actions and
body postures. Visual Cognition, 6(6), 665-693.
Gilaie-Dotan, S., Bentin, S., Harel, M., Rees, G. & Saygin,
A. P. (2011) Normal form from biological motion despite
impaired ventral stream function. Neuropsychologia, 49,
1033-1043.
Goolkasian, P. (1997) Size scaling and spatial factors in
visual attention. American Journal of Psychology, 110(3),
397-415
Grossman, E. D., Blake, R. & Kim, C-Y. (2004) Learning to
see biological motion: Brain activity parallels behavior.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(9), 1669-1679.
Hemeren, P.E. (2008) Mind in Action: Action recognition
and the perception of biological motion. Lund University
Cognitive Studies 140, Lund University, Sweden.
Hirai, M., Chang, D. H. F., Saunders, D. R. & Troje, N. F.
(2011) Body configuration modulates the usage of local
cues to direction in biological-motion perception.
Psychological Science, 1(22):12, 1543-1549.
Hochstein, S. & Ahissar, M. (2002) View from the top:
Hierarchies and reverse hierarchies in the visual system.
Neuron, 36, 791-804.
Ikeda, H., Watanabe, K. & Cavanagh, P. (2013) Crowding
of biological motion stimuli. Journal of Vision, 13(4):20,
1-6.
Johansson, G. (1973) Visual perception of biological motion
and a model for its analysis. Perception and
Psychophysics, 14, 201-211.
Johnson, M. H. (2006) Biological motion: A perceptual life
detector? Current Biology, 16(10), 376-377.
Jokisch, D., Daum, I., Suchan, B. & Troje, N. F. (2005)
Structural encoding and recognition of biological motion:
Evidence from event-related potentials and source
analysis. Behavioural Brain Research, 157, 195-204.
Shi, J., Weng, X., He, S. & Jiang, Y. (2010) Biological
motion cues trigger reflexive attentional orienting.
Cognition, 117, 348-354.
Shiffrar, M., Lichtey, L. & Heptulla Chatterjee, S. (1997)
The perception of biological motion across apertures.
Perception and Psychophysics, 59(1), 51-59.

Shiffrar, M. & Pinto, J. (2002) The visual analysis of bodily
motion. In W. Prinz & B. Hommel (Eds.) Common
mechanisms in perception and action: Attention and
Performance. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thornton, I. M. & Vuong, Q. C. (2004) Incidental
processing of biological motion. Current Biology, 14,
1084-1089.
Troje, N. F. (2003) Reference frames for orientation
anisotropies in face recognition and biological-motion
perception. Perception, 32, 201-210.
Troje, N. F. & Westhoff, C. (2006) The inversion effect in
biological motion perception: Evidence for a “life
detector”? Current Biology, 16, 821-824.
Vanrie, J. & Verfaillie, K. (2004) Perception of biological
motion: a stimulus set of human point-light actions.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
36, 625-629.
Vicario, G. B. & Kiritani, Y. (1999) Slow-motion tunnel
effect: An inquiry into vertical organization of perceptual
events. Gestalt Theory, 21(2), 100-121

1533

