UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individuals recapitulate the proposed evolutionary development of spatial lexicons

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zs7z9bv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Carstensen, Alexandra
Regier, Terry

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individuals recapitulate the proposed evolutionary development of spatial lexicons
Alexandra Carstensen (abc@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Terry Regier (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Cognitive Science Program, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

cognitive forces in the mind of speakers of a single
language, in the domain of space as well as in that of color.

Abstract
When English speakers successively pile-sort colors, their
sorting recapitulates an independently proposed hierarchy of
color category evolution during language change (Boster,
1986). Here we extend that finding to the semantic domain of
spatial relations. Levinson et al. (2003) have proposed a
hierarchy of spatial category evolution, and we show that
English speakers successively pile-sort spatial scenes in a
manner that recapitulates that proposed evolutionary
hierarchy. Thus, in the spatial domain, as in color, proposed
universal patterns of language change based on crosslanguage observations appear to reflect general cognitive
forces that are available in the minds of speakers of a single
language.

Color categories in language and cognition
Boster (1986) asked speakers of English to successively
pile-sort colors. He initially instructed participants to sort a
set of eight colors into two “natural groupings” on the basis
of similarity, imagining that they spoke a language with
only two color terms. He then asked them to subdivide
either of those two groups, making three groups total—and
so on until each color was in a group by itself. Finally, he
tested whether these hierarchical pile-sorts matched a
linguistic hierarchy that had been proposed to represent the
historical evolution of color categories across languages
(Kay & McDaniel, 1978, elaborating a proposal by Berlin &
Kay, 1969). That hierarchy of color term evolution is shown
in Figure 1.1 The top split of this hierarchy represents the
claim that a two-term color naming system will tend to
group BLUE, PURPLE, GREEN, and BLACK into one category,
while grouping WHITE, RED, ORANGE, and YELLOW into the
other—as in the language Dani (Heider, 1972). Splits lower
in the tree represent claims about finer-grained linguistic
divisions, which also tend to match cross-language
synchronic and diachronic data (e.g. Dougherty, 1977; Kay,
1975).

Keywords: Language and thought; spatial cognition; color
naming; semantic universals.

Language as a mirror of the mind
A core question in cognitive science is whether the
structure of language reflects the structure of the human
mind. Languages vary widely, both in their formal structure
and in their semantic categorization of the experienced
world (Evans & Levinson, 2009). At the same time, similar
structures and categories appear in unrelated languages, and
many logically possible linguistic structures and categories
are not attested. A natural question is whether this
constrained variation in language reflects universals of
human cognition.
One means of pursuing this question concerns language
change. One may observe or infer general patterns in the
ways languages evolve over historical time, and ask whether
these patterns of change, based on observation across
languages and across time, are also evident at a given
moment in the minds of individuals who speak a single
language.
Such a demonstration has already been made in the
semantic domain of color (Boster, 1986), and here we
present an analogous demonstration in the semantic domain
of spatial relations. In what follows, we first describe the
Boster (1986) study on color. We then describe recent work
on spatial language (Levinson et al., 2003) that proposes a
hierarchy for the evolution of spatial categories over
historical time. We next present our study, which closely
follows Boster’s in design. Our central finding is that
English speakers successively pile-sort spatial scenes in
accordance with Levinson et al.’s (2003) proposed
evolutionary hierarchy. We conclude from this finding that
generalizations concerning language change may reflect

Figure 1: Kay and McDaniel’s (1978) proposed
evolutionary hierarchy of color terms.
Boster (1986) found that there was a significant tendency
for successive pile-sorts by English speakers to follow the
“successive differentiation” (Kay & McDaniel, 1978: 640)
1

Kay and McDaniel (1978) actually proposed two closely
related hierarchies, one of which is shown here for illustration.
Boster’s analyses considered both.

293

of this linguistic evolutionary hierarchy. This finding
suggests that, at least in the semantic domain of color, the
forces that produce language change over time may be
present in the mind of an individual at a given moment.

Methods
Following Boster (1986), we performed an experiment
with two conditions in which participants sorted spatial
stimuli. In both conditions, participants were instructed to
sequentially subdivide the eight stimuli—either the line
drawings of Figure 3 (scene sorting condition) or
corresponding verbal labels (label sorting condition)—into
partitions with 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and finally 7 groups, at which
point there were no further decisions to make about which
group to split next.

An evolutionary hierarchy for spatial language
We wished to further test this claim in a different
semantic domain: spatial relations. For this, we required an
evolutionary hierarchy of spatial terms, to play the same
role in our analysis that Kay and McDaniel’s (1978) color
hierarchy played in Boster’s. Levinson et al. (2003) have
suggested such a spatial hierarchy, based on cross-language
observations of spatial systems, and drawing an explicit
analogy with the above-cited work on color.2 They
hypothesized that spatial topological categories in the
world’s languages evolve such that “large categories will
tend...to be split into [smaller] categories over time under
particular functional pressures” (Levinson et al., 2003: 512),
as shown below in Figure 2, to be interpreted as the color
hierarchy in Figure 1 was interpreted.3

Participants
A total of 60 participants took part in the two conditions,
with 30 participants in each. The population in our study
was a convenience sample of the UC Berkeley community;
the majority were undergraduate or graduate students, and
received either course credit or monetary compensation for
their participation. Of the 60 people who completed the task,
data from 15 participants were excluded from analysis: 10
due to missing data or failure to follow instructions, 3
because they were not native speakers of English, and 2 who
reported familiarity with the color or spatial relational
hierarchies proposed by Berlin and Kay (1969), Kay and
McDaniel (1978), and/or Levinson et al. (2003). Data from
the remaining participants were included in all analyses.
Accordingly, 24 participants were included in the scene
sorting condition (5 female, mean age = 25.6) and 21
participants in the label sorting condition (12 female, mean
age = 21.3), all of whom had learned English by age 4
(although a number were bilingual), and were naïve to the
research hypothesis and related findings.

Spatial scene sorting
Figure 2: Levinson et al.’s (2003) proposed evolutionary
hierarchy of topological spatial concepts.

Participants were presented with eight scenes from
Bowerman and Pederson’s Topological Relations Picture
Series (TRPS; 1992). The scenes were arranged linearly on
a tabletop in a randomly shuffled order and participants
were instructed to successively divide them based on the
similarity of the depicted spatial relationships. Each of the
eight scenes—shown in Figure 3—depicts an orange figure
object located relative to a black background, representing
the following spatial relations: NEAR (TRPS scene 37), ON
(59), IN (60), ATTACHED (38), UNDER (31), INSIDE (54), ON
TOP (34), and OVER (36). These particular scenes were
chosen to represent focal “attractors” in spatial semantics
(Levinson et al., 2003), analogous to the focal colors
proposed by Berlin and Kay (1969) and used in Boster’s
(1986) color chip sorting task. Each focal spatial scene was
selected based on (1) consistency with Levinson et al.’s
(2003) characterization of focal attractors within the core
spatial categories named above, and (2) the preferences of
native English speakers in a pilot study.
Instructions were adapted from Boster (1986) and asked
participants to imagine they spoke a language with only two
spatial words, and accordingly, to divide up the relations
shown in the scenes to make two natural groupings. After
participants initially split the eight scenes into two groups,

The present study
The present study examines successive pile-sorting of
spatial scenes by speakers of English, and asks whether
these pile-sorts recapitulate the evolutionary spatial category
hierarchy proposed by Levinson et al. (2003). If so, that
result would generalize the central claim of Boster (1986) to
a new semantic domain.

2

Levinson et al. (2003) were careful to note that their proposal
is based on synchronic, not diachronic, data; they therefore
advanced their proposal as a hypothesis concerning possible
patterns of historical language change, not as a firm claim about
such patterns.
3
As in the case of color, our interpretation of Levinson et al.’s
(2003) proposal, based on their Figures 16 and 18, reduces to two
distinct hierarchies, one of which is shown here for illustration, but
both of which we use in our analyses. Both of these hierarchies are
specified further in the analyses below.

294

they were instructed to successively subdivide their
categories until all scenes were separated, and each
subdivision was recorded to create a full ordered hierarchy
of divisions for each participant (see Figure 4 below for an
example).

Analysis
Following Boster (1986), we first measured the similarity
between Levinson et al.’s (2003) hierarchy (which we refer
to as the model) and the empirical data. We then compared
this observed similarity to that between the model and
random permutations of the empirical data, to determine
whether the observed similarity was significant. Finally, we
asked whether there was a significant amount of residual
data left unaccounted for by the model.

Similarity metric
In order to compare the empirical color hierarchies made by
participants in his experiment to Kay and McDaniel’s
(1978) theoretical hierarchy representing the diachronic
stages of color lexicon evolution, Boster (1986) converted
each hierarchy to a similarity matrix. For each pair of
colors, he determined the earliest stage in the hierarchy at
which those two colors were separated into different groups,
and took this to be the similarity between them. Thus, each
non-identical pair had a minimal similarity of 1, meaning
they were grouped together only when all eight colors were
grouped together, and a maximal similarity of 7, meaning
that they were the last pair to be separated, only after the
other 6 colors were fully partitioned into groups of 1 each.
We applied the same analysis to the spatial hierarchies
produced in this experiment, creating an 8x8 matrix
representing the similarities across all pairs of spatial
relations for each participant. Following Boster (1986), we
then averaged across corresponding cells in the matrices
from all participants in a given condition to create two
group similarity matrices—one based on scene sorting and
the other on label sorting. As in the color study, we used
Pearson correlations to measure the similarity between
matrices, where correlations were calculated based on all
corresponding pairs of off-diagonal cells.

Figure 3: Focal scenes from the Topological Relations
Picture Series used in the sorting tasks.

Spatial label sorting
The spatial label sorting task was identical to spatial scene
sorting, except that in this task, participants were presented
with the written English spatial expressions NEAR, ON, IN,
ATTACHED, UNDER, INSIDE, ON TOP, and OVER. The labels
were presented on paper in a randomly shuffled order, and
again, participants were instructed to successively divide the
stimuli based on the similarity of the spatial relations they
describe. As in Boster (1986), the images from the visual
sorting task were made available to participants for
reference, although they were instructed to base their
partitions on the meanings of the spatial phrases themselves,
rather than any specific components of the reference
scenes.

Model comparison
Given the empirical similarity matrices from each condition
and Pearson correlations as a metric of similarity between
such matrices, we ask whether the English speakers in our
experiment created hierarchies that were systematically
consistent with the cross-linguistic evolution of spatial
lexicons as hypothesized by Levinson et al. (2003).
As with the empirical hierarchies, we created similarity
matrices based on the Levinson et al. hierarchy which
models “successive fractionation of composite concepts.” 4
Like the Kay and McDaniel model (1978), Levinson et al.’s
hierarchy includes some variability in the relative order with
which certain categories emerge. For instance, the authors
leave intentional variability in whether UNDER or a cluster of
ON-like relations (i.e. ON, ON TOP, ATTACHED, OVER) are
4

This model is most clearly articulated in Levinson et al.’s
(2003) Figure 18, but where the order of divisions is
underspecified in this diagram (e.g. the relative order of IN/INSIDE
vs. NEAR/AT categorical splitting), we rely on the ordering of the
implicational scale presented in Figure 16 for clarification.

Figure 4: Example hierarchy from a participant in the
scene sorting condition.

295

split from a more general composite locative concept first.
In keeping with Boster’s treatment of such variability in the
Kay and McDaniel model, we created two model-consistent
hierarchies expressing both alternatives (one of which is
shown in Figure 2).5 Thus, the similarity matrix representing
the Levinson et al. model was created by averaging the
similarities derived from these two model-consistent
hierarchies.
We assessed the alignment of our empirical and model
similarity matrices using Pearson correlations, so in order to
determine whether these observed correlations were
significantly greater than expected by chance, we used
Monte Carlo simulations to create a distribution of
comparison correlations. To do this, we randomly permuted
the labels on our empirical similarity matrices, creating
1,000 permuted variants of each. Each permuted variant was
comparable to the original in that all similarity values were
preserved in the matrix, but simply re-assigned to different
pairings of spatial foci. We then measured the correlation
between each of these permuted matrices and the model
matrix to determine whether the correlation between the
model and the actual empirical data was greater than
chance, i.e. that the actual data was more strongly correlated
with the model than 95% of random permutations derived
from it.

mean that the Levinson et al. (2003) model has accounted
for the explainable empirical variation. In order to test the
significance of the correlation between the residual and
observed data, we again create a set of 1,000 simulated
matrices by randomly permuting the labels on each of the
residual matrices. We measure the correlations between
these permuted simulations of the residual matrices and the
original empirical matrix and compare this distribution of
correlations to that between the actual residual matrices and
their empirical counterparts. As before, we take the
observed correlation to be significant only if it is greater
than that of 95% of the randomly permuted variants.

Results
Our similarity analysis found strong correlations
between the Levinson et al. (2003) model matrix and the
empirical matrices derived from spatial scene sorting (r =
0.638) and spatial term sorting (r = 0.664), as well as
between the two empirical matrices themselves (r = 0.861).
These correlations are presented in Table 1 below alongside
the corresponding correlations from Boster (1986). The
model and empirical matrices themselves are shown in
Tables 2-4.
Table 1: Pearson correlations compared to Boster (1986).

Residual analysis

Correlation
Image sorting vs. model
Label sorting vs. model
Image vs. label sorting

Because our model comparison was based on correlations, it
is difficult to assess how well the model explains the
observed data beyond testing whether it does so to a
significant degree. To this end—and again following
Boster’s (1986) methods—we employed an analysis
designed to determine whether a significant portion of the
observed similarity matrix data was left unexplained by the
model (Hubert & Golledge, 1981). The model similarity
matrix and two empirical similarity matrices were
standardized by subtracting the mean of all values for each
matrix from each cell in that matrix, and dividing the result
by the standard deviation of the original values in that
matrix. The values in each cell of the now standardized
model matrix were then subtracted from corresponding cells
in the standardized empirical matrices to determine the
residual empirical data left unexplained by the model. We
measured the Pearson correlations between these residual
matrices and their corresponding empirical counterparts.
If the residual matrices no longer bear significant
similarity to their full empirical counterparts, we take that to

Present study
0.64
0.66
0.86

Boster
0.84
0.81
0.87

Table 2: Similarity matrix from Levinson et al. (2003)
hierarchy of topological concepts.

Table 3: Similarity matrix from spatial scene sorting.

5

The two alternative versions of the model that we considered
differ in whether more specific ON or UNDER categories form first.
In addition to these two alternatives, the model also varies in
whether OVER or NEAR categories are distinguished earlier.
However, these distinctions are made with respect to the category
AT, which is not included in our analysis because as a residual
category, it does not appear to have a meaningful cross-linguistic
focus. Thus, the NEAR/ AT distinction is not available to our
participants, which in turn prevents variability in whether OVER or
NEAR is distinguished first.

296

Table 4: Similarity matrix from spatial label sorting.

The correlation between the empirical scene sorting data
and the corresponding residual data after subtracting out the
model-explained variation is negligible and not significant
(r = -0.072; Monte Carlo 1-tailed p = 0.674). Results are
comparable for tests of the correlation between empirical
and residual data in the label sorting task (r = 0.073; p =
0.340), which may be interpreted as suggesting that the
Levinson et al. (2003) model accounts for all of the
explainable observed variation.

Discussion and conclusions
We find substantial evidence in support of the hypothesis
that English speakers synchronically recapitulate Levinson
et al.’s (2003) proposed cross-linguistic patterns in the
diachronic evolution of spatial lexicons. Our finding in the
spatial domain directly parallels that of Boster (1986) in the
color domain. Taken together, our finding and his suggest
that, at least in these two semantic domains, proposed
patterns of language change may be reflected in the minds
of individuals at a given moment.
At the same time, there are at least two grounds for
caution. First, as we have noted, the Levinson et al. (2003)
hierarchy was intended as a tentative diachronic hypothesis,
based on synchronic cross-language observation—not as a
firm diachronic claim. Direct assessment of that hierarchy
using historical data has to our knowledge not yet been
conducted, and would be needed before our account can be
considered to concern actual, rather than merely proposed,
patterns of spatial language change. Second, our analyses,
like Boster’s (1986), were based on a comparison between
model predictions and an aggregate measure of all
participants’ sorting. When viewed in this way, the evidence
does support the recapitulation claim. However, no
participants either in Boster’s (1986) study or in ours
actually recapitulated the model predictions exactly. This
may not be surprising given the large number of hierarchical
pile-sorts that are possible, some of which are only
minimally different from model predictions. Still, in future
research it would be informative to analyze such data in a
way that separately measures how close each participant
came to the model prediction, rather than rely solely on an
aggregate measure of all participants’ behavior. Such
analyses may support a more precise picture of the extent to
which
individuals
recapitulate
broad
proposed
generalizations concerning language change. The present
study, like Boster’s (1986), has nonetheless demonstrated
that such recapitulation is clearly present as a general shared
tendency—and that in this sense at least, the character of
language change may reflect the structure of the mind.

Our permutation analysis found that the randomly
permuted variants of the empirical scene matrix were more
strongly correlated with the Levinson et al. (2003) model
predictions than was the empirical scene matrix itself in
only 5 out of 1000 simulations, corresponding to a 1-tailed
p-value of .005. Similarly, only 3 out of 1000 permuted
versions of the empirical spatial label matrix were more
strongly correlated with the model than was the empirical
label matrix itself, corresponding to a 1-tailed p-value of
.003. These results (pictured in Figures 5-6) confirm that the
observed correlations represent a significant degree of
similarity between the empirical matrices and that of the
spatial hierarchy model.

Figure 5: Pearson correlations between permuted spatial
scene matrices and model matrix.

Acknowledgments
We thank Joshua Abbott and two anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments. This work was supported by NSF under
grant SBE-1041707, the Spatial Intelligence and Learning
Center (SILC).

Figure 6: Pearson correlations between permuted spatial
label matrices and model matrix.

297

cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32,
429-492.
Heider, E. R. (1972). Probabilities, sampling, and
ethnographic method: The case of Dani colour names.
Man, 7, 448-466.
Hubert, L., & Golledge, R. (1981). A heuristic method for
the comparison of related structures. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 23, 214 - 226.
Kay, P. (1975). Synchronic variability and diachronic
change in basic color terms. Language in Society 4: 25770.
Kay, P., & McDaniel, C.K. (1978). The linguistic
significance of the meanings of basic color terms.
Language, 54, 610-646.
Levinson, S. C. & Meira, S. (2003). Natural concepts in the
spatial topological domain—adpositional meanings in
crosslinguistic perspective. Language, 79, 485-516.

References
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their
universality and evolution. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Boster, J. (1986). Can individuals recapitulate the
evolutionary development of color lexicons? Ethnology,
26(1), 61-74.
Bowerman, M. & Pederson, E. (1992). Cross-linguistic
studies of spatial semantic organization. In Annual Report
of the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 1992
(pp. 53-56).
Dougherty, J.W. D. (1977). Color categorization in West
Futunese: Variability and change. In M. Sanchez (Ed.),
Sociocultural dimensions of language change. New York:
Academic.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance for

298

