UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inductive Use of Semantic Word-Families to Accelerate Vocabulary Development and
Reading Comprehension in Grades 3-4-5

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7cx8x278

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vitale, Michael
Romance, Nancy

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inductive Use of Semantic Word-Families to Accelerate Vocabulary
Development and Reading Comprehension in Grades 3-4-5
Michael R. Vitale (vitalem@ecu.edu)
College of Education,
Greenville, NC 27858 USA

Nancy R. Romance (romance@fau.edu)
College of Education,
Boca Raton, FL 33431 USA

Abstract
This study explored the acceleration of student vocabulary
growth and reading comprehension proficiency through a
multi-part instructional strategy for engendering the
inductive, semantic word-family-oriented acquisition of
vocabulary from context, a difficult task for elementary
students. Implemented on a schoolwide basis for an
academic year in grades 3-4-5, the intervention was a fourpart enhancement to a traditional basal reading program
that constructed and used semantic word families for
designated vocabulary words within stories. Results from
HLM statistical modeling using student minority status and
free/reduced lunch as covariates showed that experimental
students in grades 3-4-5 obtained significantly higher
achievement on both ITBS Vocabulary and ITBS Reading
Comprehension subtests. Implications for research and
practice are discussed.
Keywords: Inductive reasoning, Vocabulary acquisition,
Reading comprehension

A variety of research has pointed to the interdependent
linkage among vocabulary knowledge, reading
comprehension, and level of literacy (e.g., Baker et al.,
1998; Becker, 1977; Biemiller & Slonim, 2001; Snow,
2002; Wager, 2005). Although substantial vocabulary
growth can be attributed to student acquisition of word
meaning from reading context (Baker, Simmons, &
Kameenui, 1998), August, Dressler, and Snow (2005)
noted that if the proportion of unknown words is too
large, then text comprehension which serves as a context
for vocabulary development is disrupted (see also Carver,
1994).
Despite technical details in how words (e.g., counting
word roots vs. root variants) and word understanding
(e.g., recognition vs. in depth understanding) are defined
in the literature (e.g., Anglin, 1993; Beck & McKeown,
1991), research findings agree that children acquire
vocabulary at a rate that is too rapid for all the words to
be taught directly (see Baker et al., 1998) or learned
incidentally through reading (Landauer, 2002; Landauer,
& Dumais, 1996, 1997; Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998;
Landauer, McNamara, Dennis, & Kintsch, 2007). With
this point in mind, the present study addressed the

question of whether student vocabulary acquisition could
be accelerated by using a multi-part semantic wordfamily-oriented learning strategy to inductively broaden
vocabulary taught directly. In incorporating criteria
suggested by Baker et al. (1998) and Beck and McKeown
(1991), the intent of the strategy was (a) to engender an
inductive broadening of the vocabulary taught directly
and, in doing so, to enhance reading comprehension, and
(b) to be feasible for use by classroom teachers within
regular classroom settings.
Implemented as a practitioner-oriented model, the
instructional intervention reflected several interdisciplinary perspectives: (a) vocabulary research findings
with both younger (e.g., Coyne, McCoach, & Kapp, 2005)
and older (e.g., August et al., 2005; Baker et al., 1998;
Blachowicz & Fisher, 2000; Johnson, Gersten, & Carnine,
1988) students, (b) cognitive science models (e.g.,
Kintsch, 1994, 1998a, 1998b, 2002, 2004, 2005;
Landauer, 2002; Landauer, & Dumais, 1996, 1997;
Landauer et al., 1998, 2007) that emphasize the central
role of prior knowledge in comprehension and, (c) our
prior research (Vitale & Romance, 2007) investigating the
effect of knowledge-focused reading comprehension
strategies on student learning. In the present study,
different aspects of these perspectives provided a
framework for engendering the semantically-oriented
inductive learning of vocabulary.
The design of the present study was a significant
enhancement of earlier studies (Romance & Vitale, 2012;
Vitale & Romance, 2008). First, in this study, the
intervention was implemented over an school year in
multiple schoolwide sites. Second, teachers were asked to
commit to implement the model in eight selected stories
in grade 3, 4, and 5. across the school year. And third, the
criterion measures (ITBS Vocabulary and Reading
Subtests) were administered on a pre-post basis. The
specific research questions were:
 Did the instructional intervention which
incorporated words taught inferentially
accelerate
student
the
vocabulary
development as measured by story-specific,

3675

curriculum-based, pre-post tests?
 Did the instructional intervention accelerate
student vocabulary development as measured
by the nationally-normed ITBS Vocabulary
subtest?
 Did the instructional intervention engender a
transfer
effect
to
student
reading
comprehension as measured by the
nationally-normed ITBS Reading subtest?

Perspectives in Vocabulary Instruction
Although an increasing number of studies have identified
factors important in teaching vocabulary in classroom
settings (see Baker et al., 1998; Biemiller & Boote, 2006;
Coyne et al., 2005; Nagy & Scott, 2000), such studies
have limitations insofar as providing a comprehensive
means for accelerating student vocabulary acquisition.
For example, Baker et al. (1998) pointed to the fact that
the size and rate of growth of the vocabulary of school
age children is far too large to be addressed on a literal
word-by-word basis alone, while Anderson & Nagy
(1992) argued that because word meaning is learned
primarily in the context of speech or text, direct
instruction of vocabulary can address only a small portion
of words to be learned.
The approach in the present study was a
methodological enhancement of an earlier study (Vitale &
Romance, 2008) that demonstrated significant effects of
the inductive model used in the present study on both
curriculum-based vocabulary transfer tests and on ITBS
Vocabulary. Approaching the question of vocabulary
acquisition from a knowledge-based instruction approach
(see Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000), a major tenet
of this perspective is that prior knowledge is a major
factor in meaningful comprehension, learning, and expert
performance. Within this framework, building prior
knowledge has been recognized as a major determinant of
meaningful learning, general comprehension, and reading
comprehension.
In applying a knowledge-based perspective to the
classical problem of how persons can know more than
experience could have taught (literally) within the context
of vocabulary, Landauer (2002) and Landauer and Dumas
(1997, 1998) drew on the idea that the underlying
semantic dimensions as identified by Latent Semantic
Analysis (see Landauer et al. 2007) that represent the
relatedness among words, phrases, and prose provide the
“learning leverage” through which words are understood.
From this view, both the traditional and cognitive science
research literatures are consistent in that while vocabulary
words can be taught directly, the majority of vocabulary
must be gained in a fashion that is inferential. Although
some indirect vocabulary acquisition can be explained

through reading, the rate of vocabulary acquisition
exhibited by children requires a process that involves the
induction of the meaning of new words (since direct
teaching and incidental learning from reading contexts are
inadequate to explain vocabulary growth).

Method
Participants
The study was implemented over an 18 week period on a
school-wide basis in grades 3-4-5 in a large (185,000
students), highly diverse (African American: 29%,
Hispanic: 19%, Other: 5%, Free Lunch: 40%) school
system in southeastern Florida. Using a random selection
process with constraints for demographic similarity, three
of six schools were assigned the intervention and the
other three demographically similar schools served as
controls.

Instrumentation
Outcome measures consisted of the ITBS Vocabulary and
ITBS Reading Comprehension Subtests. These tests were
administered by classroom teachers with supervision from
the researchers during 2-week periods prior to the
beginning of the intervention and after the intervention
ended.
The project intervention model also provided teachers
with curriculum-based, pre-post lesson tests specific to
each story taught. These tests consisted of two
components: (a) a word recognition test in which students
indicated whether or not they believed they know the
meaning of a given word and (b) a sentence writing task
in which students used a given word in a sentence. All of
the words used in the tests were randomly sampled from
the semantic word families associated with key words in
specific stories and were not used in instruction. While
there was a partial overlap of words used on the pre and
post-tests, one-half of the words appearing on the posttest did not appear on the pre-test.

Experimental Intervention
Pre-planning identified 4-word semantic word families for
each of 3 key vocabulary words in each of 10 regular
basal reading stories for use by teachers at each grade
level. In Part 1 of the multi-part intervention in each story,
teachers pre-taught 3 key vocabulary words in a textbookspecified fashion. Then, as a student reading the story
reached a key word, teachers queried students regarding
the word meaning in context (e.g., What does the word
____ mean in this sentence? How does this word
contribute to the overall meaning of this sentence?).
In Part 2, the same procedure was followed but with
pairs of new target words similar in meaning to each of

3676

the pre-taught key words that were pre-taught and then
substituted in 3-sentence blocks from the story that
contained the original key words. In Part 2, the teacher
query was enhanced with an additional question: How
does the use of this new word change the meaning of the
sentence or story?
In Part 3, two new target words for each key word were
not pre-taught. Rather, they were substituted in the same
3-sentence blocks in Part 2 and, again, students were
queried regarding their meaning in context (an inductive
process) by adding an additional question to the Part 2
query: How did the meaning of the three sentences from
the story suggest what the meaning of the new word
should be? Finally, in Part 4, as an expansion task,
students presented sentences orally about their own
experience using a key or target words.
For use by teachers, story-specific guidelines for each
story were computer-generated in an easy-to-follow
format in which the words, word definitions, relevant
story sentences, and specific questions were inserted for
each part of the intervention.

Design, Analysis, and Procedure
The instructional intervention was implemented on a
school-wide basis in grades 3-4-5 over the school year,
with the ITBS Vocabulary and Reading subtests
administered during a two-week period prior to the
beginning and end of the 18-week study. Both
Experimental and control teachers used the same districtadopted basal reading series and followed the district
curriculum plan in selecting stories for instruction.
Experimental teachers were asked to commit to teaching 8
stories during the 18-weeks of the school year in which
the inductive vocabulary model would be applied. The
study design followed the framework appropriate for a 2Level HLM analysis, with separate HLM analyses
conducted for ITBS Vocabulary and ITBS Reading. For
the HLM analyses, Level 1 student data consisted of
student ITBS Vocabulary or Reading achievement
outcomes, with minority (vs. non-minority) status,
participation in free/reduced lunch (vs. non-eligible),
grade, and the appropriate ITBS Reading or Vocabulary
Subtests serving as a covariate. Level 2 classroom/teacher
data (with students nested within teachers) consisted of a
dummy variable representing treatment (1 = treatment, 0
= control) and grade.

Teacher
Professional
Implementation Support

Development

Monitoring of Intervention Fidelity
Researchers informally monitored all participating
classrooms on a regular/continuing basis through direct
observation and through inspection of teaching plans.

Results
Implementation Fidelity
The intervention involved 22 teachers across grades 3-4-5
and, because some teachers taught multiple sections, a
total of 39 classrooms. The average number of stories
taught using the vocabulary intervention were 7.0, 6.4,
and 6.2 for grades 3, 4, and 5, respectively. Observation
of classroom implementation by researchers averaging 3.4
visits per teacher found the intervention easy to
implement by teachers and the project-developed storyspecific vocabulary guides to be effective. Mean ratings
of fidelity of implementation ranged from 82 to 92
expressed on a 100 point scale, in which a rating of 80
percent or more indicated consistent model
implementation. Based on the observations in conjunction
with teacher planning effectiveness, the model was judged
to be implemented with fidelity. Average inter-rater
reliability (agreement) on the researcher-developed
classroom fidelity observation form ranged from .88 to
.95.

Pre-Post Story-Based Test Findings
Figure 1 shows the pre-post lesson achievement gains
across the experimental classrooms in terms of mean
percent of items correct across students and stories. As
Figure 1 shows, students exhibited consistent pre-post
achievement growth on the curriculum-based lesson tests.

Figure 1. Mean pre- and post-test scores for Word
Meaning and Sentence Writing on the story lessons in
grades 3, 4, and 5.

and

Teacher professional development consisted of 2 days
prior the start of the study with two days of “follow-up”
during the initial 9 weeks of the intervention. In addition,
researcher provided informal support as necessary.

ITBS Achievement Findings
One of the three control schools was eliminated from the
analysis because of problems with the data resulting from
the scanning of their Fall, 2011, prior ITBS response
sheets. The results presented here are for the three

3677

experimental and two control schools. Because
preliminary HLM analyses found no interactions of
treatment with minority status, or free/reduced lunch
participation, these interaction components were removed
from the final HLM models reported.
The HLM Model analyses with ITBS Vocabulary as the
achievement outcome measure found a significant crosslevel interaction between Treatment and Grade, t(1348) =
1.99, p < .04), along with each of the three covariates in
the model (White-Asian-Mixed vs. Black-HispanicIndian, Free/Reduced Lunch vs. None, Prior-ITBS
Achievement). The Treatment main effect was not
significant. However, because of the significant
interaction, the General Linear Hypothesis option in HLM
was used to test the combined effect of Treatment and the
Treatment x Grade interaction model components as a
means of interpreting the overall effect of the
intervention. The result of this follow-up analysis was
significant, Chi-Square (2df) = 11.43, p < .0003 and
confirmed the overall impact of the intervention on
student ITBS Vocabulary achievement.
A parallel HLM analysis with ITBS Reading as the
achievement outcome measure found both the Treatment
main effect, t(66) = -2.95, p < .01, and the cross levellevel interaction between Treatment and Grade, t(1431) =
2.99, p<.003, significant, along with two of the three

Figure 2. Differences in Estimated ITBS
GE achievement between adjusted means of
Experimental and Control students by grade.
Differences greater than zero show higher
achievement for Experimental students. For
Reading, Control students outperformed
Experimental students in grade 3; however
the achievement difference in favor of
Experimental students accelerated in grades
4 and 5.

covariates (Free/Reduced Lunch vs. None, Prior-ITBS
Achievement). The covariate White-Asian-Mixed vs.
Black-Hispanic-Indian
was not significant. As in
thepreceding analysis, because of the significant
interaction, the General Linear Hypothesis option in HLM
was used to test the combined effect of Treatment and the
Treatment x Grade interaction model components as a
means of interpreting the overall effect of the
intervention. The result of this follow-up analysis was
significant, Chi-Square (2df) = 11.90, p < .003,
confirming the impact of the Vocabulary Intervention on
student ITBS Reading achievement.
In order to further interpret the combined Treatment
main effect at Level 2 and the cross-level Treatment x
Grade interaction, estimates were computed from the
HLM models for ITBS Vocabulary and ITBS Reading of
the differences between adjusted means for the
Experimental and Control students by grade level for each
ITBS achievement outcome. As shown in Figure 2, the
intervention resulted in a magnified effect of the favor of
Experimental students as grade level increased.

Discussion and Conclusions
In conducting studies on vocabulary acquisition, earlier
(Romance & Vitale, 2012; Vitale & Romance, 2008)
investigations of the inductive vocabulary model along
with research cited in the literature (e.g., Kintsch, 2012;
Landauer, & Dumais, 1996, 1997; Landauer et al., 1998,
2007) were suggestive that development and inductive
use of general semantic (i.e., conceptual) meaning should
be considered as an important focus of vocabulary
learning rather than simply building understanding of
specific words in a literal fashion. This perspective is
supported by findings from earlier work (Vitale &
Romance, 2008) which explicitly demonstrated the
impact of the model on the inferential performance of
students on tasks based on the semantic word families
used and by the fact that the impact of the model on the
ITBS Vocabulary test served as an achievement transfer
measure.
From an applied research perspective, the present study
replicated and extended the preceding studies (Romance
and Vitale, 2012; Vitale and Romance, 2008) in terms of
instructional time (duration of intervention) and increased
use of the intervention across grade levels (grades 3-5).
Demonstrating the effect of the intervention on reading as
well as on vocabulary was an important finding of the
present study because engaging students in the inductive
vocabulary intervention implicitly required them to focus
attention on comprehension of each story. This “sideeffect” of the model serves as a potential explanation of
the effect of the vocabulary intervention on reading
achievement.
One important goal of future studies would be to

3678

explore the cumulative effect of the present intervention
on both the vocabulary development and reading
proficiency of low-SES students when implemented on a
multi-year basis. For practitioners, the present study is
suggestive of how student vocabulary acquisition and
reading proficiency can be accelerated through the
enhancement of their regular reading programs.
Considered together, the present findings are consistent
with traditional and cognitive science research in that
while recognizing vocabulary words can be taught
directly, it is feasible for schools to accelerate student
vocabulary growth in an inductive fashion that also
improves student reading comprehension.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this paper was supported by IES Project
R305A090523 to Florida Atlantic University.

References
American Federation of Teachers (AFT). (1997). Making
standards matter 1997. An annual fifty state report on
efforts to raise academic standards. Washington, DC:
AFT.
Anderson, R. C. & Nagy, W. (1992). The vocabulary
conundrum. American Educator, 16, 14-18, 44-47.
Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A
morphological analysis. Monographs for the Society of
Research in Child Development, Serial No. 238, Vol.
58, No. 10.
August, D., C., M., Dressler, C., & Snow, C. (2005). The
critical role of vocabulary development for English
language learners. The Division for Learning
Disabilities of the Council for Exceptional Children,
20(1), 50-57.
Baker, S. K., Simmons, D. C., & Kameenui, E. J. (1998).
Vocabulary acquisition: Research bases. In D. C.
Simmons and E. J. Kameenui (Eds.), What reading
research tells us about children with diverse learning
needs. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Beck, I., & McKeown, M. (1991). Conditions of
vocabulary acquisition. In R. Barr, M. Kamil, P.
Mosenthal, & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of
reading research (Vol. 2, pp. 789-814). New York:
Longman.
Becker, W. C. (1977). Teaching reading and language to
the disadvantaged - What we have learned from field
research. Harvard Educational Review, 47, 518-543.
Biemiller, A., & Boote, C. (2006). An effective model for
building meaning vocabulary in primary grades.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(1), 44-62.

Biemiller, A., & Slonim, N. (2001). Estimating root word
vocabulary growth in normative and advantaged
populations: Evidence for a common sequence of
vocabulary acquisition. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 93 (3), 498-520.
Blachowicz, C., & Fisher, P. (2000). Vocabulary
instruction. In M. L. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, P. D.
Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.). Handbook of reading
research. (Vol. 3 pp. 503-523). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.).
(2000). How people learn. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Carver, R. (1994). Percentage of unknown vocabulary
words in text as a function of the relative difficulty of
the text: Implications for instruction. Journal of
Reading Behavior, 26(4), 413-437.
Coyne, M. D., McCoach, D. B., & Kapp, S. (2005).
Teaching vocabulary to kindergarten students during
shared storybook readings: A comparison of rich
instruction, basic instruction, and incidental exposure.
Paper presented to the USDOE Institute of Educational
Sciences
Reading
Comprehension
Principal
Investigator Group Meeting, Washington, DC.
Feldman, S. (2000). Standards are working: But states and
districts need to make some mid-course corrections.
American Educator, 24(3), 5-7.
Johnson, G., Gersten, R., & Carnine, D. (1988). Effects of
instructional design variables on vocabulary acquisition
of learning disabilities students: A study of computerassisted instruction. Journal of Learning Disabilities,
20 (4), 206-213.
Kintsch, W. (1994). Text comprehension, memory, and
learning. American Psychologist, 49(4), 294-303.
Kintsch, W. (1998a). Comprehension: a paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press.
Kintsch, W. (1998b). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: a construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95(2), 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (2002). On the notions of theme and topic in
psychological process models of text comprehension. In
M. Louwerse & W. van Peer (Eds.) Thematics:
Interdisciplinary Studies, 157-170.
Kintsch, W. (2004) The Construction-Integration model
of text comprehension and its implications for
instruction. In R. Ruddell & N. Unrau (Eds.)
Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading. 5th
Edition, International Reading Association.
Kintsch, W. (2005). An overview of top-down and
bottom-up effects in comprehension: The CI
Perspective. Discourse Processes, 39 (2&3), 125-128.

3679

Kintsch, W. (2012). What kinds of language statistics
must be in long-term memory to make language
understanding possible. In M. A. Britt, S. R. Goldman,
& J. Rouet (Eds.). Reading- From words to multiple
texts (pp. 92-100). NY: Routledge.
Landauer, T. K., (2002). On the computational basis of
learning and cognition: Arguments form LSA.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 41, 43-84.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1996). How come you
know so much? From practical problem to new memory
theory. In D. Herrmann, C. McEnvoy, C. Hertzog, &
M. Johnson (Eds.) Basic and Applied Memory Research
Theory in Context. 1(7), 105-126.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104 (2), 211-240.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An
introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25, 259-284.
Landauer, T. K., McNamara, D. S., Dennis, S., &
Kintsch, W. (2007). Handbook of latent semantic
analysis. Psychology Press.
Nagy, W., & Scott, J. A. (2000). Vocabulary Processes.
Handbook of Reading Research, 3(18), 269-284.

Romance, N. R. & Vitale, M. R. (2012). Effects of
inductive vocabulary development in grades 3-4-5 on
achievement in vocabulary and reading comprehension.
Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.
Snow, C. E. (2002). Reading for understanding. Toward
an R&D program in reading comprehension. Santa
Monica, CA: RAND.
Vitale, M. R., & Romance, N. R. (2007). A knowledgebased framework for unifying content-area reading
comprehension and reading comprehension strategies.
In D. McNamara (Ed.). Reading Comprehension
Strategies: Theory, Interventions, and Technologies.
NJ: Erlbaum.
Vitale, M. R., & Romance, N. R. (2008). A multi-part
instructional strategy for accelerating vocabulary
acquisition as an inductive process. Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the American Educational
Research Association, New York.
Wager, R. (2005). Causal relations between the
development
of
vocabulary
and
reading
comprehension. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
of the American Educational Research Association,
Montreal, Canada.

3680

