UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inductive and deductive reasoning in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6z9146bt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Liew, Janice
Hayes, Brett

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inductive and deductive reasoning in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Janice H. Liew (j.liew@psy.unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Brett K. Hayes (b.hayes@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Abstract
This study examined the hypothesis that individuals with
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) show a selective deficit in
inductive reasoning but are unimpaired in their ability to make
deductive inferences. 100 participants from an analog sample made
inductive or deductive inferences about arguments that differed
according to causal consistency and validity. They also completed
a task examining sensitivity to the implications of diverse evidence
in induction. Participants who were high or low on obsessivecompulsive symptoms showed similar patterns of induction based
on causal knowledge and similar patterns of deduction. However,
those with the highest level of OCD symptoms showed less of a
preference for diverse evidence when evaluating inductive
arguments, compared to those with the lowest level of symptoms.
This difference was found across both OCD-relevant and OCDneutral items, and persisted when the effects of group differences
in general ability were controlled. These results indicate that both
inductive reasoning based on background knowledge and
deductive reasoning are intact in individuals with high OCD-traits
but the use of inductive heuristics such as evidence diversity is
impaired.
Keywords: inductive reasoning, deductive
psychopathology, cognitive neuropsychiatry

reasoning,

Introduction
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by
the experience of unwanted, repetitive intrusions in the form
of thoughts, impulses or images. These obsessions are often
accompanied by compulsions (repetitive behaviors or
mental acts) that represent attempts to reduce or neutralize
the marked distress that the obsessions cause.
A variety of biological, cognitive and social factors
affect the onset and maintenance of OCD symptoms (Riggs
& Foa, 1993). Recently, a number of theoretical accounts
have suggested that deficits in reasoning contribute to OCD
symptomatology. Some of these accounts suggest that
people with OCD have difficulty in reasoning about
uncertain or probabilistic information (O’Connor, 2002;
Pélissier & O'Connor, 2002); that is, they show a deficit in
some forms of inductive reasoning. These accounts suggest
that this is a global deficit, such that people with OCD show
poorer inductive reasoning compared to controls across a
range of stimulus materials and content domains. Moreover,
this impairment in inductive reasoning is thought to be
found together with a relatively intact ability to reason
deductively. Unlike induction, deduction involves the
evaluation of arguments that are certain to be either valid or

invalid on the basis of logical rules (Heit, Rotello, & Hayes,
2012).
A review of the empirical evidence however, reveals
only mixed support for this “impaired induction but spared
deduction” account of OCD. In support of this account,
Pélissier and O'Connor (2002) found that individuals with
OCD had more difficulty than controls in drawing plausible
probabilistic conclusions from a set of verbal statements
about everyday situations. This impairment in inductive
reasoning was found together with apparently intact
deductive reasoning, as measured by performance on the
Wason Selection Task and ability to discriminate between
valid and invalid verbal syllogisms. Moreover, this pattern
was found with stimulus materials that had little connection
with the content of OCD patients’ obsessions.
Other work however, has suggested that the reasoning
deficit in OCD extends to deduction as well as induction.
For example, Simpson, Cove, Fineberg, Msetfi, and Ball
(2007) found that people with OCD were poorer than
controls at discriminating between logically valid and
logically invalid syllogisms with OCD-neutral content.
This mixed pattern of evidence reflects, at least in part, a
general problem with the methods used in previous attempts
to examine inductive and deductive reasoning in people
with OCD. These studies have made little attempt to match
tasks that ostensibly assess inductive and deductive
reasoning on dimensions such as overall task difficulty,
stimulus content and task familiarity. Hence, differences in
performance between nominally inductive and deductive
tasks may actually reflect task-specific characteristics rather
than in the cognitive processes that underlie inductive and
deductive reasoning.
A major aim of the current studies was to re-examine
inductive and deductive reasoning in those with OCDrelated traits and controls, using a method that addressed
this major limitation of previous work. The general
approach is patterned after Rips (2001) and Heit and Rotello
(2010) who asked university undergraduates to evaluate a
set of verbal arguments that varied in both logical validity
and inductive plausibility. Crucially, different groups
evaluated the set of arguments on the basis of logical
necessity (deduction condition) or the overall plausibility
(induction condition) of the conclusions.
Another important aim was to carry out a more
exhaustive examination of possible deficits in inductive
reasoning in those with OCD-related traits. A review of

2890

research on induction in people without OCD (typically
university undergraduates) suggests that such reasoning is
influenced by at least two distinct factors (cf. see Hayes,
Heit, & Swendsen, 2010 for a detailed review). On the one
hand, people often evaluate inductive arguments using their
prior knowledge of causal or taxonomic relations between
argument premises and conclusions (Medin, Coley, Storms,
& Hayes, 2003). For example, Rips (2001) found that
participants were more likely to accept conclusions in
inductive arguments when these were consistent with
background causal knowledge (e.g. see the top right cell of
Table 1), than when they were causally inconsistent (e.g. see
the bottom right cell of Table 2), even though neither
conclusion is logically entailed by the premise.
A second factor influencing induction is the use of
general heuristics for assessing probabilistic evidence (Heit,
Hahn, & Feeney, 2005; Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, López, &
Shafir, 1990). Such heuristics include the sample size (or
“monotonicity”) principle in which the strength or
plausibility of an inductive conclusion tends to increase with
the number of instances of positive evidence observed
(Osherson et al., 1990). Another important heuristic is
premise diversity. All things being equal, more diverse
evidence (e.g., cows and mice have property X) is usually
seen as a stronger basis for inductive generalizations (e.g.,
mammals have property X) than less diverse evidence (e.g.,
cows and horses have property X). Although there is some
debate about the normativity of this principle (e.g., Lo,
Sides, Rozelle, & Osherson, 2002), a large body of evidence
shows that most reasoners use this heuristic when evaluating
inductive evidence (see Heit et al., 2005 for a review).
Previous work on inductive reasoning deficits in OCD
has blurred this distinction, with some researchers
examining induction based on background knowledge (e.g.,
Pélissier & O’Connor, 2002), while others have examined
the use of domain-general heuristics in probabilistic and
inductive reasoning (e.g., Fear & Healy, 1997). We sought
to clarify the nature of inductive deficits in people with
OCD by assessing those with low and high levels of OCDrelated traits on each of these two types of inductive tasks.

The Current Study
To re-examine inductive and deductive reasoning in
individuals high and individuals low on OCD symptoms, we
administered two tasks. The first examined inductive and
deductive reasoning using a common set of stimulus
materials. Following Rips (2001), participants were asked to
judge either the inductive strength or deductive validity of
four types of arguments. Table 1 illustrates this design with
arguments that vary in logical validity and consistency with
causal knowledge. Crucially, different groups were
instructed to evaluate the same set of arguments on the basis
of either deductive validity or inductive plausibility.
Previous work with undergraduates (e.g., Heit & Rotello,
2010; Rips, 2001) has found that this instructional
manipulation interacts with argument type. In particular,
Rips (2001) found that under deduction conditions, binary

judgments of argument strength were primarily affected by
validity, regardless of causal consistency. In contrast, those
given induction instructions were highly sensitive to causal
consistency. In this condition, causally-consistent but
logically invalid arguments (e.g., arguments like those in the
top right cell of Table 1) were judged to have similar
argument strength to logically valid arguments. According
to Rips (2001), this pattern shows that people use
qualitatively different criteria for evaluating arguments
when doing induction and deduction.
If those with OCD-symptomology exhibit spared
deductive reasoning but impaired inductive reasoning, then
they should show a different pattern of performance on the
Rips induction-deduction task. Specifically, they may show
sensitivity to logical validity under deduction instructions
but may not show the same sensitivity to causal consistency
as controls, when given induction instructions.
Table 1: Examples of the argument types used in the Rips
induction - deduction task. Participants were asked to evaluate the
conclusion (below the line in italics) assuming the premises (above
the line in normal font) to be true.
Validity
Causal status
Valid
Invalid
If Jill rolls in the mud, Jill rolls in the mud.
Causally
Jill gets dirty.
Consistent
Jill rolls in the mud.
________________
________________
Jill gets dirty.
Jill gets dirty.
If Jill rolls in the mud, Jill rolls in the mud.
Causally
Jill gets clean.
Inconsistent
Jill rolls in the mud.
________________
________________
Jill gets clean.
Jill gets clean.

Note that the Rips task examines induction based on
background causal knowledge. With the aim of providing a
more comprehensive examination of possible inductive
deficits in OCD, we also administered an inductive
reasoning task which tested sensitivity to the diversity
heuristic. In the diversity task, participants were asked to
make judgments about which of two pairs of premises
would provide better evidence for a more general inductive
conclusion (see Table 2 for an example). One premise pair
(non-diverse set) contained two very similar premises, while
another (diverse set) contained premises that were less
similar (but still nested within the conclusion category).
Those with no OCD-symptomology were expected to
show a robust preference for the diverse set (cf. Heit et al.,
2005; Osherson et al., 1990). However, if inductive
reasoning is impaired in people with OCD, then we would
expect to see less evidence of the diversity heuristic in those
with OCD symptoms. Indirect support for this prediction
comes from the finding that relative to controls, individuals
with OCD often make repeated observations of the same or
similar items before making a probability judgment (e.g.,
Fear & Healy, 1997; Volans, 1976). As shown in Table 2,
the prediction about differences between diversity-based
reasoning in those low or high in OCD traits was examined

2891

using “OCD-neutral” arguments as well as arguments with
content relevant to common obsessions (OCD-relevant).
Table 2: Examples of the four argument types used in the Diversity
task. The premises are given in normal font above the line and are
assumed to be true. Conclusions are given in italics below the line.
Content
Premise
OCD-Neutral
OCD-Relevant
Sets
All cows have an
All
gold coins are
Diverse
ileal vein
contaminated
by
the
bacteria hemonasella coli
All mice have an
ileal vein
________________
All mammals have
an ileal vein
NonDiverse

All cows have an
ileal vein

All horses have an
ileal vein
________________
All mammals have
an ileal vein

All dollar bills are
contaminated
by
the
bacteria hemonasella coli
____________________
All forms of money are
contaminated
by
the
bacteria hemonasella coli
All
gold coins are
contaminated
by
the
bacteria hemonasella coli
All silver coins are
contaminated
by
the
bacteria hemonasella coli
____________________
All forms of money are
contaminated
by
the
bacteria hemonasella coli

It is important to note that unlike many previous studies
(e.g., Pélissier & O'Connor, 2002; Simpson et al., 2007), we
did not test patients who had received a formal diagnosis of
OCD. Instead we employed an “analog-sample” of
undergraduates who showed relatively low or high levels of
OCD symptomology as measured by a widely used selfreport screening questionnaire. This approach is justifiable
given that non-treatment seeking individuals who score
highly on self-report measures of obsessive-compulsive
symptoms often do meet diagnostic criteria for OCD
(Burns, Formea, Keortge, & Sternberger, 1995).

Method
Participants. One-hundred undergraduate students who
spoke English as their primary language participated for
course credit.
These participants were all assessed using the
Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised (Foa et al., 2002).
This is an 18-item self-report measure that assesses
subjective experience of OCD symptoms in the past month.
Item ratings are made on a 5-point Likert scale (0=not at all
distressing, 4=extremely distressing). The OCI-R has been
shown to reliably distinguish between individuals with OCD
and non-OCD controls, and to have high internal
consistency and test-retest reliability (Foa et al. 2002).
Individuals high on obsessive-compulsive symptoms were
defined as those scoring equal to or greater than 21 on the

OCI-R (n = 44, M = 29.95, SD = 7.19), which is consistent
with the cut-off used for distinguishing between nonanxious controls and those with OCD (Foa et al., 2002). Of
these participants, the majority were female (n = 30) and the
mean age was 18.75 years (SD = 1.64). Low-OCD
individuals were defined as those scoring less than 21 on the
OCI-R (n = 56, M = 10.85, SD = 5.42); the majority of these
participants were female (n = 30) and the mean age was
20.46 years (SD = 6.67).
Design and Procedure.
All participants were tested individually in the UNSW
Cognition and Reasoning lab. All were administered a Rips
induction-deduction task and a premise diversity task, with
order of task presentation counterbalanced across
participants. After completion of the reasoning tasks, all
participants also completed a test of general ability (the twosubtest short-form of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of
Intelligence) (WASI; Wechsler, 1999), and the OCI-R. The
general ability test was included so that possible group
differences in reasoning performance could be differentiated
from group differences in overall cognitive ability.
Rips induction-deduction task. The Rips inductiondeduction task consisted of 16 arguments that varied
factorially in logical validity (valid vs. invalid) or causal
consistency (consistent vs. inconsistent) (see Table 1 for
examples), such that there were four argument types. The
valid items were based on either the inference form modus
ponens (If p then q, p therefore q) (as in the Table 1
example) or conjunctive syllogism (not (p and q), p
therefore not q), such that valid items followed an
acceptable logical structure but invalid items did not. Item
content for 12 of the arguments was taken from Rips (2001),
and the remaining four arguments were generated by the
researchers.
Instructions for evaluating these arguments (deduction
vs. induction) were manipulated between subjects, with
approximately equal numbers allocated to each condition.
Those in the induction condition were told that strong
arguments are those for which “assuming the information
above the line is true, this makes the sentence below the line
plausible”, whilst those in the deduction condition were told
that valid arguments are those for which “assuming the
information above the line is true, this necessarily makes the
sentence below the line true”. They were instructed to
examine each argument and make a binary judgment about
the conclusion (“strong” or “weak” in the induction
condition; “valid” or “invalid” in the deduction condition).
Arguments were presented one at a time on a computer
screen in random order, and responses were made via onscreen buttons. There was no time limit on responding.
Premise Diversity task. This consisted of 30 items, each
made up of two pairs of premises (one diverse, one nondiverse) and a general conclusion (see Table 2 for
examples). Assignment of premises to the diverse or nondiverse set was based on pre-test ratings of the similarity

2892

interaction, p = .595). All of these results remained robust
when group comparisons were restricted to the highest and
lowest quartile groups on the OCI-R (OCD-low, n = 24;
OCD-high, n = 27). These results challenge the view that
induction involving the use of background causal
knowledge is selectively impaired in OCD.
Induction, OCD-Low
Deduction, OCD-Low
Induction, OCD-High
Deduction, OCD-High

1
Proportion of Positive Responses

between the categories mentioned in the premises (e.g.,
cows and horses) by an independent group of participants
who took no part in the main experiment. This pre-test
established that diverse premise pairs (M = 4.52, SD = 1.31)
were reliably perceived as less similar to one another than
the non-diverse pairs (M = 7.94, SD = .54), t(10) = 11.75,
p<.01. Premise and conclusion categories (e.g., cows,
horses, mammals; gold coins, silver coins, money) were
selected so that they would be familiar to participants, but
the properties attached to each (e.g., “have an ileal vein”,
“are contaminated by hemonasella coli”) were unfamiliar
(cf. Osherson et al., 1990). For each item, participants had
to choose which of the premise pairs provided stronger
evidence for the conclusion, as illustrated in Table 2.
Half the diversity items were content-neutral (related to
animals), whilst the other half were OCD-relevant
(containing emotional content related to common OCDrelated concerns, such as washing and checking). The leftright positioning of diverse and non-diverse premises was
randomized, as was item order. The full set of items is
available from the authors.

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
V-C

Results
Preliminary Analyses. A one-way ANOVA analysis of
general ability scores between OCD-high and OCD-low
groups indicated that the groups did not differ in estimates
of general ability, F(1, 98) = 3.36, p =.07. However, general
ability estimates for those scoring in the highest quartile on
the OCI-R (M = 105.37, SD = 11.62) were lower than those
in the lowest quartile (M = 112.4, SD = 7.55), F(1, 98) =
298.04, p < .01. As there were general ability differences in
the lowest and highest quartiles of OCD symptoms, general
ability was controlled in all analyses.
Rips Induction-deduction task - Proportion of positive
responses. The proportion of trials in which OCD-high and
OCD-low participants judged an argument as “valid” in the
deduction condition or “strong” in the induction condition is
given in Figure 1. As Figure 1 indicates, the proportion of
positive responses across item types is clearly affected by
argument consistency, F(1, 98) = 261.94, p < .01, and
validity, F(1, 98) = 223.33, p < .01.
The key question however, is whether responses to
valid-inconsistent (V-I) and invalid-consistent (Inv-C) items
differ as a function of instruction and OCD-group status.
Crucially, as in Rips (2001), we found a crossover
interaction between the relative likelihood of making a
positive response to V-I and Inv-C and the instruction
manipulation, F(1, 96) = 10.82, p < .01. Figure 1 shows that
under deduction instructions, there was a higher rate of
positive responding to V-I items than to Inv-C items, but
that this pattern reverses under induction instructions. This
suggests that people applied qualitatively different criteria to
evaluating argument strength in the induction and deduction
conditions. Notably, as is clear from Figure 2, this effect
was found in both OCD-low and OCD-high groups (i.e.
there was no significant group x item x instruction

V-I

Inv-C

Inv-I

Figure 1. Proportion of positive responses ('strong' or 'valid')
for each item type, by instruction condition and group. V-C
= Valid + causally consistent items; V-I = Valid + causally
inconsistent items; Inv-C = Invalid + causally consistent
items; Inv-I = Invalid + causally inconsistent items.
A further analysis of the deduction data was carried out
by calculating an “interaction index”, which measures the
influence of causal consistency on positive responding for
valid and invalid problems, whilst correcting for response
bias (see Dube, Rotello, & Heit, 2010). The interaction
index was calculated using the formula;
Interaction index = (HI – FI) – (HC – FC)

(1)

H denotes the rate of hits (responding “valid” to a logically
valid item). F denotes false alarms (responding “valid” to a
logically invalid item), and C and I denote causally
consistent and causally inconsistent arguments respectively.
The index is scaled such that a positive index suggests that
people find it easier to discriminate between valid and
invalid items with unbelievable conclusions. An interaction
index score was calculated for each participant and mean
scores were compared between the OCD-low (M = 0.39, SD
= .05) and OCD-high (M = 0.34, SD = .07) groups.
Consistent with previous work, the interaction index
calculated for the OCD-low group was positive (Dube et al.,
2010), as was the index calculated for the OCD-high group.
The interaction index scores did not differ between these
groups, F(1, 95) = .38, p = .54. In other words, there were
no OCD-group differences in the impact of causal
consistency on judgments of logical validity. Again it
appears that OCD-low and OCD-high show similar patterns
of reasoning based on background causal knowledge.

2893

Proportion of Diverse Pairs Chosen

Proportion of Diverse Pairs Chosen. Overall, both OCDhigh and OCD-low groups were more likely to choose the
diverse premise pairs as providing stronger evidence for
inductive generalization than would be expected by chance,
(OCD-low, t(55) = 7.98, p < .01; OCD-high, t(42) = 4.05,
p < .01). The relative preference for diverse pairs in OCDhigh and OCD-low groups was compared. There was no
effect of OCD status for overall proportion of diverse pairs
chosen, F(1, 106) = 1.35, p = .25. Participants showed a
reliable diversity effect (i.e. selection of diverse pairs above
chance) for both OCD-neutral, t(99) = 7.27, p < .01, and
OCD-relevant items, t(99) = 9.24, p < .01.
We again reanalyzed these data restricting group
comparisons to those individuals showing the most extreme
scores on the OCI-R (i.e. the lowest and highest quartiles).
As can be seen in Figure 2, individuals exhibiting the
highest OCD symptoms shows reduced preference for
diverse evidence in induction than those with low levels of
OCD symptoms, F(1, 51) = 7.41, p <.01, d = 1.09.
Individuals with high scores on the OCI-R were less likely
to show a preference for diverse evidence, regardless of
whether item content was neutral, F(1, 51) = 5.95, p < .05,
d = 1.06, or emotionally relevant, F(1, 51) = 7.89, p < .01,
d = 1.01. Moreover, this difference persisted when group
differences in general ability were controlled by using
individual scores on the ability test as a covariate.1
1

Lowest Quartile
Highest Quartile

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Overall

Neutral

Emotional

Figure 2. Proportion of Diverse Pairs Chosen by Lowest and
Highest Quartiles on the OCI-R.
Overall, these data suggest that non-clinical adults with
the highest levels of OCD symptoms were less likely to
make use of the diversity heuristic in inductive reasoning
than those who show low levels of symptomatology.
1

Moreover, linear regression analyses showed that scores on the
OCI-R explained a significant amount of variance in the proportion
of diverse pairs chosen overall after the common variance
explained by general ability had been controlled (i.e. when OCI-R
scores were entered into the equation after general ability), R2 =
.33, F(1,97) = 5.95, p < .01, and for both neutral items, R2 = .35,
F(1,97) = 6.77, p < .01, and OCD relevant items, R2 = .29, F(1,97)
= 4.42, p < .05.

General Discussion
Previous work (e.g. Pélissier & O’Connor, 2002) has
suggested that people with OCD show a selective deficit in
inductive reasoning but unimpaired ability to reason
deductively. This study tested this hypothesis in two ways.
First, we compared the inductive and deductive performance
of those with low or high levels of OCD-related traits using
a common stimulus set for both tasks. Second, we examined
the performance of these two groups on two types of
inductive problems; one based on the use of background
knowledge to determine inductive validity and another
examining the inductive heuristic of evidence diversity.
Overall there was mixed support for the hypothesis of a
selective inductive deficit in people with OCD-related traits.
Results from the Rips induction-deduction task replicated
the main findings of other comparisons of inductive and
deductive reasoning in nonclinical populations (e.g, Heit &
Rotello, 2010; Rips, 2001). Induction and deduction
instructions led participants to evaluate arguments in
qualitatively different ways. Evaluations of inductive
strength were based on consistency with prior knowledge.
Evaluations of deductive validity were evaluated according
to logical necessity. Crucially, there were no differences
between OCD-low and OCD-high groups in patterns of
inductive and deductive reasoning. These data provide little
support for a selective deficit in inductive reasoning based
on background knowledge in people with OCD.
An important finding however is that those who showed
the highest level of OCD symptomatology exhibited an
atypical pattern of induction based on the diversity heuristic.
Those in the highest OCD symptom quartile were less likely
to see diverse premise pairs as a stronger basis for inductive
generalization than those in the lowest quartile. This
difference persisted when the effects of general ability were
factored out. This suggests that although inductive
reasoning based on consistency with background knowledge
may be intact in people with high-OCD symptoms, this
group does show an impaired understanding of the
implications of evidence diversity. Moreover, this appears
to be a global impairment, affecting inductive reasoning
about both OCD-related and OCD-neutral items.
Further work is needed to identify the specific source of
this inductive impairment. It is notable that although
sensitivity to evidence diversity is robust in nonclinical
groups (Heit et al., 2005), there are some cases where this
heuristic interacts with other factors, such as property
knowledge. When diverse premises share a highly specific
or idiosyncratic property, inductive generalizations based on
diverse premises may actually be weaker than those based
on non-diverse premises (Feeney & Heit, 2011). For
example, Medin et al., (2003) found that people were less
likely to generalize a property shared by camels and desert
rats to other mammals, than a property shared by camels
and rhinos, even though the first set of premises was rated
as more diverse. It seems unlikely however, that this type of
mechanism could explain the weakening of the diversity
effect in people with OCD-symptoms. If this effect was

2894

driven by the high OCD group inferring more specific or
idiosyncratic relations between diverse premise pairs, one
could reasonably expect that this effect would be stronger in
items with OCD-relevant content. However, the weakening
of the diversity effect in people with OCD symptoms was
found across both OCD-relevant and neutral items.
A more likely explanation of reduced sensitivity to
diversity in the OCD-high group relates to preservative
tendencies observed in other studies of probabilistic and
inductive reasoning in OCD patients (e.g. Fear & Healy,
1997; Volans, 1976). Such studies have found that when
asked to evaluate evidence for an uncertain conclusion,
people with OCD-related traits often repeatedly choose to
examine similar or redundant types of evidence.
Overall, we found some evidence for impaired inductive
reasoning in people with OCD-related traits, but only when
a general inductive heuristic was involved. By contrast,
high-OCD individuals did not differ from controls in
induction based on background knowledge or in deductive
reasoning. Clearly, given the analog nature of our samples,
we must be cautious in generalizing the deficit in the use of
the diversity heuristic to clinical populations. However,
given that the level of OCD symptomology is likely to be
more severe in those seeking or undergoing treatment, it
seems reasonable to speculate that such individuals will also
show impairment in diversity-based inductive reasoning.
This study is one of the first to apply contemporary
methods and theories of induction and deduction to examine
reasoning deficits related to a specific clinical condition.
Our view is that a careful examination of patterns of spared
and impaired reasoning in such groups can contribute to the
understanding of reasoning in both clinical and non-clinical
populations (cf. Caramazza & Coltheart, 2006). For
example, the finding that OCD-related symptoms are
associated with impairments in some forms of induction but
not others suggests that more than one underlying cognitive
process drives inductive reasoning.

References
Burns, G. L., Formea, G. M., Keortge, S., & Sternberger, L.
G. (1995). The utilization of nonpatient samples in the
study of obsessive compulsive disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 33, 133-144.
Caramazza, A., & Coltheart, M. (2006). Cognitive
Neuropsychology twenty years on. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 23, 3-12.
Dube, C., Rotello, C. M., & Heit, E. (2010). Assessing
belief bias with ROCs: It's a response bias effect.
Psychological Review, 117, 831-863.
Fear, C. F., & Healy, D. (1997). Probabilistic reasoning in
obsessive-compulsive and delusional disorders.
Psychological Medicine: A Journal of Research in
Psychiatry and the Allied Sciences, 27, 199-208.
Feeney, A., & Heit, E. (2011). Properties of the diversity
effect in category-based inductive reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 17, 156-181.

Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., Leiberg, S., Langner, R., Kichic,
R., Hajcak, G., & Salkovskis, P. M. (2002). The
Obsessive-Complusive Inventory: Development and
validation of a short version. Psychological Assessment,
14, 485-495.
Hayes, B., Heit, E., & Swendsen, H. (2010). Inductive
reasoning. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive
Science, 1, 278-292.
Heit, E., Hahn, U., & Feeney, A. (2005). Defending
diversity. In W. Ahn, B. C. Goldstone, A. B. Love & P.
Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside the lab:
Festscrift in honour of Douglas L. Medin (pp. 87-100).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Heit, E., & Rotello, C. M. (2010). Relations between
inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 36, 805-812.
Heit, E., Rotello, C. M., & Hayes, B. K. (2012). Relations
between memory and reasoning. Psychology of learning
and motivation, 57, 57–101.
Lo, Y., Sides, A., Rozelle, J., & Osherson, D. (2002).
Evidential diversity and premise probability in young
children’s inductive judgement. Cognitive Science, 26,
181–206.
Medin, D. L., Coley, J. D., Storms, G., & Hayes, B. K.
(2003). A relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 10, 517-532.
O'Connor, K. (2002). Intrusions and inferences in obsessivecompulsive disorders. Clinical Psychology and
Psychotherapy, 9, 38-46.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., López, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Pélissier, M.-C., & O'Connor, K. P. (2002). Deductive and
inductive reasoning in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41, 15-27.
Riggs, D. S., & Foa, E. B. (1993). Obsessive compulsive
disorder. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical handbook of
psychological disorders (2nd ed., pp. 189-239). New
York: Guilford Press.
Rips, L. J. (2001). Two kinds of reasoning. Psychological
Science, 12, 129-134.
Simpson, J., Cove, J., Fineberg, N., Msetfi, R. M., & Ball,
L. J. (2007). Reasoning in people with obsessivecompulsive disorder. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 46, 397-411.
Volans, P. J. (1976). Styles of decision-making and
probability appraisal in selected obsessional and phobic
patients. British Journal of Social & Clinical
Psychology, 15, 305-317.
Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of
Intelligence (WASI). San Antonio, TX: Harcourt
Assessment.

2895

