UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inferring One’s Own Prosociality Through Choice: Giving Preschoolers Costly Prosocial
Choices Increases Subsequent Sharing Behavior

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6381210d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Chernvak, Nadia
Kushnir, Tamar

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inferring One’s Own Prosociality Through Choice: Giving Preschoolers Costly
Prosocial Choices Increases Subsequent Sharing Behavior
Nadia Chernyak (nc98@cornell.edu) & Tamar Kushnir (tk397@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Abstract
Prosociality emerges early in ontogeny, but the mechanisms
driving its early-emergence are not well understood. We
propose that the experience of choice is tied to the expression
of children’s prosocial behavior. In Experiment 1,
preschoolers shared with a puppet by either making a Costly
Choice (giving a resource they could have kept for
themselves), Non-Costly Choice (giving a resource that
would otherwise be thrown away), or No Choice. Subsequent
prosociality was measured by allowing children to share with
a new puppet. While most children shared initially, children
who were given costly choices shared more with the new
puppet. Experiment 2 replicated this result using a different
manipulation for Costly vs. Non-Costly choices. Experiment
3 found that preschoolers were more likely to infer that
actions are intentional when they are costly. Results suggest a
prosocial construal hypothesis: that children rationally infer
their prosociality through making difficult, autonomous
choices.
Keywords: cognitive
preschoolers

development;

choice;

altruism;

Introduction
People very rapidly acquire remarkable prosocial
tendencies. By the second to third year of life, children help
others complete their goals (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006),
share toys (Schmidt & Sommerville, 2008; Svetlova,
Nichols, & Brownell, 2010), sympathize with those who are
harmed (Vaish, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2009) or are in
distress (Zahn-Waxler, Radke-Yarrow, & Wagner, 1992),
and punish those who harm others (Dunfield & Kuhlmeier,
2010; Vaish, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2010; Vaish,
Missana, & Tomasello, 2011). But how children acquire
such tendencies remains an understudied empirical question.
Here, we explore the possibility that having and making
choices encourages young children’s prosocial behavior.
One potential mechanism for the expression of prosocial
behavior is through past experience with prosocial action
(Staub, 1971). Self-perception theory (see Beaman, Cole,
Preston, Klenty, & Steblay, 1983; Bem, 1967; Eisenberg,
Cialdini, McCreath, & Shell, 1987; Lepper, 1973) suggests
that individuals are likely to act in congruence with their
past actions because of a desire to stay self-consistent. Thus,
through acting prosocially, children may be forming a
cognitive representation of what “the self” is like, and acting
in accordance with that representation (Freedman & Fraser,
1966; Grusec, Kuczynski, Rushton, & Simutis 1978; Grusec
& Redler, 1980).

Importantly, however, children evaluate their own actions
not simply by their occurrence, but also by the contexts
under which they occur (Warneken & Tomasello, 2008).
Here we explore one important context critical to evaluating
prosocial behavior: that of choice. Choice differs from
action in that it involves the contrast between actions
performed and alternative actions not performed. For
example, I evaluate Bob, who gave $5 to charity but could
have kept it for himself (had an alternative) more positively
than Jim, who accidentally dropped $5 into the hands of a
homeless person (had no alternative). In fact, we often go
beyond evaluating choice in absolute terms (having vs. not
having choice) to also consider degree of costliness of the
alternatives. To extend the above example, I would
consider Bob more generous if his choice was to give away
his last $5 than if his choice was to give away $5 out of his
last $100. Thus, both the presence and the costliness of
choice influence how we evaluate others.
No study to our knowledge has addressed whether choice
plays a causal role in young children’s own prosocial
behavior. In this work, we asked whether making costly
choices
increases
young
children’s
prosociality.
Specifically, we hypothesized that the contrast between
actions chosen and alternative actions not chosen influences
children’s later prosocial behavior above and beyond the
prosociality of the actions themselves.
We allowed preschool-aged children (3-4 year-olds) to
perform a prosocial action: allocating a limited and desired
resource to a puppet who was feeling sad. We
systematically manipulated the presence and magnitude of
alternative actions (non-prosocial actions) that children
could also undertake. We were interested in how the
presence and valence of these alternative actions affected
children’s subsequent prosociality. Subsequent prosociality
was measured by allowing children to then make a new
prosocial action towards a different puppet.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, children were presented with an
attractive and limited resource: 1 star sticker that they could
give to a puppet (“Doggie”) who was described as feeling
sad. We manipulated children’s experience of choice by
allowing children to either make a Costly Choice (give the
sticker to Doggie instead of keeping it for themselves),
Non-Costly Choice (give the sticker to Doggie instead of
having the experimenter put the sticker away), or No
Choice (instructed to give the sticker to Doggie). As such,
all children were given the option between (a) a positive

2040

prosocial action (+), and (b) either a selfish, negative action
(-), a neutral action (0), or no action. See table 1 for a
summary. Children’s actions towards Doggie were
recorded. We were then interested in how the contrast
between the action chosen (action a) and the action
unchosen (the alternative action b) affected children’s
subsequent
prosociality.
To
measure
subsequent
prosociality, children were introduced to a new puppet
(“Ellie”) who was also feeling sad, and given three stickers
that they could either keep or share with Ellie.

children made their choices, the experimenter said “good
job!” and put the box away.
Dependent Measure A new puppet was then shown
(“Ellie”) who was also feeling sad. Ellie was then put away,
Ellie’s box was presented along with a second (plain) box
on the table, and three smiley-faced stickers placed between
the two boxes. The positioning of the two boxes was
counterbalanced across participants. The experimenter then
said that the three stickers were for the child, but that Ellie
also really liked them. The number 3 was chosen to force
children to create an uneven distribution (either to prioritize
themselves, or to prioritize Ellie).
After counting the stickers, the experimenter then said
that the child could either keep all of the stickers for
him/herself (and pointed to the plain box) or share some
with Ellie (and put them in Ellie’s box). Re-prompts were
used if children left any stickers on the table (“and what do
you want to do with this/that one?”), until a box was chosen
for each sticker.

Table 1: Summary of Experiment 1
Condition

Target Action

Costly Choice

Give sticker to
Doggie (+)

Non-Costly Choice

Give sticker to
Doggie (+)
Give sticker to
Doggie (+)

No Choice

Alternative
Action
Keep sticker for
self (-)
Throw sticker
away (0)
None

Results and Discussion

Participants
Seventy-two preschool-aged children (mean: 3.96 years;
range: 2.85–4.98) participated. Conditions were fully
balanced for age and gender. There were no age differences
between conditions, F (2,71) = .96, p = .39. One child was
replaced due to parental interference. Participants were
tested at a local school or children’s museum.

Materials and Procedure
Materials were two plush puppets (“Doggie” and “Ellie”),
three small wooden boxes: Doggie’s box, Ellie’s box (which
had pictures on the tops and insides of Doggie and Ellie,
respectively), and the child’s box (no pictures), and a set of
small star and smiley face stickers. A schematic of the
materials and procedure is shown in Figure 1.
Introduction All children sat at a table facing the
experimenter. Children were first shown a plush animal
named “Doggie” and told that Doggie was feeling “very sad
today”. Doggie was then put away. One of the toy boxes
was placed on the table and introduced as “Doggie’s box.”
Choice Manipulation All children were induced to act
prosocially. However, we varied the presence and
magnitude of the alternative option across conditions. In the
Costly Choice Condition, children were presented with the
choice of either keeping the sticker for themselves or giving
it to Doggie. In the Non-Costly Choice condition, children
were presented with the choice of putting the sticker away
or giving it to Doggie. Finally, in the No Choice Condition,
children’s actions were restricted by experimenter
instruction (“This star sticker, you have to put in the box for
Doggie so that he feels better”). Across all conditions, once

We first analyzed children’s initial prosocial responses:
the majority of children chose the prosocial action over the
non-prosocial alternative: 19/24 in the Costly Choice
condition, 23/24 in the Non-Costly Choice condition, and
23/24 in the No Choice condition (all Binomial p’s < .01).
Next, we analyzed children’s prosocial actions subsequent
to the choice manipulation (Figure 2). Almost all children
gave at least one sticker and shared at least one sticker,
confirming that children both liked stickers and were
motivated to share. Children were thus divided into two
response groups based on whether they distributed
unequally in favor of themselves or Ellie: other-prioritizing
(giving majority, 2, or 3, stickers to Ellie), and selfprioritizing (giving the minority, 1, or 0, stickers to Ellie).1
See Table 2 for details on number of stickers given per
condition. A higher proportion (16/24; 67%) of children in
the Costly Choice condition made an other-prioritizing
response than those in the No Choice (8/24; 33%) condition,
Fisher’s exact test p < .05 (see Figure 2), suggesting that
having choice influenced children’s subsequent sharing. The
cost of the choice also affected sharing: a higher proportion
of children who made the initial Costly Choice were more
likely to be other-prioritizing than those who made the NonCostly Choice (7/24; 29%), Fisher’s exact test p < .01.
Making a non-costly choice did not increase subsequent
sharing over being instructed to share, p > .15.
The results of Experiment 1 thus provide initial evidence
that having made a costly choice to perform a prosocial
action increased children’s later prosocial behaviors. Why
might this be the case? One possibility is that, by
1
Results remain nearly identical when analyzing only the subset
of children who made the initial prosocial choice. For a
conservative estimate, we thus include the full set of children
across all experiments.

2041

Figure 1: Schematic of materials and procedure used in all experiments.
Choices (a) and (b) were presented verbally in the order shown.
Contrasting their chosen actions with non-prosocial
alternatives, children inferred their prosociality. The above
explanation is consistent with traditional self-perception
theories (e.g.,Bem, 1967) which predict that people learn
about their own preferences from observing their past
actions. There are, however, at least two alternative
explanations, also consistent with self-perception theory,
which consider the actions but do not take into account
whether the action was contrasted with alternatives. One
possibility is that the initial costly choice may have led
children to believe they had exhibited their dislike for the
object (“I gave away the sticker so I must not like stickers).
Another possibility is that the initial Costly Choice caused
children simply to repeat the initial outcome of distributing
more to another than to themselves.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to rule out these possibilities.
Procedures mirrored Experiment 1’s Costly Choice
condition, with the following modifications. Children were
once again introduced to the first puppet, Doggie. This time,
however, in the Costly Choice condition, children were
given a colorful rubber toy frog, rather than a star sticker. In
the Non-Costly Choice condition, children were given a

small white piece of torn paper. All children were told they
could choose to keep the object for themselves or give it to
Doggie. The dependent measure (and the new puppet, Ellie)
remained the same.
It is important to note that unlike in Experiment 1, the
objects used were different between the choice manipulation
(which involved either a frog or piece of paper) and the
dependent measure (which again involved smiley face
stickers). Thus, any increased tendencies to share stickers
during the dependent measure phase could not be attributed
to children’s inferences about their preference (or lack
thereof) for stickers. Additionally, the choice manipulation
of both the Costly And Non-Costly choice conditions
required children to undertake the same prosocial action of
giving the object to Doggie instead of keeping it for
themselves, controlling for the possibility that initial
practice with giving away objects causes children to repeat
the outcome of giving more to others than to themselves.

Participants
Forty-eight preschool-aged children (mean: 3.91 years;
range: 2.81–4.96) participated. Conditions were fully
balanced for age and gender. There were no age differences

2042

Figure 2: Proportion of children who allocated the majority of their stickers in the dependent measure phase (to Ellie) in
Experiments 1 and 2. * p < 05, ** p < .01.
between conditions, t(46) = .41, p = .69. Four children were
replaced due to either experimental error or prior
participation. Participants were tested at a local school or
children’s museum.

(paper) condition (24/24) chose the prosocial action over the
non-prosocial alternative (Binomial p’s < .01).
Table 2: Number of Stickers Donated Across Conditions
(modal responses bolded and underlined)

Materials and Procedure
Materials were the same as those used in Experiment 1,
except a set of colorful toy frogs and plain torn pieces of
paper were used during the introduction instead of smiley
face stickers (see Figure 1).
The procedure also largely followed that of Experiment 1,
with the following modifications. In the Costly Choice
Condition, children were given an attractive object (a
colorful toy frog), and told they could either keep it or give
it to Doggie. In the Non-Costly Choice condition, children
were given a small torn piece of paper and also told they
could either keep it or give it to Doggie. The dependent
measures remained the same.

Condition

Results and Discussion

A higher proportion of children in the Costly Choice
(16/24; 67%) condition performed other-prioritizing
prosocial behaviors than those in the Non-Costly Choice
(8/24; 33%) condition, Fisher’s exact test p < .05,
demonstrating once again, that costly choices led to greater
subsequent sharing behaviors. Once again, for details on
number of stickers given per condition, see Table 2.
Moreover, we confirmed that children’s prosociality
could not be explained by the child making inferences about
their own lack of preference for stickers: sharing rates
across the two Costly Choice conditions of Experiments 1

First, to confirm that giving away the toy frog was in fact
a more costly choice than giving away the piece of paper,
we showed the two objects (side of object counterbalanced)
to an independent sample of age-matched children, and
asked them which object they preferred more. Nineteen (of
20) confirmed they preferred the frog (Binomial p < .001).
Once again, the majority of children in both the Costly
Choice (frog) condition (21/24) and the Non-Costly Choice

Exp 1: Costly Choice

Number of Children Who
Made Each Allocation
Type (to Ellie)
0
1
2
3
2
6
11
5

Exp 1: Non-Costly Choice

3

14

3

4

Exp 1: No Choice

3

13

4

4

Exp 2: Costly Choice

2

6

13

3

Exp 2: Non-Costly Choice

3

13

5

3

2043

and 2 were identical. Moreover, we ruled out the possibility
that children in Experiment 1 simply repeated the outcome
of having fewer objects than another agent – children in
both conditions of Experiment 2 initially shared an object
with Doggie instead of keeping it for themselves.

Experiment 3
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 provide initial
evidence that making costly prosocial choices plays an
important role in children’s subsequent prosocial behavior.
We suggest that our findings are best explained by a
prosocial construal hypothesis (see Cialdini, Eisenberg,
Shell, & McCreath, 1987; Grusec et al., 1978): In making
costly prosocial choices, children construe their actions as a
signal of their prosociality (e.g., “I shared so I must like to
share”).
How children perceive costly vs. non-costly situations,
however, remains an important question. In Experiment 3,
we wished to more closely investigate the differing
perceptions that might occur during costly vs. non-costly
choice situation. One possibility is that children perceive
their own costly choices as intentions (i.e., that their actions
were in fact, intentionally and freely chosen, rather than
obligatory). On this account, children would encode costly
choice situations as choices, and non-costly choices as
obligatory acts (e.g., “I chose to give the sticker to Doggie
instead of keeping it for myself” vs. “I had to give the
sticker to Doggie instead of throwing it out”).
In Experiment 3, we tested for this possibility, by once
again giving children either a Costly or Non-Costly Choice,
and then asking them whether they chose to or had to
perform the target action.

Participants
Fifty preschool-aged children (mean: 3.37 years; range:
2.84–4.84) participated. There were no age differences
between conditions, t(48) = 98, p = .34. Five children were
replaced due to either experimental error, or because they
refused to answer the question. Participants were tested at a
local school or children’s museum.

Materials and Procedure
Materials were the same as those used in Experiment 1,
except there was no new puppet (Ellie). See Figure 1.
The Introduction and Choice Manipulation were nearly
identical to that of Experiment 1, with the following
modifications: a smiley-face sticker was used instead of a
star sticker in the Introduction phase. Additionally, because
we did not wish to bias children’s answers with choice
language, we avoided using the phrase “You get to choose”,
and instead simply presented the two options (e.g., “You
can either give this sticker to Doggie or you can keep it for
yourself”).
Dependent Measure In the dependent measure, children
were reminded of the choice they had made (“Do you
remember when you put that sticker in Doggie’s box?”).
Children were then asked a Choice Question (“Did you

choose to do that, or did you have to do that?”). The
question was re-asked if children did not initially answer.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiments 1 and 2, the majority of children in
both the Costly Choice condition (19/25) and the NonCostly Choice condition (25/25) chose the prosocial action
over the non-prosocial alternative (Binomial p’s < .01).
A greater proportion of children in the Costly Choice
condition stated that they chose to perform the target action
(18/25; 72%) than those in the Non-Costly Choice condition
(9/25; 36%), Fisher’s exact test p < .05.
These results suggest that one of the inferences children
may be making during Costly Choice situations is that their
actions were intentional. These results are consistent with
work that finds that young children learn about people’s
intent, both in the moral and non-moral domain, through
evaluating the presence and amount of alternative actions
available to them (e.g., Kushnir, Xu, & Wellman, 2010;
Zelazo, Helwig, & Lao, 1996).

General Discussion
We began this paper with the hypothesis that allowing
children opportunities to make costly choices would
influence their subsequent prosocial behavior. In fact,
children were more prosocial after making costly than noncostly choices, and after making costly choices than making
no choices at all. Moreover, children were sensitive to
different types of evidence for what counts as a costly
action: they shared more after making costly choices, and
also after giving away costly objects. Finally, we found that
children were more likely to construe their actions as
intentional when making costly vs. non-costly choices.
Further work may examine the specific features of costly
choice situations that enable children’s subsequent prosocial
behavior. One possibility is that children felt positive
emotion by making a costly choice, and therefore were
motivated to repeat the behavior at the next timepoint. The
positive emotion may have occurred because children were
subconsciously attuned to their own pride in making a
choice that was costly, and were thus motivated to make
themselves proud again by being prosocial. Yet another
possibility is that in making a costly prosocial choice,
children actively self-regulated their own physiological
arousal elicited by hearing about a sad puppet (Hepach,
Vaish, & Tomasello, 2012). The coordination of setting
goals and watching oneself effectively self-regulate in order
to meet those goals may then have empowered children to
repeat the self-regulatory prosocial behavior later on
(Grolnick, 2009).
It is also important to examine the scope of influence that
costly choices have on the development of prosocial
behavior and on later-developing altruistic behaviors. Moral
self-construction, as well as altruistic behavior, are likely to
be the product of a rather complicated process involving
emotional, behavioral, and cognitive components (Blasi,
1983; Hardy & Carlo, 2011; Kochanska, 2002). Our

2044

findings show that costly choices play a causal role in
determining the short-term prosocial behavior of very young
children. Though more research is needed to investigate
how choice interacts with other components of moral
development, demonstrating the short-term results
underscores previous findings that choice may make a
critical contribution to children’s emerging understanding of
themselves as moral beings through rational inference.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a Cornell Cognitive Science
Fellowship to NC. We would like to thank Bertilia Trieu,
Christina Bryce, Chelsea Brite, Andrew Strauss, Lauren St.
Victor, Kelly Yang, and Emily Hayko for assistance with
data collection and coding. A portion of this work has been
accepted for publication.

References
Beaman, A. L., Cole, C. M., Preston, M., Klentz, B., &
Steblay, N. M. (1983). Fifteen Years of Foot-in-the Door
Research A Meta-Analysis. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 9, 181-196.
Bem, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: an alternative
interpretation of the cognitive dissonance phenomena.
Psychological Review, 74, 183-200.
Blasi, A. (1983). Moral cognition and moral action: A
theoretical perspective. Developmental Review, 3, 178210.
Cialdini, R. B., Eisenberg, N., Shell, R., & McCreath, H.
(1987). Commitments to help by children: Effects on
subsequent prosocial self-attributions. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 26, 237-245.
Dunfield, K. A., & Kuhlmeier, V. A. (2010). Intentionmediated selective helping in infancy. Psychological
Science, 21, 523-527.
Eisenberg, N., Cialdini, R. B., McCreath, H., & Shell, R.
(1987). Consistency-based compliance: When and why do
children become vulnerable? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 52, 1174.
Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I. K., Cumberland, A., Murphy, B.
C., Shepard, S. A., Zhou, Q., & Carlo, G. (2002).
Prosocial development in early adulthood: a longitudinal
study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82,
993.
Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1966). Compliance
without pressure: the foot-in-the-door technique. Journal
of personality and social psychology, 4, 195.
Grusec, J. E., Kuczynski, L., Rushton, J. P., & Simutis, Z.
M. (1978). Modeling, direct instruction, and attributions:
Effects on altruism. Developmental Psychology, 14, 51.
Grusec, J. E., & Redler, E. (1980). Attribution,
reinforcement, and altruism: A developmental analysis.
Developmental Psychology, 16, 525.
Grolnick, W. S. (2009). The role of parents in facilitating
autonomous self-regulation for education. Theory and
Research in Education, 7, 164-173.

Hardy, S. A., & Carlo, G. (2011) Moral identity: What is it,
how does it develop, and is it linked to moral action?
Child Development Perspectives, 5, 212-218.
Hepach, R., Vaish, A., & Tomasello, M. (2012) Young
children are intrinsically motivated to see others helped.
Psychological Science, 23, 967-972.
Kochanska, G. (2002). Committed compliance, moral self,
and internalization: A meditational model. Developmental
Psychology, 38, 338-351.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young
children use statistical sampling to infer the preferences of
others. Psychological Science, 21, 1134-1140.
Lepper, M. R. (1973). Dissonance, self-perception, and
honesty in children. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 25, 65.
McGrath, M. P., Wilson, S. R., & Frassetto, S. J. (1995).
Why some forms of induction are better than others at
encouraging prosocial behavior. Merill Palmer Quarterly,
41, 347-347.
McGrath, M. P., & Power, T. G. (1990). The effects of
reasoning and choice on children's prosocial behavior.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 13,
345-353.
Schmidt, F. H., & Sommerville, J. A. (2012). Fairness
expectations and altruistic sharing in 15-month-old human
infants. PLoS ONE, 6, e23223.
Staub, E. (1971). The use of role playing and induction in
children's learning of helping and sharing behavior. Child
Development, 805-816.
Svetlova, M., Nichols, S., & Brownell, C. (2010). Toddlers’
prosocial behavior: From instrumental to empathic to
altruistic helping. Child Development, 81, 1814-1827.
Vaish, A., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).
Sympathy through affective perspective-taking and its
relation to prosocial behavior in toddlers. Developmental
Psychology, 45, 534-543.
Vaish, A., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Young
children selectively avoid helping people with harmful
intentions. Child Development, 81, 1661-1669.
Vaish, A., Missana, M., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Threeyear-old children intervene in third-party moral
transgressions. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 29, 124-130.
Warneken F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in
human infants and young chimpanzees. Science, 311,
1301-1303.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Extrinsic rewards
undermine altruistic tendencies in 20-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 44, 1785-1788.
Zahn-Waxler, C., Radke-Yarrow, M., Wagner, E. W. M.
(1992). Development of a concern for others.
Developmental Psychology 28, 126-136.
Zelazo, P. D., Helwig, C. C., & Lau, A. (1996). Intention,
act, and outcome in behavioral prediction and moral
judgment. Child Development, 67, 2478-2492.

2045

