UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Information-Sharing in Three Interacting Minds Solving a Simple Perceptual Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2fj353sr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Denkiewicz, Micha
R?czaszek-Leonard, Joanna
Migda, Piotr
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Information-Sharing in Three Interacting Minds Solving a Simple Perceptual Task
Michał Denkiewicz (michal.denkiewicz@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Warsaw
Stawki 5/7, 00-183 Warsaw, Poland

Joanna Rączaszek-Leonardi (raczasze@psych.uw.edu.pl)
Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences
Jaracza 1, 00-378 Warsaw, Poland

Piotr Migdał (piotr.migdal@icfo.es)
ICFO–Institut de Ciències Fotòniques
08860 Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain

Dariusz Plewczynski (darman@icm.edu.pl)
Interdisciplinary Centre for Mathematical and Computational Modelling, University of Warsaw
Pawińskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland

Abstract
We study three-person groups solving a simple, two
alternative forced choice task of perceptual nature. The group
members provide individual answers and afterwards discuss
and reach a joint decision. Different models of information
sharing describe the theoretical relationship between group
and individual performance. Experimental data shows that
average-performing members can benefit from cooperation,
but the groups do not outperform their best members. Results
point to voting as the best explanation of the behavior of the
groups.
Keywords: group decision making; distributed cognition;
information sharing

Introduction
Whether “two heads are better than one” is no settled
question in psychology. Many studies report groups to be
less proficient than their most capable members (Corfman &
Kahn, 1995), or that there is no benefit (Heaney, Foster,
Gregor, O’Neill, & Wood, 2010). Groups are often regarded
as source of negative influence on individual performance,
stemming from conformism (Asch, 1951) or social loafing
(Allport, 1924).
There are, however, studies that report benefit from
cooperation (Kerr & Tindale, 2004; Hastie & Kameda,
2005). In one of such studies Bahrami (B. Bahrami et al.,
2010) determined that dyads can outperform their members
in a simple two-choice perceptual task, provided that those
members have similar individual effectiveness. This group
benefit disappeared when communication was forbidden;
hence free information sharing was a key factor.
This result is interesting because there is no obvious
reason for group benefit to occur in such a simple task. For
certain types of tasks, such as concept mastery, concept
attainment or learning, group members can pool cognitive
resources, or utilize complimentary skill or knowledge.
Then a group can provide better solutions in terms of
quality, though not necessarily efficiency (Steiner, 1966;

Hill 1982). A notable exception is brainstorming, where
participating in a group has a negative impact both on
quality and quantity of creative solutions (Taylor, Berry,
& Block, 1958).
If resources cannot be shared, perhaps solutions can be.
For so-called “eureka-tasks” a solution can be demonstrated
in objective terms, thus (at least in theory) a single
participant, who finds the correct answer, can easily
persuade other members, leading to a correct group solution.
Hence, the chance of group solving a task grows with its
size. Examples of such task are Remote Associates Test
(Laughlin & Bitz, 1975), or simply scrambled
letters/anagrams.
In Bahrami’s study neither of these conditions was met.
The participants first performed the perceptual task on their
own, without the ability to divide it into parts. Then a group
decision was made, based solely on what the participants
perceived individually. No reasoning or previous knowledge
or was of any use and the only thing, that the participants
could communicate was their subjective idea, of what they
think the answer was. Still not only did the pairs perform
better, than chance (which in this case means the averaged
effectiveness of the two participants), but they also
outperformed the better of the two members.
Bahrami tested several theoretical models of information
sharing in communication, developed in the spirit of signal
detection theory, and concluded, that dyad members
communicate their own relative confidences, which allows
the group benefit to occur.
Later these models were theoretically extended to groups
of arbitrary size by Migdał (Migdał, Rączaszek-Leonardi,
Denkiewicz & Plewczynski, 2012). “Aggregation of
decisions” was also considered, that is a situation when
subgroups of a larger group first reach their decisions, and
then try to convince one another.
The topic of this paper is an experimental attempt to
verify the applicability of these theoretical models to three-

2172

person groups, and shed light onto how these groups reach
their decisions.

about who is the best member. This is a somewhat
simplistic assumption, yet it is feasible that the best member
can be determined in the beginning, based on a small
number of trials.

Decision-Making Models
Consider the following task. On each trial a group
consisting of three participants views two sets of stimuli,
one after another, for a brief period (85 ms). Each of the two
sets consists of six Gabor patches. All patches are identical,
with the exception of one (target) patch – which has higher
contrast. The task is to determine which screen, the first or
the second, contains the target patch. The difference in
contrasts between the target patch and non-target patches
determines the difficulty of the task. We use the convention,
that this difference is positive, when the target is in the
second set, and negative, if it’s on the first.
Knowing the answers of a given a participant, we can
determine the probability, that he or she chooses the second
answer as a function of the contrast difference. We model
this relationship with a cumulative of the normal
distribution, as it provides a good fit to the experimental
data (Bahrami et al., 2010).
Again, following the convention we describe this
psychometric function with two parameters: slope (s) and
bias (b). The slope is a measure of participant’s performance
and is of primary interest. The bias describes the tendency to
give one particular answer – the task is constructed in such a
way, that this parameter should be close to 0. These
parameters are related to the standard parameters of a
Gaussian curve (mean μ and standard deviation σ) in the
following way:
(1)

Voting (Vot) The group uses the majority rule to determine
the group decision. It requires only the communication of
individual decisions.
Weighted Confidence Sharing (WCS) Each member
shares his/her own relative confidence. The participants are
unable to discern their perceived contrast difference from its
reliability (determined by the participant’s slope).
Direct Signal Sharing (DSS) Group members
communicate both their perceived contrast difference and
their confidence separately. This allows for a statistically
optimal decision (Sorkin & Hays, 2001).
Truth Wins (TW) In this model each participant either
knows the correct answer, or is aware of not knowing it. In
other words a person cannot falsely believe that he knows
the answer. This basically means, that if a single group
member finds out the correct answer, the group also answers
correctly.
Table 1 summarizes the mathematical relationships
between group and individual performance, according to the
formulas for arbitrary group sizes presented in Migdał et al.,
2012.
Table 1: Group slope as a function of individual slopes
according to different models.

√

𝑏

−𝜇

(2)

Random Responder (RR) This model assumes that the
communication is actually ineffective, and the final decision
is randomly chosen from the individual decisions.
Best Decides (BD) It is plausible that the group will simply
entrust the decision to the biggest “expert” in the task. That
person’s decision becomes the group decision. The model
assumes that the group initially possesses the knowledge

𝑔(

Model

In the same way as individual decision are used to
construct curves for participants, group curves can be
obtained from group decisions, allowing for a comparison of
group and individual slope parameters.
By making different assumptions about communication
and decision making process within the group, a theoretical
dependency between individual slopes s1,s2,s3 and group
slope parameter sg can be established, in the form of a
function sg(s1,s2,s3).
If the behavior of the group actually matches the
assumptions, then the empirically obtained group slopes
should not differ significantly from theoretical predictions.
By an information-sharing model we understand a possible
set of such assumptions. We consider six such models:

+

RR

+

TW

3)

+

3

+

3

2
𝑚𝑎𝑥{ ,
+

WCS
DSS

,

3

Vot
BD

,

,
+

3}
3

√3
√

+
+

+
+

3
3

All models, with the exception of the RR model, predict
that group performance should exceed average individual
performance of that group’s members.
In Bahrami’s (Bahrami et al. 2010) study of dyads, the
WCS model best described the behavior of the participants.

2173

We expected that such behavior should also be seen in
three-person groups, that is the groups would outperform
their best members, at least in cases of homogenous groups
(in terms of performance).

Experiment
Subjects
Participants were recruited from general population of
Warsaw, Poland, using snowball method. There were 15
three-person groups, which gives 45 participants: 30 female
and 15 male. All participants were adults (mean age 38, s.d.
15.6) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Members
of each group knew each other. Written informed consent
was obtained from each participant prior to the experiment
and each person was rewarded with 25 PLN (approximately
6 EUR) for completing the experiment.

Experimental setup
The testing room contained three computer stations, each
with a LCD display (24 inch, resolution = 1920 x 1280,
refresh rate = 60 Hz) and a keyboard. The stations were
connected via a local network and arranged in the form of
an equilateral triangle, with the displays facing outwards.
Each participant saw only his/her own display, but was able
to see the fellow group members’ faces. To minimize
distractions, during the experiment the room was nearly
completely dark – the only sources of light were the
monitors. However, the lighting was sufficient for the
participants to see each other’s faces.
Each computer was assigned a color: blue, orange or
yellow, for the purpose of identification. The experiment
was controlled by custom software based on the PsychoPy
framework (“http://www.psychopy.org/”; Peirce, 2008).

Stimuli
Each of the two stimuli sets consisted of six Gabor
patches evenly distributed around the center of the screen, at
a distance of 8 degrees. All patches were vertically oriented
and had the following parameters: standard deviation of the
Gaussian envelope = 0.45 deg. spatial frequency = 1.5
cycles/deg. The contrast parameter equaled 10% for the
non-target patch and 11.5% 13.5%, 17% or 25% for the
target patch (hence, the contrast difference value was 1.5%
3.5%, 7% and 15%, respectively). The position of the target
patch within its set was chosen randomly each trial.
The background was uniform and gray at all times.

Task and Procedure
The experiment consisted of a practice block followed by
three experimental blocks. After each experimental block
the participants changed their places, moving one seat to the
left, so that each participant spent about the same time using
each computer. The experimenter was present in the testing

room during the entire experiment, to assure that the
procedure was followed.
There were 288 experimental trials - three blocks of 96
trials. The practice sessions consisted of 8 trials. The
number of trials with each combination of difficulty level
and correct answer combination was equal within blocks.
Each trial started with a black fixation cross, placed in the
center of the screen, displayed for 500 ms. The two sets of
stimuli followed, each visible for 85 ms, separated with a
blank screen presented for 1000 ms. Finally, a white
question mark appeared, indicating that the participants are
to make their individual decisions. The decisions were made
by pressing an appropriate key - left or right arrow
indicating that the target was in the first or in the second set
respectively. The keys were labeled “1” and “2”. After a
button had been pressed the question mark was replaced
with a message “Wait for other participants’ decisions”. It
stayed on the screen until all individual decisions were
made. So far the participants were not allowed to
communicate with each other.
Next, the group decision phase followed. Individual
decisions were displayed for 1.5 s, one above the other, each
in the color of the respective computer. Then a message
appeared asking the participants to discuss the group
decision. After the group decision has been agreed upon, a
single person was required to input the decision, in the same
way as the individual decisions were made. This was always
the person to the left of the previous decision maker.
During the group decision phase the participants [] could
communicate freely, but were not allowed to leave their
seats. The method they could use to arrive at a group
decision was not constrained in any way, there was no
predefined decision-making scheme (e.g. voting).
After the group decision had been made, feedback was
displayed, containing information about the correctness of
the group decision and of each individual decision.
Feedback was visible for 1.5 s and after it disappeared, the
next trial followed immediately.
If the individual decisions were unanimous, the group
decision was automatically assumed to be the same. In such
case the group decision phase was skipped and feedback
was displayed.
The duration of the experimental session depended solely
on the pace at which the participants completed the trials,
and this was on average 44 minutes.

Results
For each participant and each group the slope, s, and bias,
b, parameters were estimated by fitting a probit regression
model to that individuals (or that groups) decisions.
Individual slopes were used to compute the theoretical
values of group slope, predicted by each model, according
to appropriate formula from Table 1 (smodel). These values
were compared to the values obtained empirically (sgroup). If
the ratio of the empirical and theoretical value, sgroup / smodel,
was greater than one, it means that the groups outperformed
the model, if it was less than one – the groups did not reach

2174

predicted accuracy. A one sample Student’s t-test was used
to determine the significance of the deviations from
theoretical predictions; the quotient was compared with the
value of 1. The results are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2: Experimental results.
model

M

SD

t(14)

p

RR
1.42
0.32 5.16
<.001
BD
0.93
0.24 -1.11
.29
Vot
0.95
0.21 -0.94
.36
WCS
0.82
0.18 -3.77
.002
DSS
0.71
0.15 -7.19
<.001
TW
0.47
0.11 -19.23 <.001
Note: * p < .05. ** p < .01. *** p < .001.

***

**
***
***

The ratio sgroup / smodel was significantly greater than 1 for
the RR model and significantly less than 1 in the case of
WCS, DSS and TW models. In other words the actual slope
parameters of the groups were significantly greater than
those predicted by RR model, and significantly lower, than
the predictions of the WCS, DSS, TW models.
In case of some models, namely BD, Vot and TW, a
group decision on a given trial can be determined from the
individual decisions. This allows for a per-trial comparison
of the theoretical decisions and the decisions actually made.
A group decision agrees with the BD models if it is the
same, as the decision of the best group member (i.e. the one
with the highest slope parameter). In case of the Vot model
it is the decision made by the majority of participants.
Finally, in the TW model it is the correct answer, unless all
members were wrong. For each group three values were
calculated, indicating the number of group decisions that
were consistent with each of these tree models. A paired ttest was performed for each pair of these models. The
differences in consistency between the Vot model (M =
254.7, SD = 21.18) and both the BD model (M = 218.7, SD
= 27.6, p < .001), and TW model, (M = 213.5, SD = 19.6, p
< .001) were significant and positive. The difference in
consistency between BD model and TW model was not
significant (p = .77).

Conclusions
Results of the experiment indicate that three-person groups
prefer voting as a method of reaching a joint decision, and
more advanced communication is rarely employed. Groups
outperformed, so to say, their average members, but best
members generally made better decisions than the group.
This group benefit can be attributed solely to the use of
voting as a decision-making scheme.
The failure to outperform the best group members, as it
was in the case of pairs in the study by Bahrami et al.
(2010), can be explained in many ways. First, the
requirement for cognitive resources used for communication
and integration of information increase as more group
members are added, leading to deterioration of information
processing performance. Secondly, in groups of size three,
as opposed to dyads, voting becomes possible. Since group
members are not directly rewarded for accuracy, and the
experimental task is somewhat tedious, employing a simple,
relatively good, and socially acceptable method of reaching
a group decision seems tempting.
Conformism, or caring for group’s coherence, can also
play a role, as it can shy away a single correct group
member, from confronting the majority decision (and
prolonging the decision phase). The social acceptance of
voting can afterwards serve as a justification for this group
member, if he or she were blamed for not insisting on the
correct answer. On the other hand the responsibility for
being wrong diminishes, if one is the member of a majority.
It is feasible that the impossibility of automatically
resolving a tie in dyads fosters communication and, in turn,
increases performance. Adding a third member provides an
opportunity to use a simpler and less effective decision
making system and, paradoxically, diminish performance.
This shows how seemingly simple task and situations can
produce non-trivial dependencies.

Acknowledgements
The work was supported by EC EuroUnderstanding grant
DRUST to JRL, Spanish MINCIN project FIS2008-00784
(TOQATA) and ICFO PhD scholarship to PM, and the
Polish Ministry of Education and Science (grants: N301
159735, N518 409238) to DP.

References

Discussion
Analysis of individual and group slopes allows us to
reject the RR, WCS, DSS and TW models, leaving Vot and
BD as plausible explanations of group performance. A trialby-trial analysis points to Vot model (majority voting) as
the best explanation.
The rejection of some models does not mean that the
types of behavior they describe did not occur or that they are
impossible. It merely shows that they were not dominant in
the course of the experiment. Indeed in a small, but not
negligible number of trials (about 12%), the group decisions
corresponded neither to BD nor Vot model predictions.

Allport, F. H. (1924). Response to Social Stimulation in the
Group. Social Psychology (pp. 260–291). Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
Asch, S. E. (1951). Effects of group pressure on the
modification and distortion of judgements. In H.
Guetzkow (Ed.), Groups, leadership and men. (pp. 177–
190). Pittsburgh:PA: Carnegie Press.
Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Latham, P. E., Roepstorff, A., Rees,
G., & Frith, C. D. (2010). Optimally Interacting Minds.
Science, 329(5995), 1081–1085.
Clark, A. (2006). Language, embodiment, and the cognitive
niche. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(8), 6–10.

2175

Corfman, K. P., & Kahn, B. E. (1995). The influence of
member heterogeneity on dyad judgment: Are two heads
better than one? Marketing Letters, 6(1), 23–32.
Hastie, R., & Kameda, T. (2005). The robust beauty of
majority rules in group decisions. Psychological review,
112(2), 494–508.
Heaney, R., Foster, F. D., Gregor, S., O’Neill, T., & Wood,
R. (2010). Are two heads better than one? An experiment
with novice share traders. Australian Journal of
Management, 35(2), 119.
Kerr, N. L., & Tindale, R. S. (2004). Group performance
and decision making. Annual review of psychology, 55,
623–55.
Laughlin, P. R., & Bitz, D. S. (1975). Individual versus
dyadic performance on a disjunctive task as a function of
initial ability level. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 31(3), 487–496.
Migdał, P., Rączaszek-Leonardi, J., Denkiewicz, M. &
Plewczyński, D. (2012). Information-sharing and
aggregation models for interacting minds, Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 56, 417–426.
Peirce, J. W. (2008). Generating Stimuli for Neuroscience
Using PsychoPy. Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 2
(January), 10.
Sorkin, R., Hays, C., (2001). Signal-detection analysis of
group decision making. Psychological Review - New York
- 108 (I), 183–203.
Steiner, I. D. (1966). Models for inferring relationships
between group size and potential group productivity.
Behavioral Science, 11, 273-283.
Taylor, D.W., Berry, P.C., Block, C.H. (1958). Does group
participation when using brainstorming facilitate or
inhibit creative thinking? Administrative Science
Quarterly, 3, 23-47.

2176

