UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Insight Follows Incubation In The Compound Remote Associates Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/69w4f8nh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
McCarthy, Sean
Malony, John
Morrison, Robert

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Insight Follows Incubation In The Compound Remote Associates Task
Sean W. Mc Carthy (smccartesol@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology
Loyola University Chicago
1032 W Sheridan Rd
Chicago, IL 60626 USA
John M. Malony (jmalony@luc.edu)
Department of Psychology
Loyola University Chicago
1032 W Sheridan Rd
Chicago, IL 60626 USA
Robert G. Morrison (rmorrison@luc.edu)
Department of Psychology, Neuroscience Institute
Loyola University Chicago
1032 W Sheridan Rd
Chicago, IL 60626 USA
Insight has been studied using a variety of different
approaches. Beginning with the Gestalt psychologists,
researchers attempted to create problems where the
experience of insight was more likely (e.g., Duncker’s
(1945) Candle Problem; Katona’s (1940) Matchstick
Arithmetic Problems; Mednick’s (1962) Remote
Associates Problems). Using these types of problems
researchers have examined the experience of insight, for
instance by asking participants to monitor their problem
solving progress in situ (Melcalfe, 1986) or asking
participants to report whether they experienced insight
upon problem completion (Bowden & Jung-Beeman,
2003a). The latter approach allows researchers to make
post hoc comparisons between problems solved with and
without insight on a problem-by-problem basis for each
participant.
Alternatively, some studies have examined how
problem-solving context could facilitate insight solutions
(e.g., Barid et al., 2012; Kounios et al., 2008; Smith &
Blankenship, 1991; Storm, 2010, 2011; Wallas, 1926). For
instance, Smith and Blankenship (1989) argued that
incubation allows problem solvers to forget (or perhaps
inhibit) mental representations resulting in fixation and
thereby achieve an insight solution.

Abstract
The phenomenon of insight is frequently characterized by
the experience of a sudden and certain solution. Anecdotal
accounts suggest insight frequently occurs after the problem
solver has taken some time away from the problem (i.e.,
incubation). Here we used Compound Remote Associates
problems to examine how incubation affects the subjective
experience of insight at different levels of problem fixation.
We hypothesized that incubation would elicit a mind-set
change resulting in improved problem solving performance
regardless of the initial level of fixation. Second, we
predicted to the extent that insight reflects a person’s
assessment of mind-set change, the experience of insight
would be more likely after incubation. Results were
consistent with these predictions. These findings suggest that
the role of incubation in producing insight may have more to
do with changing mind-set than forgetting information that
fixates problem solvers.
Keywords: creativity; fixation; incubation; insight; problem
solving

Introduction
People frequently describe solving problems with either an
analytic, step-by-step process, or a comparatively
unconscious process resulting in unexpected answers
(Boden, 1994; Morrison, in press; van Steenburgh et al.,
2012). In the latter situation people show little ability to
predict their sudden insight (Metcaffe, 1986), yet have
great confidence in the solution that seemingly came from
unconscious processing (Simonton, 2012; Smith & Ward,
2012). This experience often follows a time away from the
problem, also known as incubation (van Steenburgh, et al.,
2012).

The role of incubation in promoting insight
Building on an earlier study by Smith and Blankenship
(1989), Kohn and Smith (2009) asked participants to solve
remote associates problems (Mednick, 1962) in which
participants must discover a single word that is a remote
associate of three different words. Prior to attempting to
solve each problem participants completed an initial task

3008

Figure 1: (a) Unrelated – Direct and (b) Blocking – Incubate example trials. In Unrelated Compound Remote Associates
(CRA) trials the preceding Two Word Phrase Task (TWPT) problem has no words in common with the CRA problem while
in Blocking CRA trials the preceding TWPT problem contains two of the CRA problem words which pair with a third word
that is not the correct answer for the CRA problem, thereby increasing CRA problem fixation. In Direct CRA trials
participants have two contiguous epochs to try to solve the CRA problem, while in Incubate CRA trials the two epochs are
separated by a 40 s incubation period in which participants perform the Digit Monitoring Task (DMT).
designed to manipulate the level of fixation experienced
while trying to solve the remote associates problems.
Participants briefly tried to solve each remote associates
problem and then were given either a second continuous
solution period or a brief 30s incubation period during
which they performed a working-memory distractor task.
Kohn and Smith found a trend towards participants
showing an improvement in performance for problems on
which they were initially more fixated and received an
incubation period. Using a different type of insight
problem, Baird and colleagues (2012) also found a benefit
for incubation; however, the greatest benefit was found
not from a difficult distractor task or simple rest during
incubation, but rather from a task designed to promote
mind-wandering. This latter result suggests that the benefit
of incubation may not be to help participants overcome
fixation, but rather, to promote the appropriate cognitive
processing conducive to insight. Likewise, sleep studies by
Cai and colleagues (2009) demonstrated that implicit
priming of answers to unsolved Remote Associates
Problems helped participants solve the problems after
REM sleep compared to non-REM sleep or an equivalent
rest period. This result suggests that time alone is
insufficient for incubation effects, but rather solutions
involving insight require a change in the underlying
cognitive processing used for problem solving. However,
none of these studies specifically asked participants
whether they had experienced insight while solving the
problem.
Bowden and Jung-Beeman (2003a) developed a
subjective measure of insight for use with Compound
Remote Associates problems (CRA; Bowden & JungBeeman, 2003b) variants of Mednick’s (1962) classic
Remote Associates Task problems. Specifically Bowden
and Jung-Beeman (2003a) asked participants after they had

solved a CRA problem to report via a numeric scale, how
much insight they had experienced. Jung-Beeman and
colleagues (Bowden & Jung-Beeman, 2003b; JungBeeman et al., 2004; Kounios et al, 2006, 2008) have used
various versions of this methodology to perform post hoc
sorting of problems based on the participant’s subjective
experience. Using this methodology along with various
neuroimaging methods they found evidence that right
anterior superior temporal gyrus, a brain area associated
with semantic integration, was specifically engaged just
prior to CRA problems that participants reported solving
with insight (Jung-Beeman, et al., 2004). Importantly, they
also found evidence for neural activity indicative of visual
gating just prior to the right temporal activity suggesting
that a part of solving with insight might involve inhibiting
the external world in favor of subconscious processing.
Likewise, Kounios and colleagues (2008) identified this
same neural signature before participants had initially seen
problems they subsequently reported solving with insight,
suggesting that the visual gating was likely indicative of a
different problem solving strategy (Kounios et al., 2008).

Current Study
The purpose of this study was twofold. First we wanted to
explore whether taking time away from a problem (i.e.,
incubation) contributes to the subjective experience of
insight.
Second, to investigate whether incubation
specifically helps participants overcome fixation, we
adapted Kohn and Smith’s (2009) paradigm for use with
CRA problems (Bowden and Jung-Beeman, 2003b) and a
subjective measure of insight. Specifically, we used Kohn
& Smith’s two-word task to manipulate the degree of
fixation prior to attempting to solve a CRA problem. We
then manipulated incubation by either giving participants a
second immediate opportunity to solve the problem, or

3009

Figure 2: In Epoch 1, there was a reliable effect of blocking on CRA resolution rates demonstrating the effectiveness of the
TWPT problem fixation manipulation. In Epoch 2, there was a reliable effect of incubation, with no interaction with initial
TWPT induced fixation. Error bars represent ±1 SEM.
instead gave them a period of incubation where they
performed a working-memory distractor task. Whenever
participants solved CRA problems, they were asked to
report whether they experienced insight or not. This
procedure thus allows us to evaluate whether insight is
more likely after incubation and whether insight solutions
were likely the result of release from problem fixation.
We hypothesized that incubation with a mild workingmemory distractor would elicit a mind-set change resulting
in improved CRA problem solving performance regardless
of the initial level of fixation. Second, we predicted that if
the experience of insight reflects a person’s assessment of
mind-set change they would report greater insight on
successfully solved problems after incubation than if they
simply continued working on the problems without an
incubation period.

make three compound word pairs (see Figure 1 for an
example problem).
After the methods of Kohn and Smith (2009), we
manipulated CRA problem fixation through use of a
preceding Two-Word Phrase Task (TWPT) problem
corresponding to each CRA problem. This task required
participants to combine three presented words, two of
which were from the corresponding CRA problem, into
two two-word phrases (see Figure 1). This was intended to
create a strong association for two of the CRA words to a
word that was not the correct CRA answer, and thereby
induce CRA problem fixation. We used the corresponding
TWPT problem before the CRA problem in the Blocking
condition (see Figure 1b), while we used an unrelated
TWPT problem created for a different CRA problem in the
Unrelated condition (see Figure 1a).
Lastly, we used a Digit-Monitoring Task (DMT; Kohn &
Smith, 2009) as the distractor task during incubation. In
the DMT participants saw a series of digits from 1 to 9
presented one digit each second for 40s. Participants were
to track the total number of times that two odd digits were
presented in a row and report that at the end of the
incubation period.

Method
Participants
Eighty undergraduate students (60 female) from Loyola
University Chicago participated in the experiment.
Participants gave informed consent to take part in the
study.
The Loyola University Chicago Institutional
Review Board approved all recruitment methods and
procedures.

Testing Procedure
Forty-four CRA problems were rotated between four
counterbalanced conditions (i.e., Unrelated/Direct,
Unrelated/Incubate, Blocking/Direct, Blocking/Incubate;
see Figure 1 for a schematic of two of the conditions).
Each trial began with a TWPT problem for 20s followed
by a CRA problem. On Direct trials if the participant did
not solve the CRA problem in 20s (Epoch 1) they were
given 10 additional seconds to solve the problem (Epoch
2). On Incubate trials that they did not solve in 20s they
performed the DMT for 40s and then were given an
additional 10s to solve the CRA problem. To encourage

Task Descriptions
Three tasks implemented in e-Prime 2.0 were used in this
experiment. The primary task consisted of Compound
Remote Associate problems (CRA; Bowden & JungBeeman, 2003b). Each CRA problem consists of three
unrelated words that can each be paired with a fourth target
word that is a remote associate of each of the cue words to

3010

Figure 3: In the first epoch, reports of insight were significantly higher in the unrelated condition suggesting that
overcoming fixation was not responsible for the experience of insight. In the second epoch reports of insight were greater
following incubation suggesting that the incubation task helped participants to elicit a mind-set change resulting in an
insight solution. Error bars represent ±1 SEM.
and Smith’s study participants showed a reliable difference
in CRA resolution rate with respect to incubation in the
Blocking condition (F(1,79) = 12.0, p = .001, p2 = .13).
However, unlike Kohn and Smith we found a trend
towards a difference for the unrelated condition as well
(F(1,79) = 2.8, p = .10, p2 = .03), consistent with our
failure to find a reliable interaction between incubation and
fixation. Thus, overall our results suggest that incubation
aided in CRA problem solving regardless of the level of
fixation as manipulated by the TWPT.
Overall, 62% of all correct answers were answered with
insight and 38% were answered without insight. In an
effort to measure participant’s subjective experience of
insight within each condition, we calculated an insight
score for each participant by subtracting total number of
correct non-insight answers from their total number of
correct insight answers and dividing by the resolution rate.
Insight score in the first epoch was impacted by fixation
with participants reporting greater insight on solution when
they had less fixation as manipulated by the Two-Word
Task (see Figure 3; t(79) = 2.6 , p = .012). Next we
evaluated whether the experience of insight in Epoch 2 was
impacted by incubation and whether this interacted with
our fixation manipulation. A two-way within subjects
ANOVA yielded a main effect of incubation (see Figure 3;
F(1,79) = 9.0, p = .004, p2 = .10), but no main effect of
fixation F(1,79) = 2.3, p = .14, p2 = .03) and no
interaction F(1,79) = .78, p = .4, p2 = .01). Our results
suggest that incubation increased the experience of insight,
just as it aided solution performance. Likewise, the
experience of insight does not appear to be majorly
impacted by the initial degree of problem fixation.

participants to form links between the TWPT and the CRA
problems we used 6 additional CRA problems in the
Helping condition. In these problems the correct answer
for the CRA problem was given as the third word in the
TWPT problem.
The definition of insight given to subjects was taken
from Jung-Beeman et al. (2004). Briefly, the feeling of
insight was described as a sudden experience in which a
fully formed answer came to mind all at once. Upon
solving a CRA, subjects were asked if they experienced
insight. The subjects responded verbally with either yes or
no.

Results
Due to the CRAs being divided into a first 20s epoch and a
second 10s epoch, accuracy was calculated using
resolution rates (Kohn & Smith, 2009). For the first epoch
the Resolution rate was simply equal to the proportion
solved correctly. For the second epoch we corrected for the
number of problems solved in the first epoch and used the
number of problems attempted during the second epoch as
the denominator in the proportion correct calculation.
Resolution rate in the first epoch was impacted by
fixation with participants solving more problems when
they were preceded by a TWPT that did not result in
greater fixation (see Figure 2; t(79) = 5.6 , p < .001). Next
we evaluated whether performance in Epoch 2 was
impacted by incubation and whether this interacted with
our fixation manipulation. A two-way within subjects
ANOVA yielded a main effect of incubation (see Figure 2;
F(1,79) = 11.5, p = .001, p2 = .13), but no main effect of
fixation F(1,79) = .48, p = .5, p2 = .006) and no
interaction F(1,79) = .73, p = .4, p2 = .009). Following the
analysis of Kohn and Smith (2009) we also performed
planned comparisons to look at the effect of incubation on
Blocking and Unrelated trials independently. As in Kohn

Discussion
Using a similar incubation and fixation paradigm with
different remote associates problems, Kohn and Smith

3011

(2009) reported that incubation led to higher resolution
rates when participants were subjected to a task intended to
cause problem fixation. They suggested that this
improvement was due to distraction during incubation
helping participants overcome problem fixation by
forgetting wrong associations. In our study, we found that
in spite of a strong initial fixation effect, incubation helped
participants solve problems regardless of the level of
fixation. In addition, participants experienced greater
insight when they successfully solved problems after
incubation regardless of fixation compared to when they
successfully solved problems in a continuous period
(Direct condition). Our results suggests that incubation
does contribute to the experience of insight, and that
incubation likely contributes to insight problem solving in
ways other than just through forgetting fixation.
Recently Baird and colleagues (2012) presented
evidence suggesting that what people do during incubation
affects how likely they are to solve insight problems.
Importantly, they found that a more demanding task
resulted in less improvement than a less demanding task
that encouraged mind wandering. Likewise, Cai and
colleagues (2009) found that when participants
experienced REM sleep during a Remote Associates Task
incubation period they were more likely to benefit from an
implicit semantic clue prior to incubation than if they had
non-REM sleep or simply rested during incubation. Like
our results, these findings suggest that something more
than just forgetting must occur during incubation to
facilitate insight.
One possible role for incubation may be to shift the
mood of the participant. In our study when participants
solved CRA problems during the first epoch prior to
incubation they reported less insight when they had
previously solved a TWPT problem intended to create
CRA problem fixation than when they solved an unrelated
TWPT problem (see Figure 3 Epoch 1). It is possible that
the frustration resulting from fixation may encourage a
negative mood. Several previous studies have suggested
that participants are more likely to solve insight problems
when they are in a positive mood (e.g., Isen, Daubman, &
Nowicki, 1987; Subramaniam et al., 2009). Subramaniam
and colleagues showed that when people were high in selfreported positive affect prior to testing they were more
likely to solve CRA problems and report insight. Van
Steenburgh and colleagues (2012) have speculated that this
effect of positive affect may be due to the ability of
positive affect to encourage a broadening of attention (see
also Rowe, Hirsch, & Anderson, 2007). A broad attentional
focus has long been known to be associated with creative
behavior (e.g., Ansburg & Hill, 2003; Mendelsohn &
Griswold, 1966). While it seems unlikely that performing
the DMT incubation task in the present study would likely
elicit a positive mood it is possible that the shift away from
being stuck on a problem may result in at least a less
negative mood perhaps resulting in a broader attentional
mindset.

While our findings do support the idea that incubation
can contribute to a change in mindset that aids in solving
problems with insight, much remains to elucidate the
precise nature of cognitive change that occurs during
incubation.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Stephanie Hare, Leonidas Skiadoupolis,
Kelly Brandstadt, and Krishna Bharani for assistance in
collecting data and for excellent technical support and
Mark Beeman and Marcia Grabowecky for helpful
discussions.
The American Federation of Aging
Research/Rosalinde and Arthur Gilbert Foundation, the
Illinois Department of Public Health, and the Loyola
University Chicago Deans of Arts and Sciences and the
Graduate School provided generous support.

References
Ansburg, P. I., & Hill, K. (2003). Creative and analytic
thinkers differ in their use of attentional resources.
Personality and Individual Differences, 34, 1141–1152.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W.,
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by
distraction: Mind wandering facilitates creative
incubation. Psychological Science, 23(10), 1117-1122.
Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2003). Aha! insight
experience correlates with solution activation in the right
hemisphere. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10(3),
730-737.
Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2003). Normative
data for 144 compound remote associate problems.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers:
A Journal of the Psychonomic Society, Inc, 35(4), 634639.
Bowden, E. M., Jung-Beeman, M., Fleck, J., & Kounios, J.
(2005). New approaches to demystifying insight. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 9(7), 322-328.
Cai, D. J., Mednick, S. A., Harrison, E. M., Kanady, J. C.,
& Mednick, S. C. (2009). REM, not incubation,
improves creativity by priming associative networks.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 106(25), 10130-10134.
Duncker, K., & Lees, L. S. (1945). On problem-solving.
Psychological Monographs, 58(5), i-113.
Isen, A. M., Daubman, K. A., & Nowicki, G. P. (1987).
Positive affect facilitates creative problem solving.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 1112–
1131.
Jung-Beeman, M., Bowden, E. M., Haberman, J.,
Frymiare, J. L., Arambel-Liu, S., Greenblatt, R., . . .
Kounios, J. (2004). Neural activity when people solve
verbal problems with insight. PLoS Biology, 2(4), e97.
Katona, G. (1940). Organizing and memorizing. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Kohn, N., & Smith, S. M. (2009). Partly versus completely
out of your mind: Effects of incubation and distraction

3012

on resolving fixation. Journal of Creative Behavior,
43(2), 102-118.
Kounios, J., Fleck, J. I., Green, D. L., Payne, L.,
Stevenson, J. L., Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M.
(2008). The origins of insight in resting-state brain
activity. Neuropsychologia, 46(1), 281-291.
Kounios, J., Frymiare, J. L., Bowden, E. M., Fleck, J. I.,
Subramaniam, K., Parrish, T. B., & Jung-Beeman, M.
(2006). The prepared mind: Neural activity prior to
problem presentation predicts subsequent solution by
sudden insight. Psychological Science, 17(10), 882-890.
Kounios, J., Frymiare, J. L., Bowden, E. M., Fleck, J. I.,
Subramaniam, K., Parrish, T. B., & Jung-Beeman, M.
(2006). The prepared mind: Neural activity prior to
problem presentation predicts subsequent solution by
sudden insight. Psychological Science, 17(10), 882-890.
Mednick, S. A. (1962). The associative basis of the
creative process. Psychological Review, 69, 220-232.
Mendelsohn, G. A., & Griswold, B. B. (1966). Assessed
creative potential, vocabulary level, and sex as predictors
of the use of incidental cues in verbal problem solving.
Journal of Personality and Socia Psychology, 4, 421–
423.
Metcalfe, J. (1986). Premonitions of insight predict
impending error. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12(4), 623-634.
Morrison, R. G. (in press). Problem solving. In M.
Aminoff & R. Daroff (Eds.), The encyclopedia of the
neurological sciences (2nd Edition). San Diego:
Academic
Press.
http://www.canlab.org/uploads/2/8/1/3/2813551/morriso
n_problemsolving_2ed_ens.pdf
Rowe, G., Hirsch, J. B., & Anderson, A. K. (2007).
Positive affect increases the breadth of selective
attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA, 104, 383–388.
Simonton, D.K. (2012). Genius. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G.
Morrison (Eds.), Oxford handbook of thinking and
reasoning (pp. 492-509). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Smith, S. M., & Blankenship, S. E. (1991). Incubation and
the persistence of fixation in problem solving. The
American Journal of Psychology, , 61-87.
Smith, S.M., & Ward, T. (2012). Cognition and the
creation of ideas. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp.
456-474). New York: Oxford University Press.
Storm, B. C., & Angello, G. (2010). Overcoming fixation.
creative problem solving and retrieval-induced
forgetting. Psychological Science, 21(9), 1263-1265.
Storm, B. C., Angello, G., & Bjork, E. L. (2011). Thinking
can cause forgetting: Memory dynamics in creative
problem
solving.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology.Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37(5),
1287-1293.
Subramaniam, K., Kounios, J., Parrish, T. B., & JungBeeman, M. (2009). A brain mechanism for facilitation

of insight by positive affect. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 21(3), 415-432.
van Steenburgh, J.J., Fleck, J.I., Beeman, M., & Kounios,
J. (2012). Insight. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp.
475-491). New York: Oxford University Press.
Wallas, G. (1926). The art of thought. New York: Harcourt
Brace.

3013

