UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integration Costs on Auxiliaries? – a self-paced reading study using WebExp

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8x88t4b2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Demberg, Vera

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integration Costs on Auxiliaries? –
a self-paced reading study using WebExp
Vera Demberg (vera@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Cluster of Excellence, Saarland University,
Campus C7.4, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
Abstract
In their evaluation of the integration cost component of Dependency Locality Theory on the Dundee Corpus, Demberg and
Keller (2008) found no significant main effect of DLT integration cost on reading times, but suggested that this might be due
to auxiliaries incurring some of the full verb’s integration cost
and thus facilitating processing of the verb. This hypothesis
however, has to date not been tested. The present paper fills
this gap by reporting an experiment on subject vs. object relative clauses including auxiliaries, as well as by testing Demberg and Keller’s hypothesis directly on the Dundee Corpus.
A further contribution of this paper is methodological: we
replicate experimental results on the subject vs. object relative clause assymmetry in a self-paced-reading experiment run
remotely on the web using WebExp.
Keywords: Dependency Locality Theory, Relative Clause,
Auxiliary, WebExp, Dundee Corpus, Self-paced reading, Eyetracking

Introduction
Dependency Locality Theory (DLT), proposed by (Gibson,
1998; Gibson & Pearlmutter, 2000) is a theory of sentence
processing which has received quite a lot of attention in the
field of psycholinguistics, and has been argued to explain
a range of phenomena including including the SRC/ORC
processing difficulty asymmetry, difficulty of centre embeddings, cases of processing breakdown, filler-gap dependencies, heavy NP shift and extraposition.
(Demberg & Keller, 2008) evaluated the integration cost
component of DLT on an eye-tracked corpus of newspaper articles (Dundee Corpus; Kennedy and Pynte, 2005), and found
that verbs which were preceded by nouns were read more
slowly than verbs which were preceded by both auxiliaries
and nouns. Demberg and Keller thus hypothesized that integration costs might not be incurred at the main verb (as predicted by DLT), but at the auxiliary, at which it should thus
be possible to observe an integration cost effect.
They did however not test whether such an integration
cost effect could indeed be detected on the auxiliaries. This
paper fills this gap through two studies that test Demberg
and Keller’s hypothesis: a self-paced reading experiment of
matched and controlled subject and object relative clauses
containing auxiliaries, as well as a corpus study analysing
the auxiliaries across various syntactic constructions in the
Dundee Corpus for an integration cost effect.

(IC) measures the distance between a head its dependent in
terms of new discourse referents (DR) that occur inbetween
them. Figure 1 shows the dependencies for a subject relative clause (SRC) and an object relative clause (ORC). In the
example, discourse referents are marked as either 0 (no new
discourse referent) or 1 (new discourse referent). The dependency edge between reporter and the main clause verb admitted is annotated with “+2” to express that two discourse
referents occur between these words (namely, attacked and
senator). The interesting case when comparing the subject
and object relative clause is the embedded verb attacked: the
integration cost is 1 in the SRC case (just the cost of constructing the discourse referent), while the it is 3 in the case
of the object relative clause. There is a cost of 1 for constructing the discourse referent, plus a cost of 2 for integrating the
relative pronoun who at the trace *t*, at which point two discourse referents (senator and attacked) intervene. There are
also integrations of senator and attacked and the trace and attacked, but no new discourse referents occur between them,
so these integrations are cost-free.
SRC

+2

The reporter who *t* attacked the senator admitted the error.
1
0
1
1
0 1
DR: 0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
3
0 1
IC: 0
ORC
+2

+2

The reporter who the senator attacked *t* admitted the error.
DR: 0
1
0 0
1
1
1
0 1
IC: 0
1
0 0
1
3
3
0 1

Figure 1: Dependency Locality Theory Integration Cost.

Auxiliaries in DLT
Most previous experimental studies on locality effects do
not contain auxiliaries. An exception is Experiment 4 from
(Warren & Gibson, 2002), which compares self-paced reading times of an object relative clause with a full or pronominal
embedded subject NP vs. a complementizer clause with full
or pronominal subject NP, see example (1).
(1)

a.

Background and Related Work
Dependency Locality Theory
An important component for quantifying processing difficulty
in DLT is the so-called “integration cost”. Integration cost

2160

b.

Relative clause: The woman who you/the boy
had accidentally pushed off the sidewalk got
upset and decided to report the incident to the
policeman standing nearby.
Complement clause: The woman knew that
you/the boy had accidentally pushed the girl

but gave him/you a long lecture anyway.
Warren and Gibson found that the reading times were longest
in the full NP in ORC condition, which is also the one in
which highest integration costs are expected. On the auxiliary, the difference between the ORC with full NP and the
ORC with pronoun is significant. While this would be in line
with an integration effect already on the ORC auxiliary, Warren and Gibson also point out the possibility that the longer
reading times on the auxiliary might be a spill-over effect.
The present study seeks to directly investigate whether integration costs can be measured on auxiliaries.

Result from Demberg and Keller, 2008
Demberg and Keller’s (2008) evaluation of Dependency Locality Theory on the Dundee Corpus showed that there was
no general positive correlation between DLT integration costs
and reading times. They however looked at integration cost
at verbs in more detail, and found that verbs which integrate
an auxiliary and a nominal dependent exhibit a reduced estimated reading time compared to verbs that only integrate a
nominal dependent, while there seemed to be an overall effect
of increased reading time at verbs with more nominal dependents, see Table 1.
Demberg and Keller therefore suggested that the relevant
integration cost might not be incurred at the main verb, but
at the auxiliary itself, which might integrate nominal dependents and thus incur a non-zero integration cost (DLT assume
that auxiliaries are cost-free). When the auxiliary would then

Table 1: First pass durations for verbs (with non-zero integration cost) in the Dundee Corpus: coefficients for verbs
grouped by verbal dependents (N > 20) and their significance
levels for a model fitted on residual reading times (with respect to a model including other predictors known to influence reading times). Abbreviations in the table refer to part
of speech tags used by the Penn Treebank annotation: AUX:
auxiliary, PRP: personal pronoun, NN: singular or mass noun,
NNP: proper noun, singular, RP: particle, MD: modal, NNS:
plural noun, RB: adverb, AUXG: auxiliary present participle,
TO: preposition to, JJ: adjective, VBP: non-third person singular present verb. Table from Demberg and Keller (2008).
Dependents
NNP-AUX-AUX
NNS-AUX-AUX
NNS-MD-AUX
PRP-AUX-PRP-AUX
NN-MD-AUX
PRP-AUX
PRP-AUX-RB
AUXG
NNP-AUX
TO-PRP
NNP
NN-RB
NN-NNS
PRP-MD-PRP-MD-JJ

Coeff
-62.41
-35.65
-30.75
-29.72
-25.35
-22.64
-21.75
-20.26
-19.05
-16.97
12.01
22.26
76.43
105.4

Signif
**
*
**
***
**
***
*
*
**
***
**
*
***
*

N
21
57
110
184
153
700
133
121
301
723
1372
127
25
65

be integrated with the main verb, it would facilitate integration (hence the negative coefficient), as the main work of
the integration of the nominal dependents has already happened at the auxiliary. They also point out that this explanation is compatible with syntactic theories such as Head-driven
Phrase Structure Grammar (Pollard & Sag, 1994), which assume that auxiliaries inherit the subcategorization frame of
the main verb, and that dependents are unified (integrated)
into the subcategorization frame at the auxiliary. Demberg
and Keller did however not test this hypothesis in their study,
so the contribution of this paper is to fill this gap and test
both in a controlled experiment and on the Dundee corpus
whether the hypothesis that the verb’s integration cost can be
measured on the auxiliary is true.

Experiment: Auxiliaries in Relative Clauses
As a first experiment, we chose to use a strictly controlled
experimental setting in which we compare the processing of
subject vs. object relative clauses including auxiliaries. The
processing difference in subject vs. object relative clauses
is well-established: Object relative clauses (as in (2-b)) are
more difficult to process than subject relative clauses (1a)
(King & Just, 1991), with increased reading times on the
ORC embedded verb as opposed to the SRC embedded verb
(Staub, 2010). Dependency Locality Theory (DLT; Gibson,
2000) accounts for this effect in terms of long-distance dependencies, see the explanation of this case in Section on Dependency Locality Theory.
We created 24 subject and object relative clauses with auxiliaries preceding the embedded verb, based on the experimental items from (Staub, 2010), see (2).
(2)

a.

b.

The mathematician who [AUX had] [V visited]
[NP the chairman] found a solution to the problem.
The mathematician who [NP the chairman]
[AUX had] [V visited] found a solution to the problem.

Data Collection
We ran a self-paced reading experiment with 126 participants
online, using WebExp, www.webexp.info (Keller, 1999), an
experimental software that carries out psychological experiments over the internet. Keller, Gunasekharan, Mayo, and
Corley (2009) demonstrate that response times collected with
WebExp are sufficiently accurate to conduct reaction time experiments over the internet. Experiment 2 from (Keller et al.,
2009) replicates results from a lab-based phrase-by-phrase
self-paced reading experiment using the WebExp software.
Participants were recruited using Amazon MechanicalTurk, which we used to create HITs linking to the WebExp
experiment. In order to encourage participants to complete
the whole WebExp experiment, the HIT also contained a field
that required participants to fill in a password which was provided on the last screen of the WebExp experiment. We restricted the HITs to workers who were based in the USA, and

2161

Mixed-effects modelling
In order to test whether our manipulation of relative clause
type has an effect on the reading times on the auxiliaries,
we use linear mixed effects models from the R lme4 package (R. Baayen, 2008; R. H. Baayen, Davidson, & Bates,
2008). This type of model can be thought of as a generalization of linear regression that allows the inclusion of random
factors as well as fixed factors. We treat subjects and items
as a random factors, which means that our models contain an
intercept term for each subject and each item, representing
the individual differences among the subjects and differences
between our items. Furthermore, we include random slopes
under both subject and item for our predictor (relative clause
type), essentially accounting for idiosyncrasies of a participant or item with respect to the predictor, such that only the
part of the variance that is common to all participants and all
items is attributed to the main effect for our predictor.
We excluded as outliers any reading times shorter than
100msec or longer than 1000msec.

Results
We found a significant effect of relative clause type on the
auxiliary (AUX), the embedded verb (VB) and the determiner
(DT), but not on the noun (NN) or the sentence’s main verb
(VBM), see Figure 2.
Auxiliaries and verbs were read significantly faster in the
subject relative clause condition than in the object relative
clause condition. We furthermore found that SRC determiners were read more slowly than ORC determiners; a similar
effect was found on the noun region in early reading time
measures in Staub (2010), see Figure 3. Differences in terms
of the location of the effect may be due to differences in selfpaced reading vs. eye-tracking.
The faster reading times on the verb of the subject relative
clause are in line with DLT integration cost, while the large
and significant effect on the auxiliary seems to support also
1 There were some problems with WebExp, which sometimes
failed to correctly transfer the collected data to our server. This
resulted in loss of about 30% of our data. This problem had been
observed by others and reported earlier; it appears to be independent of the operative system and browser used by workers. Workers
whose data failed to transfer were paid normal rates regardless.

10

have a HIT approval rate ≥ 80%. In the instructions, we additionally required workers to only participate if they were
native speakers of English. We successfully collected data
from 126 participants1 (approx. 60 per condition). Following
recommendations in (Keller et al., 2009), we only allowed
workers with a Windows or Linux operating system.
The experiment was programmed as a word-by-word selfpaced reading experiment. Due to a limitation of WebExp,
each sentence within a set of sentences to be randomized has
to contain the same number of words. In addition to inserting
auxiliaries, we therefore edited the items from (Staub, 2010)
to conform to this format by adapting the length of the region
following the relative clause.

Difference in estimated reading times
for SRCs compared to ORCs.

−15

−10

−5

0

5

*

***
AUX

**
VB

DT

NN

VBM

Figure 2: Coefficients for relative clause condition shown as a
bar plot, a negative value at the auxiliary means that the auxiliary was read faster in the subject relative clause condition
than in the object relative clause condition.

Figure 3: Experimental results from Staub, 2010 using the
same materials without auxiliaries in an eye-tracking study.
an account of an integration cost effect being observable at
the auxiliary. There is however a confound in such subject
vs. object relative clause stimuli: the regions preceding the
auxiliary (or the verb, in other studies) differ in that the SCR
auxiliary is preceded by the relative pronoun, while the ORC
pronoun is preceded by a noun.
We therefore ran a second analysis which takes into account spill-over effects. We approximate the spill-over effect
that a word can cause by calculating with mixed-effects models the effect of one word’s log frequency on the following
word’s reading times2 . In order to obtain an accurate estimate of typical spill-over effects, we ran this estimation on
all words in our experiment, including fillers. used residual
reading times for each of the words in our relative clause ma2 While it would be possible to approximate the spill-over effect
given not only the previous word but also the word before that, note
that for our stimuli, only the previous word can plausibly explain
the longer reading times on the ORC auxiliary. (Word aux − 2 in the
ORC is shorter and more frequent than word aux − 2 in the SRC.)

2162

*

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

15

Difference in estimated residual reading times
for SRCs compared to ORCs
after accounting for spill−over effects.

**
AUX

VB

DT

NN

VBM

Figure 4: When taking spill-over effects into account, the effect on the auxiliary disappeared.
terials as a response variable and re-ran the earlier mixedeffects analysis on these residual reading times. The results
then looked rather different: the facilitation effect on SRC
auxiliaries, and difficulty effect on SRC determiners disappears when we account for spill-over effect, see Figure 4.
We furthermore find a significant effect of relative clause
type on the reading times of the main verb, indicating that the
main verb in the subject relative clause condition was read
more slowly than the main verb in the object relative clause
condition. This effect is puzzling as previous studies on selfpaced reading rather seem to suggest a tendency for longer
reading times on the ORC main verb, while reading times in
Staub’s eye-tracking experiment were virtually identical.

Discussion
We find that increased reading times on auxiliaries can be explained in terms of spill-over effects, thus not supporting the
hypothesis of (Demberg & Keller, 2008), who suggested that
integration costs might occur at auxiliaries and facilitate integration at the verb. Instead, our findings support the original
predictions of Dependency Locality Theory (Gibson, 2000).
This result calls for a closer investigation of the Dundee corpus data to directly examine whether any integration cost effect is associated with auxiliaries in that data, see our Experiment 2.
In terms of experimental methodology, we provide evidence for the validity of self-paced reading using WebExp,
by replicating the established relative clause asymmetry result on the embedded verb. Initial evidence that timing using
WebExp is sufficiently accurate for self-paced reading studies
is presented in (Keller et al., 2009). To the best of our knowledge, the present results are the first ones for word-by-word
SPR using WebExp, as previous studies used much larger regions.

Corpus Study: Auxiliaries in Dundee Corpus
Data
For our data analysis, we used the Dundee Corpus (Kennedy
& Pynte, 2005), an English language eye-tracking corpus

based on text from The Independent newspaper. The texts
contain about 51,000 words and were read by 10 native speakers of English. The text was presented on a computer screen,
five lines at a time at a line length of 80 characters.
Since the corpus data is not syntactically annotated, we
parsed the entire corpus with the Stanford parser (Klein &
Manning, 2003; De Marneffe, MacCartney, & Manning,
2006), which generates both a phrase structure parse and a
dependency representation. We calculated DLT integration
cost based on the top-ranked dependency output for each sentence. We evaluated our integration cost implementation using a short text that had been hand-annotated with integration
cost values (Wu, Bachrach, Cardenas, & Schuler, 2010). This
evaluation gives us an estimate of how well our automatic annotation tool performs, and also enables us to evaluate our
new implementation based on the Stanford parser with an
older implementation (Demberg & Keller, 2008) which was
based on the MiniPar parser (Lin, 1998), see Table 2.
Table 2: Evaluation on a text of 770 words, manually annotated with integration costs.
correlation (Kendall)
Parser
% correct IC to manual annotation
MINIPAR
83%
τ = 0.77, p ≪ 0.001
Stanford
89%
τ = 0.84, p ≪ 0.001
We then automatically aligned each auxiliary with the automatically determined integration cost calculated for its governing main verb, in order to measure whether any effect of
increased integration cost at the verb might be measurable on
the auxiliary. In order to decrease noise in the data set, we
excluded any cases in which further discourse referents occurred between the auxiliary and the verb, or where no verb
could be found within a window of three words after the auxiliary. We furthermore excluded contractions (e.g. we’ll).

Methods
We analysed the data using linear mixed effects models. Because the corpus data are not as closely controlled as the experimental data from the first study, and because the methodology differs (eye-tracking here vs. self-paced reading in experiment 1), we run mixed-effects models with a larger range
of different predictors, including the length of a word in characters WordLength, its log frequency WordFreq, a flag indicating whether the previous word was fixated PrevFix, the
frequency of the preceding word to account for spill-over effects PrevFreq, forward and backward transitional probabilities ForwTransProb and BackwTransProb, the word number
within the sentence WordNo, the fixation landing position in
relation to word length LandPos, the launch distance of the
saccade LaunchDist, the surprisal3 at the word Surprisal
as well as the verb’s integration cost IntegCost.
3 Surprisal was calculated using the Roark parser (Roark,
Bachrach, Cardenas, & Pallier, 2009).

2163

three. (An integration cost value of zero can only occur if the
main verb of the sentence is a copula.)

60

Integration Cost and First Pass Times on Auxiliaries

0

20

40

spline for verb’s IC
density plot of verb’s IC

−20

As response variables, we use four different measures of
reading times: first fixation duration (duration of the first fixation, if any on the first pass through the sentence from left to
right), first pass duration (sum of duration of fixations during
first pass reading on a word before leaving the word), total
duration (sum of the durations of all fixations on a word) and
go past times (time spent between the first fixation in first pass
reading on a word and first leaving it to the right).
We only analysed auxiliaries which had received at least
one fixation. Before fitting LME models, we applied outlier
removal: we computed the mean reading time (over all items
and participants), and then removed all data points which
deviated more than two standard deviations from the mean.
Outliers can affect the results of analyses on the Dundee corpus, as (Roland, Mauner, OMeara, & Yun, 2012) show. Furthermore, this way of trimming the data also reduces the long
tail of the reading time distribution, resulting in a distribution
that is closer to normal. This left us with 1257 data points.

0

2

4

6

8

Integration Cost at Verb

Figure 5: Spline plot for the verb’s integration cost fitting the
first pass times on the auxiliary.

Results
None of our models support the hypothesis that higher integration costs at the verb increase reading times at the auxiliary preceding the verb. In none of the reading time models
did the verb’s integration cost come out as a significant predictor of reading times on the auxiliary, see for example the
best fitting regression model for first pass times in Table 3.
When we add the verb’s integration cost as a predictor, model
fit is not significantly improved (p ≈ 0.75), and we even get a
negative coefficient (β = −0.33,t = −0.293), so there is not
much reason to believe at this point that the failure of finding
a positive significant effect would simply be due to an insufficient number of data points.
Table 3: Final model for first pass times on auxiliaries, showing that reading times are longer when word length increases,
and shorter when the previous word was fixated or was a
highly frequent word.
Predictor
(Intercept)
WordLength
PrevFreq
PrevFix
LandPos
Surprisal
WLen:LandP

Coeff
230.52
5.46
-5.18
-25.19
-11.98
2.00
-9.02

Std. Err
9.44
2.40
1.50
4.04
15.02
1.33
6.13

t value
24.40
2.27
-3.45
-6.23
-0.79
1.50
-1.47

Signif
***
*
**
***

Overall Discussion
Neither the results from the experiment nor the results
from the corpus study support the hypothesis suggested in
(Demberg & Keller, 2008), that integration may already happen at the auxiliary and costs of such an integration would
be measurable in reading times. The results from the corpus
study are in line with the results from the closely controlled
relative clause experiment. While the experiment compared
auxiliaries in a specific syntactic construction, the corpus
study complements the first experiment in that it includes
auxiliaries from many different syntactic constructions. It
also shows that the result can be replicated for contextualized
reading in more naturalistic conditions.
In both studies, we took care to account for spill-over effects from previous words, and such effects indeed turned out
to be important in both studies: in the relative clause study,
the interpretation of results changes completely when taking into account spill-over effects, and in the corpus study,
the variables capturing overspill effects significantly improve
model fit.
Getting back to the fundamental question underlying these
studies, these results lead to the following hypotheses about
integration cost at auxiliaries:
a) Auxiliaries help integration at the verb in a way which is
not directly reflected in their reading times.

To more closely inspect the relationship between DLT integration cost and reading times and understand where the
negative coefficient comes from, we ran a generalized additive model with a spline (k=30) for the verb’s integration cost
as a predictor and the auxiliaries’ first pass times as the response variable. As can be seen in Figure 5, there is indeed a
negative trend for increasing integration cost, at least for auxiliaries with the most common integration cost values one to

b) Auxiliaries do in fact not help integration at the verb, and
DLT integration cost, despite showing stable effects in experimental settings, does hence not have much general explanatory power for data of properly contextualized utterances such as those occurring in a corpus.
c) The integration cost estimate using automatic parsing tools
is not accurate enough (in particular due to shortcomings
in dealing with traces).

2164

The last concern is unlikely to be valid, however, as it only
applies to the corpus study, and doesn’t explain failure to find
an effect in the first experiment. Also, we have taken great
care to re-implement integration cost based on a state-of-theart parser, and have used heuristics to account for traces.
Question a) could be addressed experimentally by manipulating constructions with respect to the presence of an auxiliary (the effects of spill-over could be diminuished by using
an adverb before the verb such that the word immediately before the verb is always the same).

Conclusions
The contribution of this paper is two-fold. We find that increased reading times on auxiliaries in subject vs. object relative clauses can be explained in terms of spill-over effects,
thus do not support the hypothesis of (Demberg & Keller,
2008), who suggested that integration costs might occur at
auxiliaries and facilitate integration at the verb. Instead, our
findings support the original predictions of Dependency Locality Theory (Gibson, 2000). These results are further supported by a corpus study of auxiliaries from the Dundee Corpus. We can not find any significant effect of the verb’s integration cost on reading times at the auxiliary in any of our
reading time measures. Given our evidence about the lack of
any detectable integration cost effect on auxiliaries, we can
no longer explain away the lack of an overall positive effect
of integration costs on the verbs from the Dundee corpus as
being due to the presence of auxiliaries.
Our second contribution is methodological: the self-paced
reading study (Experiment 1) provides evidence for the validity of word-by-word self-paced reading via WebExp, by replicating the established relative clause asymmetry result on the
embedded verb. While initial evidence that timing using WebExp is sufficiently accurate for self-paced reading studies is
presented in (Keller et al., 2009), the present results are, to
the best of our knowledge, the first ones for word-by-word
self-paced-reading using WebExp.

Acknowledgments
I want to thank Silas Weinbach for his contributions to this
work in programming the WebExp and Mechanical Turk experiment, as well as Jesus Calvillo and Asad Sayeed for their
contributions to the new integration cost component based on
the Stanford parser.

References
Baayen, R. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical
introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge Univ Pr.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language.
De Marneffe, M., MacCartney, B., & Manning, C. (2006).
Generating typed dependency parses from phrase structure
parses. In Proceedings of lrec (Vol. 6, pp. 449–454).

Demberg, V., & Keller, F. (2008). Data from eye-tracking corpora as evidence for theories of syntactic processing complexity. Cognition, 109, 193-210.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68, 1-76.
Gibson, E. (2000). Dependency locality theory: A distancedased theory of linguistic complexity. In A. Marantz,
Y. Miyashita, & W. O’Neil (Eds.), Image, language, brain:
Papers from the first mind articulation project symposium
(pp. 95–126). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibson, E., & Pearlmutter, N. (2000). Distinguishing serial
and parallel parsing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
29(2), 231–240.
Keller, F. (1999). Webexp: A java toolbox for web-based psychological experiments. University of Edinburgh, Human
Communication Research Centre.
Keller, F., Gunasekharan, S., Mayo, N., & Corley, M. (2009).
Timing accuracy of web experiments: A case study using
the webexp software package. Behavior Research Methods,
41(1), 1–12.
Kennedy, A., & Pynte, J. (2005). Parafoveal-on-foveal effects
in normal reading. Vision Research, 45, 153–168.
King, J., & Just, M. A. (1991). Individual differences in
syntactic processing: The role of working memory. Journal
of Memory and Language, 30, 580-602.
Klein, D., & Manning, C. (2003). Accurate unlexicalized
parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st annual meeting on association for computational linguistics-volume 1 (pp. 423–
430).
Lin, D. (1998). An information-theoretic definition of similarity. In J. W. Shavlik (Ed.), Proceedings of the 15th international conference on machine learning (pp. 296–304).
Madison, WI: Morgan Kaufmann.
Pollard, C., & Sag, I. A. (1994). Head-driven phrase structure grammar. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Roark, B., Bachrach, A., Cardenas, C., & Pallier, C. (2009,
August). Deriving lexical and syntactic expectation-based
measures for psycholinguistic modeling via incremental
top-down parsing. In Proceedings of the 2009 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp.
324–333). Singapore.
Roland, D., Mauner, G., OMeara, C., & Yun, H. (2012). Discourse expectations and relative clause processing. Journal
of Memory and Language.
Staub, A. (2010). Eye movements and processing difficulty
in object relative clauses. Cognition, 116, 71-86.
Warren, T., & Gibson, E. (2002). The influence of referential
processing on sentence complexity. Cognition, 85(1), 79–
112.
Wu, S., Bachrach, A., Cardenas, C., & Schuler, W. (2010,
July). Complexity metrics in an incremental right-corner
parser. In Proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics (pp. 1189–1198).
Uppsala, Sweden.

2165

