UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integration and Inference: Cross-Situational Word Learning Involves More than Simple Cooccurrences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/49t2k929

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Romberg, Alexa
Yu, Chen

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integration and Inference: Cross-situational Word Learning Involves More than
Simple Co-occurrences
Alexa R. Romberg and Chen Yu
{aromberg, chenyu}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Statistical word learning involves forming and aggregating
associations between words and objects that co-occur across
contexts (e.g., Vouloumanos & Werker, 2009; Smith & Yu,
2008; Yu & Smith, 2007). However, the mechanisms that
support such learning are currently under debate, including
the extent to which learners carry forward multiple
ambiguous associations (e.g., Trueswell et al., 2013). The
current study presented adults with a set of statistical word
learning tasks designed to measure the statistical
computations learners employ to build label-object mappings
and to probe what information from past contexts is available
to further process and integrate with new information. Results
reveal that learners use the co-occurrence of label-object
pairings to make inferences both about objects and labels
currently present and those presented on previous trials.
Further, the strength of learners’ memory for past contexts
moderated their inferences, suggesting a role for a rich
information structure in cross-situational word learning.
Keywords: word learning; statistical learning; language
acquisition; cross-situational learning

Introduction
Imagine an infant on a walk with his father. The father,
like many parents, comments on the things they see
together: “There’s a doggie and a kitty in the window!” and
a few moments later: “Look, the man is walking the
doggie!”. How might the father’s comments help the infant
learn the meanings of words like doggie, kitty and man?
Recent research has demonstrated that learners readily form
label-object mappings by gathering co-occurrence statistics.
Human infants (Smith & Yu, 2008; Vouloumanos &
Werker, 2009), children (Scott & Fisher, 2011) and adults
(Kachergis, Yu & Shiffrin, 2012; Suanda & Namy, 2012;
Yu & Smith, 2007) are all capable of converting multiple
individually ambiguous learning instances into specific
knowledge as demonstrated by above-chance performance
on a post-learning test or by an improvement in selection of
the correct referent in a combined training and test
procedure (Trueswell, Medina, Hafri & Gleitman, 2013).
However, the precise ways in which learners resolve the
local ambiguities have been relatively unexplored.
Specifying how exactly learners use the information
available is an important step to understanding the
mechanisms contributing to success. When learners perform
some computations but not others, this offers important
constraints to any model of their learning and can inform
discussion about the nature of the information stored. In the
context of cross-situational word learning, two primary
mechanisms, associative learning and hypothesis testing,

have been proposed for how learners accrue information
over time. These mechanisms differ largely in the amount of
information stored and, consequently, in how prior
information influences later learning (Yu & Smith, 2012). In
particular, associative learning proposes that learners form
multiple associations between the objects and labels present
during each learning instance, storing a relatively rich
information network. Hypothesis testing proposes that
learners store only a single link between a label and possible
referent, discarding other co-occurrence information.
Distinguishing these possible mechanisms has been
challenging thus far because of a lack of data regarding how
learners process information on a trial-by-trial basis.
Details about what information learners store and how
they use it during cross-situational word learning is vital for
advancing theories of this process. The typical crosssituational word learning experiment uses a fairly large
novel vocabulary (up to 18 to-be-learned label-object
mappings) and consists of a series of trials that each present
a subset of the labels and objects. Thus, the learner is faced
with the difficult task of tracking these many labels and
objects across trials (typically between 27 and 60 trials) and
using what co-occurrences they can glean to generate as
many correct mappings as possible. While this experimental
design is daunting for the participant, it is also daunting for
the experimenter, as there are inevitably many possible
paths to success. One cannot know definitively how
participants arrived at a particular mapping over the course
of statistical learning or whether the same types of
computations were used for all learned mappings.
The present study sought to alleviate these analytical
ambiguities for the experimenter while maintaining the
learning ambiguities for the participants. Rather than have
participants view many trials across which to learn many
mappings, learners were presented with a series of
“miniature” cross-situational word learning tasks. These
tasks consisted of only 2 or 3 trials and were constructed so
that some, though not all, label-object mappings could
(theoretically) be disambiguated, depending on which
information learners stored and which inferences they made.
The miniature tasks were constrained so that there was only
one pathway to disambiguation, allowing us to infer the
computations successful learners employed.
We focused on three fundamental processes that could
serve as building blocks for sophisticated statistical
learning. The first was the tracking of co-occurrence
information – noticing that some labels and some objects
appear together across multiple trials. The simplest of

1235

statistical learning models, such as the “dumb associative
model” outlined by Yu & Smith (2012) do only this cooccurrence tracking to fill an association matrix. The second
process was “forward integration”, by which learners use
information that they carry forward across trials about some
objects and labels to make an inference about another
object-label mapping. Mutual exclusivity (Markman, 1990)
would be a strong form of forward integration, when one
rules out objects with known labels as possible referents for
a novel label. Recent evidence indicates that learners do
employ mutual exclusivity during cross-situational word
learning and that this type of inference could arise through
basic attentional processes (Kachergis, Yu & Shiffrin,
2012). The third process was “backward inference,” by
which learners use information on the current trial to infer
something about an object/label experienced on a previous
trial (but not on the present trial). This last process can be
thought of as learning from negative evidence, as it entails
noting the absence of particular objects and labels.
We compare performance on three different “miniature”
cross-situational word learning tasks to assess learners’
ability to use the available information in the three processes
of co-occurrence tracking, forward integration and
backward inference. The tasks were designed to look
specifically at how trial-by-trial information is retained and
processed. We also relate performance on the miniature
tasks to a “full” cross-situational word learning task, to
investigate whether these fundamental processes are also
employed in larger-scale statistical word learning.

Method
Participants
Participants were 38 undergraduates (20 females) at
Indiana University who earned course credit for their
participation. The mean age was 20.9 years.

Materials
The auditory stimuli consisted of 108 nonce words
synthesized with the Ivona voice Jennifer using the
TextSpeaker program. Nonce words consisted of one or two
syllables (264 ms to 795 ms in duration) and followed
English phonotactics. The visual stimuli were 123 color
photographs of real objects or 3D models either of novel
objects or objects that were not readily nameable. Images
were displayed in the 4 corners of a 17” monitor, on a white
background at a size of approximately 3” square.

Experimental Design
There were 3 types of “mini-tasks” (see Figure 1), each
made up of 2-3 training trials and then 3-4 test trials. Each
mini-task was independent of the others and no stimuli were
repeated across tasks. When objects and labels were
repeated on multiple trials they were always presented in
different spatial or temporal positions.
Across all parts of the experiment, each trial consisted of
viewing 4 objects on a screen and listening to 4 nonce

words. Each trial began with the objects displayed in silence
for 3 seconds. The onsets of the words were 3 seconds apart
and the total trial length was 15 seconds. Every time an
object was on screen the corresponding label was provided.
The training trial structure of each of the 3 types of minitasks is given in Figure 1. For all tasks, the R items refer to
the object-label pairs R1, R2 and R3, which were presented
on Trials 1 and 2. T1 refers to the object-label pair presented
on Trial 1 but not Trial 2. T2 refers to the object-label pair
presented on Trial 2 but not Trial 1. The Base and Familiar
Context tasks each consisted of a total of 5 word-object
pairings: R1-3, T1 and T2. The Novel Context task consisted
of a total of 8 word-object pairings: R1-3, T1 and T2 and the
3 novel, label-object pairs presented only on Trial 3 (N1-3).

Figure 1. Schematic representing the training trial structure
for the 3 mini-tasks, with letters representing objects filling
different roles in the design.
For each of the mini-tasks, the training trials were
followed immediately by a series of test trials. On each test
trial one word was presented auditorally and participants
were instructed to click on the object the word most likely
referred to out of all objects presented on the task plus a
novel distracter object. For the Base and Familiar Context
tasks, participants selected from 6 objects and for the Novel
Context task participants selected from 9 objects. The tested
words came from the different categories of items in the
task (R, T1, T2 and, for Novel Context only, N). While the
tested items aligned structurally across tasks, the
information available to participants differed, enabling us to
test hypotheses about what information participants track
and what inferences they make.
All participants also completed a “full” cross-situational
word learning task, based on Yu & Smith, 2007, which
consisted of 18 label-object pairings. These were presented
4 at a time across 27 training trials, so that each label cooccurred with its referent object 6 times. With the 4x4
design, objects co-occurred with other labels, but such
“spurious” correlations were limited to no more than 3 times
across the 27 trials. Training was followed immediately by
18 test trials. On each test trial all 18 objects were displayed,
one auditory label was presented and participants selected
the best referent by mouse click.

1236

Procedure
Participants were given an overview of the experiment
and informed consent was obtained. All participants first
completed the Full CSL task. They were told that they there
were 18 words and 18 objects, that they would see them 4 at
a time and that the order of the labels on any trial did not
correspond to the spatial location of the objects. They were
instructed to learn as many label-object mappings as they
could. Once participants completed the test for the Full task,
they moved on immediately to the mini-tasks. There were a
total of 15 mini-tasks, 5 of each task type. The tasks were
grouped so that there was one of each type in each block of
3. The order of the 15 tasks was the same across all
participants but the order of the test questions within each
task were randomly determined for each participant. In the
instructions for the mini-tasks, participants were told they
would see a series of 15 tasks that were miniature versions
of what they had just done and that they would be tested
after just 2 or 3 training trials. They were told that no
objects or words would be repeated across the mini-tasks.
Participants were tested one at a time and listened to the
auditory stimuli over headphones. The entire experiment
took approximately 30 minutes.

Predictions
The Base task provides a baseline measure of each of the
three processes we are examining: The R items represent the
co-occurrence tracking process. For each of the tasks, the
precise object-label mappings within this group remain
ambiguous. However, successfully tracking the repetition of
this group of objects and labels theoretically enables
learners to perform two types of inference to disambiguate
the T1 and T2 mappings. The T2 items represent forward
integration: whether participants can use the familiarity of
the R1, R2 and R3 pairs on Trial 2 to make a mapping
between the relatively novel T2 label and object. Finally, the
T1 items represent backward integration: whether
participants use the absence of T1 on Trial 2 to make a
mapping between that label and object.
Backward integration relies on participants remembering
the T1 pair across multiple ambiguous trials and was
expected to be difficult. Thus, the other two mini-tasks were
designed to test participants’ memory for T1 by presenting it
in either a novel or familiar context. This necessarily
changes the interpretation of the T1 pair in the Novel and
Familiar Context tasks, as participants no longer need rely
solely on backward integration to learn the mapping.
In the Novel Context task, T1 is presented with 3 new
objects and labels on the 3rd trial. This task is the only task
in which the association matrix distinguishes the T1
mapping, enabling a correct mapping if participants
recognize T1 from the first trial. It is also possible that
learners could employ forward integration, mapping the
familiar-looking object to the familiar-sounding label
without any memory specifically linking the two. If,
however, participants do not retain any memory of T1, they

should choose randomly from T1 and N1, N2 and N3 on both
the T1 and the N test trials.
Unlike the Novel Context task, the Familiar Context task
does not provide any additional statistical certainty relative
to the Base task. While participants get an additional T1
pairing, it occurs with the same items on both trials.
However, participants could infer the T1 mapping by using
forward integration in the same manner as the T2 item on
Trial 2. Comparing performance between the Base and
Familiar Context tasks provides further insight into how
learners track information. In the most straightforward
extrapolation from the Base task, accuracy on R and T1
should improve due to the extra trial and accuracy on T2
should decrease due to the extra trial between when T2 is
presented and tested. Further, within the Familiar Context
task, accuracy on T1 is expected to be higher than T2, as
participants can use the same process to infer them and T2 is
presented on the last trial of the experiment.

Results
All objects from the ambiguous groups (R1-3 and N1-3)
were scored as correct. The baseline for chance performance
varied between test items and between tasks. For the Base
task and Familiar Context task participants selected from 6
objects, so chance performance was 50% for R test trials
and 16.7% for T1 and T2 test trials. For the Novel Context
task, participants selected from 9 objects, so chance
performance was 33.3% and 11.1%, respectively. Statistical
comparisons between trial types and tasks were performed
with logistic mixed-effects models with random effects of
subject (other random effect structures were tested but in no
case improved model fit).

Forward integration and backward inference
We first address performance on individual mini-tasks
before turning to relationships between the mini-task and
full task and comparisons between mini-tasks. Mean
accuracy for each type of test item is shown in Figure 2. The
results from the Base task reveal that learners do engage the
three processes it was designed to test: co-occurrence
tracking, forward integration and backward inference. Each
of the three trial types has accuracy significantly above
chance performance (see confidence intervals on figure).
While forward integration accuracy was quite high, our
prediction that backward inference would be relatively
challenging was confirmed, with participants performing
significantly better on T2 items than T1 items on the Base
task (b=1.898, z=7.88, p < 0.001).
Results from the Novel Context and Familiar Context
tasks point to the robustness of co-occurrence tracking and
forward integration. In the Novel Context task, neither R
items nor T2 were presented in the final trial, so learners
must maintain that information while concurrently learning
about additional objects and labels. Despite this challenge,
participants were significantly above chance on both R and
T2 items for the Novel Context task (see Figure 2). In the
Familiar Context task, T2 information must be maintained

1237

while familiar objects and labels from Trial 1 are repeated in
Trial 3. Again, learners were quite successful, performing
significantly above chance. Surprisingly, there was no
decrement in performance for T2 from the Base to the
Familiar Context task (see further discussion below).
While accuracy was significantly above chance for
backward integration T1 items on the Base task, it was not
very high. Backward integration relies on memory for the
T1 pair, as the inference must be made in the absence of the
object and label. Remembering the T1 label and object may
pose a particular challenge since the mapping between them
is ambiguous when they are first presented; it is possible
that rapid decay of this information is responsible for the
relatively low performance on backwards inference.
However, results from the Novel Context task
demonstrate that participants recognized the T1 pair as
familiar on Trial 3 and distinguished it from N1-3. Indeed,
accuracy on T1 is numerically much higher than the Base
and Familiar Context tasks even though the chance baseline
is lower. The error pattern also suggests that participants
were not likely to confuse T1 and N1-3. On N trials,
participants selected T1 only 4.7% of the time, less than
they selected T2 (10%), which did not co-occur with the N
group. On T1 trials, participants selected one of N1-3 18.4%
of the time, less than is expected for random guessing
(33.3%) and much less than they selected T1 (65.3%).

Figure 2. Mean percentage correct for each of the three
mini-tasks. The error bars are 95% confidence intervals of
the mean. The horizontal lines within each bar represent
chance performance for that test item.
Are forward integration and backward inference relevant
for statistical word learning beyond the mini-tasks? While
the mini-tasks used in our experiment are structured
similarly to the design of the larger cross-situational word
learning paradigm employed in previous research (e.g., Yu
& Smith, 2007; Yu, Zhong & Fricker, 2012) the mini-tasks
had much more trial-to-trial overlap than other crosssituational learning paradigms. Thus, it is possible that
learners don’t rely on these inferential computations in the
larger task, but simply accumulate co-occurrence statistics.
In order to verify that forward integration and backward
inference were relevant for cross-situational word learning
in a larger set, we correlated participants’ scores on the Base

task with their scores on the Full CSL task (see Figure 3).
The proportion of correct object-label mappings was
positively correlated for the Base mini-task and Full CSL
task (r=0.485, p=0.002), suggesting that these tasks tapped
similar skills. We also tested correlations between
participants’ accuracy on the Full CSL and on each of the
individual trial types in the Base task to investigate the role
of the individual computations. Positive correlations were
found for both backward inference (T1) items (r=0.407,
p=0.011) and forward integration (T2) items (r=0.387,
p=0.016). The relationship between accuracy on the cooccurrence tracking (R) items and Full CSL accuracy was
marginally significant (r=0.303, p=0.065). Accuracy on R
items was in general quite high and this measure of cooccurrence tracking may not have been sensitive enough to
detect a significant relationship. However, as described
above, the tracking of co-occurrence information is
necessary for the other two computations. Together, these
results strongly suggest that forward integration and
backward inference are processes integral to crosssituational learning.

Figure 3. Scatterplot depicting the correlation between
percentage correct on the Base Mini-Task (horizontal axis)
and the Full Task (vertical axis). Values have been jittered
so that all data may be seen. Overall performance on the
Base Task is shown in the top left panel, R test trials in top
right, T1 test trials in bottom left and T2 test trials in bottom
right. Lines represent linear best fit.

The role of tracking multiple co-occurrences
We now turn to comparisons between the mini-tasks to
further explore the computations learners employed to infer
label-object mappings and participants’ memory for
ambiguous prior information. The Familiar Context task
repeated the information from Trial 1 on Trial 3. We
predicted that this repetition would lead to higher accuracy

1238

relative to the Base task for R and T1 items and lower
accuracy for T2 items (because of the addition of Trial 3
between training on T2 in Trial 2 and test). Of these
predictions, only the improvement on T1 is confirmed by
the data. Accuracy on R items was not significantly
different between the two tasks (p > 0.29), suggesting that
the additional co-occurrence information did not lead to
better mappings.
Changes in performance on T1 and T2 items were tested
with a logistic mixed-effect model with Task (Base or
Familiar Context) and Trial Type (T1 or T2) as fixed effects
and Subject as a random effect. This revealed a significant
Task by Trial Type interaction (b=-1.00, z=3.13, p=0.002).
However, follow-up analyses confirmed that the pattern of
effects was not as predicted. While accuracy on T1 was
higher for the Familiar Context task than the Base task
(b=0.631, z=2.94, p=0.003), accuracy on T2 was not
different across the two tasks (b=-0.347, z=1.48, p=0.14).
Accuracy was significantly higher for T2 than T1 for both
tasks (Base: b=1.898, z=7.88, p<0.001; Familiar Context:
b=0.785, z=3.64, p<0.001). Surprisingly, even though
participants could use the same forward integration process
to infer the T1 and T2 mappings and the T1 object and label
were presented on the last training trial while T2 had to be
maintained across this trial, participants were more accurate
on T2 than T1.
Why might the results differ so much from our initial
prediction? One possibility is that, for some participants,
rather than increasing certainty, the repetition of the Trial 1
information on Trial 3 actually increased spurious
correlations, and therefore the confusability, between R1-3
and T1. The pattern of errors across tasks supports this
interpretation. On R trials participants were significantly
more likely to incorrectly select T1 for the Familiar Context
task than the Base task (b=1.153, z=2.92, p=0.004).
Selection of an R item on T1 test trials was equivalent
across the two tasks, despite the improved performance on
T1 for the Familiar Context task (b=-0.282, z=1.06, p=0.29).
The participants with the best memory of the first trial
should be most likely to confuse R1-3 and T1. The nature of
the backward inference requires memory for T1, as well as
memory for the context in which T1 occurred (i.e., the other
objects and labels), since it is the absence of T1 from this
context on Trial 2 that allows the inference. If memory of
Trial 1 increases confusability between R1-3 and T1,
participants who were successful on backward inference in
the Base task should improve less on T1 items for the
Familiar Context task than participants who were not
successful on backward inference.
Participants were split into two groups at the median for
backward inference on the Base mini-task (N=19 in each
group). Participants with 20% or less correct on T1 items for
the Base task were labeled low-backward inference (low-BI,
M=0.116, SD=0.322) and those with more than 20% correct
were labeled high-backward inference (high-BI, M=0.537,
SD=0.501). A logistic mixed-effect model predicting
accuracy on T1 test items with Task (Base or Familiar

Context) and BI (high or low) as fixed factors and Subject
as a random factor revealed a significant Task by BI
interaction (b=-2.346, z=4.86, p<.001). The low-BI group
had significantly higher accuracy on the Familiar Context
task (M=0.484, SD=0.502) than the Base task (b=1.973,
z=5.18, p<0.001), while the high-BI group did not
(M=0.453, SD=0.500; b=-0.349, z=1.19, p=0.23). Thus,
participants with a weak memory of T1 from the first trial
benefitted from the repetition of that information on Trial 3,
while participants with a strong memory did not. This is
further confirmed by the pattern of accuracy for R items
across the two tasks, which was also subject to a Task by
BI-group interaction (b=-1.122, z=2.01, p=0.044). The lowBI group improved slightly from the Base task to the
Familiar Context (Base M=0.768, SD=0.424; FC M=0.80,
SD=0.402) while the high-BI group actually declined (Base
M=0.905, SD=0.294; Familiar Context M=0.789,
SD=0.410), suggesting that the Trial 1 repetition disrupted
their memory for the R items.
In contrast to the Familiar Context task, performance on
the Novel Context task should only be aided by improved
memory for T1 (and its first-trial context). Both high-BI and
low-BI participants benefitted from the presentation of T1 in
a novel context with high accuracy on T1 items (high-BI
M=0.726, SD=0.448; low-BI M=0.579, SD=0.496).
While a better memory for context impeded performance
on the Familiar Context mini-task, such memory should
generally improve statistical word learning, as learners
would have a more complete association matrix on which to
build. We tested the role of contextual memory in crosssituational word learning by comparing performance in the
Full CSL task for the high- and low-BI groups. As
predicted, high-BI participants were significantly more
accurate in the Full CSL task than low-BI participants (highBI M=0.444, SD=0.192; low=BI M=0.254, SD=0.173,
t(36)=3.2, p=0.003).

Discussion
The present study investigated three fundamental
processes that may contribute to cross-situational word
learning. We found that learners readily tracked cooccurrence information trial by trial and used those cooccurrence statistics to infer label-object mappings in new
learning situations, a process we termed forward integration.
We also found that learners inferred label-object mappings
when the disambiguating evidence was the absence of the
label and object on trials on which they would otherwise be
expected, a process we termed backward inference. Further,
we found that participants retained multiple co-occurrences
between objects and labels presented on previous trials.
Importantly, participants who best remembered multiple
object-label co-occurrences within a learning trial were most
successful at cross-situational word learning.
Our results support the argument that cross-situational
word learning involves learning a system of label-object
mappings, in which learning about one set of items
influences knowledge about other items. From a

1239

straightforward co-occurrence information point of view,
the T1 and T2 objects are not more strongly associated with
the T1 or T2 labels than the R1, R2 and R3 labels for either
the Base or Familiar Context task. In order to disambiguate
these mappings participants must use the information
available not just about the T1 and T2 pairs but also about
the R1, R2 and R3 pairs. In this way, participants draw on the
entire association matrix to make inferences that are
reasonable given their experience. Our results provide
empirical evidence of these inferences, but do not tell us
whether inferences were made by explicit reasoning or
emerged from the dynamics of attention within and across
trials (Kachergis, Yu & Shiffrin, 2012; Yu & Smith, 2012;
Yu, Zhong & Fricker, 2012). If replicated in young word
learners, these results suggest an important role for the
contexts in which word learning occurs.
There has been debate about the nature of information
selection and information processing by cross-situational
word learners. The presence of multiple objects and multiple
labels on an individual learning instance means that learners
could potentially associate all labels with all objects – the
multiple association account (e.g., Yurovsky, Smith & Yu,
2012). While equal attention may not be given to all
possible mappings, this account predicts that learners will
have a rich store of statistical information to draw on, so
that if evidence for one particular mapping is contradicted
(e.g., the label is given but the object is not present) there
are other associations already in place that can inform the
learners’ inferences about the label’s likely referent.
Alternatively, in the single-association account learners
retain a single hypothesis for each object, discarding all
other associations from a particular learning instance
(Medina, Snedecker, Trueswell & Gleitman, 2011;
Trueswell, Medina, Hafri & Gleitman, 2013). This account
predicts that when a particular hypothesis is contradicted the
learner must start from scratch, forming a new hypothesis at
random based on the current learning instance.
These two accounts make disparate predictions for the
present study, specifically within the Familiar Context task.
The single-association account proposes that learners may
form a hypothesis linking the T1 object and label during
Trial 1 and that this hypothesis would be confirmed on Trial
3. However, because choice of hypotheses is random, there
should not be systematic differences between which learners
benefit from this extra information from one mini-task to the
next. In direct contrast to this, our results suggest that for
some learners, the repetition of information in Trial 3 was
beneficial, improving accuracy on R and T1 items, and for
some learners it was not. Crucially, what defined whether
Trial 3 was beneficial was whether the participant had
formed a strong memory for the first trial, both the potential
T1 mapping AND the other objects present, as measured by
their ability to perform backward inference. These findings
raise important questions about how memory development
may influence word learning in toddlers, as we found that
better in the mini-tasks with high overlap, better memory
led to potential interference, while in the larger task with

little trial-by-trial overlap, better memory (i.e., backward
inference) led to better performance. Our data suggest that
those learners who are successful in cross-situational
learning tasks carry multiple possible associations forward.
These associations are integrated in both the forward and
backward directions to discover likely object-label pairs.
Thus, statistical associative learning is a powerful
mechanism that is within the repertoire of human cognitive
systems.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH R01 HD056029 to C. Yu
and an NIH Ruth Kirschstein NRSA training grant to
Indiana University: T32 HD007475-17.

References
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2012). An
associative model of adaptive inference for learning
word–referent mappings. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 1-8.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Medina, T. N., Snedeker, J., Trueswell, J. C., & Gleitman,
L. R. (2011). How words can and cannot be learned by
observation. PNAS, 108(22), 9014-9019.
Scott, R. M., & Fisher, C. (2011). 2.5-Year-olds use crosssituational consistency to learn verbs under referential
uncertainty. Cognition, 122, 163-180.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Suanda, S. H., & Namy, L. L. (2012). Detailed Behavioral
Analysis as a Window Into Cross‐ Situational Word
Learning. Cognitive Science, 36, 545-559.
Trueswell, J. C., Medina, T. N., Hafri, A., & Gleitman, L.
R. (2013). Propose but verify: Fast mapping meets crosssituational word learning. Cognitive Psychology, 66, 126156.
Vouloumanos, A., & Werker, J. F. (2009). Infants’ learning
of novel words in a stochastic environment.
Developmental psychology, 45, 1611.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Modeling cross-situational
word–referent learning: Prior questions. Psychological
Review, 119, 21.
Yu, C., Zhong, Y., & Fricker, D. (2012). Selective attention
in cross-situational statistical learning: evidence from eye
tracking. Frontiers in Psychology, 3:148 doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00148
Yurovsky, D., Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2012). Does
Statistical Word Learning Scale? It’s a Matter of
Perspective. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. Cooper
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 34nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.

1240

