UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Double-Dipping an Alternative to Double-Dissociation?: Sampling Two Representational
Systems Using a Single Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/88d4r2f9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Schoenherr, Jordan Richard
Lacroix, Guy

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Double-Dipping an Alternative to Double-Dissociation?:
Sampling Two Representational Systems Using a Single Task
Jordan Richard Schoenherr (psychophysics.lab@gmail.com)
Guy Lacroix (guy_lacroix@carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada
categorization performance, COVIS also makes claims
concerning post-decisional confidence reports. To our
knowledge, the implications of these claims have not been
examined. The present study is directed toward exploring
this prediction: The correspondence between categorization
accuracy and subjective confidence should change
depending on the category structure that participants are
required to learn.

Abstract
Dual-process models of categorization posit dissociable implicit
and explicit category learning systems. Evidence in favour of these
accounts is typically obtained by examining how categorization
responses differ over time, with differing category structures, and
by changing task demands. If these two categorization systems are
activated concurrently (e.g., COVIS) then both implicit and
explicit representations can be examined over the course of
learning even when one system dominates category response
selection. In the current study, we used subjective measures of
performance (i.e., confidence reports) to continuously sample from
a participant’s explicit representation of the category structure
while also examining changes in these reports over the course of
training. Using category structures that motivate the acquisition of
either explicit or implicit representations, we observed differences
in confidence reports that did not correspond to changes in
categorization accuracy. These findings provide evidence for
categorization systems that contain different representations.
Keywords:
processing

dual-process,

categorization,

COVIS Categorization Systems
COVIS has two main assumptions. First, categorization
is assumed to rely on a multidimensional variant of signaldetection (SDT) referred to as general recognition theory
(GRT; Ashby & Townsend, 1986). With the provision of
feedback, the category boundary divides separable or
integral stimulus dimensions into discrete regions of a
categorical space (e.g., Ashby & Gott, 1988; Ashby &
Maddox, 1992). If a stimulus consists of values along a
dimension greater than those specified by the criterion, it is
assigned to one category. If the values are less than that
specified by the criterion, it is assigned to another category.
Using curve fitting, Ashby and colleagues have
demonstrated that by the end of training, participants
performance is well described by an optimal classifier
model that employs a category boundary.
The second critical feature of COVIS is the interaction
of the explicit and implicit categorization systems during
response selection (Ashby & O’Brien, 2005; Ashby et al.,
1998). Initially, the hypothesis-testing system which uses
executive function and working memory is assumed to
dominate categorization as it can rapidly generate and test
explicit, one-dimensional (rule-based) representations.
Simultaneously, the implicit procedural learning system
begins to associate regions of perceptual space with a
category label though it does not yet dominate category
response selection. As more instances of the categories are
retained in memory, the process of retrieving the stimulusresponse mapping within the implicit system becomes
increasingly rapid. With sufficient training, the implicit
system begins to dominate category response selection.
Thus, in the absence of an executive load (e.g., Waldron &
Ashby, 2001), participants will acquire rule-based category
structures earlier in the course of the experiment relative to
an information-integration category structures. These
findings have been taken as evidence representing a
qualitative change in responding rather than merely a
quantitative shift in a category boundary location within a
single implicit system (Ashby et al., 1998).

confidence

Introduction
Dual-process models of categorization assume that
information is processed by and represented in independent
cognitive systems. For instance, one such model, RULEX
(Nosofsky, Gluck, Palmeri, McKinley, & Glauthier, 1994),
postulates that people categorize objects by using simple
rules and by memorizing the exceptions to those rules.
Similarly, another model, ATRIUM (Erickson & Kruschke,
1998) assumes that categorization involves the combination
of rule-based and exemplar-based processes whose relative
contributions are mediated by an attentional gating
mechanism. An alternative account provided by Love,
Medin, & Gureckis’ (2004), SUSTAIN, assumes that
instances of a category are stored as clusters of feature
associations and these clusters are associated with a
category in the context of both supervised and unsupervised
learning. Moreover, the goals of the participant will also
determine the nature of the representations that are formed
(see the Conclusion for further discussion and implications).
Following from Logan’s (1988) instance theory of
automaticity, Ashby, Alfonso-Reese, Turken, and
Waldron’s (1998) COVIS model instead assumes that there
is a competition between the verbal and implicit systems
responsible for the categorization process. Evidence in
favour of COVIS comes from double-dissociation
paradigms which demonstrated feedback and a concurrent
working memory load affect the implicit and verbal
systems, respectively. In addition to predictions concerning

1
3366

present study, COVIS provides a similar model of
confidence. Ashby et al.’s (1998) assume that confidence
reports result from activation of the prefrontal cortex
associated with the response alternative by the implicit
system which they claim is supported by neurological
studies examining cortical modulation (e.g., Frith, Friston,
Liddle, & Frackowiak, 1991). Given the direct
correspondence between the implicit representation used to
categorize stimuli and that used to report confidence, Ashby
et al.’s (1998) direct-scaling account of confidence predicts
greater correspondence between accuracy and confidence
reports in the information-integration condition. This pattern
would result in high levels of confidence calibration.
Furthermore, if subjective confidence is determined by
an implicit representation, then greater levels of
miscalibration should be observed in the rule-based
condition due to a difference between the representation
used to categorize stimuli and that used to report
confidence. Specifically, if an implicit representation is used
to report confidence and that representation is inaccurate
early in training then Ashby et al.’s (1998) account would
appear to imply that underconfidence should be observed
when learning rule-based category structures.
In contrast to this account, an alternative class of models
assumes that confidence reports require an indirect-scaling
of primary decision evidence requiring additional cognitive
operations. Both a post-decisional locus (e.g., Audley, 1960;
Vickers & Packer, 1980), or an alterable locus (Baranski &
Petrusic, 1998) have been considered wherein participants
process confidence following the primary decision or can
additionally compute it concurrently with the primary
decision. If confidence reports require a secondary set of
operations, it is possible that they could be affected by
information other than that available to the primary
decision. This would follow from the observation that
performance on any task is the result of explicit and implicit
processes (Jacoby, 1991).
There is considerable support that confidence reports
involve a secondary set of effortful scaling operations that
either integrate information from multiple sources (e.g.,
perceptual and conceptual) or manipulate this information in
the process of scaling (Busey, Tunnicliff, Loftus, & Loftus,
2000; Schoenherr, Leth-Steensen, & Petrusic, 2010). For
instance, Schoenherr et al. (2010) were able to alter
subjective confidence independently of the primary
decision. Studies investigating metamemory have also
observed that subjective awareness appears to be determined
by encoding and retrieval cues rather than the number of
items recalled (e.g., Koriat, Sheffer, & Ma'ayan, 2002).
Given that different sources of information can affect the
primary decision and confidence reports, these studies
suggest that a comparison of primary decision responses and
confidence reports might be an alternative means to

A critical observation concerning Ashby et al.’s (1998)
dual-process account of COVIS is that although a single
response results when presented with a stimulus, the
resulting
perceptual
information
activates
both
categorization systems. Later in training, when an implicit
representation stored within the procedural-learning is used
to produce responses, an explicit representation should still
be produced by the hypothesis-testing system. If a method
can be adopted to examine this explicit representation over
the course of training, further evidence would be provided
for a dual-process account of categorization. Confidence
reports might be used to sample such an explicit
representation over the course of learning.
Measures of Awareness of Performance
Confidence reports and related measures were among
the earliest tools used in experimental psychology to assess
participants’ ability to consciously monitor their
performance on a given task (for a review, see Baranski &
Petrusic, 1998). Retrospective confidence reports are
typically obtained by having an individual assign a numeric
value corresponding to a subjective probability (e.g., 60%)
in their belief that they have provided a correct response to a
primary task. The degree of correspondence between a
participant’s mean accuracy and assigning a subjective
probability to a response is referred to as subjective
calibration (e.g., Baranski & Petrusic, 1994). Perfect
calibration requires that the proportion correct (e.g., 0.6) and
mean confidence are equivalent (60%). Typically,
participants are observed to deviate from ideal performance
as evidenced by miscalibration. Rather than presenting a
random pattern, miscalibration occurs in a systematic form
in terms of either over- or underconfidence. Overconfidence
is observed when confidence exceeds accuracy. This pattern
is typically observed when the task requires the use of either
general or conceptual knowledge. Underconfidence is
observed when accuracy exceeds confidence. This pattern is
typically observed in perceptual tasks (for reviews see,
Lichtenstein & Fischhoff, 1977; Kvidera & Koustaal, 2008).
There is disagreement as to whether this pattern represents
task dependencies (Lichtenstein & Fischhoff, 1977) or
whether it is a result of differential accessibility of
information within the systems when performing the task
(Dawes, 1980).
A consideration of confidence models reveals the
sources of this disagreement. The first formal models of
confidence assumed a direct-scaling of primary decision
information with a decisional-locus of confidence
processing (e.g., Ferrel & McGooey, 1980; Gigerenzer,
Hoffrage, & Kleinbolting, 1991; for recent models see,
Pleskac & Busemeyer, 2010). On these accounts,
confidence reports are based solely on information used by
the primary decision process and consequently do not
require any additional processing. Importantly for the

2
3367

exhibit overconfidence when the category structure is
readily verbalizable but category overlap is permitted. Thus,
while we would expect the same comparatively high level of
calibration in the information-integration condition as
Ashby et al. (1998), we expect overconfidence in the rulebased condition. We also anticipate that the requirement of
confidence should also increase categorization response
time if it constitutes a secondary process and that these
response times should be longer in the informationintegration condition relative to the rule-based condition
given the need for representational change. We do not report
the successful observation of these findings here due to
space limitations. Rather, we limit ourselves to changes in
overconfidence bias across experimental blocks.

dissociate implicit and explicit categorization systems (see
also Dienes & Berry, 1997).
In the context of indirect-scaling models, we can predict
a different pattern of miscalibration. If we disregard the
direct-scaling model adopted by Ashby et al. (1998) we can
still adopt some of the assumptions of COVIS to predict an
alternative pattern of overconfidence. If a hypothesis-testing
system is not as dependent on feedback to learn a category
structure as the procedural-learning system, negative
feedback should exert less of an effect when learning rulebased category structures relative to information-integration
category structures. Thus, in instances where there is
category overlap which result in a performance asymptote,
an explicit representation of the category structure that
informs confidence reports would not reflect the proportion
of negative feedback that results. This would lead to
overconfidence. Greater calibration would be observed in
the information-integration condition due to that system's
reliance on feedback and absence of an explicit category
structure to bias confidence reports.

Experiment
Method
Participants
Eighty-eight undergraduate students participated in the
study for course credit.
Materials
Stimuli consisted of Gabor patches varying in terms of
spatial frequency and orientation. Replicating the method of
earlier studies (e.g., Zeithamova & Maddox, 2007), 40
Gabor patches were created for each category for the
training phase using the randomization technique by
randomly sampling values from two normal distributions.
Stimulus values were rescaled into stimulus dimensions
with spatial frequency given by f = .25 + (x1/50) and
orientation given by o = x2(π/500). Using these values,
stimuli were generated with the Psychophysics Toolbox
(Brainard, 1997) using MATLAB R2008 (MathWorks,
Matick, MA) with an 85% performance asymptote resulting
from category overlap (see Figure 1). After a categorization
response was provided and a confidence report was
obtained, a feedback signal was presented to indicate a
participant’s accuracy in completing the task. Stimuli were
presented to participants using E-Prime experimental
software on a Dell Dimension desktop PC.

Present Study
The present study starts from the assumption that the
degree of correspondence between measures of accuracy
and confidence can be used to infer the nature of
representations used at different stages of the category
learning process. To accomplish this, we adopted the
randomization technique used by Ashby and colleagues and
required participants to provide confidence report
concerning the accuracy of their responses.
Two sets of predictions can be made concerning the
relationship between accuracy and confidence depending on
whether a direct- or indirect-scaling account of confidence
is adopted. When adopting Ashby et al’s (1998) directscaling model of confidence, we can expect participants to
be well calibrated in the information-integration condition
due to representational correspondence between the
information used within the categorization system and that
used to report confidence. Conversely, the rule-based
condition should produce underconfidence due to the
inaccurate implicit representation used to report confidence
and an accurate explicit representation used to categorize
stimuli.
An alternative set of prediction follows from indirectscaling models of confidence (e.g., Baranski & Petrusic,
1998) should also be considered. First, when participants are
incapable of obtaining 100% accuracy, such as when a
performance asymptote is adopted, confidence should reach
the equivalent subjective probability of this performance
asymptote prior to categorization accuracy. Second, if the
explicit system is not as dependent upon response feedback
as the implicit system, then the proportion of negative
feedback observed in the rule-based condition should not
affect subjective confidence reports to the same extent as the
implicit-condition. Following from this, participants should

Figure 1. Information Integration Category Structure
20
18

Category A
Category B

Spatial Frequency

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
70

80

90

100

110

120

130

140

Orientation

Procedure
The category task procedure used the randomization
technique. A training phase consisted of 10 blocks of trials

3
3368

with 40 exemplars from each category, and a transfer phase
consisted of 2 blocks with the same 40 exemplars from each
category. Participants learned either a rule-based (1D) or an
information-integration (2D) category structure. In the
present experiment, participants were provided with both
trial-to-trial and block feedback during the training phase. In
the transfer phase, participants did not receive feedback.
Before trial-to-trial feedback was provided, participants
reported confidence on a 6-point Likert scale from 50
(guess) to 100 (certain) scale.
Results
Proportion Correct. As demonstrated in Figure 2, the
results of categorization accuracy replicated earlier findings:
1D rules were learned in fewer blocks then 2D rules, F(1,
83) = 6.317, MSE = .039, p = .014, η2p = .071, and accuracy
increased with the number of experimental blocks, F(11,
913) = 49.167, MSE = .005, p < .001, η2p = .372 The
interaction between categorization rule and experimental
block was also significant, F(11, 913) = 6.891, MSE = .005,
p < .001, η2p = .077. We also found that the requirement of
confidence affected category learning as it interacted with
block, F(11, 913) = 2.093, MSE = .005, p = .052, η2p = .025.
Although the requirement of confidence initially produced
reduced performance in the first block (M = .703, SD =
.140) relative to no confidence (M = .738, SD = .131),
participants who reported confidence in the transfer phase
were more accurate (M = .866, SD = .112) then those who
did not (M = .829, SD = .103).

Figure 3. Overconfidence Bias across experimental blocks.
0.14

Proportion Correct

Overconfidence Index

0.70
0.65
0.60
6

7

8

9

10

11

LATE

TRANSFER

Conclusions
In the present study, we examined confidence reports as
an alternative to double-dissociation paradigms. Using the
randomization technique, we sought to replicate previous
findings of the categorization literature such that
participants would learn 1D categorization rules in fewer
blocks then 2D categorization rules due to differences in the
categorization systems that retain these representations. In a
confidence rating paradigm, we had participants report trialby-trial confidence after each categorization response and
compared this to their accuracy. We examined whether the
correspondence between accuracy and confidence (i.e.,
overconfidence bias) differed between category structures as
well as whether this pattern changed across experimental
blocks.
The results of our experiment replicate several earlier
studies within categorization and confidence processing
literature. Categorization performance was found to be
affected by the category structure that participants learned.
We observed that participants who were required to learn
the rule-based category structure reached a performance
asymptote faster than those who were required to learn the
information-integration category structure (e.g., Ashby et al.
1998). Moreover, response latencies decreased in fewer

0.75

5

INTERMEDIATE

Overall, we found that the overconfidence bias differed
across the learning phases, F(1,77) = 8.842, MSE = .085, p
= .004, η2p = .103. As expected, learning phase was also
found to interact with category structure, F(1,77) = 4.539,
MSE = .085, p = .036, η2p = . 056. As can be seen from
Figure 3, overconfidence remained relatively constant in the
information-integration condition suggesting that, in
general, participants did not have access to the
representation that guided their performance. In contrast, an
increase in overconfidence was observed in intermediate
phases of training in the rule-based condition. This finding
suggests that once participants identified the 1D rule, they
expected to have continual improvements in performance.

0.80

4

0.04

Learning Stage

0.85

3

0.06

EARLY

0.90

2

0.08

0.00

2D Rule
1D Rule

1

0.10

0.02

1.00
0.95

1D Rule
2D Rule

0.12

12

Block

Confidence Reports. Due to inter-block variability
resulting from individual differences in the between-subject
design, we collapsed blocks into learning phases. We
examined overconfidence in early phases of training across
two blocks (Blocks 1 and 2) in order to compare to the two
transfer blocks (Blocks 11 and 12). Two other phases of
training were also examined for comparison constituting and
intermediate (Blocks 3 through 6), and late phases of
training (Blocks 9 through 10).

4
3369

for this pattern given that performance does not significantly
differ from the performance asymptote (see Figure 2).
Given the inclusion of both a categorization and
confidence processing component, COVIS provides a
possible explanation of the findings of the present study.
COVIS posits that the evidence accumulated within the
information-integration condition should be used to report
confidence. For this reason, the high level of subjective
calibration in the information-integration provides evidence
in support of such an account. Although it does not make
explicit predictions concerning the rule-based condition, it
would seem that participants should be quite accurate early
in training due do rapid generation and testing of explicit
rule. Participants should also exhibit underconfidence due to
an inaccurate implicit representation that informs subjective
confidence. As noted above, this was not observed. Thus,
COVIS can account for the categorization results of the
present study but does not provide a sufficient account of
confidence processing. The basic assumptions of two
categorization systems - one explicit and one implicit – are
supported by our results.
Although in some respect similar to models that retain
both rules and exemplars, SUSTAIN (Supervised and
Unsupervised STratified Adaptive Incremental Network;
e.g., Love & Medin, 1998; Love et al., 2004) might be better
equipped to provide an explanation of the relationship
between accuracy and confidence observed in the present
study. A basic assumption of SUSTAIN is that clusters of
features constitute a category and that there is response
competition between clusters with a bias toward simple
solutions. Unlike COVIS, SUSTAIN does not provide a
comprehensive account of confidence processing. Love et
al. (2004) note that the number of competing alternatives
should reduce participant’s subjective confidence. In the
rule-based condition used in the present study there should
be fewer clusters competing for response selection given
that rule-based category structures can be identified
relatively quickly. This would give rise to greater
confidence. In contrast to this, the information-integration
condition should have a larger number of clusters
(constituting multidimensional rules) competing for
response selection thereby reducing subjective confidence.
On this account, however, it is not clear why exceptions
would not affect confidence reports. Namely, exceptional
exemplars should suggest the selection of alternative
clusters thereby increasing competition and concomitantly
decreasing confidence. Without a clear formulation of
confidence processing within the context SUSTAIN,
speculation on the adequacy of extension to accommodate
our calibration results must be limited.
One promising feature of SUSTAIN is that it does allow
for unsupervised learning and influences of participants’
goals while learning. In our experiment we did find some
evidence of better performance in the transfer phase with the

blocks for participants in the rule-based condition relative to
those in the information-integration condition indicating that
participants could more readily acquire a stimulus-response
mapping for rule-based categories relative to informationintegration categories. Furthermore, these findings conform
to the predictions of dual-process accounts of categorization
such as COVIS (Ashby et al., 1998) allowing us to interpret
the results obtained from confidence reports in a
straightforward manner.
Our analysis of confidence reports also provides new
evidence for dual-process accounts of categorization. In the
experiment conducted here, we observed increased
overconfidence in intermediate phases of training for those
participants learning a rule-based category structure relative
to those who learned the information-integration category
structure. In general, the miscalibration observed here
suggests that the representation used to report subjective
confidence and that used to respond to categorize stimuli
were informed by different sources of information. Greater
overconfidence in the rule-based condition suggests that the
category structure that participants were explicitly aware of
did not contain the stimulus variability that resulted from
category overlap. We would expect such a finding if the
hypothesis-testing system were less reliant on feedback and
could not incorporate exceptional exemplars into the explicit
representation as a consequence.
Further support for the kind of representational
dissociation that we predicted stems from the findings of
greater calibration in the information-integration condition.
In the absence of an explicit representation, the only explicit
information available to participants is the proportion of
feedback they have received on a trial-to-trial basis. Given
that feedback is an accurate predictor of performance, less
miscalibration is likely to result. Moreover, we should not
expect perfect calibration if an explicit representation might
be biasing confidence responses. This would occur if
confidence reports incorporated multiple sources of
information (Schoenherr & Logan, 2012) or if we
additionally consider that any task is determined by both
explicit or implicit processes (i.e., Jacoby, 1991).
We can also consider how these findings might be
accounted for by models of categorization more generally.
Although it is possible that with a sufficient number of
parameters, a single-process model of categorization could
account for the findings of the present study, it appears more
principled to assume two independent learning systems. In
terms of models that posit the retention of both rules and
exemplars (e.g., Nosofsky, et al., 1994; Erickson &
Kruschke, 1998) participants should be able to retain the
optimal categorization rule as well as the exceptional
exemplars. In the present study, one might expect that the
retention of exemplars would ensure that participants would
exceed the performance asymptote. There is little support

5
3370

requirement of confidence reports (see Figure 2). We might
expect this pattern of results if participants were monitoring
their performance and consequently desired a higher level of
accuracy. Thus, when asked to provide confidence reports
participants might be induced to attend to the task more so
than they would otherwise.

learning exhibit increased underconfidence with practice.
Journal of Experiment Psychology: General, 131, 147–
162.
Kvidera, S., & Koustaal, W. (2008). Confidence and
decision type under matched stimulus conditions:
overconfidence in perceptual but not conceptual
Decisions. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21,
253–281.
Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1977). Do those who
know more also know more about how, much they know?
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 20,
159-183.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492-527.
Love, B. C., & Medin, D. L. (1998a). Modeling item and
category learning. In M. A. Gernsbacher & S. J. Derry
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 639–644). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309–332.
Maddox, W. T., Ashby, F. G., & Bohil, C. J. (2003).
Delayed feedback effects on rule-based and informationintegration category learning. JEP: LMC, 29, 650-662.
Nosofsky, R. M., Gluck, M. A., Palmeri, T. J., McKinley, S.
C., & Glauthier, P. (1994). Comparing models of rulebased classification learning: A replication and extension
of Shepard, Hovland, and Jenkins (1961). Memory &
Cognition, 22, 352-369.
Pleskac, T.J. and Busemeyer, J.R. (2010) Two-stage
dynamic signal detection: a theory of choice, decision
time, and confidence. Psychological Review, 117, 864–
901.
Schoenherr, J. R. (2009). Mapping Internal Representations
of Confidence onto Scales Varying in Range, Interval, and
Number of Response Categories. Unpublished Manuscript.
Schoenherr, J. R., Leth-Steensen, C., & Petrusic, W. M.
(2010). Selective attention and subjective confidence
calibration. Attenion, Perception & Psychophysics, 72,
353-368.
Schoenherr, J. R., Logan, J., & Larose, C. (2012).
Subjective confidence of acoustic and phonemic
representations during speech perception. Proceedings of
the 28th Annual Meeting of the International Society for
Psychophysics, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Waldron, E. M., & Ashby, F. G. (2001). The effects of
concurrent task interference on category learning:
Evidence for multiple category learning systems.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 168-176.
Zeithamova, D., & Maddox, W. T. (2007). The role of
visuo-spatial and verbal working memory in perceptual
category learning. Memory & Cognition, 35, 1380–1398.

References
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., &
Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of
multiple systems in category learning. Psychological
Review, 105, 442-481.
Ashby, F. G., & O’Brien, J. B. (2005). Category learning
and multiple memory systems. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 83-89.
Ashby, F. G., & Gott, R. E. (1988). Decision rules in the
perception and categorization of multidimensional stimuli.
JEP: LMC, 14, 33-53.
Ashby, F. G., & Townsend, J. T. (1986). Varieties of
perceptual independence. Psychological Review, 93, 154179.
Baranski, J. V., & Petrusic, W. M. (1994). The Calibration
and resolution of confidence in perceptual judgements.
Perception & Psychophysics, 55, 412-428.
Baranski, J. V., & Petrusic, W. M. (1998). Probing the locus
of confidence judgments: Experiments on the time to
determine confidence. JEP: HPP, 24, 929-945.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox, Spatial
Vision 10, 433-436.
Busey, T. A., Tunnicliff, J., Loftus, G. R., & Loftus, E.
(2000). Accounts of the confidence-accuracy relation in
recognition memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7,
26-48.
Dawes, R. M (1980). Confidence in intellectual vs.
confidence in perceptual judgments. In E. D. Lantermann
& H. Feger (Eds .) Similarity and Choice: Papers in
Honor of Clyde Coombs (pp. 327-345). Bern Hans Huber.
Dienes, Z., & Berry, D. (1997). Implicit learning: Below the
subjective threshold. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4,
3-23.
Erickson, M. A., & Kruschke, J. K. (1998). Rules and
exemplars in category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127, 107-140.
Ferrel, W. R., & McGoey, P. J. (1980). A model of
calibration for subjective probabilities. Organizational
Behaviour and Human Performance, 26, 32-53.
Frith, C. D., Friston, K. J., Liddle, E. E., & Frackowiak, R.
S. J. (1991). Willed action and the prefrontal cortex in
man: A study with PET. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, B, 244, 241-246.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework:
separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513-541.
Koriat, A., Sheffer, L., & Ma'ayan, H. (2002). Comparing
objective and subjective learning curves: Judgments of

6
3371

