UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Justified True Belief Triggers False Recall of "Knowing"

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dq4g72z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Powell, Derek
Horne, Zachary
Pinillos, Angel
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Justified True Belief Triggers False Recall of “Knowing”
Derek Powell (derekpowell@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

	  
Zachary Horne (horne2@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61802 USA

Angel Pinillos (pinillos@asu.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281 USA

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90034 USA

Abstract
Philosophers traditionally held that knowledge is justified true
belief. Gettier (1963) challenged this view with thought
experiments in which someone has a justified and true belief,
but an element of luck is involved that disqualifies the belief
from counting as knowledge. We examined laypeople’s
concept of knowledge using a semantic integration paradigm
modeled after that of Gentner (1981). Participants read stories
in which a character ‘thought’ something was true. On a
subsequent recall task, readers sometimes falsely recalled the
verb ‘thought’ as ‘knew,’ implicitly indicating that the reader
had attributed knowledge to the character. False recall of
‘knew’ occurred more frequently when the story described a
justified true belief than an unjustified belief. Justified true
belief triggered these recall errors even in a so-called “Gettier
case”. The present findings suggest that semantic integration
provides an empirical paradigm suitable for investigating lay
notions about knowledge.
Keywords: belief; knowledge; semantic integration; false
memory; experimental philosophy

People’s beliefs are the primary drivers of their actions, yet
these beliefs are often uncertain—the products of limited
information about the world and interconnections between
other (often uncertain) beliefs. For this reason, a capacity for
evaluating the status of different beliefs is important for
individuals in directing their own rational behavior, and for
predicting the behavior of others. Understanding these
processes requires an analysis of the concept of knowledge:
the distinction between what is known versus what is
merely believed, imagined, hoped for, or assumed. Research
on metacognition has examined how people assess their
confidence in their own beliefs (e.g., Klayman et al., 1999;
Tsai, Klayman & Hastie, 2008), and research on theory of
mind (Premack & Woodruff, 1978) has examined how
beliefs are attributed to others (e.g., Birch, 2005) but there

has been very little psychological research examining the
self-assessment and attribution of knowledge.
Making a decision about when to attribute knowledge,
either to oneself or to another, hinges on one's conception of
knowledge: it is a decision about whether or not the concept
applies in a particular instance. Although other factors may
play into this decision process, understanding the exact
nature of the concept itself is essential to understanding the
overall process of knowledge attribution. Philosophers have
long contemplated the nature of knowledge, and have also
developed a variety of methods for studying concepts. A
common method involves using thought experiments.
One of the most influential of these thought experiments
was proposed by Edmund Gettier (1963). Named for their
progenitor, “Gettier cases” challenge the traditional
conception of knowledge. Prior to the 1960s, most
philosophers thought that knowledge should be analyzed as
justified true belief. Today, many philosophers see Gettier
cases as counterexamples to that analysis. Gettier cases are
situations in which an agent has a true belief that is justified,
but an element of luck is involved that disqualifies their
cognitive state from being considered knowledge. To
illustrate such a case, suppose that at 3:34pm an agent
comes to believe it is 3:34pm by looking at her normally
reliable watch. Suppose also that unbeknownst to the agent,
her watch had been stopped for exactly 24 hours—she just
happened to glance at her watch at the correct time. The
agent’s belief is not only true, but is also justified (since
looking at one’s normally reliable watch is a good way to
form veridical beliefs about time of day). However, most
philosophers judge that this agent does not know that it is
3:34pm, because her belief is true only by luck. If this
judgment is correct, then this case is a counterexample to
the traditional thesis that knowledge is justified true belief.
It remains an open question whether philosophers’
conceptions of knowledge are shared by laypeople. Recently,

1151

experimental philosophers have sought to empirically
investigate laypeople’s intuitive judgments about
philosophical thought experiments (for a review, see Knobe
et al., 2012). In particular, researchers have turned their
attention to examining whether philosophers’ Gettier
judgments are shared by laypeople (Weinberg, Nichols &
Stich, 2001; Turri, in press). Starmans and Friedman (2012)
investigated laypeople’s evaluations of Gettier cases by
presenting participants with short vignettes that described
agents forming beliefs under different circumstances. Three
different versions of each scenario were created: the agents
in the vignettes either formed a false belief, formed a
justified true belief, or were “Gettiered”—the belief they
formed was both justified and true, but was true only by
luck. Starmans and Friedman then asked participants to
judge whether the agents “knew” or “only believed” the
proposition in question, and to rate how confident they were
in their judgment. Participants attributed knowledge to
agents in Gettier cases almost as readily as they did in cases
of non-Gettiered justified true belief, suggesting that
laypeople’s concepts of knowledge may differ from those
held by many philosophers. Their findings led Starmans and
Friedman to conclude that laypeople view knowledge as
justified true belief, in accord with the more traditional
philosophical view.
However, the survey-based methodology used by
Starmans and Friedman (2012) has limitations. Answers on
such surveys may be influenced by demand characteristics
(Orne, 1962). For example, if participants form some
interpretation of the experimenter’s hypothesis, they may
attempt to confirm or disconfirm this hypothesis. In addition,
participants commonly display apprehension about being
evaluated (Weber & Cook, 1972). This may lead them to
give responses they perceive as either socially desirable, or
likely to be considered “correct,” irrespective of their actual
attitudes or answers. For research on folk concepts, this type
of evaluative apprehension might be manifested as a sort of
amateur philosophizing, or attempts to avoid being “tricked”
by the experimenter.
A further concern with survey-based methods is that
asking participants to make knowledge attributions fails to
isolate their knowledge concepts from other decision
processes that could influence their judgments downstream.
This is a general problem for survey-based methods, one
that applies not only to investigations of concepts for
knowledge, but also to investigations of lay concepts in
general. Recently, social psychologists and experimental
philosophers have investigated such concepts as intentional
action (e.g., Knobe et al., 2012), causation (e.g., Livengood
& Machery, 2007), and explanation (Braverman et al.,
2012), but thus far their methods have been primarily
survey-based. In fact, almost all work in experimental
philosophy utilizes these methods.
Here we propose and test a new method for examining
people’s concepts, based on psychological research related
to semantic integration. Semantic integration is the
cognitive process by which smaller units of semantic

information are combined to form larger meaningful
structured representations, or “discourse meanings,” during
language processing. Many researchers in cognitive
psychology and psycholinguistics have investigated how
these structured representations are formed and how they
are stored in memory. Early research by Sachs (1967)
revealed that memory for the meaning of sentences is more
robust than memory for their specific wordings. During
language processing, the original form of presented material
is stored only temporarily, just long enough to be
comprehended. Once comprehended, the material’s meaning
is then encoded into long-term memory. Bransford and
Franks (1971) reasoned that if semantic information is
integrated during language processing, and it is the meaning
of a passage that is actually encoded into memory, then
human memory ought to exhibit productivity. That is, it
should be possible for exposure to several basic, interrelated
propositions to produce false verbatim memory for more
complex propositions that express their combination, even
when these propositions were never themselves experienced.
These sorts of productive memory errors have been taken as
evidence for semantic integration across a variety of
language comprehension contexts (Flagg, 1976; Owen,
Bower & Black, 1979; Gentner, 1981; Sulin & Dooling,
1974; Thorndyke, 1976).
To explain such findings, Gentner (1981) proposed a
model of language processing in which linguistic
propositions are considered both individually and in the
broader context of the story in which they appear. Her
model assumes that when a sentence is read within the
context of a larger passage, the discourse meaning that a
reader forms may incorporate information not contained in
the original sentence.
In evaluating this model, Gentner (1981) focused her
investigations on a relatively well-analyzed area of
linguistics, the meanings of verbs. She was able to make
specific predictions about how manipulations of the
contextual information given in a passage of text would
affect later recall for verbs within that passage. To illustrate,
consider the relationship between the general verb ‘give’
and the more specific verb ‘pay’. An informal analysis
suggests that ‘to give’ some item is to take some action that
transfers ownership of that item to a recipient. ‘Paying’ is a
more specific form of giving, in which the giver owes the
recipient. In her experiments, Gentner (1981) asked her
participants to read paragraph-long stories that each featured
a critical sentence containing some key verb of interest. For
instance, one of these stories contained the critical sentence,
“Max finally gave Sam the money.” Two versions of this
story were created, one that contained additional context
explaining that Max owed Sam money, and a control story
that lacked this information. After reading one version of
the story, Gentner’s participants performed a recall task, in
which they were shown the critical sentence with the word
‘gave’ removed, and asked to fill in the word that had
appeared in the story. In support of her predictions, Gentner
found that participants who had been provided with the

1152

additional contextual information were more likely to
falsely recall the more specific verb ‘paid’ as having
appeared in the critical sentence than participants who had
read the control story.
We aimed to turn this methodology on its head: Whereas
Gentner (1981) used a false recall paradigm to examine how
known semantic structures are integrated during language
processing, we used a similar paradigm to examine the
semantic structure of the concept ‘knowledge’. Following
Gentner (1981), we constructed stories containing the
generic cognition verb ‘thought’, and used false recall of the
more specific verb ‘knew’ as a measure of the extent to
which different contexts instantiate the semantic structure of
‘knowledge’. By incorporating the relevant contextual
information into our stories, we can examine whether the
different scenarios imagined in various thought experiments
differentially activate people’s concept of knowledge.
Gentner’s (1981) paradigm has several qualities that are
desirable for our present purposes, relative to other semantic
integration tasks. First, the use of free recall makes its
results more compelling than tasks that rely on recognition
judgments. Participants’ responses to recognition tasks can
be influenced by both true recollection as well as feelings of
familiarity (Tulving, 1985). In contrast, explicit recall of the
word ‘knew’ provides strong evidence for the semantic
activation of the concept. Second, this paradigm focuses
responses onto a single specific word of interest, whereas
other semantic integration paradigms often ask participants
to evaluate larger semantic units, such as phrases or
sentences. This specificity may help reduce ambiguity in
investigations of individual concepts.
Experiment 1 served as a proof of concept, demonstrating
that semantic integration can be used to investigate
laypeople’s concept of knowledge. In Experiment 2 we
examined the more controversial issue of how Gettier cases
activate people’s concept of knowledge.

Experiment 1
Method
In Experiment 1 we constructed two similar stories about a
detective investigating a crime. In the first story, the
detective forms the justified true belief (JTB condition) that
his suspect is guilty: the omniscient narrator reveals that the
detective’s suspect committed the crime, and the detective
uncovers evidence that his suspect is guilty. In the second
story, the detective forms the unjustified belief (UB) that his
suspect is guilty: he cannot find any useful evidence linking
his suspect to the crime, and the narrator does not reveal
whether the suspect is guilty. Following Gentner (1981),
each story included a critical sentence with a critical word
(italics added here for emphasis): “Whatever the DA’s
reservations, Dempsey thought Will was guilty.” The
critical word in both stories was 'thought', a generic
cognition verb that could plausibly be recalled as 'knew',
should the right conditions be met. This critical sentence
was later presented with a blank in place of the critical word,

and participants were asked to recall the word that appeared
in the story.
Based on prior research involving semantic integration
and false recall paradigms (Gentner, 1981), we predicted
that participants who read the story in which Dempsey’s
belief is justified and true would be more likely to falsely
recall the word “knew” than participants who read the story
in which Dempsey’s belief is unjustified. Of course, it will
not come as a surprise if a justified true belief more closely
resembles people’s concept of knowledge than an
unjustified belief. Experiment 1 examined this simple case
in order to demonstrate the potential of the semantic
integration paradigm.
Participants This experiment was conducted online, with
147 participants (91 female) recruited from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk (mTurk). The mean age of the participants
was 34 years. They were all paid $0.50 for their
participation.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to the JTB
and UB conditions, and were asked to read the
corresponding story about the detective. Then, participants
completed a distraction task, reading an approximately
1000-word selection from a fictional article on gamma ray
bursts (taken from Waskan et al., under review). Timing
controls ensured that participants spent an adequate amount
of time attending to each section of the experiment.
In the recall task, participants were shown five sentences
from the detective story, each missing one word that was
replaced with an underscored blank space. They were
instructed to type in the word that originally appeared in the
story. The critical sentence was always presented first.
After the recall task, participants were asked a direct
question to assess their understanding of whether Dempsey
had knowledge or not. Following Starmans and Friedman
(2012), they were asked: “Would you say that Dempsey
knew Will was guilty, or only thought Will was guilty?”
They indicated their choices as ‘knew’ or ‘thought,’ and
then rated their confidence on a 1-5 Likert scale.

Results and Discussion
Recall task Participants’ responses during the recall task
were classified as either ‘thought’-type responses or ‘knew’
responses. Words and phrases synonymous with ‘thought’
but neither stating nor implying knowledge were grouped
together as ‘thought’-type responses. In an effort to remain
conservative, only the word ‘knew’ was counted toward the
tally of ‘knew’ responses. Responses that were nonsense
(i.e., were not verbs, were random letters typed in the blank,
etc.) were excluded from analysis. After these exclusions,
64 participants remained in the JTB condition and 65
participants remained in the UB condition.
As predicted, participants recalled the word ‘knew’
significantly more often when they were assigned to the
JTB condition than when they were assigned to the UB
condition (39% vs. 18%; Χ2(1) = 5.72, p = .016). This

1153

finding demonstrates that participants semantically
integrated contextual information, specifying that
Dempsey’s belief was both true and justified, with the
generic cognition verb ‘thought,’ leading to false recall of
the more specific verb ‘knew.’
Knowledge survey question Following Starmans and
Friedman (2012), participants’ ‘knew’ and ‘thought’
responses were assigned scores of 1 and -1 respectively, and
these values were multiplied by the confidence ratings
participants reported to produce a knowledge rating score.
Knowledge ratings from participants in the JTB condition
(-1.40) were significantly higher than in the UB condition
(-3.66), t(127) = 6.94, p < .001.

corresponding story about the detective. The distractor and
recall tasks for Experiment 2 were the same as those in
Experiment 1. After the recall task, participants were asked
the same question about Dempsey’s knowledge as in
Experiment 1, and were also asked, “Should Dempsey have
arrested Will?” Participants rated their confidence for both
responses. After these questions, participants answered a
pair of comprehension questions to ensure they had attended
to central details of the story.

Results and Discussion

Experiment 2
Method
In Experiment 2 we used the semantic integration paradigm
to examine a more substantive question about knowledge.
Specifically, we investigated the extent to which Gettier
cases activate people’s concept of knowledge. Experiment 2
used three stories, adapted from the detective stories of
Experiment 1.
In the first story, one character “Will” is guilty of a crime
and “Dempsey,” the detective in the story, finds authentic
evidence of his guilt, forming the justified true belief that he
is guilty (JTB condition). Meanwhile, another character
“Beth”, who is Will’s girlfriend, observes the sequence of
events that unfold and result in Dempsey thinking that Will
is guilty. In the second story, Will is innocent of the crime,
but is framed by his girlfriend Beth because she suspects
that he is cheating on her. Dempsey finds evidence planted
by Beth, and as a result forms the false belief that Will is
guilty of the crime (FB condition). Finally, in the third
story, Will is guilty of the crime, but he has eliminated all
the authentic evidence of his crime. Beth, as part of a ploy
to seek reprisals against Will, plants evidence that
implicates him in the crime. Dempsey finds this evidence
and forms the belief that Will is guilty. In this case,
Dempsey’s belief is both justified and true, but is only true
by chance (Gettier condition). In each of these stories, the
critical sentence read, “Whatever the ultimate verdict would
be, Dempsey thought Will was guilty” (italics added here
for clarity).
Importantly, the evidence Dempsey uncovered was the
same in each version of the story. Moreover, the structure
and wording of the stories was identical—save for the
relevant manipulations—and the stories were closely
matched in overall length.

Recall task Some participants were excluded from analysis
after failing the reading comprehension check. Others gave
ambiguous free recall responses that did not fit into either
the 'knew' or 'thought' response categories. After these
exclusions, 259 participants remained in the final analysis.
Participants’ recall responses were classified according to
the same criteria as in Experiment 1. Figure 1 shows the
proportion of ‘knew’ responses in the three conditions.
False recall of ‘knew’ was observed significantly more
often in the JTB (42%) and Gettier (47%) conditions as
compared with the FB (23%) condition (Χ2(1) = 5.94, p
= .015, and Χ2(1) = 9.63, p < .01, respectively). No
significant difference was found between the frequencies of
‘knew’ recall in the JTB and Gettiered conditions (Χ2(1)
= .20, p = .66). Participants thus seemed to believe that
agents in Gettier cases possess knowledge, and apparently
drew no distinction between Gettier cases and non-Gettier
cases of justified true belief. This finding agrees with that
reported by Starmans and Freidman (2012), and stands in
contrast to how philosophers have understood the
implications of Gettier cases.
Survey questions Participants’ knowledge rating scores
were calculated as in Experiment 1. This same procedure
was also employed with the “arrest” question to calculate an
action rating score, where a positive score indicated that
participants endorsed Dempsey’s arresting Will.

Participants Experiment 2 was also conducted online, with
304 participants (164 female) recruited from mTurk. The
mean age of participants was 31 years. All participants were
paid $0.50 for their participation.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the three conditions, and were asked to read the

Figure 1: Percent false recall of ‘knew’ in critical sentence
across conditions

	  
1154

Participants’ knowledge ratings differed significantly
between conditions, F(2,256) = 18.12, p < .001. Post hoc
tests using Bonferroni corrections indicated that participants’
knowledge ratings in both the JTB (0.62) and Gettier
conditions (-0.11) were higher than those in the FB
condition (-2.56; p < .001), but that knowledge ratings did
not differ significantly between the JTB and Gettier
conditions (p = .65). This finding is consistent with the
results of the recall task, and replicates the pattern of results
reported by Starmans and Friedman (2012). It is worth
noting, however, that participants’ actual knowledge rating
scores are considerably lower in the present experiment than
in that reported by Starmans and Friedman. This is likely
due to the different experimental materials used, and in
particular the quality of evidence depicted in the different
stories: Starmans and Friedman’s vignettes feature direct
perceptual evidence, whereas our materials describe weaker
physical and testimonial evidence.
Significant differences between conditions were also
found for action ratings, F(2, 256) = 52.81, p < .001, where
planned comparisons revealed the same pattern as for
knowledge ratings: participants action ratings differed
between the JTB (3.26) and FB (-0.12) conditions (p < .001),
and between the Gettier (3.80) and FB conditions (p < .001),
but not between the JTB and Gettier conditions (p = .69).
Interestingly, participants endorsed Dempsey’s action
(arresting Will) even when Dempsey had been Gettiered. A
number of philosophers hold that knowledge is intimately
connected to action (Hawthorne & Stanley, 2008). In
particular, they hold that it is intuitive that if a person knows
some proposition, then it is acceptable for them to use that
proposition in reasoning and in action. Our result is
consistent with this thesis: in conditions where participants
say that Dempsey knows Will is guilty, they also tend to say
that he should have arrested Will.

General Discussion
Summary
Experiment 1 provided a proof-of-concept that semantic
integration tasks can be used to examine people’s concept of
knowledge. As expected, a story in which a character forms
a justified true belief activated people’s concept of
knowledge more strongly than a story in which this same
character forms an unjustified belief, as evidenced by an
increase in false recall of the verb ‘knew’ in place of
‘thought.’
The results of Experiment 2 corroborate Starmans and
Friedman’s (2012) findings on laypeople’s reactions to
Gettier cases, while avoiding alternative interpretations that
might be raised with survey-based methods. As our
participants believed they were completing a memory task,
it is very unlikely that their responses were affected by
unwanted demand characteristics, or are indicative of some
sort of performance error (Kauppinen, 2007; Cullen, 2010).
Rather, their responses presumably reflect their concept of
knowledge, which apparently differs from the concept

developed by philosophers who have considered Gettier
cases.
These results have important implications for
philosophical research. Most philosophers have accepted
that Gettier cases are not instances of knowledge, and thus
that knowledge is not equivalent to justified true belief. At
the same time, many of them also assume that when they
analyze the concept of knowledge, they are investigating a
concept that is shared by laypersons (or at least that lay
judgments inform philosophical theories of knowledge). In
light of our findings, as well as those of Starmans and
Friedman (2012), it appears that philosophers may need to
reconsider their assumptions (but see Nagel, San Juan &
Mar, 2013, for evidence that different variants of Gettier
cases may yield divergent findings).
The present study demonstrates that semantic integration
tasks provide a promising methodology for empirically
investigating lay concepts, avoiding many of the pitfalls
associated with survey-based methods. Semantic integration
tasks minimize the likelihood that participants’ responses
are affected by demand characteristics, and make it possible
to isolate the activation of concepts from downstream
decision processes.

Directions for Future Research
The fact that ‘knowledge’ has a verb form, as well as
approximate near-synonyms such as ‘thought’ and
‘believed’, allowed us to model our investigations of
knowledge directly on Gentner’s (1981) research on the
semantic integration of verb meanings. Of course, not all
concepts of interest to psychologists and philosophers will
necessarily exhibit these desirable traits. Where this is not
the case, other semantic integration tasks may be more
appropriate. For example, these constraints would not apply
to semantic integration tasks measuring recognition for
sentences or phrases (e.g., Bransford & Franks, 1971;
Owens, Bower & Black, 1979). As described earlier, this
type of task presents some disadvantages (e.g., increased
ambiguity from the assessment of recognition memory over
larger semantic units). However, these disadvantages are not
insurmountable. In particular, employing a remember-know
procedure (Tulving, 1985) could help distinguish between
genuine recollection and familiarity. With sufficient care, it
should be possible to craft phrases or sentences that
unambiguously express whatever concept may be of interest
to researchers.
The present investigation demonstrates the need for
empirical research on knowledge attribution and knowledge
concepts, and also illustrates a powerful method that may be
applicable in future investigations. Further research is
needed to explore both the implications of these early
findings on Gettier cases, as well as other factors that are
potentially relevant to knowledge, such as the salience of
error (e.g., Schaffer & Knobe, 2012) and agents’ practical
interests (e.g., Pinillos, 2012). Moreover, semantic
integration tasks may prove useful for the study of other

1155

philosophical concepts, including intention (Knobe et al.,
2012) and causation (Livengood & Machery, 2007).

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by grant
N000140810186 from the Office of Naval Research.

References
Birch, S. A. J. (2005). When knowledge is a curse. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 14, 25–29.
Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1971). The abstraction of
linguistic ideas. Cognitive Psychology, 2, 331–350.
Braverman, M., Clevenger, J. Harmon, I., Higgins, A.,
Horne, Z., Spino, J., & Waskan, J. (2012). Intelligability
is necessary for explanation but accuracy may not be. In
N. Miyake, D. Peebles & R. P. Cooper (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1368-1373). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Cullen, S. (2010). Survey-driven romanticism. Review of
Philosophy and Psychology, 1, 275–296.
Flagg, P. (1976). Semantic integration in sentence memory?
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 15,
491–504.
Gentner, D. (1981). Integrating verb meanings into context.
Discourse Processes, 4, 349–375.
Gettier, E. L. (1963). Is justified true belief knowledge?
Analysis, 23, 121-123.
Hawthorne, J., & Stanley, J. (2008). Knowledge and
action. Journal of Philosophy, 105, 571.
Kauppinen, A. (2007). The rise and fall of experimental
philosophy. Philosophical Explorations, 10, 95-118.
Klayman, J., Soll, J., González-Vallejo, C., & Barlas, S.
(1999). Overconfidence: It depends on how, what, and
whom you ask. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 79, 216–247.
Knobe, J., Buckwalter, W., Nichols, S., Robbins, P.,
Sarkissian, H., & Sommers, T. (2012). Experimental
philosophy. Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 81–99.
Livengood, J., & Machery, E. (2007). The folk probably
don’t think what you think they think: Experiments on
causation by absence. Midwest Studies in Philosophy,
XXXI, 107 – 127.
Nagel, J., San Juan, V., & Mar, R. A. (2013). Lay denial of
knowledge for justified true beliefs. Cognition.
Orne, M. (1962). On the social psychology of the
psychological experiment: With particular reference to
demand characteristics and their implications. American
Psychologist, 17, 776–783.
Owens, J., Bower, G., & Black, J. (1979). The “soap opera”
effect in story recall. Memory & Cognition, 7, 185–191.
Pinillos, A. (2012). Knowledge, experiments, and practical
interests. In J. Brown & M. Gerkin (Eds.), Knowledge

ascriptions (pp. 192-219). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee
have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1,
515-526.
Sachs, J. (1967). Recognition memory for syntactic and
semantic aspects of connected discourse. Perception &
Psychophysics, 2, 437–442.
Schaffer, J., & Knobe, J. (2012). Contrastive knowledge
surveyed. Noûs, 46(4), 675-708.
Starmans, C., & Friedman, O. (2012). The folk conception
of knowledge. Cognition, 124, 272–283.
Sulin, R. A., & Dooling, D. J. (1974). Intrusion of a
thematic idea in retention of prose. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 103, 255–262.
Thorndyke, P. (1976). The role of inferences in discourse
comprehension. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 15, 437–446.
Tsai, C., Klayman, J., & Hastie, R. (2008). Effects of
amount of information on judgment accuracy and
confidence. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 107, 97–105.
Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian
Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 26, 1-12.
Turri, J. (in press). A conspicuous art: Putting Gettier to the
test. Philosopher’s Imprint.
Waskan, J., Clevenger, J., Harmon, I., Horne, Z., & Spino,
J. (under review). Explanatory anti-psychologism
overturned by lay and scientific case classifications.
Weber, S., & Cook, T. (1972). Subject effects in laboratory
research: An examination of subject roles, demand
characteristics, and valid inference. Psychological
Bulletin, 77, 273–295.
Weinberg, J. M., Nichols, S., & Stich, S. (2008).
Normativity and epistemic intuitions. Experimental
Philosophy, 29, 17-45.

1156

