UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Knowledge tracing and cue contrast: Second language English grammar instruction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x0094cp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Zhao, Helen
Koedinger, Kenneth
Kowalski, John

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Knowledge tracing and cue contrast: Second language English grammar instruction
Helen Zhao (helenz@cuhk.edu.hk)
Department of English, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong

Kenneth R. Koedinger (koedinger@cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute and Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

John Kowalski (jkau@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
This paper introduces a cognitive tutor designed for second
language grammar instruction. The tutor adopted Corbett and
Anderson’s (1995) Bayesian knowledge tracing model and
provided adaptive training on the English article system. We
followed the Competition Model (MacWhinney, 1997) and
understood the article system as a galaxy of cues determining
article usage on the basis of form-function mapping. Cues are
in competition during language acquisition; hence cue
contrast is predicted to be an effective instructional method.
Seventy-eight students were randomly assigned to four article
training conditions (to learn 33 cues) and a control condition
(to write essays). We found that article-training groups
significantly outperformed the control group in an immediate
posttest and a delayed posttest. Specifically, our result also
suggested that there was a significant interaction between cue
contrast and cue type (definite vs. indefinite). Cue contrast
promoted more learning on the indefinite cues (more difficult
for learners). Knowledge tracing did not demonstrate such an
interactional effect with cue types. Instead, it boosted the
instructional effect promoted by cue contrast.
Keywords: knowledge tracing; cue contrast; cognitive tutor;
second language acquisition; English article.

Introduction
Since the mid-1990s Corbett & Anderson’s (1995) Bayesian
knowledge tracing model has been widely used to model
student knowledge in learning systems of various domains,
including tutors for mathematics, computer programming,
and reading skills (Baker et al., 2010). In recent years, there
has been an emergence of tutoring systems designed to
facilitate second language learning (MacWhinney, 1995;
Pavlik & Anderson, 2005). Among them we rarely find
learning systems adopting Bayesian knowledge tracing to
promote robust language learning (Koedinger, Corbett &
Perfetti, 2012).
This paper introduces a Bayesian tutorial system of
grammar instruction applied in an English as a Foreign
Language (EFL) context. The primary goal of this research
has been to develop an adaptive vehicle for testing the
efficacy of Bayesian Knowledge Tracing in this domain.
Another feature of the tutor, which presents grammatical
cues in contrast, is informed by the cognitive linguistic

theories of the Competition Model (MacWhinney, 1997).
This paper discusses how these two areas of thought are
blended to shape the design of the tutor and how they
interact to influence learning effects. Specifically, the tutor
targets the English article system, a difficult grammatical
category for second language learners (Butler, 2002; CelceMurcia & Larsen-Freeman, 1999).

Bayesian Knowledge Tracing
Corbett and Anderson’s (1995) Bayesian knowledge tracing
assumes that at any given opportunity to use a rule within
the software, there exists a probability that a student knows
the rule and may either give a correct or incorrect response.
A student who does not know a skill generally will give an
incorrect response, but there is a certain probability (called
p(G), the Guess parameter) that the student will give a
correct response. Correspondingly, a student who does
know a skill generally will give a correct response, but there
is a certain probability (called p(S), the Slip parameter) that
the student will give an incorrect response. Each rule has an
initial probability (p(L0)) of being known by the student, and
at each opportunity to practice a skill, the student has a
certain probability (p(T)) of learning the skill. Once these
four parameters are set, the model can be used to predict
student performance. Figure 1 illustrates the relationship
between the four parameters in the Bayesian Knowledge
Tracing Model.
p(T)
Not learned

Learned
p(L0)
1-p(S)

p(G)
correct

correct

Figure 1: Bayesian Knowledge Tracing Model (Corbett
and Anderson, 1995)
The system’s estimate that a student knows a rule at time
n (P(Ln)) is continually updated every time the student
responds (correctly or incorrectly) to a problem step. First,

1653

the system calculates the probability that the student knew
the rule before making the attempt, using the evidence from
the current step. Then, taking this into account, it computes
the probability that the student learned the rule during the
problem step. The equations for these calculations are:
P(Ln−1 / Correctn ) =

P(Ln−1 )* (1− P(S))
P(Ln−1 )* (1− P(S)) + (1− P(Ln−1 )* (P(G))

P(Ln−1 / Incorrectn ) =

P(Ln−1 )* P(S)
P(Ln−1 )* P(S) + (1− P(Ln−1 ))* (1− P(G))

P(Ln / Actionn ) = P(Ln−1 / Actionn ) + ((1− P(Ln−1 / Actionn ))* P(T ))

To set the initial P(S), P(G), P(T), and P(L0) parameters
for each skill, we used data from a previous English article
study to train each model (Zhao, 2012). During this previous
study, we collected 10,523 student attempts at choosing the
correct article, with each attempt labeled with the article
rule applied. We used the "brute force" method (Baker et al,
2010) to utilize this data and arrive at the most likely
parameter values. This method tries every possible
combination of the four parameters in the grain size of 0.01
and for each combination, computes the sum of squared
residuals (SSR). The parameter value combination that
gives the best SSR for that rule are the ones we use to model
the rule in the tutor.

The Competition Model
An important feature of the tutorial system in this paper is
its theoretical ground in cognitive linguistics. We adopted
the Competition Model (MacWhinney, 1997) and integrated
one of its fundamental principles (cue competition) into the
design of grammar instruction.
The model presents a functionalist rather than nativist
view of language acquisition and understands the linguistic
sign as a set of mappings between forms and functions.
Forms are the external phonological and word order patterns
that are used in words and syntactic constructions.
Functions are the communicative intentions or meanings
that underlie language usage. Each lexical item or syntactic
construction can be understood as a form-to-function
mapping.
In the context of discussion of the English article system,
there are four forms: the, a, an, and the zero article (0). The
form the specifies the definite article; the forms a and an
encode the indefinite article (a is followed by noun phrases
starting with consonants; an is followed by noun phrases
starting with vowels); the form 0 is commonly known as the
zero article or null article.
How about functions in the English article system?
Adopting the model, we carried out a functional linguistic
analysis and found that the four article forms are mapped
with approximately 90 different functions or usages (more
information see Zhao, 2012). Some functions are syntactic
and semantic properties (e.g., countability, singularity,
plurality); some functions are discourse-based properties

(e.g., first mention, second mention, immediate situation);
many functions are idiosyncratic surface features whose
usage is highly conventional (e.g., names of rivers, lakes,
malls, parks, bridges, theatres); and some functions combine
both syntactic and idiosyncratic properties (e.g., names of
singular mountains or plural mountains). So many functions
are mapped with only four forms. This complex formfunction mapping is one of the critical reasons why English
articles are difficult to acquire.
The Competition Model understands one form-function
mapping as a unit or a cue. E.g., the tag “the – river names”
represents a cue since it maps the association between the
form the and the semantic property of names of rivers. But
the tag “the – river names and second mention in the
discourse” is not a valid cue because one form is mapped
with two functions. In this case, the form-function mapping
needs to be broken down to the smallest unit.
The basic claim of the Competition Model is cue
competition. It considers cue competition as vital for
language acquisition. Sentences (1-2) illustrate how cues
compete and one gains dominance over another. In sentence
(1), the zero article is required because “wealth” is a
noncountable mass noun and is used alone with no
modifiers. When this noncountable noun is modified by the
prepositional phrase (PP) “of her parents” in sentence (2),
the noun “wealth” becomes concrete and identifiable.
Hence, the PP structure (strongly associated with the)
overrides noncountability (strongly associated with 0) in
sentence (2).
(1) Alice is interested in 0 wealth.
(2) Alice is interested in the wealth of her parents.
Early stages of language acquisition focus on obtaining
input on individual cues from the learning environments.
Learners may not know when a cue can or cannot override
another cue. As their language proficiencies increase,
learners develop their skills of interpreting cue conflict.
Some cue competitions are easier to interpret than others.
For example, the competition between the cue “a – first
mention” and the cue “the – second mention” is relatively
easier to interpret and are among the earliest acquired cues
in the article system. But the competition between the two
cues in Sentence (1-2) is relatively harder to interpret.
Learners need to know the grammatical properties of a PP
structure, its strong association with the definite article, and
how a PP structure typically interacts with mass nouns.
This paper proposes an instructional invention of cue
contrast that originates from the basic claim of the
Competition Model. There are two theoretical justifications
for the proposal. First, regularities, and heuristics are always
good for learning a complex problem space (Reber et al.,
1980; Ellis, 2011). Instead of understanding the article
system as a space with almost 90 unrelated usages, learners
formulate a more organized mental space with more than 40
contrasting pairs of usages. That leads to the most important
advantage of cue contrast: it significantly reduces learners’

1654

memory load and storage cost, and consequently increases
their learning capacity. One major theoretical commitment
made in the Competition Model is to a capacity-limited
model of language processing. This account treats sentence
interpretation as a constraint satisfaction process that
balances the limitations imposed by verbal memory against
the requirements of conceptual interpretation. Our raw
memory for strings of nonsense words is not more than
about four. However, when words come in meaningful
groups, we can remember dozens of words, even when the
message is unfamiliar. The most likely candidate for this
additional storage is some form of conceptual
representation. By presenting article usages to learners as
meaningful groups, we help learners form the conceptual
representation of the article system. In turn, storage cost is
reduced.

were given immediate feedback. The feedback included
correct/wrong, cue name, explicit cue explanations, and
examples. Training pages in the two no-cue-contrast
conditions also included two sentences. But they cannot
belong to a contrasting pair.

Method
Participants
The participants of the current experiment were 78 (31
males, 47 females) Chinese intermediate-advanced learners
at a public university in Beijing that specialized in foreign
language education and research. Their average years spent
learning English was 7.8 years.

Materials and Design
A 2 (Contrast: yes vs. no) × 2 (Knowledge tracing: yes vs.
no) × 2 (Cue type: the vs. 0/a/an)1 mixed model design was
used in this experiment. Cue contrast and knowledge tracing
are two between-subject variables, whereas cue type is a
within-subject variable.
There were five conditions in the experiment (Table 1):
four experimental groups who received article training; one
control group who did not receive article training. The four
experimental conditions were manipulated based on the two
between-subject variables. The control group spent roughly
the same amount of training time as the four experimental
groups. Instead of learning articles, they were asked to write
four English essays during the training sessions and weren’t
given feedback.

Figure 2: A training page of cue contrast conditions.
This experiment trained 33 article cues that were grouped
into 18 pairs of contrasting cues. Definite article cues were
paired with indefinite article or zero article cues primarily
based on structural distinction. Table 2 exemplifies five
representative cue pairs. In the first and second pairs, article
choices are distinguished based on the existence of a relative
clause as a post-modifier. The distinction in the third pair is
due to the “of …” prepositional phrase as a post-modifier.
The contrast in the four pair originates from the singular vs.
plural distinction of mountain names. When we could not
rely on structural distinction to create cue pairs, we relied on
semantic distinction. The ‘hall’ and ‘building’ cues in the
fifth pair, for example, are idiosyncratic cues whose article
choices can only be explained by historical conventions.
Hence, we relied on their semantic distinction to manipulate
the contrast.
Table 2: Exemplar Cue Pairs (With Examples)

Table 1: Experiment conditions.
Cue
Contrast
(CC)

Knowledge Tracing (KT)
KT-CC
noKT-CC
KT-noCC

noKT-noCC

Control
group

Article training was provided as a sentence-level cloze
task. Figure 2 exemplifies training received by the two cue
contrast groups. Students were given a prompt question and
two sentence items that belonged to a pair of contrasting
cues. They used a pull down menu to make choices and

1 a –singular countable
(a store)
2
0 – noncountable
(0 wealth)
3 0 – XX University
(0 Yale University)
4 0 – single mountains
(0 Bell Mountain)
5
0 – hall
(0 Baker Hall)

1

We grouped indefinite article cues with zero article cues due to
the small number of a/an cues.

1655

the – singular countable+clause
(the store she bought the dress)
the – noncountable+clause
(the wealth of her parents)
the – the University of XX
(the University of Chicago)
the – plural mountains
(the Rocky Mountains)
the – building
(the Tepper Building)

Implementing Bayesian Knowledge Tracing
We adopted Corbett and Anderson’s (1995) Bayesian
knowledge tracing algorithm and used Baker et al.’s (2010)
approach to train the model parameters using learner data
from a previous but similar article tutor study (Zhao, 2012).
With the models for each article skill trained this way, the
tutor updates P(Ln) after observing correct/incorrect
attempts at each skill and uses P(Ln) for the item selection
criteria. If we simply chose the next item to present with the
lowest P(Ln), the tutor would frequently show the same item
back-to-back. To introduce some variety while still giving
more practice on the items least learned, we use P(Ln) to set
the selection criteria of training items as: random selection
in proportion to percent unlearned. Percent unlearned for a
rule is calculated by taking the probability the rule is
"unlearned": (1-P(Ln)), divided by the sum of the
probabilities each other rule is "unlearned". A difficult cue
will have a higher percent unlearned compared to other cues
and will thus be more likely to be chosen next. But it is still
possible (but less likely) that a better-acquired cue will be
chosen next. This selection criterion avoids over-training of
unlearned cues and under-training of better-acquired cues.

Procedure
The study was composed of three sessions. Session I
included a pretest (25-min) and the first training session (1
hour). Session II (2 days later) included the second training
session (1 hour) and an immediate posttest (25-min).
Session III (2 weeks after Session 2) included a delayed
posttest (25-min). All sessions were administered online.
The tests were also in the format of a sentence-level cloze.

accuracy from immediate-posttest to delayed-posttest (T=
1.361, p= .195).

0.8
0.75
0.65

Control
group

0.6
0.55
Pretest Posttest Delayed
accuracy accuracy accuracy

Figure 2: Mean test accuracies of conditions.

Cue Contrast, Knowledge Tracing, Cue Type
Figure 3 compares the four article training conditions (KTCC, KT-noCC, noKT-CC, noKT-noCC) in terms of mean
accuracies of all the cues in the pretest, posttest, and delayed
posttest. In the pretest, univariate analysis indicates no
significant difference of mean accuracy among the four
conditions when all the cues are examined (F = .468, p =
.759, η2 = .025). Meanwhile, univariate analyses of pretest
accuracy also show no significant difference among the four
conditions regarding the acquisition of the-cues (F = 1.083,
p = .371) and 0/a/an-cues (F = .441, p = .778).

0.8

Results

KT-CC

0.6

Instructional Effects
A univariate analysis indicates that there was no significant
difference of mean accuracy between the article training
groups and the control group in the pretest (F= .207, p=
.651). These two groups showed a significant difference of
mean accuracy in the immediate posttest (F= 37.836, p<
.001). The article training groups gained a mean accuracy of
.154 (SD= .071), whereas the control group only gained a
mean accuracy of .026 (SD= .076). Figure 2 illustrates the
learning trajectories of the above conditions.
A paired samples t-test shows that the article training
groups significantly improved mean accuracy from pretest
to immediate posttest (T= 17.156, p< .001). Though they
had a significant drop of accuracy from immediate-posttest
to delayed-posttest (T= -3.774, p< .001), their mean
accuracy in the delayed posttest was significantly higher
than their pretest level (T= 13.374, p< .001). This suggested
that the article training groups retained learning two weeks
after training.
A paired samples t-test suggests that the control group did
not show improvement from pretest to immediate posttest
(T= 1.359, p= .196). Neither did they improve mean

Article
training
groups

0.7

KT-noCC

0.4

noKT-CC

0.2

noKT-noCC

0
Pretest

Posttest Delayed

Figure 3: Mean accuracies of three tests of four conditions
In the immediate posttest, univariate analyses suggest no
significant difference between contrast and no-contrast (F =
.110, p = .741, η2 = .002) and between knowledge-tracing
and no-knowledge-tracing (F= 2.435, p= .124, η2= .038),
when all the article cues are examined. The same pattern
was found in the delayed posttest. We then delved into four
conditions and looked for variations. Again, when all article
cues were considered, we could not find significant
differences among the four conditions in the immediate

1656

posttest (F= 2.165, p= .102, η2= .099) and in the delayed
posttest (F= 1.464, p= .234, η2= .069).

Gained Mean Accuracy
(Posttest - Pretest)

Our next step was to explore interaction between the two
primary variables (KT, CC) and cue type (the vs. 0/a/an). A
repeated measure ANOVA suggested that there was a
significant interaction (Figure 4) between cue contrast and
cue type (F= 9.744, p< .001, η 2= .138). Bonferroni
pairwise comparisons indicated that within each cue type,
the differences between cue contrast and non-cue contrast
were significant: the-cues (p< .001) and 0/a/an-cues (p<
.001). Cue contrast promoted significantly more learning
(p< .001) of 0/a/an cues than of the cues. In contrast, noncue contrast created a more balanced instructional effect. Its
instructional effect on the cues and 0/a/an cues were not
significantly different (p= .844).

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Discussion and Conclusion

the

0/a/an

Cue Contrast

0.017

0.276

Non-Cue
Contrast

0.152

0.16

Figure 4: Contrast versus non-contrast

Gained Mean Accuracy
(Posttest-Pretest)

Yet, we did not find significant interaction between
knowledge tracing and cue type. Bonferroni pairwise
comparisons suggested no significant differences between
knowledge tracing and non-knowledge tracing within the
cues (p= .557) or 0/a/an cues (p= .385).

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1

the

0/a/an

-0.069

0.291

KT-noCC

0.17

0.115

noKT-CC

0.064

0.269

noKT-noCC

0.128

0.225

KT-CC

Figure 5 illustrates an interaction between cue types (the
vs. 0/a/an) and the four training conditions. The Y-axis is
gained mean accuracy (immediate posttest–pretest). As we
can see, the cue contrast conditions (KT-CC, noKT-CC)
pushed for more learning of the 0/a/an cues. In particular,
KT-CC had a more tilted slope leaning towards more
learning on 0/a/an, which sharpened the interactional effect
between cue contrast and article forms. Meanwhile, the noncue contrast conditions (KT-noCC, noKT-noCC) were
suggested to promote more learning on the cues. This trend
appears to be more obvious in the KT-noCC condition than
in the noKT-noCC condition.
The above findings indicated that cue contrast played the
primary role of determining patterns of results. Knowledge
tracing did not change the interactional effects between cue
contrast and article type. It gave the interactional effects a
boost and made the patterns sharper.

Figure 5: Gained accuracy (immediate posttest – pretest)
of the-cues and 0/a/an-cues in four training conditions

The intermediate-advanced students in this study were
given a difficult task of learning 33 article cues within two
hours of training. The article training groups managed to
show significant learning in the immediate posttest and
retained learning two weeks later. This positive instructional
effect confirms two principles that MacWhinney (1995)
suggested to be important in designing and evaluating
foreign language tutoring systems: 1) practice makes perfect
and 2) feedback promotes learning (p. 318-319). Our study
clearly demonstrated that given a difficult learning task,
students would learn when they are given enough practice
trials, accurate and digestible feedback, and an effective
instructional method that helped to reduce memory and
learning loads. The study implications for a third principle
of MacWhinney (1995), that 3) cue conflicts are crucial for
learning, are less clear.
As indicated by the interaction with type of item ('the' vs.
0/a/an), the cue contrast manipulation had a clear impact,
raising performance on 0/a/an-cues but lowering
performance on the-cues. By analyzing contrasting cue
pairs, it was hypothesized that learners in the cue contrast
condition would formulate a new understanding of the
article system and develop a more systematic knowledge
space. Knowledge tracing effects, in comparison, would be
less visible. Indeed, KT did not change how learners
conceptualized the article system. It mainly functioned to
escalate learning.
Why did only cue contrast show interaction with cue type
(the vs. 0/a/an)? Because that was the way the tutor was
designed. Contrasting pairs were created because they
shared similar features (e.g., mountain names) but required
different article forms (e.g., 0-single mountain names, theplural mountain names). But knowledge tracing was not
manipulated based on article type.
And why did cue contrast promote more learning on
0/a/an cues than the cues? At first we suspected an ordering
effect behind this interactional effect, i.e., cue contrast made
learners pay more attention to the first item on a training

1657

screen and consequently paid less attention to the second
item. But in fact there were more the items than 0/a/an
items at the top of the training screen. Meanwhile, a
repeated measure ANOVA also suggested no significant
interaction between cue contrast and item sequence (F=
2.427, p= .124) and no main effects of item sequence (F=
1.311, p= .991) or of cue contrast (F= .049, p= .825). Also
we suspected that cue contrast groups got a higher
frequency of exposure to 0/a/an items. Yet this was not
confirmed either. Frequency of exposure to the-items and
0/a/an-items was balanced between contrast and no-contrast
conditions.
Then the most plausible account was that cue contrast
illuminated weak areas of learning. 0/a/an cues were poorly
acquired by learners. Their pretest mean accuracy of 0/a/an
cues (M= .472) was significantly lower (p< .001) than the
cues (M= .761). We found that a particular problem
associated with the zero article acquisition was due to a
misunderstanding made by students2. They thought that all
the so-called “proper nouns” (e.g., Lake Michigan, the
Colorado River, Baker Hall, the Tepper Building) were
unique and therefore had to be used with the definite article.
They did not know that some of such noun phrases required
the zero article. Therefore, it became enlightening moments
for students to see two proper nouns being contrasted in one
screen. They allocated more time and attention to the zero
article proper noun. As we can see, the mechanism behind
cue contrast was cue focusing that directed students’
attention to the right areas.
Due to the interaction between contrast and cue type,
there was a trade-off that cancelled the overall instructional
effect of cue contrast when all cues were considered.
The last question to discuss is the reason why knowledgetracing groups did not outperform non-knowledge-tracing
groups. The most plausible reason was the relatively short
duration of instruction. Two hours might not be enough for
knowledge tracing to demonstrate its full advantages.
Learners in the knowledge tracing conditions were in the
middle of tackling the most difficult cues when training
ended. They did not have enough time to work on the less
difficult cues. The posttest mean accuracy (.744) of the
article training groups was far from the mastery level (.950).
This sent us a stronger signal that a longer training time was
needed for knowledge tracing to be more effective.
In short, this study demonstrated a successful application
of cognitive psychology and human-computer interaction
theories in second language grammar instruction. We found
that cue contrast was an effective method in teaching
English article usages to adult second language learners. In
particular, contrast allowed learners to become aware of and
shift focus to problematic knowledge domains. Knowledge
tracing boosted instructional effects of cue contrast. More
research is needed to further specify duration of instruction
so that we can make the best use of knowledge tracing in
second language grammar instruction.

Acknowledgments
We thank Brian MacWhinney, Naoko Taguchi, Yasuhiro
Shirai, Like Li, and Howard Seltman for their help in
conducting this research. This work is supported by the
Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center which is funded by
the National Science Foundation award number SBE0354420.

References
Baker, R. et al. (2010). Contextual Slip and Prediction of
Student Performance After Use of an Intelligent Tutor.
Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference on User
Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization, 52-63.
Butler, Y. G. (2002). Second language learners’ theories on
the use of English articles. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 24, 451-480.
Celce-Murcia, M. & Larsen-Freeman, D. (1999). The
Grammar Book: An ESL/EFL Teacher’s Course (2nd
Edition). U.S.: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
Corbett, A. T., & Anderson, J. R. (1995). Knowledge
tracing: Modeling the acquisition of procedural
knowledge.
User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 4, 253-278.
Ellis, N. (2011). Implicit and explicit SLA and their
interface. In Sanz, C. & Leow, R. P. (Eds.), Implicit and
Explicit Language Learning: Conditions, Processes, and
Knowledge in SLA and Bilingualism. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Koedinger, K. R., Corbett, A. C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The
Knowledge-Learning-Instruction
(KLI)
framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust
student learning. Cognitive Science, 36, 757-798.
MacWhinney, B. (1995). Evaluating foreign language
tutoring systems. In V. M. Holland, J. D. Kaplan & M. R.
Sams (Eds.), Intelligent Language Tutors: Theory
Shaping Technology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (1997). Second language acquisition and
the Competition Model. In J. Kroll & A. De Groot (Eds.),
Tutorials in Bilingualism. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Pavlik Jr., P. I. & Anderson, J. R. (2005). Practice and
forgetting effects on vocabulary memory: An activationbased model of the spacing effect. Cognitive Science, 29,
559-586.
Reber, A. S. et al. (1980). On the relationship between
implicit and explicit modes in the learning of a complex
rule structure. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6, 492-502.
Zhao, H. (2012). Explicitness, Cue Competition, and
Knowledge Tracing: A Tutorial System for Second
Language Learning of English Article Usage.
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Carnegie Mellon
University.

2

We carried out semi-structured interviews with selected
students. Due to space limit, the interview data is not reported here.

1658

