UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Later events lie behind her, but not behind you: Compatibility effects for temporal
sequences along the sagittal axis depend on perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7115619q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Walker, Esther
Bergen, BEnjamin
Nunez, Rafael

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Later events lie behind her, but not behind you: Compatibility effects for temporal
sequences along the sagittal axis depend on perspective
Esther J. Walker (e1walker@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Benjamin K. Bergen (bkbergen@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Rafael Núñez (nunez@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA
Abstract
Perspective plays a large role in how we think about space.
Does perspective also influence how we think about abstract
concepts, such as time, which have been shown to be closely
associated with how we think about space? Linguistic patterns
suggest that speakers talk about temporal sequences from two
perspectives: field-based and ego perspective (Moore, 2011).
However, the psychological reality of these mappings beyond
their use in language is unclear. The present study examines
whether sequential reasoning recruits the sagittal (front-back)
axis differently, depending on the perspective adopted for the
task. We manipulated perspective by using pronouns meant to
evoke a field-based or ego perspective (“her” vs “your” high
school graduation, respectively). Participants made earlierthan or later-than judgments about event sequences using a
mouse in front of or behind their body. We observed an
interaction between pronoun, temporal reference, and
response location. Participants map space onto time
differently depending on the frame of reference from which
temporal sequences are interpreted.
Keywords: spatial construals of time; perspective; pronouns;
compatibility effects; sequence time

Introductions
Spatial perspective plays an important role in how people
think about and comprehend the world around them (e.g.,
Tversky, 2003, 2005) and humans are quite flexible in the
spatial perspectives they are able to adopt. Indeed,
individuals are not only able to think about and interpret
scenes from their own perspective, but are also able to adapt
their perspective to that of another person (Tversky & Hard,
2009). Furthermore, language can also influence the
perspective from which one interprets a scene. For example,
the use of a single pronoun influences the perspective from
which readers simulate actions described in narratives
(Brunyé, Ditman, Mahoney, Augustyn, & Taylor, 2009).
Brunyé et al. (2009) demonstrated that when participants
read sentences such as “You are cutting the tomato” versus
“He is cutting the tomato”, they were faster to match the
sentence to the corresponding picture if the pronoun
matched the spatial perspective from which the picture was
taken. As such, it appears that one’s embodied simulation of
actions in the world is sensitive to the perspective from
which those actions are described. However, is it also the
case that the use of different pronouns influences the
perspective from which one thinks about more abstract
concepts, which have been suggested to obtain their

conceptual structure from our embodied experience of
moving through and interacting with the world around us
(e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1980)? One candidate that may
help provide insight into such a question is time—the
conceptualization of which appears tightly tied to how we
think about space.
Across the world's languages, people use space to talk
about time. Nevertheless, there's diversity in precisely how
languages spatialize time—what axis they use, and how they
map time onto that axis (Clark, 1973; Haspelmath, 1997;
Núñez & Sweetser, 2006). Moreover, the use of space to
structure time isn't merely a matter of language, it's also a
matter of thought—a large literature suggests that
conceptualizations of time are also strongly linked to
thought about space (e.g., Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008).
Indeed, from linguists to philosophers to psychologists,
scholars have discussed at length the ways in which time
recruits spatial structure. This research has produced a large
body of findings in language (Clark, 1973; Traugott, 1975;
Moore, 2006; 2011), gesture (Cooperrider & Núñez, 2009;
Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012), and psychological experiments
(Santiago et al., 2007; Torralbo et al., 2007; Weger & Pratt,
2008; Ouellet et al., 2010).
Scholars have long noted that there exist at least two
distinct spatial construals of time: deictic and sequence
(McTaggart, 1908; Núñez & Sweetser, 2006). Deictic time
conceptualization reflects past/future relationships and
centers around the present moment, or "now," as a reference
point. Sequence time, on the other hand, does not use “now”
as a reference point. Instead, one event becomes the
reference point for another event, capturing “earlier” or
“later” relationships in time. Experimental research on this
topic has often overlooked this distinction, pooling deictic
with sequential judgments, but because the two types of
time judgment relate to space differently (Casasanto &
Jasmin, 2012; Walker, Bergen, & Núñez, 2013), the present
study will focus only on sequence time.
Sequence time has been shown to recruit the transversal
(left-right) axis in a systematic manner. In gesture, English
speakers often sweep their hand to their left when talking
about earlier events and to the right when talking about later
events (Cooperrider & Núñez, 2009; Casasanto & Jasmin,
2012). Furthermore, space-time compatibility effects are
widely reported for this axis in a variety of languages (e.g.,
in Spanish: Santiago, Lupiañez, Perez, & Funes, 2007; in

3729

English: Weger & Pratt, 2008; in German: Ulrich &
Maienborn, 2010). For example, English-speakers are faster
to respond to earlier events on their left and to later events
on their right (Weger & Pratt, 2008). Interestingly, this
pattern reverses in languages that write right-to-left. Hebrew
speakers show the opposite patterns and are faster to
respond to earlier events on their right and later events to
their left (Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010). These consistent
patterns are likely the product of our long history of
experience with various cultural practices, suggesting a
strong role of such practices like graphical notation and
writing direction in the recruitment of the transversal axis.
By contrast, linguistic patterns reveal the spatialization of
temporal sequences along a sagittal (front-back) axis, and
how such temporal sequences are mapped onto the sagittal
axis in language appears to depend on the frame of
reference from which it is interpreted.
Moore (2011) observes that, in language, temporal
sequences can be interpreted from two different reference
frames: ego-perspective and field-based. An ego-perspective
depends on the perspective of the ego, as in the sentence “It
looks like there are sunny days ahead” (of now). In this
example, “sunny days” are described as lying ahead of the
present moment, which is co-located with the speaker’s ego.
This is clearly a case of deictic time, where the deictic
center is the present moment and ahead refers to the space
in front of the speaker, which is then interpreted as in the
future or later-than-now. On the other hand, while egoperspective frames depend on the perspective of the ego (as
in deictic time), field-based frames are deictically neutral,
meaning they do not require a deictic center, and do not
change if an observer's perspective changes. For example,
Moore (2011) considers people waiting in line: no matter
which way you look at the line, there is a front and back to
that line, dictated by convention. Those in front of others
will be served earlier than those who are later in line. This
can also be seen in the linguistic example, “Polls showed a
widening lead for the Democrats ahead of last month’s
elections” (example from Moore, 2011). From this frame of
reference, "ahead" is interpreted to mean "ahead of some
reference event", which is subsequently interpreted as
"earlier than some reference event". Thus, how sequences
of events in time map onto space in language appears to
depend on the frame of reference from which they are
interpreted.
While patterns in language suggest that these two
perspectives differ in how they use spatial terms such as
“ahead”, does this mean that speakers are actually using
space differently when thinking about these sequences of
events? Recent work has shown that, at least in deictically
neutral settings, the earlier-in-front/later-in-back mapping
observed in field-based frames in language emerges in
experimental paradigms. Walker et al. (2013) had
participants listen to a series of two events presented from a
speaker that was either in front of or behind them.
Participants were then asked to vocally respond whether the
second event they heard happened earlier or later than the

first event they heard (e.g., after hearing her high school
graduation, her college graduation, participants would
respond “later” into the microphone). Results indicated that
participants were faster to make earlier judgments to stimuli
presented in front of them and faster to make later
judgments that were presented behind them. However, the
stimuli in that study all used the pronoun “her”, and thus it
is unclear whether the results reflect how sequences
generally map onto the sagittal axis or whether they were
due to the use of deictically neutral stimuli, which,
according to patterns in language, elicit such a mapping.
Thus, in order to determine whether perspective influences
how one interprets the relationship between earlier/later and
sagittal space, we’d need to know whether manipulating the
perspective from which participants interpret deicticallyneutral sequences changes the pattern of space-time
mappings.
In the present study, we used the same basic design as
described above (Walker et al., 2013). However, stimuli
were presented visually instead of auditorily and
participants responded using a mouse click instead of
responding vocally. Participants made judgments about
deictically-neutral sequences along the sagittal axis.
Critically, we manipulated the pronoun that preceded each
of the events in order to examine whether differences in
person perspective induces differences in the frame of
reference that participants use to think about the sequences
of events. Participants received the pronoun "her" for two
blocks, while in the other two blocks they received the
pronoun "your".
If temporal sequences are simply mapped onto space in a
manner consistent with a field-based frame of reference, we
would expect to see no difference in the time-space
mappings recruited for each of the pronouns—both
pronouns would elicit a clear earlier-in-front, later-in-back
sequential mapping. Alternatively, the use of different
pronouns may lead to the use of different space-time
mappings. While making a judgment about whether your
high school graduation is earlier or later than your college
graduation need not involve any deixis or reference to the
present moment, the inclusion of the pronoun “your” may
automatically bring forth thoughts about your location in
time. Conversely, the use of the pronoun “her” in sequences
would keep them deictically neutral. If this is the case, then
the use of the pronoun "her" should lead to time-space
mappings consistent with a field-based interpretation
(earlier-in-front/later-in-back) while the use of the pronoun
“your” should encourage the use of time-space mappings
consistent with an ego-perspective (earlier-in-back/later-infront). More specifically, we would expect a three-way
interaction between the pronoun used, temporal reference,
and location of response.

3730

Methods

second event. After each block, participants received new
instructions for how to respond during the next block.

Participants
Forty-two undergraduates at the University of California,
San Diego participated for partial course credit. Eight
participants were removed due to low levels of accuracy
(<80%), leaving 36 participants for analysis.

Materials and Design
The stimuli were composed of forty pairs of typical life
events (e.g., “her/your high school graduation, her/your
college graduation”). Twenty pairs required “earlier”
judgments while twenty required “later” judgments. Stimuli
for earlier judgments were no different in length than those
presented for later judgments, p=.72.
The experiment was programmed using E-Prime
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Each
participant completed a total of four blocks of forty trials of
sequential judgments. During two of the blocks, each event
was preceded with the pronoun “her” and during the other
two blocks, events were preceded with “your”. Participants
completed two blocks of trials (one block for each response
mapping) with each pronoun, followed by another two
blocks of trials using the other pronoun. Response mappings
and pronoun order were counterbalanced across participants.

Figure 1: Participants held one mouse in front of their body
and one mouse behind their body. Which hand was in front
was counterbalanced across participants.

Procedure
Participants held two computer mouses, one in each hand,
with each of their thumbs over one of the mouse buttons.
One mouse's button was covered with red tape, while the
other mouse's button was covered with yellow tape.
Participants held one mouse directly in front of their body
and the other mouse behind their back (see Figure 1). Which
hand was in front (right or left) was counterbalanced across
participants.
Before each block, participants were presented with
instructions that explained the stimulus-response mappings
they would use for that block. The yellow mouse was
always in front of the participant, while the red mouse was
always behind the participant. Which judgment required
pressing a button on which mouse was changed after each
block. Participants were instructed to judge whether the
second event they saw in a sequence was earlier or later than
the first event, and to indicate their decision by pressing
either the yellow or red mouse. They were told to complete
the judgments as quickly and accurately as possible. They
then completed four practice trials, followed by forty
randomly ordered experimental trials. There were a total of
160 trials (four blocks of 40 trials) and 16 practice trials
(four practice trials per block).
On each trial, participants were presented with a fixation
cross for 1000ms, followed by the first event in the
sequence. After 2000ms, the first event was removed from
the screen and a white screen was presented for 500 ms. The
second event was then presented and remained on the screen
until the participant responded, up to a maximum of 5000
ms. Reaction times were measured from the onset of the

Analyses
All analyses were conducted in R (R Development Core
Team, 2005). Incorrect trials (5.8% of the data) as well as
trials that were 2.5 standard deviations from each subject or
item's mean (3.7% of the data) were excluded from analysis.
Response times were fitted with a series of linear mixedeffect models with subjects and items as crossed random
effects using the lme4 library (Bates, Maechler, & Bolker,
2011) in R (R Development Core Team, 2005). P-values
were obtained using the pvals.fnc function in the languageR
package (Baayen, 2011). To investigate whether the
different pronouns elicited different spatial construals of
temporal sequences, a linear mixed-effects model with
temporal reference (earlier, later), response location (front,
back), and pronoun (her, your) as fixed effects was fitted to
the response times. As needed, appropriate follow-up tests
were conducted, as reported below. Models were all
significantly different from their respective null models.

Results
The overall model revealed a two-way interaction between
temporal reference and response location, β=253.53,
SE=43.14, p<.001. Follow-up tests indicated that overall,
participants responded faster to later events when
responding on the mouse located behind them than the
mouse in front of them (β =90.36, SE=22.17, p<.001) and
responded faster to earlier events when responding in front
than in back (β = -69.86, SE=20.97, p<.001). There was also

3731

a main effect of response location, β=-88.78, SE=43.14,
p<.001. Participants were overall faster to respond by
clicking on the mouse in front of them than the mouse
behind them. No other main effects were significant.
Critically, there was also a three-way interaction between
pronoun, temporal reference, and response location, β=184.70, SE=60.99, p=.003. Follow-up analyses indicated
that this interaction was driven by a strong interaction
between temporal reference and response location on trials
using the pronoun “her”, β=254.03, SE=41.71, p<.001. This
interaction was not reliably significant for the pronoun
“your”, β =69.63, SE=42.15, p=.10 (see Figure 2).
To examine whether participants' responses were affected
by which pronoun they received first, we ran further
exploratory analyses. We divided the data by which pronoun
participants received first (her or your) and then created a
model with spatial location and temporal reference as fixed
effects and subject and items as random effects. Results are
presented in Figure 3. For participants who were presented
with the pronoun “her” first, there was no longer a threeway interaction between temporal reference, location, and
pronoun, p=.31. However, the interaction between temporal
reference and location remained, β=279.48, SE=61.38,
p<.001, and the earlier-in-front/later-in-back mapping was
revealed for both “her” (β =274.42, SE=60.65, p<.001) and
“your” (β=198.38, SE=59.09 p<.001). On the other hand,
participants who were tested with the pronoun “your” first
demonstrated a three-way interaction between pronoun,
temporal reference, and location, β=-283.32, SE=83.58,
p<.001. While the earlier-in-front/later-in-back pattern
remained for the pronoun “her”, β=231.73, SE=57.53,
p<.001, no clear pattern emerged for the pronoun “your”,
p=.38.

Figure 2: Mean response times for earlier and later
judgments along the sagittal axis. The left graph displays the
results for the pronoun “her”. The interaction between
response location and temporal reference is significant. The
right graph displays the results for the pronoun “your”.
Error bars represent standard error.

Figure 3: Mean response times for earlier and later
judgments along the sagittal axis when split by which
pronoun participants received first: the top-left graph shows
responses to the pronoun “her” when it came first; the
bottom-left graph shows responses to the pronoun “your”
when it came after “her”; the top-right graph shows
responses to the pronoun “your” when it came first; the
bottom-right graph shows responses to the pronoun “her”
when it came after “your”.

General Discussion
We investigated whether the use of different pronouns
(“her”, “your”) would lead participants to interpret temporal
sequences from different perspectives and therefore lead to
differences in how individuals mapped temporal sequences
onto space. If participants simply systematically map
sequences of events onto the sagittal axis in a manner
consistent with patterns in language (earlier-in-front/laterin-back), the use of different pronouns should have no effect
on the space-time mappings used by the participants.
However, we observed a three-way interaction between
pronoun, response location, and temporal reference: spacetime mappings recruited for temporal sequences involving
“her” were different than those recruited for the pronoun
“your”.
The spatialization of temporal sequences along a bodycentered sagittal axis in the present study is intriguing for
multiple reasons. First, sequence time does not make
reference to the present moment (as in deictic time). As a
result, events in a sequence are generally not co-located
with a speaker’s body in gesture as they are in deictic time.
Indeed, sagittal gestures are rarely observed when talking
about sequential time (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012). Second,
even though sagittal language (e.g., ahead) is used to talk
about sequences of events, this language is often used to
refer to the location of one event with respect to another
event, independent of the speaker’s location in space (or
time, for that matter) and thus does not reflect a sagittal axis
that is centered around the speaker’s body. Rather,
sequential time is often talked about from an external
perspective (Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013). However, it is

3732

interesting to consider what may be happening in the present
experiment, where one’s body is, by virtue of the
experimental design, forced into the same sagittal axis as the
rest of the events in the sequences. One potential outcome as
a result of this design is that participants simply map the
types of responses (earlier, later) onto the spatial locations
(back, front) in a manner consistent with deictic time, which
is associated with a body-centered sagittal axis. However,
the present data, as well as the results of previous work by
Walker et al. (2013) do not support such an interpretation.
Rather, it appears that the body may be acting as an anchor
for the first event in the sequence, leading participants to
map earlier or later events on to the inherent “frontness” and
“backness” of their bodies, with earlier events lying ahead
of their body and later events lying behind, consistent with
the “earlier events lie ahead of later events” structure found
in deictically neutral sequential language. This finding is
consistent with findings by Núñez, Motz, and Teuscher
(2006), who demonstrated that participants appear to
interpret sequential relationships in time by using the frontback relationship that is intrinsic to the spatial organization
of whatever is anchoring the sequential construal, which, in
the case of the present experiment, is the body. However, as
revealed in the present study, this pattern of mappings can
be flexible.
While we predicted a three-way interaction between
pronoun, temporal reference, and response location, we did
not observe the exact interaction pattern we expected.
Though participants recruited an “earlier-in-front, later-inback” mapping for the pronoun “her”, we did not see a
reversal of this mapping when the stimuli were preceded
with “your”. What might explain the lack of an interaction
between response location and temporal reference for the
“your” stimuli? One possibility may be due to the fact that
the pronoun “you” in English can be interpreted in two
ways: either as the second person “you”, referring to the
interlocutor, or as the indefinite pronoun “you”, which
refers to a generic person (or people), as in “exercise is good
for you”. Thus, while some participants may be interpreting
the sequence “your high school graduation, your college
graduation” relative to their own lives, others may interpret
it from a third person perspective, similar to “her high
school graduation, her college graduation”. Any effects for
the pronoun “your” would then be masked by averaging and
thus no interaction would emerge.
One potential factor that could have pushed participants to
adopt either a personal or an indefinite interpretation of
“your” could have been the order in which they completed
the blocks in the experiment. Participants who started the
experiment by making judgments to events that used the
pronoun “her” might have been primed by that experience to
subsequently interpret the sequences using “your” as not
pertaining to themselves, but rather to be indefinite. By
contrast, participants who started by making judgments to
“your” events might have been more likely to adopt a
personal second-person interpretation.

When the present data were divided by which pronoun
participants received first, as described above, this very
pattern of results emerges. Participants who received “her”
first demonstrated an earlier-in-front/later-in-back mapping
for events containing both “her” and “your”. On the other
hand, no consistent space-time mapping was observed for
“your” events by participants who received “your” first
while the earlier-in-front/later-in-back pattern was again
demonstrated for the “her” events. Though these analyses
are exploratory and must be interpreted with caution, they
provide preliminary evidence that the pronoun that was
presented first influences the pattern of space-time
mappings for each of the pronouns in a manner consistent
with the explanation offered above. Future investigations
may want to examine whether a between-subjects design
elicits a clearer difference in space-time mappings for each
of the pronouns.
One question that remains from this pattern of results is
why, even when “your” is presented first, the pronoun
“your” does not reveal space-time mappings consistent with
an ego-perspective. If “your” can be interpreted from these
two different perspectives and can be primed by the
pronoun “her”, as the data above suggests, then it is
plausible that no clear effect emerged because participants
are interpreting the “your” in different manners from the
beginning. Thus, in order to better understand the nature of
these mappings, future work must examine what factors are
responsible for this lack of effect. For example, teasing apart
whether “your” is interpreted from second person as
opposed to the indefinite may resolve some of the
ambiguities expressed here.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that
participants are sensitive to the perspective from which
temporal sequences are framed. While the pronoun “her”
encourages a strong pattern of space-time mappings for
sequential time, consistent with a field-based perspective
(Moore, 2011), the pronoun “your” does not. This observed
difference in how participants map sequences of time onto
the sagittal axis reveals that while time often recruits space
in systematic and regular patterns in language, these
mappings are flexible and interact with the spatial
perspective from which one thinks about time.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Lucas Medeiros de Paula,
Amanda Natsuhara, and Colleen Takahashi for helping with
data collection as well as Tyler Marghetis and two
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on previous
versions of this work. This work was supported by an
NSERC PGS-D awarded to EJW.

References
Baayen, R.H. (2011). languageR: Data sets and functions
with "Analyzing Linguistic Data: A practical introduction
to statistics". R package version 1.2. http://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=languageR

3733

Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2011). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4classes. R package version
0.999375-42. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4
Brunyé, T.T., Ditman, T., Mahoney, C.R., Augustyn, J.S.,
& Taylor, H.A. (2009). When you and I share
perspectives: Pronouns modulate perspective taking
during narrative comprehension. Psychological Science,
20, 27-32.
Casasanto, D., & Jasmin, K. (2012). The hands of time:
Temporal gestures in English speakers. Cognitive
Linguistics, 23, 643-674.
Clark, H.H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In: Moore, T.E. (Ed.), Cognitive Development and
Acquisition of Language. Academic Press, New York, pp.
27-63.
Cooperrider, K., & Núñez, R. (2009). Across time, across
the body: Transversal temporal gestures. Gesture, 9, 181206.
E-Prime 2.0 Software, (Psychology Software Tools,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA).
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-cultural
differences in mental representations of time: Evidence
from an implicit nonlinguistic task. Cognitive Science, 34,
1430-1451.
Fuhrman, O., McCormick, K., Chen, E., Jiang, H., Shu, D.,
Mao, S., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). How linguistic and
cultural forces shape conceptions of time: English and
Mandarin time in 3D. Cognitive Science, 35, 1305-1328.
Haspelmath, M. (1997). From space to time: Temporal
adverbials in the world's languages. Munich: Lincom
Europa.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kranjec, A. & McDonough, L. (2011). The implicit and
explicit embodiment of time. Journal of Pragmatics, 43,
735-748.
McTaggart, J. (1908). The unreality of time. Mind, 17,457–
474.
Moore, K.E. (2006). Space to time mappings and temporal
concepts. Cognitive Linguistics, 17, 199-244.
Moore, K.E. (2011). Ego-perspective and field-based
frames of reference: Temporal meanings of FRONT in
Japanese, Wolof, and Aymara. Journal of Pragmatics, 43,
759-766.
Núñez, R. E., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the Future
Behind Them: Convergent Evidence From Aymara
Language and Gesture in the Crosslinguistic Comparison
of Spatial Construals of Time. Cognitive Science, 30,
401–450.
Núñez, R. & Cooperrider, K. (2013). The tangle of space
and time in human cognition. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 17, 220-229.
Núñez, R., Motz, B., & Teuscher, U. (2006). Time after
time: The psychological reality of the ego- and timereference-point distinction in metaphorical construals of
time. Metaphor & Symbol, 21, 133-146.
R Development Core Team (2005). R: A language and

environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, URL,
http://www.R-project.org.
Santiago, J., Lupiañez, J., Perez, E., & Funes, M.J. (2007).
Time (also) flies from left to right. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 14, 512-516.
Traugott, E. C. (1975). Spatial expressions of tense and
temporal sequencing: A contribution to the study of
semantic fields. Semiotica, 15, 207–230.
Tversky, B. (2003). Structures of mental spaces: How
people think about space. Environment and Behavior, 35,
66–80.
Tversky, B. (2005). Functional significance of visuospatial
representations. In P. Shah & A. Miyake (Eds.),
Handbook of higher-level visuospatial thinking (pp. 1–
70). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Tversky, B., & Hard, B.M. (2009). Embodied and
disembodied cognition: spatial perspective-taking.
Cognition, 110, 124-129.
Ulrich, R., & Maienborn, C. (2010). Left-right coding of
past and future in language: The mental timeline during
sentence processing. Cognition, 117, 126-138.
Walker, E.J., Bergen, B.K., & Nunez, R. (2013).
Investigating spatial axis recruitment in temporal
reckoning through acoustic stimuli and non-spatial
responses. Center for Research in Language Technical
Report, University of California, San Diego, 25, 1-10.
Weger, U. & Pratt, J. (2008). Time flies like an arrow:
Space time compatibility effects suggest the use of a
mental time-line. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15,
426-430.

3734

