UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning the language of time: Children’s acquisition of duration words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4bc8v4n3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tillman, Katharina
Barner, David

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning the language of time: Children’s acquisition of duration words
David Barner (barner@ucsd.edu)

Katharine A. Tillman (katillman@ucsd.edu)

University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Abstract
Before children acquire the precise definitions of time words,
like minute and hour, how do they interpret them? And how
are such proto-meanings acquired in development? Here we
present three experiments, and assess children’s early
understanding of seven time words: second, minute, hour,
day, week, month, and year. Our findings indicate that
children first learn time words as a lexical class, then learn
their ordinal relations, but initially have little to no knowledge
of their relative durations. This understanding emerges late in
development – many years after children first start using time
words in speech – and in many children does not emerge until
they have acquired formal definitions for the words.
Keywords: abstract word learning; time perception; language
acquisition; number-line estimation

Introduction
Understanding the nature of time is a hard problem, not
only for physicists and philosophers who debate its status in
the universe, but especially for young children who are
exposed to artifacts and linguistic representations of time
from early in life. We rely on clocks, calendars, and words
like second, minute, and hour to measure and keep track of
time, and to coordinate our activities with others.
Interestingly, although children begin using time words
relatively early in life – by as young as 2- and 3-years of
age, most do not receive formal instruction regarding the
meanings of these words until much later, when they enter
school. This raises the question of how children interpret
these words prior to formal instruction, and how these
words are initially related to their subjective experience of
time, and the relative durations of events. In the present
study, we explored this question, and asked what types of
information children use to make sense of early time words,
and thus how they begin to acquire their meanings in early
development.
Duration words like time, day, and year, are among the
most frequent nouns in English (Kucera and Francis, 1967).
In addition to duration words, which we focus on in the
present study, time is also conveyed through verb tense,
through temporal adverbs such as yesterday and tomorrow,
through spatiotemporal metaphor (e.g., “a long meeting”),
and through the sequential structure of narrative itself. The
rich and varied ways in which language encodes the
dimension of time make it possible to reason and
communicate about events that are not currently happening.
Despite this abundance of temporal language, acquiring
the meanings of time words presents a considerable
challenge to the early language learner. Time can neither be

seen nor heard. Unlike concrete nouns referring to whole
objects that can be easily pointed out, and even more
challenging abstract terms like color words (referring to
properties of objects) and number words (referring to sets of
objects), there is no static perceptual stimulus to which a
duration word like minute refers. Word-learning principles
such as “fast mapping” and mutual exclusivity, which
describe useful strategies for learning the names of new
objects or object properties in the context of familiar ones,
do not easily apply. Rarely in everyday life (in the absence
of clocks and timers) are there explicit perceptual markers
denoting when events or specified temporal periods start
and end, further complicating the task of figuring out the
proper referents for time words.
Children are not typically taught the formal definitions of
duration words (e.g., one minute equals sixty seconds) until
they reach school age, but they begin hearing and even
producing these words much earlier, albeit with very low
accuracy. In child-directed speech, mothers of preschoolers
use time words less often, but in a wider variety of contexts,
than color and number words (Tare et al., 2008). While over
80% of children produce duration terms, including minute(s)
and hour(s), by age 5, only 22% of 5-year-olds reportedly
use hour(s) appropriately (Grant and Suddendorf, 2011).
Here we are interested in whether, during these years of
inaccurate production, before learning the adult definitions
(e.g., that an hour is 60 minutes), children acquire naive
meanings based on other information, and, if so, what
information they use to do so.
There are two broad sources of information children
could use in forming intuitive definitions of duration words.
One source is their capacity to perceive and represent the
durations of experienced events, and the other is their
linguistic input. Children’s ability to use and combine
information from these two sources leads to three possible
hypotheses characterizing the extent of their early learning,
each increasingly sophisticated.
By the first account, which we call the Nominal
hypothesis, children rely upon linguistic input to construct a
lexical category for time words, thus understanding only
that hour and minute belong within a common class of
words. Consistent with this, Shatz and colleagues (2010)
observed that, when asked “how long” or “how much time”
an event takes, a much higher proportion of preschool-aged
children are able to respond appropriately (using a quantity
word and a duration word) than are able to respond
accurately (Shatz et al., 2010). Children apparently
understand what kinds of words can answer a question

1462

about time before they can map those words onto specific
durations.
Second, children might learn the ordinal relations among
time words. This requires an additional inference: duration
words vary along a common scale. Linguistic input could
also be used to support this level of understanding. For
instance, if a child hears an adult utterance such as, “We’re
leaving for the zoo in an hour, so you only have ten minutes
to finish eating lunch,” without knowing the precise
definitions of either duration word, he could still use the
linguistic context to conclude that an hour must be longer
than a minute, if he understands that both those words
denote amounts of time. By the Ordinal hypothesis, beyond
simply learning that time words share a nominal class,
children also learn the ordinal relationships among their list
of known time words, e.g., year > month > week > day >
hour > minute > second.
Third, children might learn the approximate ratios
between the durations encoded by time words. How could
this most knowledge be acquired before explicit instruction
on time words? The Ratio hypothesis relies on duration
perception, as understanding of relative temporal
magnitudes requires that duration words be associated with
nonverbal representations of duration. By the Ordinal
account, above, a child will know only that a minute is
‘bigger’ than a second, but by the Ratio account, he would
also know approximately how much bigger than a second a
minute is (a ratio of 60:1).
We experience duration, thus children might be able to
map this dimension onto language. Experimental work has
shown that even nonverbal animals use temporal
information to guide behaviors such as seeking food or
avoiding shocks that come at predictable intervals. The
human mind must have means of representing elapsed time,
and many cognitive models have been proposed describing
the operation of mental clocks and pacemakers. By four
months, babies habituate to the temporal pattern of a
flashing visual stimulus, and react when a flash is omitted at
a prescribed time, revealing a very early sensitivity to
elapsed duration (Columbo & Richman, 2002). Basic
psychophysical tasks have also measured the precision with
which adults and children can estimate and compare the
durations of auditory and visual stimuli, usually on the order
of milliseconds or seconds. Although temporal sensitivity
does not reach adult levels until around age 8, even the
youngest children tested are able to discriminate stimuli on
the basis of duration (Droit-Volet et al., 2004).
If the duration representations are available to children,
how would the mapping between duration and language be
formed? Perhaps a child hearing adult speech about time
may associate unfamiliar duration words with the familiar
events they describe or in whose context they are uttered,
resulting in associative mappings between duration words
and perceived temporal magnitudes. Evidence that children
have knowledge of the durations of familiar events that they
are not currently experiencing (and which extend beyond a
few seconds in temporal extent) comes from a study by

William Friedman (1990). Friedman first taught children
that a spatial array of nine boxes, much like a number-line,
represented duration, from a very short time (the leftmost
box) to a very long time (the rightmost box). He then had
children indicate how long familiar events, such as drinking
a glass of milk or watching a cartoon show, took, by placing
a cube in the appropriate box. Four-year-old children
correctly ranked-ordered the activities by duration, and by 5
years their mean placements on the 9-point scale were wellcorrelated with adult-estimated durations of the activities.
Friedman’s tasks did not utilize any conventional duration
terms such as minute or hour. Our Experiment 3 asks
whether children are able to use a number-line paradigm to
estimate the durations represented by conventional time
terms as well as by familiar events.
Few prior studies of language acquisition have assessed
children’s early comprehension of time words. Such studies
probe what children know about time words before they can
produce them accurately, for instance by requiring a forced
choice. In Shatz et al. (2010)’s Study 2, children were
introduced to a puppet “from far away” who “didn’t know
very much,” and were asked show him which of two
pictures represented an activity taking a specific amount of
time, such as 10 minutes. Five-year-olds performed above
chance overall, and 6-year-olds were near 70% correct. This
study suggests that 5-year-olds have a rudimentary
understanding of the meanings of duration words and how
they relate to familiar activities. However, the results are
difficult to interpret because each prompt combined duration
words, number words, and events. Children could succeed
(or fail) at the task based on their level of understanding in
any of these three areas. Though Shatz et al. interpreted
their results as favoring a lexical domain hypothesis, they do
not rule out the possibility that children may rely on
quantitative representations of duration as well.
Here we present three experiments designed to assess
whether children understand time words at the Nominal,
Ordinal, or Ratio level. Experiment 1 uses a forced-choice
procedure to ask whether children can make time quantity
comparisons on the basis of duration words alone (Nominal
hypothesis predicts failure, Ordinal and Ratio hypotheses
predict success). Experiment 2 introduces number words
into the forced-choice, asking whether children can combine
their knowledge of time words with their understanding of
number (only Ratio hypothesis predicts success on critical
trials). Experiment 3 uses number-line estimation to assess
children's ability to map time words and events onto a
spatial scale representing duration, providing data that can
be analyzed both by ordinality (testing the Ordinal
hypothesis) and by relative distance (testing the Ratio
hypothesis). Finally, we assess children's explicit knowledge
of the formal definitions of duration words, and use this as a
predictor of their number-line estimation performance.

Materials and Methods
Participants
For Experiment 1, we recruited 89 children from the San
Diego area, including 25 3-year-olds, 26 4-year-olds, 20 5-

1463

year-olds, and 18 6-year olds. For Experiment 2, 85 children
participated, including 25 4-year-olds, 22 5-year-olds, 22 6year-olds, and 16 7-year-olds. Fifty-two children
participated in Experiment 3, including 22 5-year-olds, 17
6-year-olds, and 13 7-year-olds. 36 young adults (Mean age
= 20.6 years) also participated in Experiment 3. An
additional 16 children also participated but were excluded
from analysis due to failure to complete the task (8), failure
to comprehend the task (4), being outside the age range of
interest (3), and experimenter error (1).

Incongruent, depending on whether the larger number word
was paired with the larger time word (see Table 1).All 30
trials were conducted in quasi-random order. Half the
participants received one item-order while the other half
received the reverse order.
Table 1: Experiment 2 trial types
Number
comparison
No numbers
Same

Procedure, Experiments 1 and 2: Forced-choice
Two action figures, Farmer Brown and Captain Blue,
were placed on a table in front of the child. On each trial,
the experimenter read a short scenario such as, “Farmer
Brown [jumped] for [a minute]. Captain Blue [jumped] for
[an hour].” This was followed by a two-alternative forced
choice, “Who [jumped] more, [Farmer Brown or Captain
Blue]?” If the child was reluctant to give a verbal response,
she was encouraged to point to the character that did the
action more. Procedures for Experiment 2 were identical to
those of Experiment 1, but the time words were modified by
number words. For example, “Farmer Brown [jumped] for
[two] [minutes]. Captain Blue [jumped] for [three] [hours].”
Each child completed a total of 26 trials in the Experiment
1, or 30 trials in Experiment 2.
Trials and coding, Experiment 1. Children completed two
blocks of thirteen duration comparisons involving seven
time words: second, minute, hour, day, week, month, and
year. The comparisons tested were: week vs. month, day
vs. week, month vs. year, hour vs. day, day vs. month, week
vs. year, minute vs. hour, second vs. minute, hour vs. week,
day vs. year, minute vs. day, second vs. hour, and second vs.
day. Six action verbs, all of which were high-frequency
words denoting activities that could be done for variable
lengths of time, were used: jumped, slept, cried, played,
danced, and talked. Within each block, trials were
conducted in quasi-random order. Verbs were randomly
assigned to duration comparisons, with the stipulation that
the same verb was never used in two consecutive trials.
Trials were counterbalanced with respect to whether the
larger duration word came first, which character represented
the correct answer, and which character was prompted first.
Half the participants received one item-order, and the other
half received the reverse order. For analysis, the child’s
response on each trial was coded as correct (1) or
incorrect(0). These numbers were then converted into
proportions correct.
Trials and coding, Experiment 2. Trials in Experiment 2
included the same six verbs from Experiment 1. However,
only five time-word comparisons were used in Experiment
2: minute vs. hour, week vs. year, day vs. year, day vs.
week, and second vs. hour. For each of those five time-word
pairs, 7 different types of number-word comparisons were
made (Table 1). One trial included no numbers (identical to
Experiment 1,), 3 included “small” numbers (2 and/or 3),
and 3 three included “big” numbers (6 and/or 9). Each
comparison was designated Same, Congruent ,or

Congruent
Incongruent

Number size

Example

None
Small
Big
Small
Big
Small
Big

a minute vs an hour
2 minutes vs 2 hours
6 minutes vs 6 hours
2 minutes vs 3 hours
6 minutes vs 9 hours
3 minutes vs 2 hours
9 minutes vs 6 hours

Procedures, Experiment 3: Number-line estimation
Participants were given a sheet of 8.5’x11’ paper with
four horizontal,17-cm lines printed in a vertical column
down the center of the page. Each line had circles on both
endpoints and no other markings. Children were told that
the top line was a number-line going from 0 to 100. “Each
number has its own place on the line,” said the
experimenter. “You’re going to show me where certain
numbers go on the number-line. Look, 0 goes here
[experimenter draws vertical mark at left endpoint] and 100
goes here [experimenter marks right endpoint].” For each of
four number stimuli (see Table 2), the experimenter
instructed the child, “The [first] number is [4]. Can you
show me where [4] goes? Can you draw a line with the
[blue] pencil?” The first line was intended to give a baseline
measure of children’s ability to perform an estimation task
using a number-line. For each of the next three tasks, the
line represented duration rather than numerical quantity.
This was explained to the participants as follows: “Now,
this line is different. It shows how much time things take to
do. It goes from a very short amount of time to a very long
amount of time. Each amount of time has its own place on
the line, and the further you go over here [gesturing along
the line], the more time something takes. You're going to
show me how long certain things take to do on the line.
Something very short, like blinking your eyes, goes here
[experimenter marks left endpoint]. Something very long,
like the time from waking up in the morning to going to bed
at night, goes here [experimenter marks right endpoint]. For
each stimulus (see Table 2), the child was instructedto think
about how long the activity takes to do and to mark theline
accordingly. Participants were reminded that each
subsequent line represented duration and what the endpoints
represented (blinking eyes, morning to night) in between the
remaining tasks and if confused.

Trials and coding, Experiment 3.
Stimuli for Experiment 3 are shown in Table 2. Each
participant estimated number on the first line, familiar event
durations on the second, conventional time word durations

1464

on the third, and combinations of time words and number on
the fourth. Within each line, half the participants received
the four stimuli in the order shown in Table 2, while the
other half received the reverse order. As in Experiments 1
and 2, participants were presented with time word stimuli
(lines 3 and 4) in the context of events that could take
variable amounts of time, e.g. “[jumping] for a minute.”
Table 2: Experiment 3 Number-line stimuli
Number
4
45
18
61

Event
Watching movie
Washing hands
Trip to zoo
Eating lunch

Time word
Hour
Second
Minute
Day

Num + time
2 hours
6 hours
9 min
3 min

Explicit knowledge. Following completion of the four
number-line tasks, the participant was asked 3 follow-up
questions: how minutes are in an hour, how many hours are
in a day, and how many seconds are in a minute. Responses
were coded as either correct (1) or incorrect (0), and were
converted to proportions correct.
Estimation. To analyze the number-line data, we measured
the distance (in cm, to the nearest tenth) from the left
endpoint of the line to the intersection of the number-line
with each of the participant’s pencil marks. Marks falling
exactly on the left endpoint were recorded as 0.1 cm (to
avoid divide-by-zero errors) and those falling exactly on the
right were recorded as 17.0 cm. To assess knowledge of
relative durations, we computed ratios between each pair
stimuli (e.g., min/sec, hour/sec, hour/min, day/sec, day/min,
day/hour). Children’s estimation performance was assessed
by comparing their distances and ratios with corresponding
means from the adult participant group. We focus on the
results from the time word numberline task, which most
directly bear on the Ordinal and Ratio hypotheses.
Ordinality. Responses to each trial were also coded for
ordinality. To do this, each of the four stimuli for each line
was rank-ordered by increasing magnitude or duration. In
the case of line 2, the correct (adult-estimated) rank order
was: 1. washing your hands, 2. eating lunch, 3. watching a
movie, 4. going on a trip to the zoo. The participant’s marks
were also ranked by increasing distance from zero. For each
estimated item which fell in the correct rank, the participant
was awarded a 1, for each incorrectly ranked item, the
participant was given a 0, which were converted into
proportions correct for each child and each age group.

Results and Discussion
We began with three alternative hypotheses for how to
characterize children’s early knowledge of duration words
prior to learning their definitions. The Nominal hypothesis
is that children simply understand that durations words
belong to a common lexical category, the Ordinal
hypothesis is that children have knowledge of the ordinal
relations among the words within this category, and the
Ratio hypothesis is that children have knowledge both of the

ordinal relations and of the relative lengths of the durations
to which the words refer. Of these three possibilities, only
the Ratio hypothesis requires that children form associations
between duration words and nonverbal representations of
duration.

Experiment 1
The primary goal of Experiment 1 was to distinguish
between Nominal and Ordinal/Ratio understanding of time
words, by asking whether children are able to compare two
lengths of time strictly on the basis of the conventional
duration terms used to describe them. In order to succeed at
this two-alternative forced choice task, children must
possess some understanding of the ordinal relations among
the various time words. Unlike in prior forced-choice
studies of time word comprehension (Shatz et al., 2010),
here participants could not rely on their knowledge of
number or of familiar events in order to succeed. Measuring
overall accuracy in Experiment 1, we found that while our
youngest group of participants, the 3-year-olds, did not
perform better than 50% accuracy, as predicted by chance
(M±SEM=0.48±0.02 p=0.2,n.s.), the 4-, 5-, and 6-year-old
groups all performed significantly better than chance
(M±SEM, respectively,= 0.57±0.02; 0.67±0.04; 0.81±0.03,
all p’s<0.005). Furthermore, each age group performed
significantly better than each younger group (all p’s<0.05).
While the question of whether 3-year-olds have nominal
understanding of some or all of the terms is left open, these
data reject the possibility that children 4 years and older
know only that time words belong to a common category. It
is also noteworthy that our oldest age group, the 6-year-olds,
while performing quite well, were not at ceiling, despite the
simplicity of the task and the likelihood that this sample had
already received some formal instruction on duration words.
We were also interested in possible comparison effects or
time-word effects in the data, as these may provide
important clues into the order in which duration words are
acquired. We hypothesized that, if these words are truly
associated with durations, we might observe patterns such as
greater accuracy on comparisons between more distant
terms (sec. vs. day > sec. vs. min.), or greater success on
comparisons involving shorter, and thus easier-to-represent
durations, such as second and minute, than comparisons
involving longer terms, such as month and year, which may
be harder to represent nonverbally. Though a mixed logistic
regression predicting the probability of making the correct
choice as a function of the participant’s age and the timeword comparison type did find significant effects of each
(Age: c2(3)=142.7,
p<0.001, TrialType: c2(13)=59.0,
p<0.001), as well as an interaction between them
(c2(36)=71.2, p<0.001), there was no evidence indicating
that the relative durations encoded by the two words being
compared were driving the effect. Furthermore, collapsing
the data across all comparisons involving each time word so
as to compare overall accuracy for each word revealed no
differences in performance (F(6,595)=1.2, p=0.3, n.s.). As
accuracy improved from age group to age group, it
improved across the board, with equal improvement on each

1465

tested word, as would be expected if these words are being
learned as a set, with performance on each word being
limited by overall understanding of the ordinal relations
among the words in the list, without direct associations
between each individual term and duration per se (consistent
with the Ordinal, rather than the Ratio hypothesis).
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 assessed children’s ability to integrate their
knowledge of number with their understanding of time
words, pitting the Ordinal and Ratio hypotheses against one
another by probing the specificity of children’s knowledge
of the relative lengths of time referred to by conventional
duration terms. In Congruent trials (e.g., 3 hours vs. 2
minutes), the numbers provide an additional cue to the
correct answer. Even a child with no idea how long either an
hour or a minute is might still choose correctly, based solely
on his understanding of 3 vs. 2, thus improving overall
performance on Congruent relative to Same/No Number
trials. We expect the children with the least precise
understanding of time words to show the greatest increase in
performance in Congruent relative to Same trials. However,
in Incongruent trials (e.g., 2 hours vs. 3 minutes), basing the
choice on number alone would lead the child to make the
wrong choice. While a qualitative understanding that an
hour is more time than a minute is sufficient to succeed in
the Same or Congruent trials, only a quantitative
understanding will suffice on Incongruent trials. Making the
correct choice requires sufficient understanding of the
relative durations encoded by time words to realize that their
ratio far exceeds that of the number words, 3:2. Knowing
the order of the time words alone is insufficient, so the
Ordinal hypothesis predicts lower performance on
Incongruent trials. Only the Ratio hypothesis, in which time
words are mapped onto representations of duration, predicts
equal success on Incongruent and Same trials.
Overall accuracy in Experiment 2 was similar to that
found in Experiment 1 for those age groups represented in
both. All groups performed significantly above chance.
Proportions correct (M±SEM) for the 4-, 5-, 6-, and 7-yearolds groups, respectively, were 0.55±0.02, 0.71±-0.03,
0.81±0.04, 0.97±0.02. The critical comparison between
Same, Congruent, and Incongruent trials is shown in Figure
2. Data were collapsed across time-word comparison types
and number sizes, as neither was a significant predictor of
children’s performance in Experiment 2. Performance in the
Same number case was not significantly different from that
in the No Number case.
While the 4-year-old group was both helped by number
word congruency and hindered by incongruency, as
predicted by the Ordinal hypothesis, the 7-year-olds were
near ceiling on the task in all conditions, with no cost to
incongruency or benefit to congruency, as predicted by the
Ratio hypothesis. The intermediate age groups show
different patterns, with the 5-year-olds showing a cost of
incongruency and no benefit to congruency, and the 6-year-

olds showing no cost to incongruency and a benefit to
congruency. Strikingly, these results suggest that there are
children who know both that 3 is greater than 2 and that an
hour greater than a minute, but fail to accurately compare 3
minutes with 2 hours.

Figure 1: Effect of congruency of time word comparisons
and number word comparisons in Experiment 2.
Taken together, the results of Experiments 1 and 2
suggest that children learn duration words as a lexical class,
and they begin to learn the ordinal structure of that class by
age 4, prior to mapping them onto nonverbal representations
of duration. Further, children do not have a full
understanding of how these words encode relative duration,
consistent with the Ratio hypothesis, until at least the age of
7, after they’ve encountered time words in school. One
possibility is that children do not map these words onto
specific durations until they learn their definitions. Another
possibility is that younger children do associate these words
with durations, perhaps relying on their experience hearing
them used in relation to familiar events to make these
associations, but these representations are imprecise, not
easily combined with number knowledge.
A limitation of the forced-choice methodology employed
in the first two experiments is that each trial probed
knowledge of two different duration words, conflating the
participant’s knowledge of them which may have precluded
finding differences in the acquisition of individual words.
To further probe children’s ability to estimate the durations
encoded by individual time words, and to obtain a more
precise measure of participants’ ability to rank-order a set of
time words, we used the number-line method in Experiment
3. This also allowed us to compare children’s ability to
estimate the durations of familiar events and conventional
time words, and to ask whether overt knowledge of the
definitions of the duration words predicted better duration
estimation performance.

1466

Figure 2: Proportion of ordinal estimates in Experiment 3 and proportion of correct definitions of duration words

Experiment 3
Estimation data were analyzed in terms of their distance
from 0 along the line representing elapsed duration. Overall
time word estimation performance for the three age groups
was assessed by plotting each child participant’s estimated
duration ratios (see Methods) as a function of adults’ mean
ratios and fitting the data for each age group with a linear
model. The closer the slope of that line approximates 1, the
more adult-like the estimation. Slopes for the 5, 6, and 7year-old groups, respectively, were 0.14, 0.57, and 0.86.
These data confirm that children have essentially no
quantitative understanding of the relative durations encoded
by these words at the age of 5 (despite their above-chance
performance in Experiments 1 and 2), but obtain this
understanding in the early school years.
Results from the ordinality measure (see Methods) are
shown in Figure 2, alongside results from the follow-up
questions testing overt knowledge of the duration words
definitions. Comparing time word and event estimation, the
five-year-olds perform better with familiar events, lending
moderate support to the idea that young children extract
duration information from familiar activities and use that
knowledge to aid them in learning duration words, via
associative mappings. By six, however, children are
estimating better overall with conventional time words than
without. The probability of successfully rank-ordering the 4
time words is correlated with having explicit knowledge of
their definitions. Almost no 5-year-olds but most 7-yearolds know these definitions. Sorting the 6-year-old data
according to whether each child knows the formal
definitions of the words reveals that those who know them
perform like 7-year-olds while those who do not perform
like 5-year-olds, highlighting the importance of this factor.
An intriguing possibility is that learning duration words
not only improves our ability to estimate the lengths of
events described in those terms, but also provides a useful
cognitive framework for encoding and estimating the
durations of perceived events in general. However, by this
account we expect explicit knowledge of time words to

improve performance on duration estimation in both the
Event and Time word tasks. However, while we find that
accuracy on the follow-up questions (e.g., How many
seconds are in a minute?”), when added to a model
including age group, was a significant predictor of
children’s proportions of ordinal responses in the time word
task, it did not account for additional variance in event
estimation performance.
In conclusion, the three experiments presented here
suggest that, prior to acquiring their adult definitions,
children learn the nominal category of time words as well as
the ordinal structure of that category. However, we find no
evidence that children map these terms onto precise
representations of duration until after they learn their formal
definitions.

Acknowledgments
We thank Eleanor Chestnut, Katherine Kimura, Saima
Malik Moraleda, and Karen Bejar for their assistance.

References
Colombo, J., & Richman, W. A. (2002). Infant timekeeping:
Attention and temporal estimation in 4-month-olds.
Psychological Science, 13, 475-479.
Droit-Volet, S., Tourret, S., & Wearden, J. (2004). Perception
of the duration of auditory and visual stimuli in children and
adults. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
57A, 797-818.
Friedman, W. J. (1990). Children’s representations of the
pattern of daily activities. Child Development, 61, 1399–
1412.
Grant, J. B. & Suddendorf, T. (2011). Production of
temporal terms by 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 26, 87-96.
Shatz, M., Tare, M., Nguyen, S. P., & Young, T. (2010).
Acquiring non-object terms: The case for time words.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11, 16-36.
Tare, M., Shatz, M., & Gilbertson, L. (2008). Maternal uses of
non-object terms in child directed speech: Color, number,
and time. First Language, 28, 87–100.

1467

