UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Managing our debt: Changing Context Reduces Misunderstanding of Global Warming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4180c63b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Newell, Ben
Kary, Arthur
Moore, Chris
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Managing our Debt: Changing Context Reduces Misunderstanding of
Global Warming
Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW 2052 Australia

Arthur Kary (art.kary@gmail.com)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW 2052 Australia

Chris Moore (christophermoore@gmail.com)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW 2052 Australia

Cleotilde Gonzalez (coty@cmu.edu)
Department of Social and Decision Sciences,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
We report an experiment in which a change in the context of
a stock-flow reasoning problem leads to a 44% reduction in
the use of an erroneous ‘correlation heuristic’ response. In its
original context – a global warming scenario – the majority
of participants pattern-match the output of a system to its
inputs (i.e., use a correlation heuristic). In the changed
context – financial debt management – the majority reason
correctly that in-flows and out-flows must converge to
stabilize stock. Potential applications for improving
communication of climate change science are discussed.
Keywords: stock-flow reasoning; correlation heuristic;
climate change

There is overwhelming agreement amongst climate
scientists that the globe is warming up, due in large part to
increases in the emissions of greenhouse gases (e.g.,
Anderegg et al., 2010). Despite this consensus in the
scientific community, highly divergent opinions about the
existence and implications of global warming remain
entrenched in the wider community in many countries (e.g.,
Leiserowitz & Smith, 2010; Leviston & Walker, 2011).
The manifold reasons for this ‘disconnect’ between the
science and belief range from fundamental differences in
the way people ‘view’ the world (e.g., Kahan et al., 2012),
to the pernicious attempts to manufacture doubt in the
science (e.g., Oreskes & Conway, 2010), to deficits in lay
understanding of the mechanisms of global warming (e.g.,
Bord et al., 2000). Here we focus on this last issue and
examine how a change in context might aid understanding
some basic science behind how global warming ‘works’.
Our experimental task focusses on the relationship
between the amount of CO2 emitted into the atmosphere,
the amount of CO2 absorbed via natural processes, and the
resulting ‘stock’ or concentration of CO2 that accumulates
in the atmosphere. The simple principle that participants

need to appreciate to complete this task successfully is
fundamental to any system that involves in-flows, outflows and an accumulating stock. Namely, that a stock will
accumulate its in-flows minus its out-flows. Thus water in a
bathtub will accumulate the water flowing in from the tap,
minus any water flowing out through the drain. If the
inflow exceeds the outflow, the tub will continue to fill up
with water (e.g., Cronin et al., 2009; Sterman, 2008).
The same principle applies to the simplified climate
system we consider in our experimental task: the
accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere is determined by
the in-flow (emissions) and the out-flow (absorptions). If
emissions exceed absorptions CO2 will continue to
accumulate; only when emissions and absorptions converge
(CO2 is entering and leaving the atmosphere at the same
rate) will the atmospheric concentration stabilize.
A graphical representation of these relationships is shown
in Figure 1 (adapted from Dutt & Gonzalez, 2012 and
Sterman & Booth-Sweeney, 2007). The top graph shows
the accumulated stock of CO2 in the atmosphere from the
period 1900 to 2100. The stock rises steadily until the final
period (between 2090 and 2100) where it stabilizes, i.e.,
remains constant at 950GtC.
The bottom graph depicts the absorption of CO2 (the
green line) which is a fixed constant of 40GtC/decade
across the time period, and the emissions (the black line up
to 2000) which steadily increases across time. The task
facing participants in our experiment was to complete this
emissions line for the remaining time period (2010-2100)
so that the concentration depicted in the top graph was
achieved; specifically, so that the concentration was
stabilized by the final period. The additional lines on the
bottom graph show an approximately correct (solid blue
line) and a characteristically incorrect (red dashed line)
response.trajectory.

3139

Figure 1: Screenshot showing the Computer Climate Stabilization Task. The participant’s task is to complete the
emissions trajectory in the bottom graph so that the stabilization of atmospheric CO 2 shown in the top graph is
achieved. The solid blue sketched line in the bottom graph shows a correct response trajectory in which the emissions
and absorption lines converge at the point of stabilization (2100). The red dashed sketched line is a typical
“correlation heuristic” response trajectory in which the emissions line mirrors the trajectory of the accumulation (i.e.,
continues steadily increasing) – such a response indicates a failure to understand the relationship between emission,
absorption and accumulation.
The solid blue line is correct because it takes account of the
principle described above. The emission value in each
decade is calculated by adding the difference in stock
between the current and previous time period to the
absorption rate. Thus reading from the top graph in Figure 1
for the first estimate, the stock in 2000 is approximately 770
GtC and in 2010 it is approximately 800GtC. To achieve a
net increase of 30GtC in the atmosphere, 70 GtC must be
emitted, 40 GtC of which is absorbed via natural processes
(the green flat line in the bottom graph). Thus the correct
response is 70GtC which is approximately the value of the
blue line for that decade. The red-dashed trajectory is
incorrect because it fails to take account of the principle –
rather, the trajectory simply mirrors that of the accumulated
stock, a steady increase.
Despite the apparent simplicity of stock-flow relationships
(we all know how to run a bath without flooding the house),
participants presented with tasks like that shown in Figure 1
overwhelmingly produce responses akin to the red-dashed
line instead of the blue line (e.g., Cronin et al., 2009;
Sterman & Booth-Sweeney, 2007). The standard
explanation of such erroneous responding is over-reliance
on pattern-matching or use of a ‘correlation heuristic’
whereby participants reason that the output of a system

should “look like” (be positively correlated with) its inputs
(Cronin et al., 2009; Sterman, 2008).
In the climate task such reasoning leads to people to think
that if the concentration is ‘going up’ then so too should the
emissions and thus they sketch a rising emissions trajectory
that looks like the accumulation line in the top graph. Such
reasoning is not confined to the climate task, however.
Responses consistent with the adoption of a correlation
heuristic have been observed across a range of task contexts
(e.g., water tanks, bank accounts, people entering and
leaving a shop) and formats (bar graphs, line graphs,
tabulated numbers, and even simple text descriptions) (e.g.,
Cronin et al., 2009; Sterman & Booth-Sweeney, 2007).
Couching the explanation of this erroneous behavior in
terms of a heuristic begs the question of why the heuristic
response is so readily adopted. Heuristics are typically
invoked in an attempt to reduce the effort associated with
performing a task (e.g., Shah & Oppenheimer, 2008). One
account (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002) suggests that
heuristic responding combines elements of attribute
substitution and natural assessment. A participant faced with
a hard question about a particular target attribute (e.g., the
emissions trajectory) tends to answer a different but easier
question (e.g., what does the concentration trajectory look
like?). Thus the question about the target attribute is
responded to by substitution of a more readily accessible

3140

heuristic attribute. The accessibility of this heuristic
attribute is determined by the extent to which its properties
are naturally assessed – that is via some routinely used
cognitive procedure (similarity, fluency, availability, etc.).
The visual availability of the accumulation trajectory in the
climate task (i.e., the functional form of the line in the top
graph of Figure 1) may well contribute to it being readily
‘substituted’ for the correct attribute.
This visual similarity cannot, however, be the only trigger
to adoption of the correlation heuristic because, as noted
earlier, its use has been observed in other contexts and in
non-graphical tasks (although the majority of studies have
used some kind of graphical representation, e.g., Cronin et
al., 2009). Thus a more likely candidate for the prevalence
of such heuristic responding is simply that stock-flow tasks
are not the kinds of things that we think about regularly,
thus we find them difficult, and readily revert to simpler
solutions. While we may be able to run a bath – thus
exhibiting behavior consistent with understanding the
principle of accumulation – it does not necessitate an
abstract appreciation of such knowledge.
Furthermore our experience with such systems does not
typically involve making sequences of decisions about the
rates of change of in-flows and out-flows across time.
Rather they involve a single decision within a particular
time period. For example, when running a bath we know
that we need to put the plug in, turn the tap on and then turn
it off before the tub overflows. While this involves
(periodic) monitoring of the water level, there is only one
interaction with the system (turn off the tap) and the outflow
is typically constant (i.e., zero, unless we have a leaky bath).
This analysis of so called ‘stock-flow-failure’ (Cronin et
al., 2009) suggests two aspects that might be important for
reducing reliance on a correlation heuristic response. First,
the elements of the problem need to be sufficiently
accessible or familiar that participants answer the question
they are being asked rather than an ‘easier’ but wrong one.
Second, the problem needs to be one in which people have
some experience in dealing with the elements across time
and preferably one that involves multiple decision points.
We reasoned that a candidate scenario that features many
of these desirable attributes is financial debt management.
Most of us can readily intuit that if we spend more than we
earn then we will get in to debt, and that if we keep
spending more than we earn that debt will continue to
increase. Unlike the bathtub, debt management involves
sequential, discrete monitoring of income and expenditure
and is something that many of us grapple with across time
(“I will pay off that credit card by the end of year!”). Figure
2 shows how the climate task depicted in Figure 1 can be
readily transformed into a ‘financial’ debt management task.
The top graph in Figure 2 depicts the size (in dollars) of
the debt incurred by an individual across a period of 21
weeks. Just like the CO2 accumulation in Figure 1, the debt
increases from just over $600 in Week 1 and then stabilizes
at $950 in Week 21. The bottom graph of Figure 2 depicts
the amount the person earns (the green line) – which is fixed

at $40 per week, and the amount the person is spending. The
amount spent gradually rises to a peak at $90 by Week 11.

Figure 2: The Financial Task: A participant’s
task was to complete the ‘amount spent’ line
in the bottom graph to ensure stabilization of
the debt depicted in the top graph. A correct
response required the ‘amount spent’ and the
‘amount earned’ lines to converge by ‘week
21’.
The task facing the participant is to complete the ‘amount
spent’ line to reflect the debt trajectory shown in the top
graph. To do this successfully requires realizing that the
‘spending’ and ‘earning’ lines need to converge by Week
21. (For simplicity, participants were told that their debt
incurred no interest.)
It is clear that the fundamental (deep) characteristics of the
problems illustrated in Figure 1 and Figure 2 are the same,
only the surface characteristics have changed (cf., Gonzalez
& Wong, 201l). Both tasks require understanding the
relations between in-flows (emissions or spending), outflows (absorption or earnings), and stock (CO2
concentration or financial debt). Despite these basic
similarities, we hypothesized that the financial debt scenario
would trigger the correct intuition more readily (i.e., stop
spending more than you earn) than the climate scenario and
thus inhibit ‘correlation’ heuristic responding. In short,
participants should be more accurate in plotting the
trajectory when given the financial context than the climate
context.
We tested this hypothesis in two ways: first we
compared participants given only the climate task depicted
in Figure 1 with participants given only the financial task in
Figure 2. Second we developed another version in which

3141

another group of participants were given the climate task but
were invited to think about it as one of financial debt
management. In other words, we provided explicit links
between the two contexts (e.g., “You might find it helpful to
think about emissions as the amount you are spending”,
etc.). We predicted that participants in this additional
condition would perform more accurately than those given
the ‘pure’ climate task and possibly as well as those given
the ‘pure’ financial task. This latter prediction was based on
related work on analogical encoding (Gentner, Loewenstein,
& Thompson. 2003), in which people are better at solving a
problem when they are able to compare similar analogous
cases prior to undertaking a target task. If the explicit links
to the financial debt scenario facilitate abstraction of the
basic principle (i.e., that in-flows and out-flows need to
converge in order for stock to stabilize) then performance
might be commensurate with the ‘easier’ version of the task.
We report these three conditions as a single experiment to
facilitate presentation, although in reality they were run
sequentially.

Prior to making the predictions participants in all
conditions answered three comprehension questions that
required reading off some numbers from both the upper and
lower graphs in the display and typing in the responses.

Results
All participants answered the comprehension questions
correctly, suggesting that they were able to read the graphs
accurately.
The key dependent measure of interest is the
emissions/spending estimate made for each decade/week.
Each participant made 10 initial estimates and then had the
opportunity to change each estimate on a second attempt.
Figure 3 shows the mean estimates for the 10 time periods
averaged across both attempts by participants in the three
conditions (very few participants changed their initial
answers when given the opportunity to make adjustments).
The figure also plots the correct trajectory calculated by
adding the difference in stock between the current and
previous time period to the out-flow (see introduction for an
example).

Experiment
Participants
Seventy-five undergraduate students from the University
of New South Wales took part in the study in return for
course credit. There were 44 females and the mean age was
19.92 (SD = 3.40). Each condition was run sequentially over
a 4 month period, so participants were not randomly
allocated to conditions. No participant completed more than
one condition.

Experimental Design and Procedure
Participants were given one of three versions of the basic
stock-flow tasks described in the introduction (see Figures 1
and 2). For the Climate Task the graphs were adapted from
ones used by Dutt and Gonzalez (2012). In each condition
the main task was to complete the trajectory in the bottom
graph of the display. This was done via moving on-screen
slide controls that plotted the line for each time period
discretely. Thus participants made 10 predictions in total. At
the conclusion of these predictions participants were invited
to make a second attempt (if they wished to) and could
readjust any or all of the sliders before finalizing their
response.
Participants in the Climate Task and Climate Financial
Context condition were given some initial introductory text
about climate change and global warming (adapted from
Dutt and Gonzalez, 2012). Those in the Financial Task
received no additional information. Participants in the
Climate Financial Context condition were given additional
instructions drawing explicit links between financial debt
management and the climate task. These instructions
appeared first on a preliminary screen and then alongside
the graphs (to the left of the display shown in Figure 1) and
remained there throughout the prediction attempts.

Figure 3: The mean emission/spending
estimates for each time period averaged across
the two attempts made by participants (error
bars are SEM). The asterisks are the correct
values for each time period – see text for
details. Financial refers to the debtmanagement task, Climate to the standard task
and Climate Fin Context to the climate task
with instructions inviting participants to
consider the problem as one of debtmanagement.
Three features of the data are noteworthy: 1) participants
given the ‘pure’ financial debt management task perform
most accurately (on average) showing the correct downward
trajectory; 2) those given the pure ‘climate frame’ display
(on average) an upward trending ‘correlation heuristic’
response; 3) those participants given the standard climate
task but with instructions to consider it as a debt-

3142

management problem (Climate Fin Context) fall in-between
the two other groups in terms of accuracy.

Table 1: Classification of Individual Responses as
achieving correct stabilization of the system (i.e.,
in-flow and out-flow converge by the final time period).
Correct Stabilization (N of Participants)
Experiment
Correct
Incorrect
Financial
13
12
Climate
2
23
Climate + Fin
7
18

Discussion

Figure 4: A boxplot showing the average
MSD between the correct response and the
estimates (average across the two attempts) in
each condition. Solid line is the median
response.
These general impressions are confirmed in an alternative
way of graphing the data shown in Figure 4. To examine
whether the differences apparent in Figure 4 were
statistically reliable we used a default Bayesian t–test
(Rouder, Speckman, Sun, Morey, & Iverson, 2009). We
assume, for fairness, that the null hypothesis and the
alternative hypothesis are equally plausible a priori. The ttest then allows us to determine the posterior plausibility of
the null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis. We
denote the posterior probability for the null hypothesis as
pBayesH0. When, for example, pBayesH0 = .9, this means that the
plausibility for the null–hypothesis has increased from .5 to
.9.
As predicted, participants given the Financial context
made significantly better (lower MSD) estimates than those
given the standard climate task (pBayesH0 = .01). In addition,
participants given the Climate task with the financial
context as a guide made more accurate estimates than those
given the standard climate task (pBayesH0 = .24). For the
difference between the Financial condition and the Climate
Financial Context the null hypothesis is more plausible
(pBayesH0 = .75).
The data in Table 1 showing classifications of individual
performance supports the interpretation provided by Figures
3 and 4. When a correct response is coded as ensuring that
in-flow and out-flows converge by the final time period,
over half (52%) of the participants given the ‘pure’
Financial task showed correct stabilization compared to only
2 people given the pure climate task (8%). In addition 7
participants given the climate task with the financial context
instructions achieved the correct stabilization pattern.

Our experiment sought to address reasons for the welldocumented ‘stock-flow failure’ observed when participants
are asked to make judgments about changes to in-flow, outflow and accumulated stock across time.
In the first instance we showed a clear replication of
participants’ inability to ‘solve’ the stock-flow task when it
is presented in the context of the climate system. This result
dovetails neatly with those reported in the literature (e.g.,
Sterman & Booth-Sweeney, 2007) and suggests that
procedural differences between our and previous studies are
not crucial for eliciting correlation heuristic-consistent
responding.
In particular, our task differed from those used before in
that we required participants only to make estimates of the
emissions (in-flow) rather than both emissions and
absorption rates (out-flow) (see Sterman & Booth-Sweeney,
2007). We suspected that this change might make the task
somewhat easier but it appeared not to affect performance.
Likewise the fact that our ‘stabilization period’ was not as
long as in previous studies (i.e., only one time period) did
not appear to affect the failures to stabilize. (Note that the
instructions stated explicitly that the emissions stabilized by
2100, and the comprehension questions suggested that
participants could read this aspect of the graph.) Finally, the
change to a computer interface rather than the hand-drawn
sketches used previously (e.g., Dutt & Gonzalez, 2012),
appears to be a useful progression that allows a more
accurate quantitative approach to analysis while not
affecting the over-all pattern of responding.
In contrast to the relatively negative conclusions that can
be drawn from the climate task, an optimistic (glass half
full) interpretation of the Financial Task context is that
(some) participants can ‘do’ stock-flow reasoning. Given
the low-base of accurate performance in these tasks (e.g.,
Cronin et al., 2009), any manipulation which leads to over
50% of the sample getting the answer (approximately)
correct is newsworthy. Our working hypothesis is that the
financial context helps because the familiar principle (don’t
spend more than you earn if you want to avoid debt) is
readily intuited thereby inhibiting the correlation heuristic
response (cf. Kahneman & Frederick, 2002; Shah &
Oppenheimer, 2008). Moreover, the familiarity of projecting
thoughts about debt management across time - because
people often cannot pay off a debt in one go - helps
understanding of the in-flow, out-flow and stock
relationship.

3143

Clearly though the familiar context on its own is not
enough for all participants – just fewer than 50% still failed
to stabilize, and most of those gave responses consistent
with a correlation heuristic response. As related literature
has shown, the relationship between context familiarity and
accuracy on these tasks is not straightforward (e.g., BoothSweeney & Sterman, 2000; Brunstein et al., 2010; Moxnes
& Saysel, 2009) and more research is needed to identify
exactly which aspects of context facilitate reasoning, and
why.
This sentiment is borne out by the results of our third
condition – climate with the financial context as a guide.
Provision of the ‘readily intuited principle’ (don’t spend
more than you earn) was enough for just over a quarter
(28%) of the sample to understand the task, and led to
significant improvements in accuracy relative to the climate
task instruction alone. Thus for these participants at least,
the additional explanation in terms of a familiar context
seemed to improve the understanding of one aspect of the
science behind global warming. However, the remaining
participants could not (or did not) apply the principle
correctly to the unfamiliar context.
An important question arising from this work is whether
participants who perform the climate tasks accurately differ
in attitudes towards taking action on global warming from
those who exhibit ‘stock-flow failure’. As noted in the
introduction, although some authors argue that differences
in ‘world view’ are more important than scientific
understanding (e.g., Kahan et al., 2012), other studies
suggest positive correlations between understanding and
willingness to act (e.g., Leiserowitz & Smith, 2010). Indeed
Sterman (2008) argued that failures in stock-flow reasoning
may well contribute to the tendency to take a ‘wait-and-see’
approach on addressing global warming.
Although we collected some data on attitudes and
intentions to behave pro-environmentally, the paucity of
accurate performers on the climate versions of our task,
made it difficult to draw any strong conclusions in this
regard. Future work will attempt to address these limitations
by building on the successful context manipulations found
here and by targeting more heterogeneous (non-student)
populations with more divergent opinions about global
warming. Such studies could provide important findings to
help in getting the message about global warming both
heard and heeded (cf., Newell & Pitman, 2010).

Acknowledgments
This support of grants (LP120100224; FT110100151) from
the Australian Research Council, Department of Climate
Change and Energy Efficiency and the ARC Centre of
Excellence for Climate Systems Science is gratefully
acknowledged.

References
Anderegg, W.R.L, Prall, J.W., Harold, J., & Schneider, S.H.
(2010). Expert credibility in climate change. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 107(27), 12107-12109.

Booth Sweeney, L. & Sterman, J.D. (2000). Bathtub
dynammics: initial results of a systems thinking
inventory. System Dynamics Review, 16, 249-286.
Bord, R.J., O’Connor, R.E., & Fisher, A. (2000). In what
sense does the public need to understand global climate
change? Public Understanding of Science, 9, 205-218.
Brunstein, A., Gonzalez, C., & Kanter, S. (2010). Effects of
domain experience in the stock-flow failure. System
Dynamics Review, 26, 347-354.
Cronin, M.A., Gonzalez, C, & Sterman, J.D. (2009). Why
don’t well-educated adults understand accumulation? A
challenge to researchers, educators, and citizens.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
108, 116-130
Dutt, V. & Gonzalez, C. (2012). Decisions from experience
reduce misconceptions about climate change. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 32(1), 19-29.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393405.
Gonzalez, C. & Wong, H. (2011). Understanding stocks and
flows through analogy. System Dynamics Review, 28, 327.
Kahan, D.M., Peters, E., Wittlin, M., Slovic, P., Ouellette,
L.L., Braman, D., & Mandel, G. (2012). The polarizing
impact of science literacy and numeracy on perceived
climate change risks. Nature Climate Change, 2, 732-735.
Leiserowitz, A. A., Smith, N., & Marlon, J. R.
(2010). Americans' knowledge of climate change. Yale
Project on Climate Change Communication.
Leviston, Z. & Walker I.A. (2011). Baseline survey of
Australian attitudes to climate change: Preliminary
Report. CSIRO, Climate Adaptation Flagship.
Moxnes, E. & Saysel, A.K. (2009). Misperceptions of
global climate change: information policies. Climatic
Change, 93(1-2), 15-37.
Newell, B.R., & Pitman, A.J. (2010). The psychology of
global warming: Improving the fit between the science
and the message. Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society, 91, 1003-1014.
Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2010). Merchants of doubt.
London: Bloomsbury Publishing
Rouder, J. N., Speckman, P. L., Sun, D., Morey, R. D., &
Iverson, G. (2009). Bayesian t tests for accepting and
rejecting the null hypothesis. Psychonomic bulletin &
review, 16(2), 225-237.
Shah, A. K., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). Heuristics
made easy: an effort-reduction framework. Psychological
Bulletin, 134(2), 207.
Sterman, J.D. (2008). Risk communication on climate:
Mental models and mass balance. Science, 322, 532-533.
Sterman, J. D., & Booth-Sweeney, L.. (2007).
Understanding public complacency about climate change:
adults’ mental models of climate change violate
conservation of matter. Climatic Change, 80(3-4), 213238.

3144

