UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Meaning Overrides Frequency in Idiomatic and Compositional Multiword Chunks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5cv7b5xs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Jolsavi, Hajnal
McCauley, Stewart M.
Christiansen, Morten H.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Meaning Overrides Frequency
in Idiomatic and Compositional Multiword Chunks
Hajnal Jolsvai (jolsvai@cornell.edu)
Stewart M. McCauley (smm424@cornell.edu)
Morten H. Christiansen (christiansen@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Idioms are perhaps the most canonical form of formulaic
language, involving a particular string of words which is
linked to a specific meaning that does not follow
compositionally from the meanings of the constituent words
(e.g., spill the beans). Importantly, it has traditionally been
assumed that idiomatic phrases are represented and retrieved
from memory as single units and thus processed faster than
compositional phrases (e.g., Swinney & Cutler, 1979).
Whereas idioms are often treated as special cases,
Construction Grammar approaches suggest that both
idiomatic and high-frequency compositional multiword
expressions are stored as conventionalized form-meaning
pairs (Goldberg, 2003).
Supporting the lexicalized idioms assumption (e.g.,
Swinney & Cutler, 1979), an eye-tracking study by
Underwood, Schmidt and Galpin (2004) found fewer and
shorter fixations for the last words of idiomatic expressions
(e.g., met the deadline by the skin of his teeth) as compared
to the same words in non-idiomatic contexts (e.g., the
dentist looked at his teeth). In a self-paced reading study,
Conklin and Schmidt (2008) found that idiomatic
expressions (e.g., hit the nail on the head) were read faster
when compared to similar phrases (e.g., hit his head on the
nail). Moreover, a recent eye-tracking study demonstrated a
processing advantage for idiomatic expressions (e.g., at the
end of the day) over similar phrases (e.g., at the end of the
war) (Siyanova-Chanturia, Conklin, Schmitt, 2011).
However, a shortcoming of these studies, which reveal
faster processing for formulaic expressions, is that wholeand sub-string frequencies were not controlled for in a
systematic way.
Nevertheless, recent experimental evidence has shown
that language users are sensitive to the frequency of
compositional multiword phrases. Typically, in these
studies, pairs of high- and low-frequency phrases are
compared, using corpus data to control for substring
frequencies. Bannard and Matthews (2008) found that
3- and 4-years-olds repeat more frequent variants of
compositional four-word phrases (such as a drink of milk)
more easily than similar but less frequent four-word strings
(such as a drink of tea). Similarly, high-frequency
compositional multiword phrases are processed faster by
adults than comparable sequences of lesser frequency (e.g.,
Arnon & Snider, 2010; Tremblay & Baayen, 2010).
In addition to findings of frequency effects for
compositional multiword phrases, recent studies have
investigated whether similar frequency effects can be

Abstract
In line with usage-based accounts, recent psycholinguistic
studies have confirmed that frequency of occurrence impacts
processing latencies for multiword strings (e.g., Arnon &
Snider, 2010). However, these studies have not been
concerned with the meaning of the multiword chunks in
question, which is central to accounts of formulaic language
rooted in cognitive linguistics (e.g., Wray, 2002). Here, we
address this issue by comparing processing latencies for three
types of multiword chunks: idiomatic expressions,
meaningful compositional phrases, and less meaningful
fragments. All three chunk types were matched for wholeand sub-string frequency. Our results show that frequency
facilitates processing for all three chunk types, but to a lesser
extent than their “meaningfulness” (as assessed in a separate
norming study), indicating that the meanings of multiword
expressions may have implications for models of language
processing which extend beyond those of frequency of
occurrence.
Keywords: idiomatic phrases; chunks; distributional
statistics; Construction Grammar (CG); usage-based
approach; cognitive linguistics

Introduction
It has been recognized through a large number of corpus
studies that everyday language involves a wide array of
fixed co-occurring multiword sequences (such as let it go),
or formulaic sequences (e.g., Sinclair, 1991). Usage-based
theories suggest that strings of words can become fixed
linguistic patterns through simple repetition of use (e.g.,
strong tea or powerful computer, as opposed to powerful tea
or strong computer; Bybee, 2006; Bybee & Hopper, 2001;
Tomasello, 2003). Indeed, recent psycholinguistic work has
shown that the processing of a multiword sequence is
affected by the frequency of the sequence as a whole (e.g.,
Arnon & Snider, 2010; Tremblay, Derwing, Libben, &
Westbury, 2011).
But how much insight does frequency alone give us into
formulaic language processing? Is it possible that some
multiword chunks become conventionalized because they
convey a highly specific meaning, in much the same way as
do individual words (e.g., let it be)? In addition to their
frequency of use, the “meaningfulness” of multiword
chunks may be another factor affecting stored linguistic
units, in line with what would be expected from a cognitivegrammar perspective (e.g., Fillmore, Kay, & O’Connor,
1988; Langacker, 1987).

692

revealed for multiword sequences crossing syntactic
boundaries. For instance, higher n-gram frequency chunks
crossing syntactic boundaries (such as in the middle of the)
are read faster compared to less frequent non-constituents
(e.g., in the front of the) when embedded in a sentence
(Tremblay, Derwing, Libben, & Westbury, 2011). Similarly,
Arnon and Cohen-Priva (in press) found no effect of
constituency when comparing production latencies for highand low-frequency constituent and non-constituent pairs.
The presence of frequency effects for not only phrases, but
for sentence fragments as well, suggests that constituency
may be a less important factor for theoretical accounts
seeking to incorporate multiword chunks as linguistic units
in their own right. Alternatively, it is possible that meaning
may also need to be considered in order to reveal
constituency effects for multiword sequences.
Although these findings make it clear that more frequent
multiword phrases are processed faster, there is work to
suggest that other factors may need to be taken in to
consideration. For instance, Siyanova-Chanturia, Conklin
and van Heuven (2011) found that readers are also sensitive
to the fixedness of multiword chunks, above and beyond
their frequency of occurrence. In this eye-tracking study,
more frequent formulaic binominal phrases (such as bride
and groom) were more easily read by participants as
compared to their less preferred reversed forms, which
nevertheless shared the same syntactic and semantic
attributes (groom and bride). More importantly, even lower
frequency formulaic chunks with fixed configurations (like
sweet and sour), were read faster than higher frequency
reversed phrases (such as west and east).
The above-mentioned studies are limited in that the
“meaningfulness” of multiword chunks is not taken into
account. Language users may also be sensitive to the
relative meaningfulness of a multiword sequence as a
whole, in line with predictions made by cognitive linguists
(e.g., Langacker, 1987; Wray, 2002).
In the current study, we attempt to fill a gap left by
previous psycholinguistic studies concerned with the
processing of multiword sequences, which have tended to
focus primarily on distributional properties, such as
frequency of occurrence. We investigate the processing of
multiword chunks that vary in the degree to which people
find them meaningful as a whole unit, while controlling for
frequency. Specifically, our goal is to determine whether the
relative meaningfulness of multiword chunks may impact
their processing over and above the well-known effects of
frequency. Moreover, we aim to test the idea that highly
meaningful
chunks
show
processing
advantages
independently of their compositional status, in accordance
with Construction Grammar approaches that treat both
idiomatic and compositional sequences as pairings between
form and meaning (e.g., Goldberg, 2003).
We address these issues by examining readers’ processing
of three different types of 3-word sequences; idiomatic
expressions, highly meaningful compositional phrases. and
less meaningful fragments which cross syntactic boundaries.

All three types of trigrams were selected from the same
corpora and matched for phrase (trigram) and substring
(bigram, unigram) frequencies. Both idiomatic expressions
and compositional phrases were rated as being equally
meaningful in an initial norming study. Furthermore,
participants in this norming study rated sentence fragments
as being significantly less meaningful than their frequencymatched idiomatic and meaningful compositional phrases.
A different set of participants found the three types of
tokens to be equally plausible as part of an English sentence
in a separate norming study (thus, our items differed only in
their meaningfulness, and not plausibility as possible
sequences of words in English sentences). Instead of
comparing pairs of high and low n-gram frequency
sequences differing by only one word (don’t have to worry
vs. don’t have to wait), as in previous studies, we
investigated sequences which varied in the whole-string
frequency (log2 transformed) with which they appeared in a
large corpus, along a continuum ranging from 1.0 to 10.4.
We predicted that idiomatic expressions and
compositional phrases would be processed faster than less
meaningful fragments because they vary in the extent to
which people find them meaningful as units. We also
predicted that when controlled for phrase and substring
frequencies, idiomatic expressions would not be processed
faster than compositional meaningful sequences. This
prediction is at odds with the traditional view that contrasts
faster access to stored idiomatic expressions with slower
processing of computed compositional phrases (e.g.,
Swinney and Cutler, 1979). However, our prediction is in
line with a Construction Grammar perspective (e.g.,
Goldberg, 2003).

Methods
Three different types of trigrams were extracted from the
American National Corpus (ANC; Reppen, Ide, &
Suderman, 2005) and the Fisher corpus (Cieri, Graff,
Kimball, Miller, & Walker, 2004, 2005). The two corpora
were combined into a single corpus containing a total of 39
million words of American English. The Fisher corpus
comprises spoken language (telephone conversations), while
the ANC consists of spoken as well as written texts. From
this combined corpus, we selected all 3-word idiomatic
expressions using the following collections: McGraw-Hill's
Essential American Idioms Dictionary (Spears, 2008);
Handbook of Commonly Used American Idioms (Makai,
Boatner,
Gates
1991);
and
the
IdiomQuest
(http://www.idiomquest.com) and American Idioms
(http://www.americanidioms.net) online idiom dictionaries.
Eighty-two 3-word idiomatic expressions from these
collections appeared in the combined corpus. For each
idiomatic expression (e.g., over the hill) we selected
frequency-matched compositional phrases (e.g., had a
dream) and frequency-matched fragments (e.g., by the
postal). Log2 transformation was applied to all raw phrase
and substring frequencies prior to the selection process
(described below). Table 1 presents examples of the three

693

groups of items alongside their frequencies in the corpus.
Each token belongs to a “triad” of whole- and sub-string
frequency-matched items, with one from each of the three
conditions (idiomatic expression, compositional phrase and
fragment).

participants rated the tokens according to how meaningful
they were as units.

Norming Study 1: Plausibility
The purpose of the first norming study was to collect
judgments regarding the plausibility of the idiomatic
expressions, compositional phrases, and fragments. This
was necessary to ensure that stimuli from each condition
were equally plausible as strings in American English,
despite any differences in the extent to which items from
each condition conveyed coherent meanings as units.

Table 1: Example triads of idiomatic expressions,
compositional phrases, and fragments with their log2
transformed phrase frequencies
Idiomatic
Expressions

Compositional
Phrases
that’s the
agreement

just the ticket
1

Fragments

1
it’s a lie

for a song

3.2
had a dream

5.4
in the wind

3.5
by the postal

5.6
to the edge

5.2
in the larger

5.8
on my mind

1
of a heavy

3.2
over the hill

5.4
is really nice

6.5

Participants Thirty-three native speakers of American
English from the Cornell undergraduate population
participated in the study for extra credit (mean age = 19.69;
SD = 1.74). Data from 2 participants were omitted because
their overall performance fell below 80% in a random
memory recall task (see below).

if the global

Materials The materials consisted of 3-word sequences of
82 idiomatic phrases, 236 compositional phrases, and 218
fragments. The 3-word sequences were presented to
participants on a computer screen (one 3-word sequence at a
time). As a control, 90 impossible 3-word combinations
were also included. The impossible tokens were created by
scrambling matching compositional phrases and fragment
tokens that were not introduced in the experimental
material.

5.6
know it gets

6.7

6.5

Both the compositional phrases and the fragments were
frequency-matched to a corresponding idiomatic expression
such that trigram frequency, first bigram, second bigram,
first unigram, second unigram, and third unigram
frequencies were within ±10% of the corresponding
idiomatic phrase’s frequencies, respectively. Table 2 shows
the results of the individual ANOVA tests of the phrase and
substring frequencies across idiomatic expressions,
compositional phrases, and fragments.

Procedure Participants’ task was to rate each trigram
according to how plausible the sequence of words was as
part of an English sentence. Participants rated each token on
a 1-7 scale by pressing a key. To ensure that participants
read each sequence, a random memory recall test was
included. In 10% of the trials for each condition (idiomatic
expression, compositional phrase, and fragment),
participants were asked to type an English sentence that
included the 3-word sequence they had just seen.

Table 2: Individual ANOVA tests showing no differences
between the averages of the six frequency measures across
the three experimental conditions
Df

F-score

p-value

Phrase

2

0.0338

0.9668

1st bigram

2

0.092

0.9121

2 bigram

2

0.0259

0.9745

1st unigram

2

0.8341

0.4368

2 unigram

2

0.6037

0.5485

3rd unigram

2

0.05

0.9513

nd

nd

Results Table 3 shows the mean scores for each condition
in the plausibility norming study. As the trigrams were rated
as equally plausible, we submitted them to a second
norming study evaluating their meaningfulness.
Table 3: Mean ratings and standard deviations of
plausibility (Norming Study 1) scores for idiomatic
expressions, compositional phrases, and fragments.

To ensure that the items differed only in the extent to
which they would be judged as meaningful (i.e., that the
fragments were less meaningful than the idiomatic
expressions and compositional phrases, which in turn should
not differ from one another) as opposed to plausibility of
occurrence, we conducted two norming studies. In the first
norming study, participants judged the plausibility of each
trigram. In the second norming study, a different set of

694

Mean

SD

Idiomatic Expressions

6.84

0.32

Compositional Phrases

6.91

0.22

Fragments

6.87

0.22

Norming Study 2: Meaningfulness

Reaction Time Study

The purpose of the second norming study was to collect
judgments regarding the meaningfulness of the idiomatic
expressions, compositional phrases, and fragments as units.

Our prediction was that the overall meaningfulness of a
sequence would facilitate processing over and above mere
frequency of use, independently whether the sequence was
an idiomatic phrase. Thus, we predicted that processing
latencies for idiomatic phrases and compositional
meaningful phrases would not differ from one another.
However, both idiomatic phrases and compositional phrases
should show processing advantages over fragments.

Participants A different set of 33 native speakers of
American English from the Cornell undergraduate
population (mean age = 19.84; SD = 1.15) participated in
the study for extra credit. Data from two subjects were
removed because their overall performance on the random
memory recall test (see below) was less than 80%.

Participants An additional 40 native speakers of American
English from the Cornell undergraduate population were
recruited, none of which participated in either of the two
norming studies (mean age = 20.5; SD = 1.58).

Materials The materials consisted of the same 3-word
sequences used in the first norming study (82 idiomatic
phrases, 236 compositional phrases, and 218 fragments).
The 3-word sequences as a whole were presented to
participants one-by-one on a computer screen.

Materials A final set of frequency-matched tokens from the
trigrams rated in the two norming studies was selected for
the reaction time study (using a selection algorithm which
sought to minimize differences along the frequency
dimensions as well as the norming scores between the
conditions). This set consisted of 40 triads, each comprising
an idiomatic phrase, a compositional phrase and a fragment.
The resulting set of 40 idiomatic expressions,
40 compositional phrases and 40 fragments did not differ
significantly along the 6 frequency dimensions (trigram,
first bigram, second bigram, first unigram, second unigram,
third unigram) or according to the percentage of subjects
rating items as 6 or 7 in the first plausibility norming study.
Additionally, the items were constrained such that the
idiomatic and compositional phrases did not differ in terms
of their meaningfulness ratings from second norming study,
whereas the fragments were chosen to have the lowest
meaningfulness scores possible. All comparisons: p > 0.4.
The log2 phrase frequencies of the final set of 40 triads
introduced in the behavioral study ranged between 1 and
10.4. Besides the 40 experimental triads, 120 impossible
sequences (such as hear I isn’t) were used as fillers.

Procedure Participants’ task was to rate each trigram
according to how meaningful they found each sequence as a
unit. Participants rated each token on a scale of 1-7 by
pressing a key. To ensure that participants read each
sequence, a memory recall test was included. In 10% of the
trials for each condition (idiomatic expression,
compositional phrase, and fragment), participants were
asked to type an English sentence that included the last 3word sequence they had seen.
Results Table 4 shows the mean scores for each condition
in the meaningfulness norming study.
Table 4: Mean ratings and standard deviations of
meaningfulness (Norming Study 2) scores for idiomatic
expressions, compositional phrases, and fragments.
Mean

SD

Idiomatic Expressions

5.90

1.02

Compositional Phrases

5.89

0.86

Fragments

1.98

0.48

Procedure We based our reaction time study on Arnon and
Snider's (2010) phrasal decision task (which in turn is based
on the classic lexical decision task). Participants were
presented with the three-word sequences (120 experimental
and 120 impossible filler tokens) separately, in random
order, on a computer screen, and asked to judge (by quickly
hitting one of two keys) whether they formed possible word
combinations in the context of English sentences.

In order to arrive at the final set of experimental items, we
submitted the following to a selection algorithm (more
details below): the arcsine-transformed proportion of
subjects rating each item 6 or 7 (1 or 2 for fragments) in
Norming Study 2, the arcsine transformed proportion of
subjects rating each item as a 6 or 7 in Norming Study 1,
and the whole- and sub-string frequencies of each item. The
algorithm selected the set of 40 triads (each comprising an
idiomatic expression, a compositional phrase, and a
fragment) which differed least according to plausibility
norming scores as well as phrase and substring frequencies
across the three trigram types, while also differing
maximally in Norming 2 scores between fragments and the
other two conditions.

Data Analysis Data points corresponding to reaction times
of less than 200 ms were removed, along with extreme
outliers (defined as those reaction times exceeding the upper
quartile by more than three times the inter-quartile range),
resulting in a 1.5% data loss. The data were then submitted
to a linear mixed-effects (LME) analysis, with Item and
Subject as random effects, and the scores from the second
norming study (hereafter referred to as the Meaningfulness
Scores), Trigram Type (using Idiomatic Expressions as the
base case), Frequency (whole-string), substring frequencies

695

(including frequency predictors for First Bigram, Second
Bigram, First Unigram, Second Unigram, and Third
Unigram), Length in Characters, and the Trigram Type x
Frequency interaction term as fixed effects. Because the
Meaningfulness scores had a fixed range of 1 to 7, they
were converted to proportions (n/7), which were then logittransformed prior to entry in the model (cf. Armitage &
Berry, 1984). As the reaction times were not normally
distributed, they were log-transformed prior to the analysis.
The LME resulted in no significant interaction between
Frequency and Trigram Type and was therefore simplified
to involve Item and Subject as random effects, and
Meaningfulness scores, Trigram Type (using Idiomatic
Expressions as the base case), Length in Characters,
Frequency (whole-string), and the substring frequency
predictors as fixed effects. There did not appear to be
substantial multicollinearity between the fixed effects: The
condition number for the matrix of predictors (cf. Belsley,
Kuh, & Welsch, 1980) was only 6.6.
The final model was compared to a version without the
fixed effects (χ2 = 140.63, p < 0.0001) as well as a version
of the model without the variables of interest
(Meaningfulness Score, Frequency, Trigram Type;
χ2 = 111.07, p < 0.0001), indicating that the full model
captured more of the variance in both cases.

General Discussion
In this study, we compared the processing latencies for
triads consisting of idiomatic expressions, compositional
phrases and less meaningful fragments. In each triad, both
the meaningful compositional phrases and the fragments
were frequency-matched to the idiomatic phrases. The aim
of the study was to investigate (i) whether the relative
meaningfulness of multiword chunks affects processing
latencies in addition to their frequency, and (ii) whether
idiomatic and meaningful compositional phrases are
processed similarly, once frequency is adequately controlled
for.
Our results indicate that participants were sensitive to the
meaningfulness of the chunks. The meaningfulness of a
given trigram—as indicated by the second norming study—
successfully predicted reaction times in the final
experiment. Participants’ decision times for more
meaningful trigrams were faster than for less meaningful
ones. Furthermore, our findings show that the whole-string
frequency of the tokens predicted the processing latencies,
but to a lesser extent than the meaningfulness of the
different chunks. These results thus suggest that in addition
to frequency of occurrence, as emphasized by usage-based
theories, the relative meaningfulness of multiword chunks
should also be considered in accounts of language
processing.
Our findings also showed that processing latencies for
idiomatic phrases did not differ from frequency-matched
compositional meaningful phrases, while processing
latencies for less meaningful fragments were significantly
greater. This suggests that meaningful compositional
sequences may be represented and processed similarly to
idiomatic phrases, despite their compositional nature. This
is at odds with traditional distinctions between stored idioms
and compositional phrases (Swinney & Cutler, 1979).
However, these results are in line with Construction
Grammar approaches, suggesting that there are no
fundamental differences between the representation and
processing of idiomatic constructions and compositional
phrases; they are both instances of conventionalized formmeaning mappings (Goldberg, 2003).
Additionally, higher meaningfulness scores were
associated with reduced processing latencies. These results,
when viewed alongside the weaker frequency effect,
provide a step forward for studies of formulaic language,
suggesting that that the meaningfulness of multiword
chunks may be as important to their processing as their
distributional properties.
It is possible that the processing latencies for
compositional phrases in the current study were affected by
their status as constituents, whereas fragments crossed
syntactic boundaries. There exists only one study that has
investigated whether constituency affects multi-word
sequence processing while controlling for frequency. In a
recent production study, Arnon and Cohen-Priva (in press)
found that constituency did not affect processing. In their
study, similar frequency effects were found when

Results
As predicted, participants showed sensitivity to the
meaningfulness of the trigrams. Decision times were faster
for more meaningful tokens, as revealed by a highly
significant main effect of Meaningfulness Score (β = -0.037,
p < 0.0001). Also in line with our predictions, reaction times
were affected by trigram type: It took longer for participants
to decide whether fragments were possible strings in
English (β = 0.089, p < 0.05). However, decision times for
compositional meaningful phrases were no slower than for
idiomatic expressions (β = 0.003, p > 0.3). Table 5 presents
the mean RTs and standard deviations for each condition.
Table 5: Mean RTs and standard deviations for idiomatic
expressions, compositional phrases, and fragments.
Mean

SD

Idiomatic Expressions

766.4

247.9

Compositional Phrases

789.4

260.3

Fragments

949.9

343.7

Frequency (whole-string) also reached significance
(β = -0.014, p < 0.05) indicating that subjects responded
faster to trigrams with greater whole-string frequency.
Importantly, the effect of Frequency was less than that of
Meaningfulness Score.
Of the fixed effects included to control for substring
frequency and character length, only Length in Characters
(β = 0.08, p < 0.05) and Third Unigram (β = 0.014,
p < 0.05) reached significance.

696

comparing high- and low-frequency variants of constituents
(a lot of work vs. a lot of years) as well as non-constituents
crossing syntactic boundaries (as far as I vs. as far as you).
Similar frequency effects for both phrases and fragments
suggest that constituency may be a less important feature of
multiword chunk processing. On the other hand, it is
possible that the lack of a constituency effect in the Arnon
and Cohen-Priva study stems from not taking chunk
meanings into account. Further studies are needed to
examine the exact nature of the relationship between
constituency and chunk meaningfulness.
To conclude, our results provide new insights into the
representation and processing of formulaic expressions; they
suggest that multiword compositional phrases that people
find highly meaningful are likely to be processed similarly
to idiomatic phrases, as a linguistic unit in its own right. Our
findings are thus relevant for usage-based approaches to
language, indicating that meaning provides an additional
dimension that such approaches must take into account, in
line with a number of expectations derived from cognitive
linguistics (e.g., Langacker, 1987).

language by native and non-native speakers? Applied
Linguistics, 29, 72-89.
Fillmore, C., Kay, P., & O’Connor, M. K. (1988).
Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical constructions:
The case of let alone. Language, 64, 501-38.
Goldberg, A. E. (2003). Constructions: A new theoretical
approach to language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7,
219-224.
Langacker, R.W. (1987). Foundations of cognitive
grammar, Vol. 1: Theoretical prerequisites. Palo Alto:
Stanford University Press.
Makai, A., Boatner, M. T., Gates, J. E. (1991). Handbook of
commonly used American idioms. NY: Barron’s
Educational Series Inc.
Reppen, R., Ide, N., & Suderman, K. (2005). American
national corpus (ANC): Second release. Philadelphia:
Linguistic Data Consortium.
Spears, R..A. (2008). Essential American idioms dictionary.
Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill.
Siyanova-Chanturia, A., Conklin, K., Schmitt, N. (2011).
Adding more fuel to the fire: An eye-tracking study of
idiom processing by native and non-native speakers.
Second Language Research, 27, 251-272.
Siyanova-Chanturia, A., Conklin, K., & Van Heuven, W. J.
B. (2011). Seeing a phrase "time and again" matters: The
role of phrasal frequency in the processing of multiword
sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 37, 776-784.
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Swinney, D., & Cutler, A. (1979). The access and
processing of idiomatic expressions. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 18, 523-34.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Tremblay, A. & Baayen, H. (2010). Holistic processing of
regular four-word sequences: A behavioral and ERP study
of the effects of structure, frequency, and probability on
immediate free recall (pp. 151-167). In D. Wood (Ed.),
Perspectives on formulaic language, NY: Continuum
International Publishing.
Tremblay, A., Derwing, B., Libben, G., & Westbury, C.
(2011). Processing advantages of lexical bundles:
Evidence from self-paced reading and sentence recall
tasks. Language Learning, 61, 569-613.
Underwood, G., Schmitt, N., & Galpin, A. (2004). The eyes
have it: An eye-movement study into the processing of
formulaic sequences. In N. Schmitt (Ed.), Formulaic
sequences: Acquisition, processing, and use (pp. 153172). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wray, A. (2002). Formulaic Language and the Lexicon.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Jaclyn Jeffrey-Wilensky and Julia
Krasnow for their assistance with the reaction time study.
Thanks also go to Jaclyn Jeffrey-Wilensky and László
Kálmán for their help during material selection. Finally, we
are grateful to Haim Bar for his valuable comments on our
statistical analyses.

References
Armitage, P. & Berry, G. (1994). Statistical methods in
medical research (3rd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Arnon, I. & Cohen-Priva, U. (in press). More than words:
The effect of multi-word frequency and constituency on
phonetic duration. Language and Speech.
Arnon, I. & Snider, N. (2010). More than words: Frequency
effects for multi-word phrases. Journal of Memory and
Language, 62, 67-82.
Bannard, C. & Matthews, D. (2008). Stored word sequences
in language learning. Psychological Science, 19, 241-248.
Belsley, D. A., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. E. (1980). Regression
diagnostics: Identifying influential data and sources of
collinearity. NY: Wiley.
Bybee, J. (2006). From usage to grammar: the mind's
response to repetition. Language, 82, 711-733.
Bybee, J., & Hopper, P. (2001). Frequency and the
emergence of linguistic structure. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Cieri, C., Graff, D., Kimball, O., Miller, D., & Walker, K.
(2004). Fisher English training speech (part 1) transcripts.
Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Cieri, C., Graff, D., Kimball, O., Miller, D., & Walker, K.
(2005). Fisher English training speech (part 2) transcripts.
Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Conklin, K., & Schmitt, N. (2008). Formulaic sequences:
Are they processed more quickly than nonformulaic

697

