UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Measuring Cultural Relativity of Emotional Valence and Arousal using Semantic Clustering
and Twitter

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4dk26673

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bann, Eugene
Bryson, Joanna

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Measuring Cultural Relativity of Emotional Valence
and Arousal using Semantic Clustering and Twitter
Eugene Y. Bann (eugene@aeir.co.uk)
Advanced Emotion Intelligence Research (AEIR)

Joanna J. Bryson (J.J.Bryson@bath.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, United Kingdom
Abstract

keywords are constructed from conceptual knowledge about
the world, emotions themselves may be concepts that humans
begin learning in infancy and continuously extend and revise
throughout life (Lindquist & Barrett, 2008). This repeated
experience of labelling a combination of core affect and the
context in which it occurs as an emotion provides training
in how to recognise and respond to that emotion. In this
sense, Barrett describes emotions as simulations. This skill
of conceptualising core affect as an emotion could be a core
aspect of emotional intelligence, in much the same way as
conceptual thinking is core to cognitive intelligence. Each
person learns the label in association with their unique experience, thus each person’s conceptualisation of their emotional
spectrum is unique. Cultures, formed of communicating individuals, may therefore also be unique if individual experiences vary somehow systematically. We base our analysis
on this hypothesis. The reader should bear in mind that we
are not analysing emotion keywords in particular, rather, we
are analysing emotion conceptualisations, or what cultures
understand specific emotion keywords to mean, using Latent
Semantic Clustering to infer these meanings.

Researchers since at least Darwin have debated whether and to
what extent emotions are universal or culture-dependent. However, previous studies have primarily focused on facial expressions and on a limited set of emotions. Given that emotions
have a substantial impact on human lives, evidence for cultural emotional relativity might be derived by applying distributional semantics techniques to a text corpus of self-reported
behaviour. Here, we explore this idea by measuring the valence
and arousal of the twelve most popular emotion keywords expressed on the micro-blogging site Twitter. We do this in three
geographical regions: Europe, Asia and North America. We
demonstrate that in our sample, the valence and arousal levels of the same emotion keywords differ significantly with respect to these geographical regions — Europeans are, or at
least present themselves as more positive and aroused, North
Americans are more negative and Asians appear to be more
positive but less aroused when compared to global valence and
arousal levels of the same emotion keywords. Our work is the
first in kind to programatically map large text corpora to a dimensional model of affect.
Keywords: Semantic Clustering, Emotion Analysis; Twitter;
Core Affect Model.

Introduction
The question as to whether the experience and expression
of emotions is universal or relative to specific cultures has
resulted in a wide variety of studies, with theories ranging
from the universality hypothesis to culture-specific facial expressions. Here we present evidence that culture is a necessary framework for researchers studying variation in emotions. Independent of the question of biological differences
in the experience of emotions, it would be unsurprising if culture shapes our conscious perception, expression and experience of emotions, as has been hypothesised for other cognitive phenomena (Hunt & Agnoli, 1991; Fuhrman et al., 2011).
Here, we use Latent Semantic Clustering on an emotional text
corpus mined from Twitter to discern how the primary properties normally attributed to emotional keywords — valence
and arousal — differ as the keywords are used in the same language (English) as exploited across different global regions.

Core Affect

The Conceptualisation of Emotion Qualia
Emotion qualia refers to the raw feel of an emotion. The
actual phenomenon of a particular emotion experienced may
differ according to each person’s perception or understanding of that emotion, with perception being the result of the
individual’s past and hypothesised responses, unique to each
human being. Barrett (2006) describes the act of conceptualising core affect, or in other words, why people attach emotion labels to the experience of emotion qualia. Since emotion

Core affect is an emerging paradigm in affective neuroscience, and postulates a continuous approach to defining
emotions (Posner et al., 2005). Several core-affect, or circumplex models have been proposed (e.g. Watson & Tellegen, 1985; Russell, 1980; Cacioppo & Berntson, 1994), yet
all have one thing in common: they represent emotions as a
single point in a continuous space defined by two (or rarely
three) dimensions. Different labels have been assigned to
these two dominant dimensions by various theorists, such as
pleasure and engagement, however most commonly, valence
and arousal are chosen. Thus far, there has been no attempt
to computationally pinpoint emotions or documents within a
core affect model using ‘online’ and ‘big’ data; to date, research regarding the core affect model has either been theoretical (e.g. Watson & Tellegen, 1985), or conducted via a
limited survey (e.g. Russell, 1980).
Core affect is one of two main theories regarding the representation of emotions, the other being the Basic Emotion
model, however, neither has thus far received unequivocal
support. Basic emotions could turn out to map to multiple
subtypes of coherent emotion networks, but this implies we
need to split basic emotion categories into further subtypes to
better reflect these emotion networks (Hamann, 2012; Bann,

1809

2012). Here we extend this view and suggest that the core
affect model enables us to quantify the properties of the basic
emotions themselves.

Previous Work
There is growing evidence that aspects of a person’s psychology can be predicted from their language usage. In the 1990s,
human semantics was shown to be recoverable from linguistic corpra independent of any further grounding (Lowe, 1997;
Bryson, 2008). Recent applications to individual psychology include discovering individual differences in personality (Pennebaker & King, 1999), discovering cultural change
in moral beliefs (Bilovich & Bryson, 2008), as well as for
emotion categorization (Fitzpatrick & Logan, 2011). French
discovered that co-occurrence techniques such as LSA does
not detect personality from short text samples (French & Gill,
2007), but do reveal that texts expressing particular emotions
have a greater semantic similarity to corresponding exemplar
words (Gill et al., 2008).
A recent study by Jack et al. (2012) found significant evidence that facial expressions are indeed culture-dependent;
that is, different cultures represent the same emotions differently. However, whether or not this is because they experience different emotion qualia is another question. Using language, rather than facial expressions, as an accessor to emotion will enable a much more detailed and less ambiguous
analysis, increasing significance by “throwing more data at
the problem” (Recchia & Jones, 2009, p.3).
Currently, there have been few attempts to analyse cultural differences using language semantics. Language plays
a key role in how emotions are conceptualised (and thus perceived); Lindquist states “language can be no more removed
from emotion, than flour can be removed from an already
baked cake” (Lindquist, 2009, p.1). Recently, Bann & Bryson
(2012) demonstrated how conceptualisations of emotions can
be inferred by performing Latent Semantic Analysis on a corpus of self-reported emotional tweets. Their DELSAR algorithm analysed 21,000 tweets each labelled with an emotion,
and clustered each document in the corpus to its most similar
corresponding emotion label using Latent Semantic Clustering. Here we use the same algorithm as the basis for our
analysis.

Corpus
Typing emotion keywords into the Internet is increasingly
becoming a significant technique for individual expression.
There now exists a rich available source of information about
emotions on the Internet, because so many people spend time
expressing how they feel in blogs, forums, social networking
websites and the like. We use data from the microblogging
website Twitter to perform large-scale analysis of the language used in thousands of expressions of emotions within
tweets. Acquiring a significantly larger corpus than Bann
& Bryson (2012), we use the Gardenhose level of Twitter’s

streaming API1 to create a corpus of 5,625,844 tweets2 collected between 19th October 2012 and 18th January 2013.
Each emotion keyword (see selection criteria below) is given
a five-minute streaming window in turn for the duration of the
period, ensuring an even temporal distribution of Tweets is
collected. Table 1 describes our corpus, split by ‘cultural’ region. We use the tweet’s timezone as an indication of the corresponding user’s geographical location; seeing as it is very
unlikely that a Twitter user would select a timezone other than
that which they reside in, it is somewhat safe to assume that
this reflects the cultural origin of each user.
Table 1: Distribution of tweets within our corpus.
Emotion
Angry
Ashamed
Calm
Depressed
Excited
Happy
Interested
Sad
Scared
Sleepy
Stressed
Surprised
Total

Asia
12194
1008
5975
3078
30923
149129
3527
46351
15435
26031
2587
3032
299270

Europe
27070
5097
10181
11615
100792
186709
9728
83075
42500
10787
8774
12454
508782

NA
61293
17107
36681
43129
292822
730839
31891
341912
194130
120473
41716
56332
1968325

All
200024
46486
102827
120473
847679
2201874
86763
966165
517715
290666
109295
135877
5625844

Region definitions. We only include those timezones that
have over 5000 tweets within our corpus. The Asia region consists of the timezones Kuala Lumpur, Beijing, Singapore, Jakarta, Bangkok, Hong Kong, Tokyo; the Europe region consists of the timezones London, Amsterdam,
Athens, Edinburgh, Dublin, Berlin, Paris; the North American (NA) region consists of the timezones Eastern Time (US
& Canada), Central Time (US & Canada), Mountain Time
(US & Canada), Pacific Time (US & Canada).
Selection of emotions. As opposed to strictly using the basic emotions as identified by Bann & Bryson (2012), we use
the most popular emotions that are used on Twitter, that is,
those emotions that have the highest stream rate. Twelve
emotions were selected that had a high rate and that equally
divided into positive/negative and engaged/disengaged theoretical categories (see Table 2).
Subcorpus creation. Each subcorpus is created using a limit
of 1000 documents per emotion for all subcorpora to ensure
consistency within our results; we chose 1000 as it is the lowest value in Table 1. To mitigate micro-temporal effects, if the
number of documents for a particular emotion is significantly
greater than 1000, we use a modulus function to extract 1000
1 https://dev.twitter.com/docs/streaming-apis.
2 Having first removed 34,725 duplicate tweets. Corpus and code
is available to download at www.aeir.co.uk/code.

1810

documents equally spaced across the subcorpus — for example, if a particular emotion in a particular subcorpus has 6000
documents, we take one document every six documents. We
also create six control subcorpora so to compare our regionspecific results with a baseline. We use the same modulus
function to extract 1000 equally spaced tweets, but without
any timezone clause, selecting six random starting points.

Table 2: Valence and arousal categorisation of the twelve
emotion keywords analysed.
Emotion
Angry
Ashamed
Calm
Depressed
Excited
Happy
Interested
Sad
Scared
Sleepy
Stressed
Surprised

Proposed Method
We use DELSAR (Bann & Bryson, 2012, see Algorithm 1) to
generate the clustering matrix for each subcorpus — the three
regions Asia, Europe and NA, and six random controls.
Algorithm 1 DELSAR
Require: Corpus C and Keyword Set K, where each document in C is mapped to one emotion keyword, emotion, in
K (through corpus generation)
Generate cosine document similarity matrix of LSC(C, K)
(document × document similarity matrix)
for each emotion ∈ K do
for each document that has emotion emotion do
delete emotion within the document
Find the closest document nearest where nearest 6=
document
Increment the count for the emotion that nearest is
labelled as in emotion vector
end for each
return emotion vector
end for each
For each subcorpus, DELSAR uses LSA (Landauer & Dumais, 1997) to create a document-document matrix of cosine
similarities (Similarity Matrix), in which similar documents
are closer to one (i.e. the cosine of the angle between their
vectors). It creates a clustering matrix that represents the corpus as an emotion-emotion matrix, describing how each emotion is similar to each other emotion.
All analysis was performed on a 64-bit Intel Core i5 CPU
2x2.67GHz with 4GB RAM using the GENSIM framework
for Python (Řehůřek & Sojka, 2010) to create LSA spaces.
For all tasks, we use a dimension of 36 and use Log-Entropy
normalisation as our Association Function, found to generate
optimal results (Nakov et al., 2001) and recommended for
LSA (Landauer & Dumais, 1997).

Valence and Arousal
Here we take valance to mean the theoretical positive or negative attribution of an emotion keyword, and similarly arousal
to mean the implied level of engagement. We should use the
keywords theoretical valence and theoretical arousal as we
are measuring emotion keywords relative to their generally
accepted categorisation, although there does seem to be consistency in these categorisations between theorists. Table 2
shows the theoretical definitions of our keywords, accumulated using several circumplex models of affect (Watson &
Tellegen, 1985; Russell, 1980; Cacioppo & Berntson, 1994).

Valence
Negative
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive

Arousal
Engaged
Disengaged
Disengaged
Disengaged
Engaged
Disengaged
Engaged
Disengaged
Engaged
Disengaged
Engaged
Engaged

We calculate the valence and arousal levels of each emotion for each subcorpus as follows. First, we run DELSAR
on the subcorpus to generate clustering vectors for each emotion. Each emotion’s valence is then calculated as the number of positive elements within its vector, as defined in Table 2, divided by the total number of documents across all
elements (which will always be 1000), or in other words, the
percentage of positive elements within its vector. Similarly,
each emotion’s arousal is calculated as the percentage of engaged elements within its vector, again as defined in Table 2.
We then normalise each valence and arousal value by taking away the average valence and arousal value, respectively,
for all subcorpora analysed — Asia, Europe and NA regions
and the six control subcorpora. This ensures relativity of the
resulting circumplex model between these analysed groups;
these groups can now be compared to one another to establish similarities and differences between them.

Results
Figure 1 shows a plot of our circumplex of selected subcorpora. We can see that some emotions are more tightly packed
than others, and interestingly, that low-valence-high-arousal
and high-valence-low-arousal emotions are much more universally similar when compared to the other two quadrants
of the circumplex. In order to visualise each separate region
more clearly we illustrate the aggregate theoretical positivity
and engagement for each subcorpus, shown in Figure 2. This
clearly illustrates that our three regions do indeed have different conceptualisations of the same emotion keyword; we
see that the region Europe is a much more positive and engaged culture; in other words, Europeans find the same emotion keywords to be more positive and engaging when compared to other cultures and indeed our control samples. Also,
we discover that Asians find the same emotion keywords to
be somewhat more positive, and North Americans somewhat
more negative, with negligible arousal differences.
In order to analyse how tightly packed our emotion clus-

1811

Figure 1: Circumplex of three regions and six controls.
ters are in Figure 1, we conducted K-Means cluster analysis
to determine the centroids for each emotion, calculating the
distances of each emotion to its centroid. We plot our centroids, shown in Figure 3, resulting in a circumplex that could
be thought of as a universal emotion circumplex, illustrating
what people think emotions to be, relative to each other emotion. We can see that the emotions scared, depressed and sad
have a very similar valence, yet varying arousal levels; so too
do the emotions sleepy and sad. We can also see, albeit less
definitively, that the emotions stressed and surprised have a
similar arousal level, but opposite valence; so too do the emotions sad and sleepy.

the emotions sad and stressed have the most similar conceptualisations across all cultures; in other words, people understand these two emotions to mean the same thing independent
of culture. Similarly, we find that the emotions surprised and
depressed have the most widely varying conceptualisations
across cultures; in other words, different cultures have very
different valence and arousal attributions towards these two
emotions. Note that we do not include the emotion ashamed
in the top two due to a strange anomaly in control group 6
which skews an otherwise relatively tight cluster.

In order to identify which emotions have the most and least
similar conceptualisations across cultures, we calculate the
distance of each emotion to its respective centroid for each
region, and calculate the sum of these distances for each emotion across all subcorpora, shown in Table 3. We discover that

We would expect that the control groups would be tightly
clustered around the centre of the circumplex in Figure 2,
and for the most part, they are. The exceptions are control
groups one and four, possibly due to the fact the the corpus is
skewed in favour of tweets originating from NA (see Table 1);

Discussion

1812

Figure 3: Centroid emotion circumplex.

Figure 2: Aggregate theoretical positivity and engagement for
each subcorpus.
Table 3: Sum of subcorpus distances to respective centroids.
Emotion
Sad
Stressed
Calm
Interested
Angry
Sleepy

Distance
17.94
19.66
20.86
22.72
23.18
23.19

Emotion
Scared
Happy
Excited
Depressed
Surprised
Ashamed

Distance
23.27
26.10
27.00
29.56
32.89
40.70

this is somewhat verified by their closeness to the NA subcorpus. Other than these anomalous subcorpora, the circumplex does illustrate how different cultures significantly conceptualise emotions differently, in keywords of valence and
arousal. Interestingly, there are certain emotions in certain regions that stick out of our analysis. One example is the emotion depression; Asians find this emotion much more negative than all other cultures and control groups. This could be
due to cultural differences such as coping strategies (Aldwin
& Greenberger, 1987). Another example concerns the emotions happy and calm; Europeans and Asians find these emotions much more positive than North Americans and all control groups. Another suggests that Asians find interest a very
positive and aroused emotion, compared to North Americans
who conceptualise the same emotions, relatively, as negative
and disengaged.

Limitations
We document several limitations of our approach. Firstly, our
database may still contain duplicate tweets, as some users duplicate tweets by appending, for example, a number at the
end, making them unique from one another. Second, our

modulus function does not take an even sample for our control groups at the country level, so they may be skewed in
favour of countries with a higher frequency of documents
within the database (our corpus on the whole is in fact skewed
in favour of NA). Thirdly, we assume that the emotion keywords we have selected are in fact emotion qualia as opposed
to adjectives. Fourth, our corpus is essentially a snapshot in
time and may reflect, for example, the political or economic
climate at the time, or skew due to global events such as the
US election. Finally, our corpus consists entirely of English
tweets, which skews our results in favour of Western cultures;
our Asia, and to some extent, Europe subcorpora may not be
entirely representative of their respective cultures as we disregard all native languages other than English. In addition, the
subpopulations of those regions who choose to use Twitter,
and do so in English, may be a biased sample.

Conclusions
Emotions are being increasingly expressed online, and being
able to understand these emotions is rapidly becoming a
concern of AI and Cognitive Science. By mapping culturespecific emotion circumplexes, we hope to be better able to
understand culture-specific perceptions or even experience
of emotions. From the work presented here we can conclude
the following:
Emotional semantics depends on culture. The same emotion keyword in one culture may describe different valence
and arousal properties in another. This seems to be more true
of some keywords than others, and could be critical where,
for example, a significantly differing conceptualisation of the
emotion depression would require a different understanding
and response.
Emotions vary by geographic region. Europeans are more
likely to express positiveness and engagement. Asians are

1813

also more positive than North Americans, both relative to
each other and to the control subcorpora. Note that this
may reflect cultural differences in the public expression of
emotion rather than its actual qualia — our method cannot
disambiguate these.
Some emotions do seem to be conceptualised universally.
The emotion keywords sad and stressed have the same
conceptualisation across cultures, whereas cultures have
the most disagreement regarding the conceptualisation of
surprised.
We hope that our research paves the way for a better
understanding of how language can be used to identify
specific properties of emotions, and we encourage the reader
to verify our results by downloading our code and corpus at
http://www.aeir.co.uk/code.

References
Aldwin, C., & Greenberger, E. (1987). Cultural differences
in the predictors of depression. Am J Community Psychol,
15(6), 789-813.
Bann, E. Y. (2012). Discovering basic emotion sets via semantic clustering on a Twitter corpus (Vol. CSBU-201301; Tech. Rep.). University of Bath, Department of Computer Science.
Bann, E. Y., & Bryson, J. J. (2012, July). The conceptualisation of emotion qualia: Semantic clustering of emotional
Tweets. In Proceedings of the 13th Neural Computation
and Psychology Workshop (NCPW13).
Barrett, L. F. (2006, February). Solving the emotion paradox:
Categorization and the experience of emotion. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 10(1), 20-46.
Bilovich, A., & Bryson, J. J. (2008, November). Detecting
the evolution of semantics and individual beliefs through
statistical analysis of language use. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Fall Symposium on Naturally-Inspired Artificial Intelligence (pp. 21–26). Arlington, VA: AAAI Press.
Bryson, J. J. (2008, June). Embodiment versus memetics.
Mind & Society, 7(1), 77–94.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Berntson, G. G. (1994). Relationship
between attitudes and evaluative space: A critical review,
with emphasis on the separability of positive and negative
substrates. Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 401-423.
Fitzpatrick, J. K., & Logan, J. (2011). Categorizing emotion
in spoken language: An analysis of semantic and prosodic
contributions to emotional communication. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Cognitive Science Conference. (pp.
762–767).
Fuhrman, O., McCormick, K., Chen, E., Jiang, H., Shu, D.,
Mao, S., et al. (2011). How linguistic and cultural forces
shape conceptions of time: English and Mandarin time in
3D. Cognitive Science, 35(7), 1305–1328.
Gill, A. J., Gergle, D., French, R. M., & Oberlander, J.
(2008). Emotion rating from short blog texts. In Pro-

ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 1121–1124). ACM.
Gill, A. J., & French, R. M. (2007). Level of representation and semantic distance: Rating author personality from
texts. In Proceedings of the 2nd European Cognitive Science Conference.
Hamann, S. (2012). Mapping discrete and dimensional emotions onto the brain: controversies and consensus. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 16(9), 458–466.
Hunt, E., & Agnoli, F. (1991). The Whorfian hypothesis: A
cognitive psychology perspective. Psychological Review,
98(3), 377.
Jack, R., Garrod, O., Yu, H., Caldara, R., & Schyns, P. (2012,
May). Facial expressions of emotion are not culturally universal. In Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America (Vol. 109, pp. 7241–7244).
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). Solution to Plato’s
Problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis Theory of Acquisition, Induction and Representation of Knowledge. Psychological Review(104), 211–240.
Lindquist, K. A. (2009, January). Language is powerful.
Emotion Review(1), 16-18.
Lindquist, K. A., & Barrett, L. F. (2008). Constructing emotion: The experience of fear as a conceptual act. Psychological Science, 19(9), 898-903.
Lowe, W. (1997, August). Meaning and the mental lexicon.
In Proceedings of the 15th International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 1092–1097). Nagoya: Morgan Kaufmann.
Nakov, P., Popova, A., & Mateev, P. (2001). Weight functions
impact on LSA performance. In Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP 2001) (p. 187-193).
Pennebaker, J. W., & King, L. A. (1999, December). Linguistic styles: Language use as an individual difference.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6), 12961312.
Posner, J., Russell, J. A., & Peterson, B. S. (2005). The
circumplex model of affect: An integrative approach to
affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology, 17(3),
715–734.
Recchia, G., & Jones, M. N. (2009). More data trumps
smarter algorithms: Comparing pointwise mutual information with latent semantic analysis. Behavior Research
Methods, 41(3), 647.
Řehůřek, R., & Sojka, P. (2010, May 22). Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for
NLP Frameworks (pp. 45–50). Valletta, Malta: ELRA.
Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(6), 1161-1178.
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. (1985, September). Toward a consensual structure of mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98(2),
219-235.

1814

