UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling the Emergence of Lexicons in Homesign Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2n44p3wr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Richie, Russell
Yang, Charles
Coppola, Marie

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling the Emergence of Lexicons in Homesign Systems
Russell Richie (russell.richie@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 406 Babbidge Road, Unit 1020
Storrs, CT 06269-1020

Charles Yang (charles.yang@babel.ling.upenn.edu)
Departments of Linguistics, Computer Science, & Psychology
619 Williams Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6305

Marie Coppola (marie.coppola@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 406 Babbidge Road
Department of Linguistics, 365 Fairfield Way
Storrs, CT 06269-1145
Abstract
Longitudinal data of conventionalization in emerging
languages, combined with computational models explaining
such data, are lacking in the literature on language emergence.
In the present study we report on the emergence of gestural
communication systems (“homesigns”) invented by deaf
individuals in Nicaragua. Analysis of longitudinal data from
several families shows gradual convergence toward a gestural
system with the essential characteristics of a shared lexicon.
We propose a general computational framework to formalize
the linguistic and social interactions among the individual
signers such that a shared lexicon may arise. More
specifically, a reinforcement learning process that adjusts the
individual’s probability of gesture use in response to others’
actual gesture use provides a suitable account of the observed
gestural convergence. Implications for language emergence
are discussed.
Keywords: lexicon; homesign; conventionalization; language
emergence; computational modeling; sign language; multiagent reinforcement learning model

Introduction
How do languages emerge? What kinds of learners and
environments, and particularly patterns of interaction among
learners, give rise to language? The spontaneous emergence
of gestural communication systems in deaf individuals not
exposed to spoken or signed language (homesigners;
Coppola & Newport, 2005; Brentari & Coppola, 2012) and
of natural languages in deaf communities (Polich, 2005;
Meir, Sandler, Padden & Aronoff, 2010) offer unique
opportunities to study the process of natural language
emergence. Computational models, in contrast, allow
formalization and testing of theories of language emergence.
These two approaches clearly complement each other, yet
there have been no integrations of the two in the literature
on language emergence. To begin to rectify this, in this
paper we compare empirical data from emerging sign
systems to computational models to investigate emergence
of a fundamental component of language: the lexicon. In
particular, we investigate the process of conventionalization

of lexicons among small groups of individuals. We begin by
reviewing extant literature on conventionalization.
Conventionalization of form-meaning mappings among
interacting agents has been a major focus of language
emergence research, mostly in experimental (see
Galantucci, Garrod, & Roberts, 2012 for review) and
computational (Hutchins & Hazlehurst, 1995; Barr, 2004;
Steels & Loetzsch, 2012) investigations. Human adults are
brought into the lab to develop novel communication
systems under various conditions (Selten & Warglien,
2007), but in nearly all cases, conventionalization is
observed among participants. In a related literature,
researchers have investigated how language-learning biases
shape communication systems as they are transmitted and
learned across multiple generations (Kirby, Cornish, &
Smith, 2008). The basic finding is that human learners
exposed to unsystematic form-meaning mappings will
restructure these form-meaning mappings to be more
compositional and learnable.
Conventionalization in natural language emergence is far
less studied—the opportunities to observe the process are of
course few and far between, and, when researchers become
aware of a case, it is often well after a basic lexicon has
conventionalized (R. Senghas, 1997). In fact, we are not
aware of any studies observing conventionalization over
time in emerging natural languages. We are only aware of
studies of emerging systems that examine either inter-user
consistency at a single point in time (e.g., Osugi, Supalla &
Webb, 1999), or intra-user consistency across a span of time
(e.g., Goldin-Meadow, Butcher, Mylander & Dodge, 1994).
Showing images of objects and eliciting gestures for them,
Osugi et al. (1999) investigated consistency in formmeaning mappings of lexical items among 21 deaf and
hearing individuals in the geographically and genetically
isolated Koniya region of Amami Island south of Japan.
They show that individuals either Deaf or hearing were
consistent with each other to the extent that they interacted.
Goldin-Meadow et al. (1994) investigated the consistency
over time of form-meaning mappings of gestures produced
in a naturalistic context by a child homesigner called David

1223

and his hearing mother. They found that David was more
internally consistent than was his mother (and concluded
that it was he who introduced into his system a noun-verb
distinction, their primary object of interest).
In all, then, the two homesign studies, while shedding
light on the outcome of conventionalization, reveal very
little about the underlying process. The experimental
research on conventionalization reviewed earlier, while
suggestive, has not addressed conventionalization in natural
linguistic settings. Computational modeling may provide
explicit proposals of conventionalization mechanism, but it
also suffers from the lack of connection with the empirical
work. For instance, Barr (2004) investigated the effect of
local vs. global information in conventionalization but the
simulations are carried out on artificial data without making
reference to experimental results or naturalistic case studies.
The disconnect between experimental and computational
approaches is a general concern for research on collective
and cooperative behavior (see Goldstone & Gureckis, 2009
for review).
In this paper, we take a step toward unifying empirical
and computational work. We first, present new longitudinal
data on conventionalization from naturally emerging
homesign systems. We compare this data to preexisting
non-longitudinal data on lexical consistency in Nicaraguan
Sign Language (NSL), a natural sign language emerging in
a vibrant Deaf community (Senghas & Coppola, 2001;
Senghas, 2003). We then present a general framework for
studying conventionalization that incorporates elements of
learning and social interactions. A specific implementation
with reinforcement learning (Yang, 2002) appears to capture
the observed trends of conventionalization. We conclude
with a general discussion on the conditions for language
emergence in a naturalistic setting.

Homesign lexicons
In the present study, we examine conventionalization over a
9-year period in form-meaning mappings for basic objects
and concepts among deaf Nicaraguan homesigners and their
family and friends.

for relations between the homesigners and their family
members.
Table 1: Homesigning groups
Family 1
Homesigner
Mother

Family 2
Homesigner
Mother

Family 3
Homesigner
Mother

Older
brother
Friend

Younger
brother
Younger
sister

Hearing
friends

Family 4
Homesigner
Younger
brother
Younger
sister
family
and

Stimuli Stimuli were images of 22 basic objects and
concepts. All items were familiar to participants. Nineteen
of these objects and concepts were taken from Osugi et al.
(1999), which itself was derived from Swadesh (1971). The
stimulus items were: boy, cat, cold, cook, cow, dog, egg,
fire, fish. flower, ice, girl, hot, moon, orange, palm tree,
potato, rain, snake, stones, and sun.
Procedure In 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2011, M.C. showed
participants images of the objects and concepts outlined
above. Participants were tested individually. Using gesture
and facial expressions, M.C. elicited participants’ gestural
responses to these images. Hearing participants were asked
to use their hands to respond, and all were easily able to do
the task. Participants responded to the camera, not to each
other, and were not allowed to see each other’s productions.
All responses were videotaped for later analysis.
Coding Participants’ responses were coded by a research
assistant in consultation with R.R. A majority of responses
contained more than one gesture (2 gestures: 40%, 3
gestures: 15%, 4 gestures: 4%, and 5 gestures: 2%), and so
we coded every gesture individually for its Conceptual
Component (CC), or aspect of the item’s meaning that the
gesture iconically represented. For example, a response to
‘cow’ might contain two gestures, one iconically
representing horns (its CC is thus HORNS) and another
iconically representing milking (its CC is thus MILKING)1.

Method

Results

Participants Participants were four deaf Nicaraguan
homesigners [3 male; aged 11 to 33 years (M=24) at various
times of testing] and nine of their hearing family members
and friends [4 male; aged 10 to 59 (M=30) at various times
of testing; we henceforth refer to these family and friends as
communication partners]. The homesigners have minimal or
no interaction with other deaf individuals, including each
other, and have minimal or no knowledge of Nicaraguan
Sign Language or spoken or written Spanish, Instead, these
homesigners have been using their respective invented
gestural homesign systems all their lives. Despite their lack
of linguistic input, they socialize with others, hold jobs,
have families, and otherwise have typical lives. See Table 1

Treating every CC as a dimension in a combinatorial space,
every response can be represented as a binary-valued vector,
with 1 representing the presence of a given CC and 0 the
absence. The distance between two responses to the same
object is thus a measure of conventionalization. We define
distance here as the number of vector values by which two
responses differ, and weight more heavily those vector
values corresponding to CC’s used more frequently (i.e.
disagreement on the use of the CC ROUND will lead to a
greater distance than disagreement on the infrequent CC
1

We have also coded every gesture for its formal components
(e.g., handshape, location, movement), but this coding does not
bear on the current analysis, and so we do not discuss it further.

1224

Weighted averaged distance
to respective homesigner

0.08

Homesigners converge with respective
partners, but not fully

0.07

Mom

0.06

O. Bro
Friend

0.05

Y. Bro

0.04

Mom

0.03

Y. Sis

0.02

Mom
Y. Sis

0.01

Y. Bro

0

2002

2004

2006

2011

Figure 1: Average distances, across objects tested, between a partner’s lexicon and his/her homesigner’s lexicon, per year.
Partners converge with their respective homesigners.
MILKING)2. For a given object in a given year, we
calculated this distance between each homesigner’s
response and that of each homesigner’s communication
partner’s responses. For example, we calculate the distance
between Homesigner 1’s 2011 response to ‘cow’ and his
mother’s 2011 response to ‘cow’, as well as their 2006,
2004, and 2002 responses to ‘cow’. For each homesignerpartner pair and year, we average these distances across all
tested objects, yielding an overall measure of lexicon
distance or conventionalization between a pair. Results are
summarized in Figure 1 which shows decreases in lexicon
distance across partners. To give a sense of the scale of
weighted distance, consider a partner that with probability P
will agree with a homesigner in the usage of a CC.
Simulations show that a partner agreeing with a homesigner
92.5% of the time gives a weighted distance of .069, and
agreeing 96% of the time gives a weighted distance of 0.036
– a ~50% reduction in error. This is roughly the change a
typical communication partner (CP13) undergoes from 2002
to 2011.
We ran two tests to establish that (1) communication
partners gradually converge with their respective
homesigners, but that (2) even in 2011, convergence was not
complete (where distance would be zero). To investigate our
first question, we first extracted, for every partner, slopes of
the linear regressions predicting homesigner-partner
distance from year of testing. A one-tailed, one-sample
Wilcoxon Signed Rank test on the nine slopes indicated that
the median of this sample was significantly below 0 (W=0,
p < .01), confirming the gradual convergence between
homesigners and partners. To investigate our second
question, we ran a series of one-tailed, one-sample
2

CC’s used more frequently offer more opportunities for
convergence, and so should arguably be weighted more heavily in
calculating distance.

Wilcoxon Rank-Sum tests on the 2011 homesignercommunication partner distances. We found that these
distances, despite decreasing over time, are still significantly
greater than 0; all 9 of 9 such tests are highly significant
(W’s ≥ 91, p’s ≤ .001).

Discussion
We showed above that deaf homesigners slowly converge
on form-meaning mappings with their hearing
communication partners, but that convergence is not
complete, even in 2011, the latest year in which we
collected data. This contrasts sharply with the state of
convergence in Nicaraguan Sign Language. The Deaf
community in Managua, Nicaragua initially formed in 1978
(Polich, 2005), and by 1993 was holding ‘standardization
seminars’ in smaller cities and towns outside the capital of
Managua to spread the signs developed in Managua to the
rest of the country (R. Senghas, 1997; López Gómez, Perez
Castellón, Rivera Rostrán, & Baltodano Baltodano, 1997).
Thus, the NSL users in Managua must have converged on at
least a basic lexicon in less than 15 years after coming
together3. By 2011, all of the present homesigners had been
using their respective systems for well more than 15 years,
yet none of them had converged completely with any of
their communication partners. What might explain this
difference in rate of conventionalization between homesign
and NSL? One possibility concerns the differences in
patterns of interaction between users of homesign systems
and users of NSL (and other Deaf community sign
languages, Woll & Ladd, 2003). While the deaf user of a
homesign system uses the system for all interactions, the
3

We are in the process of collecting data to verify convergence
in NSL, though of course this data will be 20 years after the point
of convergence we argue for.

1225

hearing users only use the system to interact with that deaf
user. In NSL and other deaf community sign languages,
however, all users of the system interact with other users of
the system using the system. In other words, the homesign
interactive structure is one-to-many, while the NSL/deaf
community structure is many-to-many. We now turn to our
model, which replicates convergence, and allows us to test
these predictions.

Modeling Conventionalization
What are the conditions for conventionalization, whereby a
shared lexicon emerges through strictly local linguistic
interactions among linguistic individuals? At least two
elements of process suggest themselves. First, the
individuals must be “lexicon ready”. In the simplest case,
they must be able to maintain a list of form-meaning
pairings. Similar to our study of homesigns, the individuals
must be capable of making combinatorial use of constitutive
units as in our case of Conceptual Components. Second, the
individuals must be capable of learning, or modifying their
lexicon as the result of linguistic and social interactions. In
this section, we first describe a general framework to study
lexical conventionalization. We then study its dynamics
through the use of reinforcement learning (Bush &
Mosteller, 1951; Yang, 2002) as a model of learning and
social interactions. Last, we use the model to test the
hypothesis regarding the difference in conventionalization
between homesign and NSL.

The Framework
Consider a population of N agents communicating a set of
meanings through the combinatorial use of C binary signs
that are analogous to Conceptual Components in the
homesign data. For a specific meaning, agent i accesses a
vector of probabilities Pc = {pic}, defined over these signs (j
= 1,2,…,C) such that with probability pic, the cth sign is used
by agent i and with probability (1 - pic), the cth sign is not
used. This representation can also be used to encode atomic
use of signs, i.e., each meaning is expressed by one sign, in
which case the vector ∑c pic = 1 (i.e., agent i has a
probabilistic distribution of the signs and only one of them
is chosen at each instance of use).
The central premise of the conventionalization model is
that individuals adjust their choices of linguistic encoding in
attunement with their communicative partners. To
communicate a meaning, agent i instantiates a vector Ui of
0’s and 1’s according to Pi. Agent j, the listener, generates a
vector Uj for that meaning according to its own Pj. (Note
that the instantiations Ui/j are not deterministic since the
values are probabilistically chosen.) For each sign, agent j
compares Uj against Ui and makes adjustments to Pj to agree
with agent i by the use of some learning algorithm. The
changes in the distance between Pj and Pi over time
represent the extent of convergence or conventionalization.
Linguistic communications among agents may also have a
social component. Consider a matrix S = [si,j], which defines
the probabilities of communication between agents i and j

such that ∀i, ∑ j si,j = 1. The social matrix provides a general
platform to encode patterns of interactions among agents. A
matrix with positive probabilities only among the
neighboring agents, for instance, is a straightforward
implementation of Schelling (1971)’s classic model of
segregation. The matrix may be fixed or it may change as
the result of communication. For instance, it seems
reasonable that agents would modify their partner
preferences based on past successes or failures of
communication, which can be modeled as si,j increasing if a
successful communication has occurred between agent i and
j and decreasing upon failure.
As the result of the communicative interactions, the
probability vectors for agents {Pi}t change over time, which
characterizes the evolution of the lexicons in the population.
In general, the dynamics of {Pi}t can be analyzed as a
Markov Chain, first used by Berwick & Niyogi (1997) to
study language learning and change. Different choices of the
learning algorithm (L), which may be discrete or
probabilistic (including Bayesian inference), the social
matrix S (and its own evolution), together with the current
values in {Pi}t define the transition matrix Tt at time t,
which can be multiplied with {Pi}t to produce the next state
of lexicon {Pi}t+1. Similar models have been developed in
the iterated learning framework (e.g., Kirby, Dowman &
Griffiths, 2007).

Conventionalization through Reinforcement
Learning
In what follows, we propose a specific learning model
and consider several variant implementations relevant to the
present study of sign convergence. The learning model is an
instance of reinforcement learning (Bush & Mosteller,
1951), a simple, efficient and domain general model of
learning now with considerable behavioral and neurological
support (see Niv, 2009 for review), and one which has been
used in computational and empirical studies of language
acquisition (Yang, 2002). Let agent j’s current probability
for sign c be p. Upon each communication, the listener j
adjusts p to match agent i’s choices, following the LinearReward-Penalty (LRP) scheme of Bush & Mosteller (1995)
where the magnitude of change is a linear function of the
current value of p:
• Agent i chooses 1: p′ = p + γ (1 - p)
• Agent i chooses 0: p′ = (1 - γ )p
where the learning rate γ is typically a small real number.
All probabilities are subsequently renormalized. Again,
other models of learning can be studied in this fashion.
Social matrix: static vs dynamic We also consider the
social communicative factors in conventionalization by
manipulating the social matrix that defines the modes of
individual interactions. As suggested above, we consider a
case of adaptive social interactions where si,j increases if
listener j agrees with agent i in all the choices of signs and
decreases otherwise. The update rules for S also follow the

1226

LRP reinforcement learning scheme described above.
Contrast this with static interactions where si,j’s remain
constant.
Social matrix: homesign vs language An additional
dimension of variation directly concerns the present study,
for which we construct a homesign matrix in which one
individual, the deaf signer (say agent 1), communicates with
all other (hearing) individuals who do not use signs to
communicate with each other. The matrix is initialized such
that si,j = 1 / (N - 1) where N is the total number of agents,
si,1 = 1 (i ≠ 1) and si,j = 0 (i, j ≠ 1). We also consider what
can be referred as the language matrix, where all agents are
deaf and use signs to communicate with each other (si,j = 1 /
(N - 1), i ≠ j), which corresponds more closely to the
sociolinguistic settings of typical sign language emergence
(Woll & Ladd, 2003). In all, we have four different modes
of social interaction, that is, (home sign, sign language) x
(adaptive, static) and we explore their dynamical properties
below.
Results In our simulations, we consider a population of N =
5 agents. For each sign, we initialize the values in Pi for
each agent randomly between 0 and 1; they start out
preferring either the use or the non-use of each sign with
random probabilities. The learning rate γ is set to 0.01 and is
used for the adjustment of both Pi’s and S, the social matrix
that
encodes
the
probabilities
of
inter-agent
communications. For each simulation, we run the
simulations over 2 million instances of communications; in
the case of convergence, i.e., all N agents in complete
agreement with respect to sign usage (all Pi’s at the value of
0 or 1), we record the number of iterations required for
convergence. The main results are summarized in Table 2.
Two things can be gleaned from these results: (1) there is no
difference in convergence time between adaptive (p=0.412)
and static (p=0.435) social structures and (2) there is a
significant difference in convergence time between the
homesign-type model and the language-type model (p<10-12,
for both social matrixes), indicating the importance of a
mutually engaged community for the rapid emergence of a
true linguistic system, and offering a potential explanation
for the difference in rates of conventionalization between
homesign and Nicaraguan Sign Language.
Table 2: Average number of iterations to convergence
(percentage of simulations reaching convergence in 2
million iterations)

Dynamic
Static

Homesign

Language

757K (87%)
698K (80%)

281K (100%)
260K (100%)

General Discussion
In the current work, we (1) presented longitudinal data
showing conventionalization of lexicons among users of
naturally emerging language-like systems (homesign gesture

systems); (2) showed that conventionalization in these
homesign systems is slower than in Nicaraguan Sign
Language (NSL), a recently emerging sign language used by
a Deaf community; (3) formulated a general framework and
causal model of conventionalization, in the form of a multiagent reinforcement learning model that obtains
conventionalization; and (4) showed that an NSL-inspired
model where all agents interact with each other converges
significantly faster than a homesign-inspired model in
which one agent (i.e. a deaf individual) interacts with every
other agent (i.e. hearing individuals), but these other agents
interact only with the first agent. We discuss implications
our findings below, as well as open questions.
To the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first
published observation of the lexicon, a fundamental
component of language, emerging in natural human
communication systems. Conventionalization has of course
been obtained and studied numerous times in experimental
settings (Galantucci et al., 2012), but our study is the first to
connect the richness and complexity of real linguistic
situations with well motivated models of learning.
Surprisingly, variations in the dynamics of communications
(the adaptive vs. static conditions in Table 1) led to little
difference in the rate of convergence. The role of
social/communicative factors in language emergence
therefore deserves more careful consideration.
Our study is likewise, as far as we know, the first
published paper to compare longitudinal or cross-sectional
empirical data of naturally emerging languages to
computational models of language emergence. As argued in
the introduction, this synthesis is critical to a better
understanding of language emergence. For example, many
previous studies had established differences in linguistic
complexity between homesign systems and natural sign
languages (e.g., Coppola & Senghas, 2010 regarding
incorporation of deictic forms into syntax; Flaherty &
Senghas (2011) with respect to the existence of a count list),
and had hypothesized about what differences between these
systems’ users affect language emergence (Senghas, 2005),
but it has not been clear how exactly these differences
influence language emergence. Our present data and model
begin to answer this last question: more connected networks
among users of the systems may accelerate
conventionalization and language emergence.
Of course, alternative explanations of the different rates
of conventionalization, and of complexity in general, in
homesign systems and NSL do of course exist. For example,
the hearing users of the homesign system have a spoken
language to communicate with, and are thus under less
pressure to use and conventionalize the homesign system.
This contrasts with the situation faced by the deaf
homesigner and users of NSL, who can only use their
signed communication system and are thus behooved to
conventionalize at a greater rate. Likewise, other learning
models, e.g. Bayesian, can be studied in the general
dynamic framework of language emergence. However, in
the absence of more data to test the unique predictions of

1227

different models, we opt here for one of the simpler possible
models. We speculate that the general effects of network
structure on conventionalization do not differ by class of
model. These and other possibilities are not mutually
exclusive and can be subject to future research. To identify a
set of empirically motivated and verified conditions under
which emergence takes place, or fails to do so (in a timely
fashion), is an important first step toward to understanding
the emergence of language.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our deaf and hearing Nicaraguan
participants and the members of the Coppola lab and the
Sign Language Reading Group at the University of
Connecticut. This research was supported by NSF IGERT
grant #1144399 to UConn and NIH grant P30 DC010751 to
MC and Diane Lillo-Martin.

References
Barr,
D.
J.
(2004).
Establishing
conventional
communication systems: Is common knowledge
necessary? Cognitive Science, 28(6), 937-962.
Brentari, D., & Coppola, M. (2012). What sign language
creation teaches us about language. WIREs Cognitive
Science. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1212
Bush, R., & Mosteller, F. (1951). A mathematical model for
simple learning. Psychological Review, 68, 313-323.
Coppola, M. and Newport, E. L. (2005). Grammatical
Subjects in home sign: Abstract linguistic structure in
adult primary gesture systems without linguistic input.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
102(52), 19249-19253.
Coppola, M. and Senghas, A. (2010). The emergence of
deixis in Nicaraguan signing. In D. Brentari (Ed.) Sign
Languages: A Cambridge Language Survey. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Flaherty, M., & Senghas, A. (2011). Numerosity and
number signs in Deaf Nicaraguan adults. Cognition,
121(3), 427-436.
Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., and Roberts, G. (2012)
Experimental Semiotics. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 6(8), 477-493.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Butcher, C., Mylander, C. & Dodge,
M. (1994). Nouns and verbs in a self-styled gesture
system: What's in a name? Cognitive Psychology, 27,
259-319.
Goldstone, R. L. & Gureckis, T. M. (2009). Collective
behavior. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 412-438.
Hutchins, E. & Hazlehurst, B. (1995) How to invent a
lexicon: the development of shared symbols in
interaction. In G. N. Gilbert and R. Conte, (Eds.),
Artificial Societies: The computer simulation of social
life. London: UCL Press.
Kirby, S., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2007).
Innateness and culture in the evolution of language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
104(12), 5241-5245.

Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: an experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105,
10681–10686.
López Gómez, J. J., Perez Castellón, A. M., Rivera Rostrán,
J. M., & Baltodano Baltodano, J. F. (Eds.) (1997).
Diccionario del Idioma de Señas de Nicaragua. Managua,
Nicaragua.
Meir, I., Sandler, W., Padden, C., & Aronoff, M.
(2010). Emerging sign languages. In M. Marschark and
P. Spencer (Eds.) Oxford Handbook of Deaf Studies,
Language, and Education, Vol. 2 (pp. 267-279). Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Niv, Y. (2009). Reinforcement learning in the brain. The
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53(3), 139-154.
Niyogi, P., & Berwick, R. (1997). Evolutionary
consequences of language learning. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 20 (6), 697-719.
Osugi, Y., Supalla, T., & Webb, R. (1999). The use of word
elicitation to identify distinctive gestural systems on
Amami Island. Sign Language & Linguistics, (2)1, 87112.
Polich, L. (2005). The emergence of the deaf community in
Nicaragua: With sign language you can learn so much.
Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Schelling, T. C. (1971). Dynamic Models of Segregation.
Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 1, 143-186.
Selten, R., & Warglien, M. (2007). The emergence of
simple languages in an experimental coordination game.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104,
7361–7366.
Senghas, A. (2003). Intergenerational influence and
ontogenetic development in the emergence of spatial
grammar in Nicaraguan Sign Language. Cognitive
Development, 18, 511-531.
Senghas, A. (2005). Language emergence: Clues from a
new Bedouin sign language. Current Biology, 15(12),
463-465.
Senghas, R. J. (1997). An 'unspeakable, unwriteable'
language: Deaf identity, language & personhood among
the first cohorts of Nicaraguan signers. (unpublished
doctoral dissertation). University of Rochester, NY.
Senghas, A., and Coppola, M. (2001). Children creating
language: How Nicaraguan Sign Language acquired a
spatial grammar. Psychological Science, 12(4), 323-328.
Steels, L. & Loetzsch, M. (2012). The grounded naming
game. In L. Steels, (Ed.), Experiments in Cultural
Language Evolution. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Swadesh, M. (1971). The origins and diversification of
language. Sherzer, J. (Ed.), Chicago: Aldine.
Woll, B., & Ladd, P. (2003). Deaf communities. In M.
Marschark & P. Spencer (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of
Deaf Studies, Language, and Education, (pp. 151-162),
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yang, C. (2002). Knowledge and learning in natural
language. New York: Oxford University Press.

1228

