UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Moral choices: The influence of the “Do not play God” principle

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/33w5x4s5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Mancini, Francesco
Gangemi, Amelia

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Moral choices: The influence of the “Do not play God” principle
Amelia Gangemi (gangemia@unime.it)
Department of Cognitive Science, Via Concezione, 6
Messina, 98121- Italy

Francesco Mancini (mancini@apc.it)
Scuola di Psicoterapia Cognitiva, Viale Castro Pretorio, 116,
Rome, 00185 - Italy

Abstract
A wide literature demonstrates that people prefer harm caused
by omissions over equal or lesser harm caused by actions. This
omission bias has been explained referring to several
principles, such as causality or responsibility. A convincing
research view has been suggested by Sunstein (2005): harmful
acts are generally worse than harmful omissions when moral
intuitions reflect the “Do not play God” principle: inactions
interfere less with the “natural order.” In two preliminary
studies, we examine the influence of the “Do not play God”
principle on individuals moral preferences, using the switch
version of the trolley problem. Study 1 demonstrates that our
participants’ justifications for their inaction choice explicitly
refer to the intention of not interfering with the “natural
order”. Study 2 demonstrates that the presence of stimuli
influencing a reduction of protagonist’s decisional autonomy
(e.g. an authority) activates the “Do not play God” principle,
leading them to prefer inaction.
Keywords: Omission bias; Moral choices; Trolley dilemma;
“Do not play God” principle.

Introduction
It’s quite common the intuition that it is worse for a doctor
to kill a patient with a deadly disease then let him die by
abstaining from any kind of medical intervention.
Consequentialist philosophers argue that these cases should
be considered equivalently (Singer, 1979). In a number of
well-controlled experiments Baron and colleagues have
shown instead that people consider harmful acts worse than
harmful omissions with otherwise identical, predictable
outcomes (i.e., omission bias). For example, Spranca, Minsk
and Baron (1991) showed that people find it worse when
somebody who wants to harm a person offers this person a
food item with an allergenic ingredient than when she
passively watches the person who does not know about the
ingredient taking this item himself. Ritov and Baron (1990)
used also vaccination to illustrate the bias: many people
consider the risk of harm from vaccination as more serious
than the risk from omitting vaccination. This bias seems to
affect real vaccination decisions (Asch et al., 1994;
Meszaros et al., 1996), and it has been replicated in several
situations (e.g. Royzman & Baron, 2002; Baron & Leshner,
2000).

Wroe and Salkovskis (2000) explain this kind of choices
arguing that most people regard themselves as more
responsible for what they actively do than what they fail to
do, and that this omission bias occurs due to perceived
differences in causality and differing degrees of
responsibility. In particular, according to these authors
participants’ judgments about the immorality of commission
depend on several factors that ordinarily distinguish
omission and commission, such as physical movements in
commission.
Sunstein (2005) suggests instead that harmful acts are
generally worse than harmful omissions when individuals’
moral intuitions reflect an overgeneralization of the “Do not
play God” principle: omissions or inactions interfere less
with the “natural order.” Omission generally carries less
negative moral weight than commission, intervening less in
individual’s destiny.
Let’s go back to the doctor who decides to let a patient
die by refraining from any kind of medical intervention.
According to the common sense, this case is considered less
morally negative than the case in which the same doctor
gives the patient a medication that quickly kills him. But the
former case (to suspend any medical treatment, i.e. the
omission) does not imply less responsibility or physical
movements than the second decision (to give a deadly
medication, i.e. the commission): the doctor could ask to
move the patient from the emergency room, or could
proceed by removing tubes or catheters, or finally by
communicating the nurses his instructions and supervising
how they follow them. In other words, contrary to Wroe
and Salkovskis (2000), the harmful omission could not
necessarily imply less responsibility or physical movements
than actions. From this point of view there are no
differences between action and omission.
So what does differentiate them? According to Sunstein’s
hypothesis, the omission choice has less impact on the
“natural order” (in the example the patient’s destiny), not
violating the “do not play God” principle, and this would
make the difference. It’s like people say: nobody can claim
the right to decide over the life and death of someone, even
if s/he explicitly asks to die. S/he can only follow and adapt
to the events.
Moreover, Haidt and Baron (1999) showed that the
differences between harmful actions and omissions
disappear (i.e. the omission has the same moral weight of

2973

action) with people that are in roles that make them
responsible. They have an equal responsibility to prevent
harm through both action and omission, like for example a
captain of a ship, who is equally responsible for both the
acts and omissions that lead to similar harm for the
passengers. That is, the higher is the social role, the higher
is the decisional autonomy and the right to intervene on the
natural order (i.e. responsibility to protect) and thus the less
is the weight of the “do not play God” principle.
So far, no empirical studies have investigated whether the
“do not play God” principle influences individuals choices
when faced with problems like moral dilemmas.
The present study aimed to examine whether individuals
tend to prefer harm caused by omissions over equal or lesser
harm caused by acts, on the basis of their moral intuition
based on the “Do not play God” principle. To this aim, we
used the well-known switch version of the trolley problem.
In its original form, the problem asks people to suppose that
a runaway trolley is headed for five people, who will be
killed if the trolley continues on its course. The question is
whether one would throw a switch that would move the
trolley onto another set of tracks, killing one person rather
than five. This moral dilemma requires participants to
choose one of two undesirable courses of action (both
involving loss of life). The action option requires subjects to
act, thereby causing the death of one person (but indirectly
saving the lives of others). According to Sunstein’s
hypothesis, it allows modification of the “natural order” in
the attempt to minimize the number of victims. The
omission option involves no action, and the failure to act
results in the deaths of five people. But omission does not
modify the “natural order” and respects the “Do not play
God” principle.
In line to the consequentialist point of view, in this
dilemma, people should prefer the action option: it involves
a lower number of victims. According to Suntein, people
would prefer the omission option, consistent with the “Do
not play God” principle.
To test this hypothesis two different studies were carried
out. In the first, we wanted to verify whether subjects
preferring inaction would actually tend to justify it by
referring to the “Do not play God” principle, while those
preferring action would tend to justify it by referring to the
consequentialist idea of minimizing suffering and victims.
According to Cushman and colleagues (Cushman, Young,
& Hauser, 2006), we assume that the principles used in
judgments are articulated in justifications. In the second
study, we wanted to verify whether the preference for the
omissions would enhance with stimuli leading to a reduction
of protagonist’s decisional autonomy (e.g. an authority).
When faced with the original trolley problem, most
subjects (80-90%) prefer action (see Greene, Sommerville,
Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001; Greene, Nystrom, Engell,
Darley, & Cohen, 2004; Greene, Cushman, Stewart,
Lowenberg, Nystrom, & Cohen, 2009). In order to avoid
this sort of ceiling effect, which could interfere with the
results of the second experiment, we used a version of the

problem with a modified proportion of victims, five vs.
three instead of the original five vs. one.
In a preliminary study of the first study we tested this
modified version with a group of 54 volunteers,
undergraduate students from the University of Rome, with a
mean age of 20.2 (ranging from 18-32). All participants
were given four moral dilemmas (see below) with the new
proportion of victims. Each dilemma required participants to
indicate which of two courses of action they would take if
confronted with such dilemmas in real life (Greene & Haidt,
2002; Greene et al., 2004). Participants were asked to
respond to each dilemma by marking “yes” (action) or “no”
(inaction). The total number of inaction choices made by
each participant was the dependent variable. With this
modified trolley problem, there were about 50% action
choices in all dilemmas.

Study 1
In this study we wanted to verify whether subjects
preferring inaction would tend to justify it by referring to
the “Do not play God” principle (e.g. “Who am I to decide
who lives and who dies?”), while those preferring action
would tend to justify it by referring to the consequentialist
attempt to minimize suffering (e.g. “it’s better that three
people die instead of five”). Four moral dilemmas were
shown to a group of participants. For each dilemma
participants were asked to justify their choice. Two judges
codified all justifications into two categories: deontological
and consequentialist.

Method
Participants
Participants were 69 undergraduate and postgraduate
students recruited by advertisements at the University of
Rome (Italy) (45 females and 24 males). Their ages ranged
from 18 to 45 with a mean age of 23.8. All of the
participants were thus volunteers and provided informed
consent.
Materials and Procedure
After completing a demographic questionnaire,
participants received seven brief scenarios comprised of 6–8
sentences each. Four scenarios concerned moral dilemmas,
each requiring participants to indicate which of two courses
of action they would take if confronted with such dilemmas
(Greene & Haidt, 2002; Greene, et al., 2004). In one (action)
alternative, the participant acted, thereby killing three
human beings, but saving the lives of five others. In the
second (inaction) alternative the participant did not act, and
therefore did not kill three human beings. However, in this
second alternative, the participant’s failure to act resulted in
more deaths (five) than in the first alternative. The other
three scenarios required participants to choose between
action and inaction. These control scenarios did not involve
moral dilemmas. They did not present any victims or harm,
but were included as filler items. The order of the seven
dilemmas was randomized. Following is an example of the
two kinds of dilemmas, moral and control, presented in the
study (translated from Italian):
Moral Dilemma

2974

You are near a Ferris wheel. It does not work. Just under
the wheel, there are five tourists. Suddenly, the wheel starts
turning and soon a cabin will kill them. There is no way to
warn them and they cannot escape in any way. The only way
to save the five tourists is to pull a lever that can change the
rotation of the wheel. Unfortunately, there are three people
on the other side that would be killed. Should you pull the
lever?
Control dilemma
You have just sent an e-mail order for three books that
you need for your studies (they are by your favorite writer),
when a colleague suggests that you buy the same books and
two more (five books in total) at a discount. The order
cancellation procedure requires too much time. Should you
proceed with the cancellation procedure?
The text of all seven scenarios is available on the web at
www.apc.it. After having responded to each scenario by
marking “yes” (action) or “no” (inaction), participants were
asked to justify their choice in their own words. Of 276
justifications, 18 were removed from the analyses because
participants provided a nonsensical response or a judgment
that made it clear they had misunderstood a scenario. Two
colleagues of the authors who were blind to the hypotheses
being tested coded a total of 258 justifications. Justifications
were coded into two exclusive categories:
Deontological: justification refers to the importance of
not substituting God, not interfering with a destiny already
determined, or not taking the responsibility of deciding for
others.
Consequentialist: justification refers to the importance of
saving the greatest number of lives.

Results
According to our hypotheses, we found that almost all
participants preferring inaction (96%) justified it by
referring to the “Do not play God” principle (e.g. “I cannot
decide who lives and who dies”) (χ2 (1, N = 69) = 213.6; p
< 0.001), while most of those preferring action (86%)
justified it by referring to the importance of minimizing
suffering (e.g. “it’s better that three people die instead of
five”) (χ2 (1, N = 69) = 133.9, see Table 1).
Table 1. Proportions (and frequencies) of justifications
given by participants for their action/inaction choices.
Choice
Justification
Deontological
Consequentialist

Action
14 (38)
86 (226)

Table 2. Agreement between coders for each moral
dilemma for the two categories of justifications, along with
Cohen’s kappa.
Inter-Observer
Reliability
kappa
.84
.71
.89
.90

Dilemma
1
2
3
4

Overall, these results show that participants tend to prefer
omission in order to respect the moral principle of “Do not
play God.”

Study 2
With the first study we have demonstrated that individual
preferences for omissions in moral dilemmas are actually
influenced by the moral goal of respecting the “Do not play
God” principle. But these results raise the question whether
participants’ justifications of their moral choice reflect their
actual reasons for deciding. It is possible that participants
simply report a justification that corresponds to their
decision, but it is not clear whether the justification
preceded and causally influenced their decision (e.g. Haidt,
2001), although Cushman and colleagues (Cushman,
Young, & Hauser, 2006) state that the principles used in
judgments are well articulated and reflected
in
justifications. For these reasons a second study is carried
out.
With this second experiment we wanted to further verify
whether the preference for the omissions in problems like
the trolley dilemma is influenced by the goal of respecting
the “natural order”, activated by a restriction of one’s
decisional autonomy.
To this aim, we compared three versions of the trolley
dilemma to isolate the effects of 1.authority presence, and
2.closeness, on moral judgments concerning harmful
actions. The original version of the trolley dilemma was
used as control condition (neutral problem, cf. study 1). We
expected that in the “authority” problem participants would
choose the inaction options more than participants in the
“closeness” and neutral problems. The presence of an
authority would indeed limit the decisional autonomy of the
protagonist, leading participants to prefer the omission.

Method

Inaction
96 (242)
4 (10)

Table 2 provides the overall agreement between coders
for the two categories of justifications, along with Cohen’s
kappa, a statistic of interobserver reliability for which
values between .60 and .70 are considered fair, from .70 to
.75 are considered good, and above .75 are considered
excellent (Fleiss, 1981). The overall agreement for the four
moral dilemmas, .83, was quite high.

Subjects
Participants were 105 undergraduate and postgraduate
students recruited by advertisements at the University of
Rome (Italy) (70 females and 35 males). Their ages ranged
from 18 to 51 with a mean age of 24.5. All of the
participants were thus volunteers and provided informed
consent.
Materials, and procedure
Subjects responded to one of three versions of the trolley
dilemma, in a between-subject design. In each condition,
participants received the seven scenarios used in the earlier

2975

experiment (4 moral dilemmas, 3 control dilemmas), in
which information about the presence of the “authority” and
the “closeness” of the protagonist to the victims were
systematically varied. In the “authority” condition (n=45),
the moral scenarios presented an authority close to the
protagonist (e.g. a policeman, a judge). In the closeness
condition (n=30), in all the moral scenarios the protagonist
was close to the potential victims. In the neutral condition
(n=30), participants were given the original version of the
trolley dilemmas.
In each condition, the order of the seven dilemmas was
randomized. Following is an example of the two kinds of
moral dilemmas, “authority” and “closeness”, presented in
the study (translated from Italian). Each version started with
the same stem but ends differently:
Start of the dilemma:
You are near a Ferris wheel. It does not work. Just under
the wheel, there are five tourists. Suddenly, the wheel starts
turning and soon a cabin will kill them. There is no way to
warn them and they cannot escape in any way. The only way
to save the five tourists is to pull a lever that can change the
rotation of the wheel. Unfortunately, there are three people
on the other side that would be killed.
The “authority” script continues as follows:
You are in the cabin and close to the lever. You know that
the cabin is under video surveillance and that cameras are
connected to the police and the security service. Should you
pull the lever?
The “closeness” script continues as follows:
You are in the cabin very next to the five tourists and you
can see clearly their faces from there. Should you pull the
lever?
The text of all seven scenarios is available on the web at
www.apc.it. In all conditions, as in the earlier study, each
dilemma required participants to indicate which of two
courses of action they would take if confronted with such
dilemmas (Greene & Haidt, 2002; Greene, et al., 2004). The
total number of inaction choices made by each participant
was the dependent variable.

Results
As expected, the proportion of scenarios for which
participants chose inaction was significantly greater in the
“authority” condition (F(2,102) = 9.55, p<0.001, M =2.47,
SD = 1.15), than in the other two experimental conditions
(“closeness”: M=1.46, SD=1.3, t(73)=3.48, p<.002; neutral:
M = 1.43; SD = 1.88, t(73)= 3.9, p<.001). No differences
were found between the “closeness” and neutral conditions,
t(58) = 0.1, n.s.
This result demonstrates that participants’ preferences for
the inaction depend on the goal of reducing or limiting one’s
own decisional autonomy, according to the not play God
moral principle.

General Discussion
The two studies present evidence that moral judgments of
harmful acts and omissions are affected by the degree of
their interference with the “natural order”. According to
Sunstein (2005), harmful acts are worse than harmful

omissions because individuals’ moral intuitions reflect an
overgeneralization of the “Do not play God” principle. In
this perspective, omissions or inactions interfere less with
the “natural order.”
Omission generally carries less
negative moral weight than commission, since it interferes
less with individual’s destiny.
In particular, in two studies we demonstrated that the “Do
not play God” principle influences individuals’ moral
preferences when faced with problems like the trolley
dilemma, traditionally used in moral psychology to study
how people reason when choosing between two morally
unacceptable courses of action. In particular, in the first
study we demonstrated that participants preferring omission
justified this choice according to the “Do not play God”
deontological
principle.
The
second
experiment
demonstrated that the presence of an “authority” lead people
to limit their decisional autonomy, thus preferring the
inaction, that is what interferes less with a given order (“do
not play God” principle).
Our findings may contribute to the explanation of the
omission bias, which is defined as the tendency to judge
harmful actions as worse or as less moral than equally
harmful omissions (inactions) (e.g. Baron & Ritov, 2004;
Spranca, Minsk, & Baron, 2003).
Several experiments have found that across a variety of
moral dilemmas, subjects’ judgments about the
permissibility of harming an individual align with some
principles, which usually distinguish between action and
inaction, such as harm intended as the means to an end is
worse than harm foreseen as the side effect of a pursuit, or
that harm involving physical contact with the victim is
worse than harm involving no physical contact.
Sunstein (2005) suggests that harmful acts are generally
worse than harmful omissions because according to the “Do
not play God” principle, they interferes less with the
“natural order.” Overall, results from our two preliminary
experiments confirm this hypothesis. In Study 1, our
participants’ justifications for their inaction explicitly refer
to the intention of not interfering with destiny. In Study 2,
our participants are affected in their moral choice by the
presence of an authority, which induce them to choose the
inaction, the option that does not modify “the natural order”.
The omission bias may thus be better considered as a part
of a deontological theory that people tend to approve
(Sinnott-Armstrong, Young & Cushman, 2010; Waldmann,
Nagel, & Wiegmann, 2012), and actively influences both
commonsense morality and law, including constitutional
law, by treating harmful omissions as morally
unproblematic or categorically different from harmful
actions (see for example the current debate on euthanasia).
The current studies are to be considered as preliminary
studies on this topic. They also present several limitations
that call for further investigation. First, participants of both
our studies were predominantly female, young, and
influenced by Catholic culture. It is possible that our results
may not generalize to a broader population. Thus, they may
not work well for others that differ in culture and religion.

2976

Further experiments could test whether our results will be
replicated for individuals of different in cultures and
religions.

References
Asch, D., Baron, J., Hershey, J. C., Kunreuther, H.,
Meszaros, J., Ritov, I., & Spranca, M. (1994).
Determinants of resistance to pertussis vaccination.
Medical Decision Making, 14, 118–123.
Baron, J., & Leshner, S. (2000). How serious are
expressions of protected values. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 6, 183–194.
Baron, J., & Ritov, I. (2004). Omission bias, individual
differences, and normality. Journal of Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 94, 74-85.
Cushman, F., Young, L., & Hauser, M. (2006). The role of
conscious reasoning and intuition in moral judgment:
Testing three principles of harm. Psychological Science,
17, 1082–1089.
Greene, J. D., & Haidt, J. (2002). How (and where) does
moral judgment work? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6,
517–523.
Greene, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Engell, A. D., Darley, J. M.,
& Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural bases of cognitive
conflict and control in moral judgment. Neuron, 44, 389400.
Greene, J., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J.
M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293,
2105–2108.
Greene, J.D., Cushman, F.A., Stewart, L.E., Lowenberg, K.,
Nystrom, L.E., & Cohen, J.D. (2009). Pushing moral
buttons: The interaction between personal force and
intention in moral judgment. Cognition, 111, 364–371.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment
Psychological Review, 108, 814–834.
Haidt, J., & Baron, J. (1996). Social roles and the moral
judgment of acts and omissions. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 26, 201–218.
Meszaros, J. R., Asch, D. A., Baron, J., Hershey, J. C.,
Kunreuther, H., & Schwartz-Buzaglo, J. (1996). Cognitive
processes and the decisions of some parents to forego
pertussis vaccination for their children. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, 49, 697–703.
Royzman, E. B., & Baron, J. (2002). The preference for
indirect harm. Social Justice Research, 15, 165–184.
Singer, P. (1979). Practical ethics. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W., Young, L., & Cushman, F. (2010).
Moral intuitions. In J. M. Doris & Th e Moral Psychology
Research Group (Eds.), The moral psychology handbook.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Spranca, M., Minsk, E., & Baron, J. (1991). Omission and
commission in judgment and choice. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 27, 76–105.

Spranca, M., Minsk, E., & Baron, J. (2003). Omission and
commission in judgment and choice (p. 31). Philadelphia,
PA: University of Pennsylvania.
Sunstein, C. (2005). Moral heuristics. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 28, 531–573.
Waldmann, M. R., Nagel, J., & Wiegmann, A. (2012).
Moral judgment. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison
(Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning
(pp. 364-389). New York: Oxford University Press.
Wroe, A. L., & Salkovskis, P. M. (2000). Causing harm and
allowing harm: a study of beliefs in obsessional problems.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 1141–1162.

2977

