UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
More than a feeling: When emotional reactions don't predict moral judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7w29s0dt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Horne, Zachary
Powell, Derek

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

More than a feeling:
When emotional reactions don't predict moral judgments
Zachary Horne (horne2@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Derek Powell (derekpowell@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1285 Franz Hall,
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
Abstract

to understand why people give such drastically different
judgments about these cases.
Many researchers have suggested that these two dilemmas
can be distinguished by the emotional reactions they elicit.
Specifically, the Footbridge dilemma is thought to elicit
strong negative emotional reactions, whereas the Trolley
dilemma is thought to elicit weak negative emotional
reactions. We will refer to this claim as the Emotion
Explanation.
The Emotion Explanation has been interpreted as having
wide-ranging implications for theories in psychology,
cognitive neuroscience, and ethics. For instance, some
psychologists have suggested that the Emotion Explanation
is revealing of the psychological mechanisms recruited in
moral judgment in general (e.g., Greene et al., 2001;
Koenigs et al., 2007). Meanwhile, philosophers have
employed the Emotion Explanation to diverse ends, using it
to advance or undercut normative ethical theories, and to
make arguments about the epistemic status of moral
intuitions (e.g., Singer, 2005).
There are several reasons to take this explanation
seriously. First, there is good evidence that emotions do
importantly influence moral judgments (Haidt, 2001). Most
directly, cognitive neuroscientists using functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) have reported finding activity in
areas of the brain associated with emotional processing
while participants made ‘deontological’ moral judgments,
such as judging that it is inappropriate to push the man in
the Footbridge dilemma (Greene et al., 2001, 2004).
Researchers have also examined the moral judgments of
participants with damage to the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC), an area of the brain associated with affect.
When given a battery of moral dilemmas, these participants
gave ‘utilitarian’ moral judgments in the Footbridge
dilemma, whereas healthy control participants tended to
give deontological judgments (Koenigs et al., 2007).
Despite this evidence, there are a number of reasons to
examine the Emotion Explanation more closely. First, it is
not clear how the Emotion Explanation coheres with
existing theories about morally relevant emotions, such as
guilt. For example, social functionalist theories of emotion
suggest that emotions like guilt serve both intrapersonal and
interpersonal functions (Keltner, Haidt, & Shiota, 2006). On
this view, guilt is typically elicited as a result of one’s
perceived transgressions against another, which can damage

Many moral psychologists have proposed that the difference
between people’s moral judgments about the Trolley and
Footbridge dilemmas can be explained by their differing
emotional responses to the dilemmas. In two experiments, we
tested this explanation by presenting the dilemmas and
measuring participants’ reactions using a self-report emotion
measure (PANAS-X). As might be expected, participants
experienced more intense emotions after reading moral
dilemmas when compared to a non-moral dilemma. However,
participants’ emotional reactions to the Trolley and Footbridge
dilemmas did not differ. Our findings call the oft cited emotion
explanation into question.
Keywords: moral psychology; emotion; PANAS-X; decision
making.

Recently, research on moral dilemmas has crossed
disciplines, branching out from ethics into psychology and
cognitive neuroscience (e.g., Ciaramelli, Muccioli, Làdavas,
& Di Pellegrino, 2007; Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom,
Darley, & Cohen, 2001; Greene, Nystrom, Engell, Darley,
& Cohen, 2004; Koenigs, Young, Adolphs, Tranel,
Cushman, Hauser, & Damasio, 2007). Within these lines
of inquiry, there has been widespread interest in
participants’ judgments about two famous moral dilemmas:
the Trolley dilemma and the Footbridge dilemma. In the
Trolley dilemma, participants are told they are at the wheel
of a runaway train that will cause the deaths of five
workmen if it proceeds on its present course. The only way
to avoid the deaths of these workmen is to hit a switch,
redirecting the train to a side track where it will kill a single
workman instead. This dilemma is often contrasted with
another famous moral dilemma, the Footbridge dilemma,
which asks participants to consider a situation in which they
are on a footbridge, in between a runaway trolley and five
workmen who will be killed if nothing is done. Participants
are then told that the only way to save the lives of the five
workmen is to push a stranger off the bridge and onto the
tracks below where his large body will stop the trolley.
Surprisingly, in the Trolley dilemma, approximately 80% of
people judge that it is appropriate to take action (hit the
switch, killing one person), yet in the Footbridge dilemma,
about 80% judge that is it inappropriate to take action (push
the man off the bridge, killing him). Given the apparent
similarity of these moral situations, researchers have sought

615

relationships (Keltner, 1995). Upon contemplating some
action, the experience of guilt might serve an intrapersonal
function, deterring the potentially damaging action.
Alternatively, if the action is ultimately taken, guilt can
serve an interpersonal function, helping to repair whatever
damage was done (Baumeister, 1994).
While it is clear that moral dilemmas can differ in the
intensity of the emotions they evoke (e.g., dilemmas that ask
participants to consider killing their child versus lying), the
emotionally salient aspects of both the Trolley and
Footbridge dilemmas are held constant. In both scenarios,
participants are asked if they should kill a stranger in order
to save five other strangers. Causing the death of another
person seems likely to place a strain on interpersonal
relationships, whatever one’s motivation for doing so. Cast
in this light, social functionalist theories of emotion seem to
predict that people will experience feelings of guilt even as
they approve of taking action in the Trolley dilemma.
Second, extant research in moral psychology provides
only indirect support for the Emotion Explanation. The most
direct support comes from fMRI investigations by Greene
and colleagues (2001, 2004). In these studies, researchers
presented participants with two large groups of moral
dilemmas. One group was composed of the Trolley dilemma
and 18 other dilemmas, and the other group was composed
of the Footbridge dilemma and 24 other dilemmas. They
called the dilemmas they considered Trolley-like
‘impersonal’, and the dilemmas they considered Footbridgelike ‘personal’, due to the ‘closeness’ of the action being
performed in the dilemma. They found that the ‘impersonal’
dilemmas activated areas of the brain associated with
deliberative cognition, whereas the ‘personal’ dilemmas
activated areas of the brain associated with emotion. They
regarded these results, in part, as evidence for the Emotion
Explanation.
However, in order for the data from the studies by Greene
and colleagues (2001, 2004) to provide compelling evidence
for the Emotion Explanation per se, each of their
‘impersonal’ and ‘personal’ dilemmas would have to elicit
emotions with valence and intensity similar to the Trolley
and Footbridge dilemmas, respectively. It is doubtful that
such parity was achieved. Dilemmas deemed ‘impersonal’
frequently did not involve physically harming someone
(even though the Trolley dilemma clearly does), whereas
those deemed ‘personal’ almost invariably did. In fact, only
10 of the 19 ‘impersonal’ dilemmas involved harm, whereas
24 of the 25 ‘personal’ dilemmas involved physically
harming someone (Moore, Clark, & Kane, 2008). This
difference is a problematic confound because moral
situations concerning the bodily harm of another have been
shown to elicit stronger negative emotional responses than
those not involving any bodily harm (Heekeren, 2005).
Misgivings about the representativeness of the dilemmas in
these sets are further supported by an item analysis
performed by McGuire and colleagues (2009) on Greene
and colleagues’ data. This analysis demonstrated that only a
subset of the moral dilemmas was responsible for the

significantly different patterns of neural activation Greene
and colleagues observed, again impugning evidence for the
Emotion Explanation.
Given the confound in these materials, and the findings of
the item analysis (McGuire, Langdon, Coltheart, &
Mackenzie, 2009), we suspect that people experienced more
intense emotions when considering ‘personal’ dilemmas
because the dilemmas much more frequently involved
physical harm, not because the Footbridge dilemma itself is
more emotionally engaging than the Trolley dilemma.1 In
other words, Greene and colleagues’ (2001) findings do not
provide clear evidence for the Emotion Explanation, and
thus corroboration of the Emotion Explanation requires a
more direct test. These criticisms apply equally to a number
of other studies by researchers who have used these same
materials and have claimed to have found evidence for the
Emotion Explanation (e.g., Ciaramelli et al., 2011; Koenigs
et al., 2007). To our knowledge, there is no empirical data
taken as evidence for the Emotion Explanation that avoids
this criticism.
We sought to test the Emotion Explanation by examining
people’s emotional responses to the Trolley dilemma and
Footbridge dilemma, individually and specifically. We
measured participants’ emotional responses to moral
dilemmas using the PANAS-X, a comprehensive emotional
state, trait, and mood self-report measure (Watson, Clark, &
Tellegen, 1988) that has been shown to correlate with neural
activation in the amygdala (Irwin, Davidson,
Kalin,
Sorenson, & Turski, 1998), as well as in the vmPFC (Zald,
Mattson, & Pardo, 2002). Importantly, use of this self-report
measure allowed us to investigate people’s emotional
responses to individual moral dilemmas, rather than to a
battery of different dilemmas. More advanced
methodologies such as GSR or fMRI, while in many ways
superior to self-report, are ill-suited for investigating
responses to individual stimuli.
In line with previous research, we hypothesized that
considering the Footbridge dilemma would elicit negative
emotions. In contrast to the Emotion Explanation, we
predicted that considering the Trolley Dilemma would also
elicit increased guilt, as well as other negative emotions.
Moreover, because the Trolley and Footbridge dilemmas
contain very similar emotionally-relevant content (they both
call on participants to imagine killing another person), we
expected to find very little difference in people’s emotional
reactions to these dilemmas. These last two predictions
stand in contrast to the way moral psychologists have
conceived of the Footbridge and Trolley dilemmas (e.g.,
Ciarmelli et al., 2007; Greene et al., 2001; Greene et al.,
1

These concerns do not necessarily undermine the
distinction between personal and impersonal dilemmas, for
which there is independent evidence (Moore, Clark & Kane,
2008). The two claims are independent; one can accept the
personal-impersonal distinction without thinking that
people’s moral judgments in these cases are driven by
differences in the emotions the situations evoke.

616

2004; Koenigs et al., 2007); hence support for our
predictions would cast doubt on the Emotion Explanation.

Self-Assurance subscales, we do not discuss analyses of the
Positive and Negative Affect scales.

Experiment 1

Procedure Experiment 1 was administered and data

were collected via pen-and-paper questionnaires. The
questionnaires consisted of text describing a moral
dilemma, followed by an emotion measure (i.e., the
PANAS-X). Participants were asked to respond to the
emotion measure after considering a statement of the
form, ‘You are thinking about (action) in order to
(outcome).’ For example, when considering the
Trolley dilemma, participants would read the
statement, ‘You are thinking about hitting the switch
in order to avoid the deaths of the five workmen.’ The
text indicating the outcome was italicized for all
conditions. On the opposite side of the questionnaire
participants were asked to make a judgment of
appropriateness. In making their judgments of
appropriateness, participants were asked, ‘Is it
appropriate for you to (action) in order to (outcome).’
They were instructed to circle ‘yes’ or ‘no.’
Participants were also asked to describe the emotions
they experienced while reading the vignettes, and were
given several lines to write in their response. These
descriptions were used to identify problematic
responses or inconsistencies between participants’
reported emotions on the PANAS-X. Finally,
participants were asked to provide demographic
information.

Method
Participants The participants in Experiment 1 were 442
students enrolled in various undergraduate courses at
Arizona State University. Approximately 54% of the
participants were males. The mean age of participants was
20.1 years old.
Materials Four different scenarios were presented to
participants in this study, with each participant reading one
scenario. Three of these scenarios were moral vignettes, the
‘Trolley,’ the ‘Footbridge,’ and the ‘Crying Baby’ vignette,
all taken verbatim from Greene et al. (2001).
One potential concern is that the PANAS-X subscales
might not be sensitive enough to detect differences between
moral dilemmas of different emotional intensity. To
evaluate the sensitivity of our chosen PANAS-X subscales,
we presented some participants with a highly emotional
dilemma, the Crying Baby dilemma. In this dilemma,
participants must consider smothering their own infant child
to save the lives of their townspeople.
The Crying Baby dilemma also afforded us the
opportunity to explore whether there was a relationship
between emotions and moral judgments within an
emotionally engaging case. Prior research shows that people
tend to be evenly divided over whether or not it is
appropriate to take action in the Crying Baby dilemma,
permitting meaningful comparisons between those who
approve and those who disapprove. The fourth dilemma was
a non-moral control dilemma (Coupon) adapted from
Greene et al. (2001).
In Experiment 1, we used selected sub-scales from the
PANAS-X to measure the extent to which participants
experienced several relevant emotions. Participants rated
how strongly they felt certain feelings on a 1 to 5 Likert
scale, where 1 corresponded to ‘Very slightly or not at all’
and 5 corresponded to ‘Extremely.’ Importantly,
participants were asked to report on their current emotional
state rather than to assess the vignette or to speculate as to
how they might feel if placed in the situation they read.
These individual ratings were then averaged to obtain a
score for each emotion subscale. Data were collected for
the Positive Affect, Negative Affect, Hostility, Guilt,
Joviality and Self-Assurance sub-scales from the PANASX. The Guilt sub-scale included words like 'Guilty',
'Ashamed', and 'Disgusted With Self', and the Hostility subscale included words like 'Angry', 'Disgusted', and 'Hostile'.
The Joviality subscale included words like 'Happy', 'Joyful',
and 'Cheerful', and the Self-Assurance subscale included
words like 'Proud', 'Strong', and 'Confident'. As the Positive
and Negative Affect scales contain many of the same
emotion words found in the Guilt, Joviality, Hostility and

Experiment 1 was conducted during various lecture
classes at Arizona State University. The questionnaires
were passed out at the beginning of the class, and students
were given approximately 10 minutes to complete them.
Instructions were given both verbally and in writing.
Participants were instructed not to talk to each other while
completing the survey, and were observed for compliance.

Results
Of the 442 participants originally involved in the
experiment, 12 gave written descriptions of their emotions
that were primarily non sequitur or conflicted with the
emotion ratings they had given on the PANAS-X. These 12
participants were removed from further analyses. Only
participants who had complete data sets for all the emotion
subscales were included in the final analysis. This resulted
in 86 participants responding to the control vignette, 147 to
the Crying Baby, 71 to the Footbridge, and 77 to the
Table 1: Participants’ judgments across conditions (percent
approval).

617

Control

Trolley

Footbridge

Crying Baby

92%

91%

25%

46%

Table 2: Summary of Logistic Regression Models
Predicting Moral Judgments in the Crying Baby Dilemma
in Experiment 1.
Model 1
β

SE

eβ

p

.81

.36

-.22

.24

.81

.37

.19

.94

.76

-.02

.20

.98

.91

.40

1.24

.59

.41

.41

1.20

.66

1.19

.35

3.27

.001

SE

e

Hostility

-.21

.23

Guilt

-.06

Joviality

.21

Gender
χ²

Model 2
p

β

β

4.08

15.81

df

3

4

p

.253

.003

scenarios were unlikely to elicit meaningfully different
emotional reactions.
Participants who read the Trolley vignette reported
greater levels of Guilt (t(377) = 4.66, p < .001) and Hostility
(t(377) = 4.22, p < .001), and lower levels of Joviality
(t(377) = -5.39, p < .001) than those who read the control
vignette. Further planned comparisons tested whether the
Crying Baby vignette was more emotionally salient than the
Footbridge and Trolley vignettes.
The Crying Baby
vignette elicited more Guilt (t(377) = 9.11, p < .001) and
Hostility (t(377) = 10.23, p < .001), and less Joviality
(t(377) = -2.79, p < .001) than the Footbridge and Trolley
vignettes. These differences indicate that the PANAS-X is
sufficiently sensitive as an emotion measure to detect
differences between moral dilemmas of different emotional
intensity.
Finally, we used logistic regression analyses to assess the
relationship between emotions and moral judgments in the
Crying Baby dilemma. We evaluated this relationship using
two different regression models. The resulting equations are
summarized in Table 2. The first model uses the Guilt,
Hostility, and Joviality subscale scores as predictors of
people’s moral judgments. No significant relationship was
found between participants’ emotion ratings and their moral
judgments for the Crying Baby problem (χ²(3) = 4.082, p =
.25). The second model adds gender to the three regressors
from the original model. This model significantly predicted
moral judgments (χ²(4) = 15.813, p < .01). Within this
model, the gender coefficient was statistically significant (β
= 1.185, eβ = 3.271, p < .01), indicating that women were
less likely to judge it appropriate to smother the child.
Importantly, this relationship between gender and moral
judgments was significant over and above the emotion
ratings.

Figure 1: Mean emotion ratings on each PANAS-X
sub-scale for the four dilemmas in Experiment 1.
Trolley. Additional participants were included in the Crying
Baby in order to achieve adequate statistical power for
comparisons to be made within that condition. Mean
subscale ratings for each vignette are shown in Figure 1.
Participants’ judgments are summarized in table 1. Their
responses accord with those obtained by previous
investigations of these scenarios.
PANAS-X scores were examined with four ANOVA tests
with vignette type as a between-subjects variable.
Significance was obtained on the Guilt (F(3, 377) = 62.57,
MSE = 1.334, p < .001), Hostility (F(3,377) = 65.66, MSE
= .953, p < .001), Joviality (F(3, 377) = 21.19, MSE= .453,
p < .001) and Self-Assurance (F(3, 377) = 2.74, MSE =
.737, p = .04) subscales.
For each of these ANOVA tests, planned comparisons
examined differences between the three moral vignettes and
the control vignette in the emotion ratings on the Guilt,
Hostility and Joviality subscales. The moral vignettes
elicited significantly more Guilt (t(377) = 8.69, p < .001)
and Hostility (t(377) = 7.90, p < .001, and significantly less
Joviality (t(377) = -6.83, p < .001) than the control vignette.
Though significance was obtained on the respective
ANOVA analyses, no significant difference was found
between the moral vignettes and control vignette for SelfAssurance ratings (t(377) = -.475, p = .635), suggesting that
the Self-Assurance subscale was not relevant to moral
judgments. No further analyses were conducted for SelfAssurance ratings.
As predicted, participants’ ratings of Guilt, Hostility and
Joviality were compared between the Trolley and
Footbridge vignettes with three separate t-tests. These tests
found no significant differences between the two groups for
Guilt (t(146) = -.09, p = .93), Hostility (t(148) = -.33, p =
.74) or Joviality (t(148) = 1.24, p = .22). This finding is
consistent with our prediction that such highly similar moral

Experiment 2
As the results of Experiment 1 stand in stark contrast to the
Emotion Explanation, we sought to replicate the findings of
Experiment 1 in a different population.

618

Method
The participants in Experiment 2 were 221 workers
recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk (mTurk).
Approximately 53% of the participants were males. The
mean age of participants was approximately 31 years old.

Table 3: Summary of Linear Regression Model Predicting
Moral Judgments in the Crying Baby Dilemma in
Experiment 2.

Materials The materials and measurements used in
Experiment 2 were identical to those of Experiment 1, with
two exceptions. The results of Experiment 1 indicated that
participants’ emotion ratings on the Self-Assurance subscale
in moral conditions did not differ from participants in the
control condition. Consequently, in Experiment 2, we only
used the Guilt, Joviality and Hostility subscales to measure
participants emotional responses. In addition, rather than
asking participants to give moral judgments as a binary
‘yes/no’ response, we asked them to rate the moral rightness
or wrongness of the proposed act on a 1-6 Likert scale. The
end points of the Likert scale were labeled ‘Completely
Inappropriate’ and ‘Completely Appropriate.’ This change
was made in order to increase our statistical power for
detecting any potential relationship between emotions and
moral judgments in the Crying Baby dilemma.

b

SE

t

p

Guilt

-.020

.345

-.059

.954

Hostility

.298

.392

.758

.452

-.521

.605

Joviality

.175

.336

Intercept

2.216

1.038

F

.764

df

47

p

.52

R2

.047

(t(217) = 4.08, p < .001) and Hostility (t(217) = 5.72, p <
.001) than did the Footbridge and Trolley vignettes. The
same contrast for the joviality subscale approached
significance (t(217) = 1.81, p = .07).
As was observed in Experiment 1, participants who read
the Trolley vignette reported greater levels of Guilt (t(111)
= 6.05, p < . 001) and Hostility (t(111) = 7.01, p < .001),
and lower levels of Joviality (t(111) = -3.67, p < .001) than
those who read the non-moral control vignette. To provide a
second test of the Emotion Explanation, participants’ ratings
of Guilt, Hostility and Joviality were compared between the
Trolley and Footbridge vignettes with three separate t-tests.
These tests again found no significant differences between
the two groups for Guilt (t(107) = -1.42, p = .16), Hostility
(t(107) = -.34, p = .74) or Joviality (t(107) = 1.27, p = .21).
The use of Likert scale ratings of moral judgments in
Experiment 2 enabled us to assess the relationship between
emotions and moral judgments in the Crying Baby dilemma
using a simpler linear regression model. The model used the
three PANAS-X sub-scale scores as predictors of people’s
moral judgments. The resulting equation is summarized in
Table 3. Replicating our findings in Experiment 1, no
significant relationship was found between participants’
emotion ratings and their moral judgments for the Crying
Baby dilemma (F(3, 45) = .90, p = .45). This model
accounted for less than 5 percent of the variance in
participants’ Crying Baby judgments, indicating an
extremely weak (and non-significant) relationship between
emotions and moral judgments about the case.

Collection Experiment 2 was administered and data was
collected through the mTurk work-distribution website.
Eligible workers were redirected to Qualtrics, where they
completed the study. Afterwards, workers were directed
back to mTurk, where they were compensated with $.20.
Procedure The survey presented to participants in
Experiment 2 was nearly identical to the survey in
Experiment 1, save for being computerized rather than pen
and paper based. It consisted of text describing a moral
dilemma, followed by an emotion measure (PANAS-X).
After rating their emotions, participants made a moral
judgment about the dilemma presented to them.

Results
Experiment 2 replicated the findings from Experiment 1. In
Experiment 2, 61 participants read the Coupon vignette, 51
read the Crying Baby, 57 read the Footbridge, and 52 read
the Trolley. On average, participants judged it appropriate to
use the coupon (mean = 5.51) and to switch the track in the
Trolley dilemma (mean = 4.69). Participants were divided
over whether to smother the baby (tending to disapprove
somewhat, mean = 2.88), and in general disapproved of
pushing the man (mean = 2.32).
An ANOVA revealed significant differences between the
moral and control vignettes in terms of the emotions they
elicited, with significance obtaining for the Guilt (F(3, 217)
= 31.86, MSE = 1.389, p < .001), Hostility (F(3, 217) =
52.57, MSE = .929, p < .001), and Joviality (F(3, 217) =
15.339, MSE= .824, p < .001) subscales. Planned
comparisons again revealed the sensitivity of the PANAS-X
for measuring the different emotions elicited by different
moral cases. The Crying Baby vignette elicited more Guilt

Discussion
We hypothesized that the Trolley dilemma would be more
emotionally engaging than many moral psychologists have
claimed. Additionally, we suspected that because of the high
degree of similarity between the Trolley and Footbridge
dilemmas, any differences between the emotions elicited by
the two dilemmas would not be sufficient to explain the
large difference in participants’ judgments about the
dilemmas. The results of Experiments 1 and 2 confirm these
two predictions. We found that participants reported
significantly more guilt and hostility in response to the
Trolley dilemma than to the control dilemma, and

619

significantly less joviality. Additionally, we found no
difference in emotion ratings from participants who
responded to the Footbridge dilemma and those who
responded to the Trolley dilemma, despite the rather large
sample size of our experiment.
To our knowledge, this is the first use of the PANAS-X to
compare the emotions elicited by different moral dilemmas.
Additionally, one of our primary hypotheses was that there
would be no differences between the emotions elicited by
the Footbridge and Trolley judgments. This made it
important to confirm that the PANAS-X is sufficiently
sensitive to detect emotional changes, not just between
moral dilemmas and a non-moral dilemma, but also between
different moral dilemmas. We found that participants who
responded to the Crying Baby dilemma reported
significantly stronger negative emotions and weaker
positive emotions than did participants who responded to
the Trolley and Footbridge dilemmas, demonstrating the
sensitivity of the PANAS-X.
The Emotion Explanation, as stated, concerns the Trolley
and Footbridge dilemmas specifically. However, this
explanation has been employed to a number of different
ends, not all of which necessarily hinge on facts about these
specific dilemmas. In this way, some proponents of the
Emotion Explanation might argue for a more general claim,
viz., in general, deontological moral judgments recruit gut,
emotional processes. In an emotionally salient case like the
Crying Baby dilemma, proponents of this more general
Emotion Explanation ought to predict a relationship
between emotions moral judgments, such that the stronger
the negative emotional reaction a participant experiences,
the more likely they are to give a deontological judgment.
Across two experiments, we observed no such relationship
between emotions and moral judgments in the Crying Baby
dilemma.
In sum, our findings indicate that the Trolley, Footbridge
and Crying Baby dilemmas fail to conform to the more
general Emotion Explanation. It is a question for future
research whether these dilemmas are simply exceptions to
the rule, or whether the more general Emotion Explanation
should be rejected. Our findings cast doubt on the Emotion
Explanation and may call for revision of the psychological,
ethical, and epistemological theories in which it has been
employed.

Greene, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Engell, A. D., Darley, J. M.,
& Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural bases of cognitive
conflict and control in moral judgment. Neuron, 44(2),
389-400.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley,
J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science,
293(5537), 2105-2108.
Haidt, J. (2001). The Emotional Dog and is Rational Tail: A
Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral Judgment.
Psychological Review, 108(4), 814-834.
Heekeren, H. R., Wartenburger, I., Schmidt, H., Prehn, K.,
Schwintowski, H. P. et al. (2005). Influence of bodily
harm on neural correlates of semantic and moral decisionmaking. NeuroImage, 24(3), 887-897
Irwin, W., Davidson, R. J., Kalin, N. H., Sorenson, J. A. &
Turski, P. A. 1998 Relations between human amygdala
activation and self-reported dispositional affect. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. (Suppl. S), 109.
Keltner, D. (1995). Signs of appeasement: Evidence for the
distinct displays of embarrassment, amusement, and
shame. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
68(3), 441-454.
Keltner, D., Haidt, J., & Shiota, M. N. (2006). Social
Functionalism and the Evolution of Emotions. In Schaller,
M., Simpson, J. A., & Kenrick, D. T. (Eds.) Evolution and
Social Psychology (115-142). New York, NY:
Psychology Press.
Koenigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Cushman,
F., Hauser, M., & Damasio, A. (2007). Damage to the
prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian moral judgments.
Nature, 446(7138), 908-911.
McGuire, J., Langdon, R., Coltheart, M., & Mackenzie, C.
(2009). A reanalysis of the personal/impersonal
distinction in moral psychology research. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 45(3), 577-580.
Singer, P. (2005). Ethics and Intuitions. The Journal of
Ethics, 9.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988).
Development and validation of brief measures of positive
and negative affect schedule. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology,54(6), 1063-1070.
Zald, D. H., Mattson, D. L., & Pardo, J. V. (2002). Brain
activity in ventromedial prefrontal cortex correlates with
individual differences in negative affect. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 99(4), 2450–4.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by grant
N000140810186 from the Office of Naval Research.

References
Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A. M., & Heatherton, T. F.
(1994). Guilt: an interpersonal approach. Psychological
Bulletin, 115(2), 243-267.
Ciaramelli, E., Muccioli, M., Làdavas, E., & Di Pellegrino,
G. (2007). Selective deficit in personal moral judgment
following damage to ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
Social cognitive and affective neuroscience, 2(2), 84-92.

620

