UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motivations and Goals in Developing Integrative Models of Human Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7mm3f2t5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Gunzelmann, Glenn

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motivations and Goals in Developing Integrative Models of Human Cognition
Glenn Gunzelmann (glenn.gunzelmann@us.af.mil)
Cognitive Models & Agents Branch, Air Force Research Laboratory
711 HPW/RHAC, 2620 Q St., Building 852
Wright Patterson Air Force Base, OH 85212-6061 USA

Abstract

Goals and Scope

There has been tremendous growth recently in theories that
attempt to provide more comprehensive accounts of the
foundational mechanisms of human cognition. Such theories
have taken a variety of forms, and have focused on different
levels of analysis. The diversity is important and necessary,
but can serve as a barrier to interaction, comparison, and
integration, even at venues like the Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society that should foster such dialogue.
This workshop is intended to bring together individuals
working on integrative models of human cognition, to
emphasize shared motivations and goals. Ultimately, building
scientific communities that bridge levels of analysis,
methodologies, and theoretical approaches to work toward
more comprehensive theories will be critical to the addressing
the central goal of the Cognitive Science Society –
understanding the nature of the human mind.

The need to bring together this community of researchers
was expressed by Newell (1990). Newell explicitly and
deliberately referred to Unified Theories of Cognition in the
plural, noting that multiple implementations are important
for progress in the science. More recently, McClelland
(2009) emphasized that “different simplifications are
required to explore different issues.” (p. 12). Interactions
among cognitive scientists from different methodological
and theoretical backgrounds are crucial to identifying
common foundations and interconnections among levels of
analysis and theoretical perspectives.
To reinforce and further develop the identity of this
scientific community, this workshop will create an
important opportunity for interaction and discussion
amongst researchers working toward more integrative
theories of cognition. It will not focus on a debate about the
merits of developing integrative models of human cognition.
The participants share, in general, an appreciation of the
value of developing such theories, which provides the
unifying theme for the event.
In addition, the workshop will not focus on the claims of
particular integrative models. That is an important scientific
activity, but the goal here is to build broader appreciation of
shared motivations and goals, despite sometimes very
different approaches and theories. All of the presenters seek
unifying mechanisms that cut through the complexity of
human cognition and enhance our understanding.
Complementary perspectives and opportunities for
integration will be highlighted to emphasize connections. In
addition, contemporary challenges in this pursuit will be
discussed, which will facilitate future scientific debates
regarding particular claims and mechanisms.

Keywords: Integrated Models; Unified Theories of
Cognition; Cognitive Models; Cognitive Architectures;
Neural Architectures.

Introduction
The motivations for integrative models of human cognition
have their roots in the origins of cognitive science as a
scientific discipline. Even before cognitive psychology
emerged, ideas about unifying principles to explain
cognition were expressed in the scientific literature (e.g.,
Newell, Shaw, & Simon, 1958; Rosenblatt, 1961), including
so-called grand psychological theories proposed during the
first half of the 20th century. The call for more
comprehensive theories was explicitly made by Newell
(1973), who expressed concern about the prospect that
traditional, phenomenon-driven cognitive psychology
would, by itself, lead to the kind of integrative
understanding of the human mind that is the goal of
cognitive science.
In the decades since, integrative theories of human
cognition have become increasingly prevalent in cognitive
science. These theories now represent an exciting diversity
of theoretical approaches and levels of analysis, better
reflecting the diversity of the cognitive science community
as a whole. As noted by McClelland (2009), this growth has
been tied in important ways to sustained increases in
computing power that enable cognitive modeling at a scale
and resolution that was unimaginable half a century ago.
The participants in the workshop have been selected to
capture much of this theoretical diversity. The current state
of the art in this area makes this workshop a timely and
important contribution to the Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society and the broader cognitive science
community.

Workshop Organization
The workshop will be organized around a set of
presentations and opportunities for discussion. The focus
will not be on theoretical overviews. Instead, contributors
will comment on the role of integrative models in cognitive
science, including understanding the fundamental principles
of human cognition broadly, and integrating across
components of cognition to perform complex tasks.
Presenters will highlight links to alternative approaches and
methodologies, and discuss current challenges in developing
integrative models of the human mind.
Speakers will be given approximately 25 minutes, with no
more than 15 minutes of presentation material. This will
allow significant opportunity for questions, comments, and
discussion. In addition, the closing session of the workshop
will consist of a panel discussion with the goal of

30

identifying and highlighting common themes
perspectives that have emerged across the day.

and

Ron Sun
Cognitive Science Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic University

Workshop Organizer

Niels Taatgen
Department of Artificial Intelligence
University of Groningen

Dr. Glenn Gunzelmann is the Science and Technology
Advisor for the United States Air Force Research
Laboratory’s Cognitive Models and Agents Branch. His
research attempts to expand the explanatory breadth of
integrative theories, including theories of human spatial
competence (e.g., Gunzelmann & Lyon, 2011) and fatigue
(e.g., Gunzelmann, Gross, Gluck, & Dinges, 2009).

Josh Tenenbaum
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Discussion Panel

Target Audience

Wayne D. Gray
Cognitive Science & Computer Science Departments
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

This workshop targets the central purpose of the Cognitive
Science Society – it “brings together researchers from many
fields who hold a common goal: understanding the nature of
the human mind” (CSS Website). The presenters represent a
range of disciplines in cognitive science, who will focus on
important challenges associated with creating more
comprehensive theories. Because this steps back from the
theoretical and technical details of the theories, this
workshop should be approachable and of interest to a broad
audience at CogSci2013, and will make an important
contribution to the event.

Jay McClelland
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
Frank E. Ritter
College of Information Sciences and Technology
The Pennsylvania State University

Archiving

Participants

In conjunction with the workshop, a proposal is being
submitted to Topics in Cognitive Science. Presenters at the
workshop will be invited to submit brief papers to
complement the presentations at the workshop. Discussants
will be encouraged to submit commentaries to the Topic on
Integrative Models of Human Cognition, based on both the
papers and workshop presentations. All workshop attendees,
and others in the cognitive science community, will also be
invited to contribute to the discussion in the journal.

Presenters
Joscha Bach
Berlin School of Mind and Brain
Humboldt University
Jerome Busemeyer
Cognitive Science Program
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University

References
Gunzelmann, G., Gross, J. B., Gluck, K. A., & Dinges, D. F.
(2009). Sleep deprivation and sustained attention
performance: Integrating mathematical and cognitive
modeling. Cognitive Science, 33(5), 880-910.
Gunzelmann, G., & Lyon, D. R. (2011). Representations
and processes of human spatial competence. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3(4), 741-759.
McClelland, J.L. (2009). The place of modeling in cognitive
science. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(1), 11-38.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified Theories of Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Newell, A. (1973). You can’t play 20 questions with nature
and win: Projective comments on the papers of this
symposium. In W. G. Chase (Ed.), Visual information
processing (pp. 283-308). New York: Academic Press.
Newell, A., Shaw, J. C., & Simon, H. A. (1958). Elements
of a theory of human problem solving. Psychological
Review, 65(3), 151-166.
Rosenblatt, F. (1961). Principles of neurodynamics.
Washington, DC: Spartan Books.

Chris Eliasmith
Canada Research Chair in Theoretical Neuroscience
Departments of Philosophy & Systems Design Engineering
University of Waterloo
Noah Goodman
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
Rick Granger
Psychological and Brain Sciences Department
Dartmouth University
Andrew Howes
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham, UK
Rick Lewis
Departments of Psychology and Linguistics
University of Michigan
Randy O’Reilly
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience
University of Colorado Boulder

31

