UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motor Asymmetries Predict Neural Organization of Emotion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8n94274j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Brookshire, Geoffrey
Graver, Cleve
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motor Asymmetries Predict Neural Organization of Emotion
Geoffrey Brookshire1 , Cleve Graver1 , and Daniel Casasanto1,2
{broog731; gravc243; casasand}@newschool.edu
1 Department

of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York
Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Nijmegen, NL

2 Donders

Abstract

motor control for approach and avoidance actions. We call
this the Sword and Shield Hypothesis (SSH; Brookshire &
Casasanto, 2012). The SSH suggests that the lateralization of
approach/avoidance motivation is functionally linked to the
way we use our hands to perform approach and avoidance actions, and offers a new principle to predict and explain the
neural organization of emotion.
The SSH predicts that differences in how people use their
hands for approach and avoidance actions should correspond
to differences in the neural organization of affective motivation. Left-handers tend to perform approach actions with
their left hands and avoidance actions with their right hands
(Coren, 1992; Harris, 2010). Accordingly, approach motivation in left-handers should be lateralized to the right hemisphere, the reversal of the pattern found in right-handers.
To test this prediction, Brookshire and Casasanto (2012)
examined resting activation asymmetries in EEG as a function of manual motor asymmetries and trait approach motivation. As in previous studies (Sutton & Davidson, 1997),
higher approach motivation in right-handers correlated with
greater leftward activation asymmetries. This pattern reversed in left-handers, however. Consistent with the SSH,
increased approach motivation in left-handers correlated
with greater rightward activation asymmetries (Brookshire &
Casasanto, 2012).

According to decades of research in affective neuroscience,
approach and avoidance motivation are supported by the left
and right hemispheres, respectively. With the Sword and
Shield Hypothesis (SSH), we challenge this conclusion, and
propose a novel principle underlying the organization of emotion in the brain: the hemispheric lateralization of motivation
depends on the neural locus of motor control for the dominant hand (used preferentially for approach actions) and the
non-dominant hand (used preferentially for avoidance actions).
The SSH predicts that the laterality of approach motivation
should vary continuously with the laterality of circuits used
for planning and executing approach-related actions. To test
this prediction, we measured mood before and after 5 sessions of tDCS applied bilaterally to DLPFC in right- and lefthanders. Results in right-handers show that positive emotions
increased after left-excitatory stimulation, but decreased after right-excitatory stimulation. In non-right-handers, however, the opposite pattern was found: Positive emotions decreased after left-excitatory stimulation, but increased after
right-excitatory stimulation. These findings reveal continuous
covariation between the neural systems for action and emotion,
supporting the SSH.
Keywords: Emotion; motivation; motor control; handedness;
hemispheric specialization, tDCS.

Introduction
A cornerstone of cognitive-affective neuroscience is the robust finding that the left hemisphere is specialized for approach motivation and the right hemisphere for avoidance
motivation (reviewed in Harmon-Jones, Gable, & Peterson,
2010). Although temporal and parietal areas have been implicated in affective motivation (Amodio, Master, Yee, & Taylor, 2008; Brookshire & Casasanto, 2012), studies suggest
that this asymmetry centrally involves dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC): Approach motivation recruits left DLPFC,
and avoidance motivation recruits right DLPFC (Berkman &
Lieberman, 2010).
Approach/avoidance asymmetries can also be observed in
behavior. People tend to perform approach actions with the
dominant hand, and avoidance actions with the non-dominant
hand (Casasanto, 2009). The dominant hand, for example, is
preferred when eating. In contrast, people reflexively protect
their faces with the non-dominant hand when startled (Coren,
1992). Sword-fighters in centuries past approached their enemies with a sword held in the dominant hand, and avoided incoming blows with a shield in the non-dominant hand (Harris,
2010).
In right-handers, therefore, the left hemisphere is involved
both in approach motivation and in coordinating actions with
the hand preferred for approach actions. Casasanto (2009)
proposed that this correspondence may result from a functional relationship between affective motivation and manual

Causal role of frontal asymmetry
Frontal asymmetries are widely believed to play a causal role
in determining emotional experience (Harmon-Jones et al.,
2010). Supporting this idea, patients with left hemisphere lesions are prone to depression, whereas those with right hemisphere lesions are prone to mania and indifference to their
injuries (Robinson, Boston, Starkstein, & Price, 1988). Similarly, deactivating the right hemisphere with sodium amobarbital causes laughter and elation, whereas deactivating the left
hemisphere causes crying and negative affect (Lee, Loring,
Meader, & Brooks, 1990). These data underscore the necessity of the two hemispheres in emotion, but they are limited
by low spatial resolution (constrained to the level of hemisphere), and by the extremity of processing disruptions used
(completely deactivating a neural area). Would subtler, more
spatially restricted manipulations of activation asymmetries
influence emotional processing?
Allen, Harmon-Jones, and Cavender (2001) used biofeedback in EEG to train participants to induce rightward or leftward frontal activation asymmetries. Participants trained to
produce leftward asymmetries experienced greater positive,
approach-oriented emotions than those with rightward train-

245

ing. However, it is possible that participants used strategies
to complete the biofeedback task (e.g. rehearsing approachmotivated memories), complicating inferences about a causal
role of frontal activation in producing emotions. Activation
asymmetries may have been a consequence—not a cause—of
changes in emotional state.
Subsequent work has addressed the causal role of frontal
asymmetries using transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS). In tDCS, a weak, constant electrical current is passed
between two conductive electrodes on the scalp. After 5–20
minutes of stimulation, neurons beneath the anodal electrode
are transiently excited, and those beneath the cathode are inhibited (Nitsche & Paulus, 2000).
Several studies have used tDCS to intervene on activation
asymmetries in DLPFC, but many of these fail to find support
for a causal involvement of frontal asymmetries in emotional
experience. Specifically, tDCS applied in a single session to
DLPFC had no effect on self-reported mood or trait motivational tendencies (Koenigs, Ukueberuwa, Campion, Grafman, & Wassermann, 2010; Plazier, Joos, Vanneste, Ost, &
De Ridder, 2011; Nitsche et al., 2012).
Studies of the causal role of frontal asymmetries on more
implicit emotional processing have yielded mixed results.
Nitsche et al. (2012) found that anodal tDCS over left DLPFC
facilitated identification of both positive and negative facial
expressions, but that the effect was stronger for positive expressions. Penolazzi et al. (2010) examined memory for
emotional pictures after bilateral tDCS over DLPFC. Anodal
tDCS almost invariably improves memory performance (for
review see Jacobson, Koslowski, & Lavidor, 2011). Surprisingly, however, left-anodal/right-cathodal stimulation facilitated recall of unpleasant pictures, and right-anodal/leftcathodal stimulation facilitated recall of pleasant pictures.
Although this experiment seems to suggest a causal role of
frontal asymmetries in emotional memory, the fact that leftexcitatory tDCS improved recall of negative pictures, and
right-excitatory of positive pictures, is inconsistent with a
great deal of research in right-handers linking positive emotions with the left hemisphere (Harmon-Jones et al., 2010).
Researchers noting the clinical potential of neurostimulation have begun using repeated sessions of tDCS to
treat major depressive disorder, with somewhat more consistent results than the single-session studies reviewed above.
Left-anodal tDCS often ameliorates symptoms of depression
(reviewed in Murphy, Boggio, & Fregni, 2009). However,
these treatment-oriented studies did not include all of the experimental conditions needed to support the conclusion that
induced activation asymmetries play a causal role in emotional experience: Researchers delivered only left-excitatory
and sham stimulation, but never right-excitatory stimulation.
Thus, it is not possible to conclude that increasing activity
in the left hemisphere relative to the right was responsible
for the positive effects of neurostimulation of mood. Perhaps
multiple sessions of tDCS may boost positive mood regardless of stimulation montage. To determine whether frontal

activation asymmetries play a functional role in determining
emotional states, experiments must apply both left- and rightexcitatory stimulation. Furthermore, in order for the findings
to be generalizable beyond a clinical population, relationships
between lateralized stimulation and mood would need to be
shown in healthy participants.

Parametric covariation in brain and behavior
According to the SSH, there is a functional relationship between the neural circuits for motivation and manual motor asymmetries. In addition to predicting a reversal in approach/avoidance lateralization in left-handers, the SSH predicts that parametric variation in manual motor asymmetries
should correlate with graded differences in the lateralization
of motivation. Strong right-handers, that is, should show
stronger left-lateralization of approach motivation than weak
right-handers. Previous work has not tested this prediction.

The present experiment
In this study, we measure mood before and after 5 sessions
of tDCS applied bilaterally to DLPFC. We analyze changes
in emotional state as a function of participants’ manual motor asymmetries, and whether they received left-anodal/rightcathodal or right-anodal/left-cathodal stimulation. In doing
so, we test for a causal role of frontal activation asymmetries
in determining emotional state. Furthermore, we test for the
graded relationship between motor control and the lateralization of affective motivation predicted by the SSH.

Method
Participants
Participants (N = 30) were recruited from the New School
community, postings to the website www.craigslist.org/, and
a database of participants who have taken part in other studies
in our lab. To ensure that the sample included participants
with the full range of handedness asymmetries, we selectively
contacted left-handed and ambidextrous participants from the
database. These participants were not aware that they were
being contacted based on their handedness.
Several exclusion criteria were followed to ensure participants’ safety. Respondents were not included in the study if
they indicated that they were pregnant, had ever experienced
an epileptic seizure, had ever sustained a stroke or other brain
injury, or were taking any psychoactive drugs or medications.
Additionally, we did not test anyone who reported ever having been diagnosed with depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety
disorder, or schizophrenia.
One participant was canceled during the first session when
a low impedance could not be obtained. Four additional participants did not complete the study (Right-excitatory stimulation, N = 2; Left-excitatory stimulation, N = 2), one
of whom returned to complete the final day of data collection. Data were analyzed from the remaining 25 participants
(Right-handers, EHI ≥ 40: N =17; Non-right-handers, EHI
< 40: N = 8). Demographics such as age and gender were
not collected.

246

Procedure

tion, the anode was placed above F4 and the cathode above
F3, exciting right while inhibiting left frontal areas (Rightexcitatory). Stimulation condition remained the same across
all 5 sessions. Of the participants retained in the final analysis, N = 10 were given right-excitatory stimulation, and
N = 15 left-excitatory stimulation.

This study took place over five consecutive days (Monday–
Friday). Informed consent was obtained at the beginning of
each session, and participants were payed at the end of every
session. On day 1, participants completed an untimed, computerized version of the Positive and Negative Affect Scale
(PANAS; Watson & Clark, 1994). Emotion words appeared
on the screen one at a time, and participants rated the degree to which they had experienced that emotion “during the
past few days” on a scale of one (“very slightly or not at
all”) to five (“extremely”) by pressing the numbers 1–5 on
a computer keyboard. To assess handedness, participants
completed the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (EHI; Oldfield, 1971). This scale offers a continuous measurement of
handedness, in which scores vary from strongly left-handed
(−100) to strongly right-handed (100).
On days 2–4, tDCS was applied after ensuring that participants had not experienced any discomfort after the previous
sessions. After applying tDCS on day 5, the same tests were
performed as on day 1. After the first cohort of 7 participants, we began collecting EHI at day 5. Participants also
completed a brief adverse effects questionnaire. Upon completing the study, participants were debriefed and encouraged
to contact the experimenter if they had any further questions
or experienced any discomfort.1

Results
Adverse effects
One participant canceled the study due to a persistent
headache, and three further participants requested that the intensity be reduced for several minutes in one session. Of the
four participants reporting discomfort, two had received leftexcitatory stimulation, and two right-excitatory stimulation.
No other subjects reported significant discomfort.

Manual motor asymmetries
To examine whether tDCS altered manual motor asymmetries, we compared EHI scores before and after stimulation.
EHI scores on days 1 and 5 were strongly correlated (r = .98).
Change in EHI scores did not significantly depend on tDCS
polarity (Welch’s t(12.3) = −1.50, p = .16).

Emotional state
PANAS responses were analyzed using linear mixed-effects
regressions fit by maximum likelihood in R (R Core Team,
2012) with the lmer() function in the lme4 library (Baayen,
Davidson, & Bates, 2008). Change in each emotion (day 5 –
day 1) was modeled as a function of valence (Positive; Negative), tDCS polarity (Left-excitatory; Right-excitatory), and
handedness (entered continuously using EHI score collected
on day 1). Random intercepts were included for Subjects and
Items (i.e. emotion words). All categorical predictors were
entered using deviation coding. Unless otherwise noted, pvalues and 95% Highest Posterior Density intervals (HPD) of
the parameter estimates were estimated using Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling with 20,000 samples using
the pvals.fnc() function in the languageR library.
Of primary interest, handedness, valence, and tDCS polarity interacted to predict change in PANAS ratings (β =
−0.015, HPD = [−0.022, −0.009], p = .0001). As evident
from Figure 1, this interaction was driven primarily by strong
effects of handedness and polarity on positive emotions, but
not on negative emotions. Separate mixed-effects regressions
with positive and negative items support this conclusion.
Change in negative emotions did not significantly depend on handedness, tDCS polarity, or their interaction
(all ps > .5; Fig. 1a). In contrast, handedness significantly interacted with tDCS polarity to predict change in
the intensity of positive emotions (β = −0.016, HPD =
[−0.021, −0.010], p = .0001; Fig. 1b). In participants receiving left-excitatory stimulation, stronger right-handedness
correlated with greater increases in positive emotions (β =
0.011, HPD = [0.0064, 0.016], p = .0001). In those receiving right-excitatory stimulation, the opposite pattern

Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
Direct current stimulation was delivered using a batterypowered stimulator (Soterix Medical, New York) with two
5 × 7 cm saline-soaked sponges covering the electrodes. New
sponges were used for each session. In each session, a current was applied at 2 mA for 20 min. To minimize discomfort,
the current slowly ramped between 0 and 2 mA when powering on and off. Stimulation was delivered bilaterally above
DLPFC at F3-4 in the 10-20 system (DaSilva, Volz, Bikson,
& Fregni, 2011). An experimenter was in the room with the
participant at all times to ensure that stimulation remained
comfortable.
Stimulation was delivered double-blindly in two betweensubjects conditions. Before beginning the study, a confederate set a polarity-blinding box to either reverse the polarity
of the outgoing wires, or leave polarity unchanged, and then
sealed the box. This allowed both the experimenter and the
participant to remain blind to the stimulation condition. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two conditions.
In one condition, the anode was placed above F3 and the
cathode above F4, exciting left frontal areas while inhibiting right frontal areas (Left-excitatory). In the second condi1 Three

additional tasks were performed on days 1 and 5. To
measure trait motivational tendencies, participants completed the
Behavioral Activation System / Behavioral Inhibition System scales
(BIS/BAS; Carver & White, 1994). Participants also completed a
finger-tapping task as a performance-based measure of manual motor asymmetries. Finally, an N-back task was performed as a measure of working memory. Results from these tasks do not bear on
mood, and have not been analyzed.

247

a

Positive

-1

0

1

2

Left-excitatory
Right-excitatory

-2

-1

0

1

Change in PANAS score (Z-score)

2

Left-excitatory
Right-excitatory

-2

Change in PANAS score (Z-score)

b

Negative

-100

-75

-50

-25

0

25

50

75

100

-100

Handedness (EHI)

-75

-50

-25

0

25

50

75

100

Handedness (EHI)

Figure 1: Change in (a) negative and (b) positive emotion from day 1 to day 5 as a function of manual motor asymmetries
(EHI). Each point illustrates Z-transformed average change across all PANAS items for a single participant. Best-fit lines are
plotted for each stimulation condition. Left-excitatory = anode left, cathode right; Right-excitatory = cathode left, anode right.
was observed: stronger right-handedness correlated with
decreases in positive emotions (β = −0.0044, HPD =
[−0.0080, −0.0006], p = .02).
By defining handedness categorically, we examined differences between right- and non-right-handers in the effects of
tDCS on emotional state. For right-handers, left-excitatory
tDCS led to more positive emotions than with rightexcitatory tDCS (β = −0.21, HPD = [−0.41, −0.012], p =
.04). For non-right-handers, the opposite pattern emerged:
left-excitatory tDCS caused decreases in positive emotions
compared with right-excitatory tDCS (β = 0.55, HPD =
[0.19, 0.89], p = .006).
These regression analyses leave open the question of
whether parametric variation in handedness corresponds to
graded differences in the hemispheric lateralization of emotion; significant parameter estimates in linear regressions
can be caused by either continuous covariation or a stepfunction. Rank-order tests, however, can be used to discriminate between categorical and continuous relationships.
A significant Spearman’s correlation revealed that stronger
right-handedness was continuously related to greater increases in positive emotions in participants who received leftexcitatory stimulation (ρ(13) = 0.71, p = .003). In those
who received right-excitatory stimulation, this correlation
was marginally significant in the opposite direction: stronger
right-handedness continuously predicted greater reductions in
positive emotions (ρ(8) = −0.56, p = .09).

increased positive emotions, whereas right-excitatory (leftcathodal, right-anodal) tDCS led to decreased positive emotions. Non-right-handers, by contrast, showed the opposite
pattern, with right-excitatory tDCS increasing positive emotions and left-excitatory tDCS decreasing them. Furthermore,
we find graded, parametric variation between manual motor
asymmetries and emotion in the brain. Stronger motor asymmetries correlate with more strongly lateralized circuits for
emotion. These results demonstrate a functional relationship
between activation asymmetries in the frontal lobes and the
experience of positive emotions, and show that the laterality
of positive emotion covaries continuously with the laterality
of manual motor control.
According to the motivational model of hemispheric specialization for emotion, approach motivation is lateralized to
the left hemisphere and avoidance to the right (Harmon-Jones
et al., 2010). In conflict with this model, we show that neural
regions specializing in approach motivation are co-lateralized
with circuits that control the dominant hand. This finding is
consistent with the SSH, which proposes a functional relationship between motivation and manual action.
Manual motor asymmetries predict the way approach motivation is distributed across the two hemispheres. For the
right-handed majority, this appears as left-lateralized approach motivation. Does this mean that the classic motivational model is mostly correct—that it is right for the approximately 90% of people who are right-handed, and only
wrong for the other 10%? We suggest the answer is no: As
a field, we have arrived at incorrect generalizations about the
cortical basis of emotions. It is not the case that “anterior
regions of the left and right hemispheres are specialized for
approach and withdrawal processes, respectively” (Davidson,
1992, p. 127). It is only incidentally true that the left hemi-

Discussion
The effects of tDCS on mood depend upon the hemisphere
to which excitatory stimulation is applied and the handedness of the participant. In right-handers, five sessions
of left-excitatory (left-anodal, right-cathodal) tDCS led to

248

sphere is specialized for approach motivation in most of the
people who have been tested. This specialization is not due to
any functional properties of the left hemisphere, per se. It appears that any theory that assigns a privileged role to the left
hemisphere in processing approach motivation is incorrect.
These findings may help to elucidate an enduring mystery
in affective neuroscience: What role do activation asymmetries play in motivation? Although no clear consensus has
emerged, some researchers believe that leftward asymmetries may reflect “expression of approach-related emotions”
(Harmon-Jones, 2004, p. 55) or “approach-related, goaldirected action planning” (Davidson, 2004, p. 225). By highlighting the close connection between action and emotion, our
findings suggest that leftward asymmetries are closely linked
to performance of approach actions.

The left and right hemispheres appear to be differentially
specialized for motivational direction, not valence (Berkman
& Lieberman, 2010; Harmon-Jones et al., 2010). Although
these dimensions are highly correlated, they can also be dissociated. Induced frontal asymmetries, then, should alter the
motivational direction—but not necessarily the valence—of
participants’ mood.
The emotions comprising the positive PANAS subscale
uniformly involve strong approach motivation (active, alert,
attentive, determined, enthusiastic, excited, inspired, interested, proud, strong). The negative subscale, on the other
hand, is more varied. Some items seem to involve avoidance
motivation (afraid, scared, ashamed), some approach motivation (hostile, irritable), and some do not have any clear motivational direction (nervous, jittery, guilty, upset, distressed).
In summary, we find that an emotion category with a consistent motivational direction (the positive subscale) is influenced by manipulations of frontal activation asymmetries,
whereas a more heterogenous emotion category (the negative
subscale) is not affected. Further studies must determine if
avoidance motivation can be similarly modulated by induced
activation asymmetries.

Causal links between frontal asymmetries,
motivation, and hand action
To our knowledge, these findings provide the first unequivocal evidence that frontal activation asymmetries casually influence emotional experience in healthy participants. However, this study leaves open the question of the causal relationship between neural circuits for motivation and for motor
control of the hands. We consider three possibilities.
First, handedness could determine the laterality of motivation. In this case, handedness is assumed to be set by some
combination of genetic and environmental influences. If approach actions require greater dexterity than avoidance actions, then habits could develop in which approach actions are
performed by the more adept dominant hand. These habits
could then stabilize on an evolutionary or a developmental
timescale, causing cortical areas involved in planning actions
with the dominant hand to specialize in approach actions.
Second, the laterality of motivation could determine handedness. In this case, the laterality of motivation is assumed to
be determined by genetic and environmental factors. Manual
action circuits ipsilateral to regions specializing in approach
motivation may subsequently come to be used preferentially
for approach actions. If approach actions are more frequent
or require more skill than avoidance actions, then dexterity
may be enhanced in the hand used to perform them.
Third, handedness and the laterality of motivation could be
determined by a common factor. In this case, there would be
no direct causal link between the lateralization of neural circuits of motivation and manual motor control. Any proposed
third factor would need to account for the close covariation
we observe.

Clinical implications
Neurostimulation techniques such as tDCS and transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) are currently in use as treatments
of major depressive disorder (Murphy et al., 2009). By increasing activation in left frontal areas, clinicians hope to augment positive, approach-oriented emotions, alleviating depression. This treatment is predicated on the assumption that
the left hemisphere is specialized for approach motivation.
We provide evidence against this assumption. Hemispheric
specialization for motivation reverses in many people, including left-handers (see also Brookshire & Casasanto, 2012),
who are at increased risk for depression (Denny, 2009).
Systematic differences in the neural organization of motivation may have urgent consequences for the success and
safety of neurostimulation therapies. We show that positive affect is reduced after anodal tDCS to the hemisphere
that controls the non-dominant hand. This result suggests
that FDA-approved treatments involving anodal tDCS to leftDLPFC may exacerbate depression in non-right-handers.

Conclusions
Accepted theories of emotion in the brain hold that the left
hemisphere is specialized for approach motivation, and the
right for avoidance motivation. We provide evidence against
this “motivation model” and in support of the SSH. Hemispheric lateralization for emotion covaries with manual motor
asymmetries, consistent with a causal relationship between
motivation and motor control. The SSH proposes a principle
by which the hemispheres become specialized for approach
and avoidance states, and may lead not only to a better understanding of how motivation is organized in the cerebral
cortex, but also of why it is organized that way.

Valence and motivational direction
We find that positive emotions are strongly modulated by induced frontal activation asymmetries, whereas negative emotions are unaffected. If negative emotions are assumed to be
the mirror image of positive emotions, this result seems incongruous. This apparent contradiction resolves when examining the motivational direction of the words in the positive
and negative PANAS subscales.

249

Acknowledgments

Jacobson, L., Koslowski, M., & Lavidor, M. (2011). tDCS
polarity effects in motor and cognitive domains: a metaanalytical review. Experimental Brain Research.
Koenigs, M., Ukueberuwa, D., Campion, P., Grafman, J., &
Wassermann, E. M. (2010). Bilateral Frontal Transcranial
Direct Current Stimulation: Failure to Replicate Classic
Findings in Healthy Subjects. Clinical Neurophysiology,
120(1), 80–84.
Lee, G. P., Loring, D. W., Meader, K. J., & Brooks, B. B.
(1990). Hemispheric specialization for emotional expression: A reexamination of results from intracarotid administration of sodium amobarbital. Brain and Cognition, 12(2),
267 - 280.
Murphy, D. N., Boggio, P. S., & Fregni, F. (2009). Transcranial direct current stimulation as a therapeutic tool for the
treatment of major depression: insights from past and recent clinical studies. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 22(3),
306–311.
Nitsche, M. A., Koschack, J., Pohlers, H., Hullemann, S.,
Paulus, W., & Happe, S. (2012). Effects of frontal transcranial direct current stimulation on emotional state and processing in healthy humans. Frontiers in psychiatry, 3(58).
Nitsche, M. A., & Paulus, W. (2000). Excitability changes
induced in the human motor cortex by weak transcranial direct current stimulation. The Journal of physiology, 527(3),
633–639.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The Assessment and Analysis of
Handedness: The Edinburgh Inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97–113.
Penolazzi, B., Domenico, A. D., Marzoli, D., Mammarella,
N., Fairfield, B., Franciotti, R., et al. (2010). Effects of
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation on Episodic Memory Related to Emotional Visual Stimuli. PloS one, 5(5),
e10623.
Plazier, M., Joos, K., Vanneste, S., Ost, J., & De Ridder, D.
(2011). Bifrontal and bioccipital transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) does not induce mood changes inhealthy volunteers: a placebo controlled study. Brain stimulation, 25–30.
R Core Team. (2012). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing [Computer software manual]. Vienna,
Austria. Available from http://www.R-project.org/
Robinson, R., Boston, J., Starkstein, S., & Price, T. (1988).
Comparison of mania and depression after brain injury:
causal factors. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145(2),
172–8.
Sutton, S. K., & Davidson, R. J. (1997). Prefrontal Brain
Asymmetry: A Biological Substrate of the Behavioral Approach and Inhibition Systems. Psychological Science,
8(3), 204–210.
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1994). The PANAS-X: Manual
for the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule - Expanded
Form. University of Iowa.

Research was funded by a James S. McDonnell Foundation
Scholar Award (#220020236; http://www.jsmf.org) to D.C.

References
Allen, J., Harmon-Jones, E., & Cavender, J. (2001). Manipulation of frontal EEG asymmetry through biofeedback
alters self-reported emotional responses and facial EMG.
Psychophysiology, 38(4), 685–693.
Amodio, D. M., Master, S. L., Yee, C. M., & Taylor, S. E.
(2008). Neurocognitive components of the behavioral inhibition and activation systems: implications for theories of
self-regulation. Psychophysiology, 45(1), 11–9.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language,
59(4), 390–412.
Berkman, E. T., & Lieberman, M. D. (2010). Approaching
the Bad and Avoiding the Good: Lateral Prefrontal Cortical Asymmetry Distinguishes between Action and Valence.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(9), 1970–1979.
Brookshire, G., & Casasanto, D. (2012). Motivation and
Motor Control: Hemispheric Specialization for Approach
Motivation Reverses with Handedness. PLoS ONE, 7(4),
e36036.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral Inhibition,
Behavioral Activation, and Affective Responses to Impending Reward and Punishment: The BIS/BAS Scales. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(2), 319–333.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts:
good and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 138(3), 351–67.
Coren, S. (1992). Handedness, Traffic Crashes, and Defensive Reflexes. Public Health, 82(8), 1176–1177.
DaSilva, A., Volz, M., Bikson, M., & Fregni, F. (2011). Electrode positioning and montage in transcranial direct current
stimulation. Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE(51).
Davidson, R. (1992). Anterior cerebral asymmetry and the
nature of emotion. Brain and cognition, 20(1), 125–151.
Davidson, R. (2004). What does the prefrontal cortex do
in affect: perspectives on frontal eeg asymmetry research.
Biological psychology, 67(1), 219–234.
Denny, K. (2009). Handedness and depression: evidence
from a large population survey. Laterality, 14(3), 246–255.
Harmon-Jones, E. (2004). Contributions from research on
anger and cognitive dissonance to understanding the motivational functions of asymmetrical frontal brain activity.
Biological psychology, 67(1-2), 51–76.
Harmon-Jones, E., Gable, P. A., & Peterson, C. K. (2010).
The role of asymmetric frontal cortical activity in emotionrelated phenomena: A review and update. Biological Psychology, 84(3), 451–462.
Harris, L. J. (2010). In fencing, what gives left-handers the
edge? Views from the present and the distant past. Laterality, 15(1/2), 15–56.

250

