UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Musical training and auditory global-local precedence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3721v6sj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gilman, Anne
Ebbets, Elizabeth

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Musical training and auditory global-local precedence
Anne T. Gilman (anne.gilman@gmail.com)
Juniata College Psychology Department, Good Hall, 1700 Moore Street
Huntingdon, PA 16652 USA

Elizabeth Ebbets (lizaebbets@gmail.com)
Juniata College Psychology Department, Good Hall, 1700 Moore Street
Huntingdon, PA 16652 USA
Abstract
People demonstrate a consistent tendency to favor holistic or
global processing over processing of local details in many perceptual domains; this tendency is called global-local precedence. Formal musical training is associated with qualitative
changes in auditory processing, but the number of years required remains unclear, particularly for any perceptual differences between untrained and minimally trained participants. In
this study, participants with zero to over ten years’ music training identified the direction of pitch changes in three-sound sequences. Only participants with three or more years’ training
demonstrated a significant global-local precedence. Individuals without musical training consistently identified the local
direction of pitch-change sequence elements better than global
pitch changes across each sequence. Although musical training was associated both with greater task accuracy and with
global-local precedence, improved accuracy did not explain
the musically trained participants’ preferential processing of
global auditory characteristics.
Keywords: Global-local precedence; musical training; temporal processing; auditory perception.

Perceptual learning and cognition
People’s experiences can alter their perceptual processing,
even as adults. Perceptual learning thus takes part in core
cognitive mechanisms underlying storage of past experiences
and their subsequent application to similar but non-identical
situations later on. Distinctions between global (or holistic)
processing and local (or detail) processing have only recently
been examined while taking perceptual learning into account.
This connection offers particular interest in the auditory domain, given long-established differences in how trained musicians and musically naı̈ve listeners perceive sounds (Bever
& Chiarello, 1974).

Global-local precedence
People who become so engrossed in the details of a complex
scene or situation that they fail to notice compelling overall patterns are said to be “missing the forest for the trees”.
This colloquial expression has a parallel in human perception: decades of vision research has documented a bias or
precedence towards overall or global characteristics of an image rather than its local details (Navon, 1977). For example,
given an image made up of a dozen K’s arranged in the shape
of an H, viewers are more likely to describe what they see as
an H than as a group of K’s. When asked to identify either
the big letter or the little component letter in a series of many
such composite stimuli, viewers are likely to make fewer errors overall when identifying the big rather than the little letters, thus global-local precedence can be identified by greater

overall accuracy for global trials. Viewers in such studies also
show a pattern in their errors for incongruent stimuli such as
an H made of K’s—one could also create a congruent stimulus by arranging K’s in the shape of a larger K. Viewers more
often mistakenly offer the big letter as an answer on local
(little-letter trials) than they err by naming the little letter on
global trials, showing an uneven influence—greater for global
patterns—of these different processing levels on perception.
This uneven influence can also be described as interference
by global processing in the local decision. A growing body
of evidence supports the overall global-local processing distinction in auditory and other non-visual modalities (Justus &
List, 2005; List & Justus, 2007, 2010; List, Justus, Robertson, & Bentin, 2007; Ouimet, Foster, & Hyde, 2012; Sanders
& Poeppel, 2007).
Cognitive scientists have found ongoing and robust preferential processing of global over local patterns (Love, Rouder,
& Wisniewski, 1999; Ripoll & Marty, 2005) even while some
boundary conditions have been delineated (Navon, 2003).
This precedence is considered an outcome of normal maturation rather than one of learning. A large body of evidence,
summarized by Poirel and colleagues (2011), suggests that
young children shift from a local to a global visual focus
around the age of 6; Poirel et al. found that lowered greymatter volume corresponded to this shift, again characterizing
global precedence as the healthy adult norm. Visual and auditory findings of differences in holistic versus detailed processing bear on issues ranging from autism (Rondan & Deruelle,
2007) to the acquisition of reading skills (Foxton et al., 2003).
For instance, exceptions to global-local precedence for auditory stimuli correspond to autism diagnoses, even though the
detail-specific advantages shown by autistic participants were
not explained by deficits in global processing as previously
thought (Mottron, Peretz, & Ménard, 2000). In all of the
above investigations, global-local precedence is taken as an
indicator of healthy and fully-developed perception, and only
very recently has this tendency been evaluated with respect to
prior musical training in a parallel auditory study (Ouimet et
al., 2012).

Expertise: Musical training
Auditory perception varies qualitatively—not just in
accuracy—depending on learning or expertise. Comparing
perception of tones presented to the right or left ear has
revealed that hemispheric dominance for this task switches

2392

following formal music training (Kellar & Bever, 1980;
Bever & Chiarello, 1974). Subsequent studies have shown
that musical training changes listeners’ perception of auditory patterns, both for musical stimuli themselves (Fujioka,
Trainor, Ross, Kakigi, & Pantev, 2004; Foxton, Brown,
Chambers, & Griffiths, 2004) and for the pitch changes that
characterize fluent speech (Moreno et al., 2009). Musical
training also contributes to changes in numerous other cognitive processes, and better understanding of the precise impact
of such training on auditory perception may clarify ongoing
questions about music and its contribution to formal measures
of intelligence and academic achievement (Schellenberg &
Peretz, 2007).
The one investigation (other than the present study) of the
role of prior musical training in auditory global-local precedence found this precedence more strongly demonstrated
among less-trained listeners (Ouimet et al., 2012). Accuracy results were contrasted between expert musicians—with
at least seven years’ formal training—and novices, where
the lower-expertise group could have one or two years of
prior training, or none at all. This division is consistent with
other key precedents in music perception (Warrier & Zatorre,
2002). However, findings in visual perception, where a mere
ten hours’ practice with a video game significantly and enduringly changed participants’ skills (Green & Bavelier, 2003),
suggest that the perceptual performance of participants with
minimal amounts of musical training should be contrasted
with the performance of those with no training at all.

Frequency (Hz)

3500

0
0

0.5
Time (s)

(a) A congruent downward stimulus

Frequency (Hz)

3500

0
0

0.5
Time (s)

(b) An incongruent stimulus: local-down/global-up

Evaluating global-local precedence and musical
training
The present study reevaluates global auditory bias for possible influences of perceptual expertise, employing the same
three-part sweep sequences tested in Sanders and Poeppel’s (2007) ERP study to contrast performance of participants with varying levels of musical expertise, including no
prior training whatsoever.

Method
Participants
Over multiple semesters, 104 undergraduates with normal or
corrected-to-normal hearing participated in the experiment,
receiving either course participation credit or snack food as
compensation.

Materials
The auditory stimuli selected for this study were created
for an ERP study of global versus local auditory processing (Sanders & Poeppel, 2007). Each stimulus consists of
three frequency-modulated octave sweeps or chirps that can
go up or down in frequency at the global or local level, as follows. Each chirp lasts only 40 ms, with 190 ms of silence separating the chirps; the three-chirp sequence takes 500 ms total. Each chirp travels smoothly up or down one octave—this
direction constitutes the local direction, and all three chirps

Figure 1: Stimulus frequency distributions over time.

of a given sequence go in the same direction. The progression of each sequence is monotonic, with the central pitch
of each sweep being higher than the previous one in global
upward sequences and lower for downward sequences. The
difference in central frequency between the first and the last
octave sweeps is .2 octaves. In musical terms, if the central
frequency of one chirp were a C note, the central frequency of
the next chirp would be a bit over a half step higher or lower
that that of the first chirp. See Figure 1 for sample spectrograms, obtained using Praat (Boersma, 2001).
Congruent stimuli (e.g.
Figure 1(a)) have changes
in frequency which go in the same direction (up or
down) at the local and global levels. Incongruent stimuli (e.g.
Figure 1(b)) require the participants to accurately distinguish between levels to answer correctly.
The stimulus set includes eleven sequences per condition, namely local-up/global-down, local-up/global-up, localdown/global-down, and local-down/global-up, for a total of
44 stimuli. Frequencies used in these stimuli range between
a minimum of 0 Hz and a maximum of 3500 Hz. The intensity of each stimulus file measures between 88 and 92 dB, but
participants could control playback volume.

2393

Music Training
None
Some

Procedure
Participants were asked to discriminate between upward and
downward sweeps (local) and sweep sequences (global) after training involving both passive familiarization and active
practice, replicating Sanders & Poeppel’s (2007) behavioral
protocol. During familiarization, participants first read a description of the type of sounds they were about to hear, e.g.
sounds that go down as a whole, and then heard all of those
stimuli (global-down ones in this example) in randomized
order. During practice trials, the participants heard a sound
stimulus while either “PART” (cueing a local judgement) or
“WHOLE” (for a global judgement) was displayed at the center of the screen. They indicated by keypress whether the current stimulus was going up or down, and then they received
on-screen feedback showing whether or not their answer was
correct. After two rounds of practice, participants then enagaged in four blocks of testing trials, which were identical to
the practice trials except that no feedback was provided.
After completing the sound discrimination task, participants indicated whether they had ever studied a musical instrument, including voice. They then had the opportunity to
clarify if they had studied music for more than one, more than
two, or more than five years.

Local Advantage
15
31

Global Advantage
5
53

Table 1: Number of participants demonstrating each sort of
bias according to presence or absence of past musical training

Apparatus
Sounds and instructions were presented on two Macintosh
iBook G4s equipped Sennheiser HD 202 headphones and
running code written by the first author in PEBL (Mueller,
2006). Participants were free to adjust the computer volume
to a comfortable level; they pressed keyboard keys (“U” and
“D” for “up” and “down”) to record their answers.

Results
An overall global-local precedence in auditory discrimination
was demonstrated by our participants, who showed 61.8% accuracy on global trials versus 51.5% accuracy on local trials. A 2x2x2 analysis of variance (ANOVA) comparing the
impact of task focus (global or local), stimulus type (congruent or incongruent), and musical training (any or none)
showed this difference to be highly significant, F(1, 18296) =
55.8, MSE = 4262, p<.001. All analyses were performed using R (R Development Core Team, 2005).
As expected, participants were more successful judging the
direction of pitch change for congruent stimuli, demonstrating 66.7% accuracy on congruent trials and 51.5% on incongruent trials, F(1, 18296) = 451.8, MSE = 4262, p<.001.
To evaluate whether our participants demonstrated any
global-local precedence, each person’s percent accuracy for
global and judgements was compared using the simple difference of their average performance in each condition,
Mglobal − Mlocal . A positive score indicated global-local
precedence, while a negative score indicated the opposite.
Our participant group as a whole demonstrated an average
global-local precedence of .05. This average differed significantly from zero, t(103) = 3.07, p = .0027. The significant
interaction between task focus and sound type, F(1, 18296) =

82.7, MSE = 4262, p<.001, further supported our finding of
global-local precedence. A Pearson’s correlation between
this precedence measure calculated over all trials and the
same measure calculated over only incongruent trials showed
that these incongruent trials were indeed driving the precedence results, r = .89,t(102) = 20.1, p<.001. This correlation confirms the presence of the second sign of global-local
precedence, where errors on local trials show what can be described as interference from global processing: participants
made more errors on local trials, and they did so to a greater
extent on incongruent (M = 0.46) than congruent (M = 0.67)
local trials.
The remaining analyses consistently indicated that musical
training is associated with differences in global-local precedence. Those participants who reported any musical training at all showed significantly higher task accuracy (60.2%)
than those with none (54.7%), F(1, 18296) = 45.6, MSE =
4262, p<.001. Reaction times were lower among musicallytrained participants. These times were not recorded for half of
the participants, due to experimenter error; the available times
did not show any interactions with other variables. Greater
musical training was associated with significantly different
global-local precedence, however, t(31) = −2.5, p = .017,
with an opposite precedence pattern for those with some musical training (M = 8%) as compared to those with none
(M = −6%). This difference clarifies the significant threeway interaction found in the main ANOVA between task focus, sound type, and presence or absence of prior musical
training, F(1, 18296) = 21.9, MSE = 4262, p<.001.
To evaluate this difference without making assumptions
about the distributional characteristics of either the training
or the precedence score, we compared this indicator of global
versus local advantage to reported prior musical training using a χ2 test (see Table 1). Those with no prior musical background were far more likely to demonstrate better accuracy
on local than on global judgements (15 out of 20), while participants with some musical training were more likely (53 out
of 84) to demonstrate global-local precedence. This difference was significant, χ2 = 8.022, d f = 1, p = .0046.
To explore this difference further, participants were
grouped according to their reported level of musical expertise. Twenty participants reported having no musical training,
16 reported up to one year of training, 17 up to two years, 2
up to five years, and 49 more than five. For these analyses,
responses from the two lone participants with between two
and five years of training were combined with the most experienced musicians.
As expected, participants with the most musical training in

2394

our sample showed the greatest overall accuracy in identifying the direction of pitch change in these three-part auditory
sequences: those with more than one year of training showed
61% accuracy; those with up to one year, 57%; and those
with none, 55%. All groups performed at above chance levels, p<.001.

1.0

Accuracy Patterns by Musical Expertise

0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

Percent Accuracy

0.8

Global-Congruent
Local-Congruent
Global-Incongruent
Local-Incongruent

None

Minimal

1-2 yrs

Extensive

Musical Training

Figure 2: Participant accuracy in identifying direction of
pitch changes. The difference between global and local accuracy shows the opposite pattern among non-trained participants compared to the rest both for congruent and incongruent stimuli. Other than incongruent trials for those with 12 years’ training and local incongruent trials for those with
none all accuracies differ significantly from chance perfomance (dotted line).

Discussion
A parallel investigation of global-local precedence in the auditory domain found the opposite results to those presented
here, in that their less-trained participants exhibited significant global-local precedence and to a greater extent than their
more expert participants (Ouimet et al., 2012). In our study,
on the other hand, more expert participants demonstrated
global-local precedence, but that precedence only reached
statistical significance for those with more than 3 years of
training. Those reporting no training at all performed better
on local than on global trials, on average. Our study differs
from Ouimet et al.’s in multiple ways, however, particularly
in the temporal characteristics of the stimuli used and in the
grouping of less-expert participants.

Stimulus differences
Ouimet and colleagues used sequences of tones that correspond to notes on a musical scale (Ouimet et al., 2012, p.
2539), based on hierarchical stimuli developed by Justus and
List (Justus & List, 2005). Although these tone sequences incorporate a hierarchical structure similar to the sequences of

octave sweeps used in our study, there are several important
differences.
First, the majority of their sound stimuli lasted much
longer. Their three-part sequences of steady tones ranged in
duration from 150ms to 600ms, so total stimulus durations
ranged from 450ms (comparable to our 500ms, but with no
silence) to 1800ms. They found only a “negligible” (Ouimet
et al., 2012, p. 2539) relation between stimulus duration
and accuracy, however, adding support to List and Justus’ arguments for the relational invariance of their tone-sequence
tasks (List & Justus, 2010, p.16).
Second, the tone and sweep elements differ sharply in
their rate of change of frequency as well as their absolute
duration, and the detection of direction of changes in pitch
recruits neural resources not required for tone discrimination (Johnsrude, Penhune, & Zatorre, 2000), possibly adding
further difficulty for the sweep task. These stimulus differences, however striking, are unlikely to fully explain our differing results, however, since our participants also showed
lower accuracy than that found in prior work with these same
octave-sweep sequences (Sanders & Poeppel, 2007), while
still performing at above-chance levels. Some of our error
level may arise from having collected data from pool participants at very different points in the semester (Grimm,
Markman, & Maddox, in press). A Pearson’s correlation between week of the semester (ranging from 6 to 17, M = 11.3)
and participant accuracy showed a modest negative correlation, r = −.25,t(102) = −2.6, p = .0096. Time of semester
showed no interaction with precedence (p>.5) or with musical training (p>.9); repeating the initial analysis of variance
including time of semester did not alter the results obtained.
A third important difference between the two stimulus sets
is that in our study, the magnitude of each local change in
pitch (one octave) is much greater than each stepped change
in the global progression of pitch (one tenth of an octave).
In Ouimet et al.’s study (2012), though, global pitch steps
are three times the magnitude of local pitch intervals (147
cents, or about 1/8th of an octave). These stimulus differences
complicate our interpretation of which accuracy changes are
due to global versus local processing and which are due to
discrimination difficulty.

Participant differences
The other barrier to explaining the opposite precedence findings between the two studies for less-trained participants lies
in the mismatch in the two studies’ categorizations of musical training levels, a topic of ongoing debate. While Sanders
and Poeppel did not measure musical expertise in their ERP
study (2007), other assessments of global-local precedence
in the auditory domain did record this participant characteristic. In the study presenting the tone-sequence design discussed above, one experiment had more musically trained
than untrained participants, while the second had only musically trained participants (Justus & List, 2005). In one of
List and Justus’ more recent studies, all participants reported
at least 6 years’ musical training (List & Justus, 2007), and

2395

Refining our examination of perceptual acuity associated
with small amounts of musical training increases a risk of
possible person confounds in the interpretation of our results. Are individuals with better auditory discrimination
more likely to have and/or to continue with music instruction? While this risk cannot be ruled out, our results go beyond what would be predicted from person differences alone.
If greater accuracy on our task were purely a matter of better auditory acuity, which may indeed influence individuals’
choice to seek or persist in musical training, there would be
differences in overall accuracy as found here, but not an interaction with task focus. Another concern, though, might be
that novices’ greater difficulty with the overall task might disguise a truly universal global-local precedence that can only
be detected among those with greater perceptual acuity. This
interpretation was not supported by our data, as shown by a
follow-up analysis of each participant group. Under the disguise theory, task accuracy should correlate positively with
global-local precedence. As shown in Figure 3, all participant groups showed a zero or, in one case, negative correlation between task accuracy and global-local precedence. In
simpler terms, better accuracy with this task did not explain
the greater global-local precedence found among more-expert
listeners.
There are many ways in which our definition of musical
training or expertise could and should be made sharper. Error
rates in this data set provide some support for concerns about
differing performance across the semester within a participant

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.2
-0.4

0.2

Global-Local Prec.

1-2 yrs Training

-0.4

0.8

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Minimal Musical Training

Extensive Training

0.2
-0.4
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.8

0.2

Avg. Accuracy

Global-Local Prec.

Avg. Accuracy

-0.4

Global-Local Prec.

No Musical Training

Global-Local Prec.

in another, all participants had at least 2 or 3 years, with
each participant group reporting a median of 10 years’ training (List & Justus, 2010). Other studies of music perception vary, such as Levitin and colleagues performing fMRI
studies on musically-naı̈ve participants who could have up to
two years of training (Sridharan, Levitin, & Menon, 2008;
Sridharan, Levitin, Chafe, Berger, & Menon, 2007) and other
studies where participants all had at least five years’ training (Vines, Krumhansl, Wanderley, Dalca, & Levitin, 2011;
Vines, Krumhansl, Wanderley, & Levitin, 2006). Ouimet and
colleagues (2012) defined musicians as those reporting 7 or
more years (versus non-musicians with less than 3 years)
of musical training. If most of their non-musicians had 1-2
years’ training, then their finding of global-local precedence
in that group comes closer to paralleling our findings. If most
of their non-musicians had no musical training at all, the contrast between their and our findings would argue all the more
strongly for an examination of the stimulus and task differences. None of the precedents listed above assessed differences between those with little training and those with none.
This omission may stem in part from widespread reliance on
undergraduates as study participants: finding 20 untrained
participants required recruiting over 100. However, since a
mere ten hours of video game playing can resolve perceptual
deficits previously considered to be genetically driven (Feng,
Spence, & Pratt, 2007), examining constrasts between untrained and minimally trained listeners is essential.

0.3

0.4

Avg. Accuracy

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Avg. Accuracy

Figure 3: Non-correlation between task accuracy and globallocal precedence, assessed separately for each participant
group according to their prior musical training.
pool. Even with these concerns, though, our results demonstrate a consistent difference according to musical training in
an attribute that is more typically presented as a universal trait
in healthy populations. Ongoing scientific interest both in the
global-local distinction and in cognitive changes associated
with musical training suggests that these results may bear on a
wide range of investigations and may specifically help future
studies of auditory processing avoid a confound of participant
expertise.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to express our gratitude to Lisa
Sanders for sharing stimuli and helpful feedback, and to John
Limber for improving an earlier draft of this submission.

References
Bever, T. G., & Chiarello, R. J. (1974). Cerebral dominance
in musicians and nonmusicians. Science, 185(4150), 537539.
Boersma, P. (2001). Praat, a system for doing phonetics by
computer. Glot International, 5, 341-345.
Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007). Playing an action
video game reduces gender differences in spatial cognition.
Psychological Science, 18(10), 850-855(6).
Foxton, J. M., Brown, A. C., Chambers, S., & Griffiths,
T. D. (2004). Training improves acoustic pattern perception. Current biology, 14, 322-325.
Foxton, J. M., Talcott, J., Witton, C., Brace, H., McIntyre,
F., & Griffiths, T. D. (2003). Reading skills are related to
global, but not local, acoustic pattern perception. Nature
Neuroscience, 6, 1097–6256.
Fujioka, T., Trainor, L. J., Ross, B., Kakigi, R., & Pantev, C.
(2004). Musical training enhances automatic encoding of
melodic contour and interval structure. Journal of cognitive
neuroscience, 16, 1010–1021.

2396

Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2003). Action video games
modify visual selective attention. Nature, 423, 534–537.
Grimm, L. R., Markman, A. B., & Maddox, W. (in press).
Semester timing and reward influence performance: Endof-semester syndrome: How situational regulatory fit affects test performance over an academic semester. Basic
and Applied Social Psychology.
Johnsrude, I., Penhune, V., & Zatorre, R. (2000). Functional
specificity in right human auditory cortex for perceiving
pitch direction. Brain, 123, 155-163.
Justus, T., & List, A. (2005). Auditory attention to frequency
and time: an analogy to visual local-global stimuli. Cognition, 98(1), 31 - 51.
Kellar, L. A., & Bever, T. G. (1980). Hemispheric asymmetries in the perception of musical intervals as a function
of musical experience and family handedness background.
Brain and Language, 10(1), 24–38.
List, A., & Justus, T. (2007). Auditory priming of frequency
and temporal information: Effects of lateralised presentation. Laterality, 12(6), 507 - 535.
List, A., & Justus, T. (2010). Relative priming of temporal
local-global levels in auditory hierarchical stimuli. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 72, 193–208.
List, A., Justus, T., Robertson, L. C., & Bentin, S. (2007).
A mismatch negativity study of local-global auditory processing. Brain Research, 1153, 122 - 133.
Love, B. C., Rouder, J. N., & Wisniewski, E. J. (1999). A
structural account of global and local processing. Cognitive
Psychology, 38, 291–316.
Moreno, S., Marques, C., Santos, A., Santos, M., Castro,
S. L., & Besson, M. (2009). Musical training influences
linguistic abilities in 8-year-old children: More evidence
for brain plasticity. Cerebral Cortex, 19, 712–723.
Mottron, L., Peretz, I., & Ménard, E. (2000). Local and
global processing of music in high-functioning persons
with autism: Beyond cerebral coherence? Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 41, 1057–1065.
Mueller, S. T. (2006). PEBL: The Psychology Experiment
Building Language. (http://pebl.sourceforge.net/)
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive Psychology,
9, 353–383.
Navon, D. (2003). What does a compound letter tell the
psychologist’s mind? Acta Psychologica, 114, 273–309.
Ouimet, T., Foster, N., & Hyde, K. (2012). Auditory globallocal processing: Effects of attention and musical experience. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 132,
2536–2544.
Poirel, N., Simon, G., Cassotti, M., Leroux, G., Perchey, G.,
Lanoë, C., et al. (2011). The shift from local to global
visual processing in 6-year-old children is associated with
grey matter loss. PLoS ONE, 6(6), e20879.
R Development Core Team. (2005). R: A language
and environment for statistical computing [Computer
software manual]. Vienna, Austria. Available from

http://www.R-project.org
Ripoll, T., & Marty, J. (2005). The role of local and global
properties in comparison of analogical visual scenes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 178–184.
Rondan, C., & Deruelle, C. (2007). Global and configural
visual processing in adults with autism and Asperger syndrome. Research in developmental disabilities, 28, 197–
206.
Sanders, L. D., & Poeppel, D. (2007). Local and global
auditory processing: Behavioral and ERP evidence. Neuropsychologia, 45(6), 1172 - 1186.
Schellenberg, E. G., & Peretz, I. (2007). Music, language and
cognition: unresolved issues. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
12, 45–46.
Sridharan, D., Levitin, D. J., Chafe, C. H., Berger, J., &
Menon, V. (2007). Neural dynamics of event segmentation in music: Converging evidence for dissociable ventral
and dorsal networks. Neuron, 55, 521 - 532.
Sridharan, D., Levitin, D. J., & Menon, V. (2008). A critical
role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between
central-executive and default-mode networks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 105, 12569 - 12574.
Vines, B. W., Krumhansl, C. L., Wanderley, M. M., Dalca,
I. M., & Levitin, D. J. (2011). Music to my eyes: Crossmodal interactions in the perception of emotions in musical
performance. Cognition, 118, 157 - 170.
Vines, B. W., Krumhansl, C. L., Wanderley, M. M., & Levitin,
D. J. (2006). Cross-modal interactions in the perception of
musical performance. Cognition, 101, 80 - 113.
Warrier, C., & Zatorre, R. (2002). Influence of tonal context
and timbral variation on perception of pitch. Perception
and Psychophysics, 64, 198–207.

2397

