UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Naïve Physics – the wrong theory?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2c93t3kc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
McLaren, Ian P.L.
Wood, Katie
McLaren, Rossy

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Naïve Physics – the wrong theory?
I.P.L. McLaren (i.p.l.mclaren@exeter.ac.uk), K.Wood, & R.P. McLaren
School of Psychology, University of Exeter, UK.
Abstract
In this paper we examine the idea of a "naïve physics" in
humans solving physics problems. This invokes the idea that
people have a theory of motion in their heads that is nonNewtonian, and hence leads to systematic errors on these
problems. We are able to show that, by selecting our
problems carefully, it is possible to obtain answers that are
consistent with this naïve physics and inconsistent with it;
suggesting that it is not used to solve these problems but
sometimes offered as post-hoc justification for the answers
given. We offer evidence that the answers given owe more to
past experience than any theory, and that a theory that
postulates extrapolation on the basis of associative memory
can give a good account of our results.
Keywords: Associative, Memory, Naïve Physics, Theory.

Figure 1: The ball bearing and curved tube problem.

Introduction
McCloskey, Caramazza and Green (1980) and
McCloskey, Washburn and Felch (1983) have proposed that
people consistently make particular mistakes when asked to
predict the path of an object, given certain initial conditions,
because they are applying the wrong theory, an intuitive
mechanics or "naïve physics", to this type of problem. Their
evidence is that, when given a relatively simple physical
situation and asked to extrapolate on the basis of the
information supplied, people tend to make certain types of
error rather than others, and justify this with verbal reports
that indicate a non-Newtonian approach to the problem
(even though the instructions encourage that type of
approach). One example of such a problem would be for
participants to be asked to imagine looking down on the
curved tube (which is held horizontally) in Figure 1, while a
ball bearing is inserted with some speed, v, as shown. Their
task is to draw the path the ball bearing takes on exiting the
tube, ignoring such factors as friction between ball bearing
and tube, and any wind resistance. The plan view is
intended to take gravity out of the picture for the purposes
of this problem, and the correct, Newtonian solution, is to
draw a straight line as shown in the figure (solid line) as the
ball bearing leaves the tube. Instead, many participants draw
something approximating the curved dotted line as their
answer, and justify this by claiming that the ball bearing has
acquired "curvy impetus" as a result of its journey through
the tube and this continues to cause its path to curve on
exiting the tube. A more sophisticated version of this
account will claim that this impetus dissipates with time,
and so the curved path will gradually straighten as the ball
bearing gets further from the tube (see McCloskey et al,
1980).

Another classic problem studied by McCloskey and
colleagues concerns what they call the "straight down
belief" (McCloskey, Washburn & Felch 1983). The idea
here is that people tend to predict a straight down trajectory
for objects that are dropped whilst being carried, whereas
they predict a parabolic path for objects that fall when
moving independently. A classic example of this is a
cannonball projected off a cliff. If fired horizontally from a
cannon with initial velocity, v, an "out and down"
approximation to the parabolic path is a typical response
from participants asked to draw its subsequent path. But if
carried (by some overhead conveyor belt arrangement) to
the edge of the cliff with velocity, v, and then released, even
though this is the identical problem in physical terms,
participants are much more likely to describe the
cannonball's motion as straight down. The reason they give
for this is that, in the first case, the cannonball possesses its
own impetus when it leaves the gun. This horizontal
impetus takes it out past the cliff edge, but starts to
dissipate. At the same time, gravity takes hold, and
accelerates it downwards – hence the "out and down"
parabolic trajectory. But, in the case of the cannonball being
carried by a conveyor belt, participants think it has no
impetus of its own, and so, when released, gravity takes
hold immediately and it drops straight down.
The research reported in McCloskey et al’s paper
investigates the basis for this finding. On the one hand, it
may be just as it seems and as participants in these
experiments claim, i.e. that they have applied a naïve
physics (or natural intuition) to the problem which is, in
some sense the "wrong" theory as it is non-Newtonian, and
it is this that leads to the consistent error in predicting the
path of the object. On the other hand, it may be that the

1008

account given by participants of why they drew that
particular path is more by way of a post-hoc rationalization
of what they did, rather than an account of what caused
them to do it. Instead, the causal factor in producing this
consistent error could be extrapolation on the basis of
experience, by which we mean to imply associativelymediated retrieval of memories based on some surface
similarity to the problem just posed. On this account, the
reason why a carried object is often portrayed as taking a
path straight downwards when released is because that is the
perceived experience that we have, and call upon, of this
situation in real life. Imagine you are cycling along and you
drop a package. To a first approximation at least, the
package appears to fall straight down. This is because both
the package and the observer on the bicycle share a
(moving) frame of reference, and in that frame of reference
there is no horizontal motion with respect to one another.
But a thrown package, which, in naïve physics terms, is one
moving independently, does not have this property and so
will follow a curved trajectory.
We realize that proponents of the naïve physics view will
argue that it is exactly episodes of this kind that lead to
induction of a naïve physics i.e. the incorrect theory is
derived from these types of experiences, and it is only by
running carefully controlled experiments that allow for
friction, wind resistance, and frames of reference that the
proper Newtonian theory can be arrived at. But we would
differ from this view in arguing that the effect of experience
is primary, and that its impact via retrieval from memory is
what drives the response, not its impact via some naïve
physics induced on the basis of these experiences. This
stance makes the prediction that, if we are able to find
scenarios where experience would predict that a carried
object would follow a curved trajectory, or an object
moving independently should take a path straight down,
then the result of putting these problems to participants
should be quite different to that predicted on the naïve
physics account. If participants have a theory that drives
their responses, then it should apply across different
situations, as long as the particular scenario employed does
not change the essential physics of the problem. Equally, if
the outcome of experimental investigation of this
proposition were to be that the responses made to a problem
involving a carried object were to predict a path straight
down (independent of considerable variation in the surface
features of the scenario), then this would be inconsistent
with an account in terms of associative memory (to the
extent that different memories would be expected to lead to
different predictions.

undergraduates studying psychology, but were naïve to the
hypotheses under test in this experiment.

!
!
Design
Eight physics problems, featuring falling objects, were
devised. These problems all had the same underlying
structure, and therefore the same answer (in terms of
Newtonian physics), but different surface and contextual
features. The problems were of two types: Those in which
the object was carried prior to being released, and those
where the object had been moving freely (independently)
throughout. These two problem types were further divided
to give two subsets in which the expected answers were
either congruent or incongruent with the predictions of a
naïve physics theory.
Four different types of problems were, therefore,
presented to the participants in a questionnaire:
Type 1: Carried – Congruent (CC) – Problems in which
objects are carried prior to release and where our predicted
answer “falls straight down” is in accordance with naïve
physics theory.
Type 2: Carried – Incongruent (CI) – Problems in which
objects are carried prior to release and where our predicted
answer is not in accordance with naïve physics theory.
Type 3: Free – Congruent (FC) – Problems in which
objects are moving freely/independently and where our
predicted answer “curved forwards/parabolic trajectory” is
in accordance with naïve physics theory.
Type 4: Free – Incongruent (FI) – Problems in which
objects are moving freely/independently and where our
predicted answer is not in accordance with naïve physics
theory.
Two imaginary scenarios were devised for each type of
problem. These were constructed using MS Powerpoint and
Word software on a Macintosh computer as follows:
Table 1
1.

Carried Congruent condition (CC):
Problem 1. Bird in flight dropping ice cream
Problem 5. Plane dropping crate

2.

Carried Incongruent condition (CI):
Problem 2. Swinging monkey drops banana
Problem 6. Cricket bowler drops ball at release

3.

Free Congruent condition (FC):
Problem 3. Cannonball fired off cliff
Problem 7. Skier approaching a crevasse

4.

Free Incongruent condition (FI):
Problem 4. Skateboarder dropping in to a half-pipe
Problem 8. Water falling over a cliff

Experiment
Method
Participants
27 University of Exeter students with ages ranging from
18-35 participated in this experiment. All were

1009

Figure 2. The figure shows one of the scenarios (Problem 1)
presented for the CC condition. Participants were asked to
select one of the 5 responses to indicate the trajectory of the
dropped object (e.g. the ice-cream)
The problems in Table 1 were chosen so that the CC and
FC examples, i.e. the congruent problems, were closely
modeled on problems that have typically been used in
previous experiments on naïve physics. As far as we could
tell, there were no associations to events or situations that
contradicted the predictions of a naïve physics theory for
these examples. The incongruent problems (CI and FI) were
chosen so that they conformed to the “Carried” or “Free”
designation, but had associations that seemed to us to
suggest that a response that was incongruent with a naïve
physics theory would be given. Thus, a cricket bowler (e.g.
Problem 6) is typically seen as projecting the ball forwards,
not dropping it straight down. If you observe someone or
something else (e.g. the monkey in Problem 2) in a state of
motion carrying an object that they drop, then the typical
perceived experience is for that object to continue to follow
that state of motion. Because waterfalls (e.g. Problem 8) are
typically seen from front-on and below, the modal
experience is of them falling nearly straight down; and when

Figure 3. This shows examples of the other three types of
scenario presented to our participants. The top panel is an
example of a CI (Type 2 problem), the middle a FC (Type 3
problem) and the bottom a FI (Type 4 problem) example. In
each case the same five response options were offered,
illustrated by mini-drawings to show the path suggested (see
Figure 2 for examples).
skateboarders drop in (e.g. Problem 4), they typically appear
to take an initial path that is straight down. So, our hope was
that these scenarios would predispose our participants to
choose paths that were not expected on a naïve physics
account.

1010

Procedure
The eight problems were collated into a nine page A4
sized booklet printed in black and white using size 12 Arial
font. The front page consisted of instructions to the
participants, a consent form and a question asking for
information about their level of physics knowledge. Each of
the following eight pages featured one of the physics
problems, a pictorial multiple-choice selection showing the
available answers and a text box with space for participants
to write an explanation of the rationale behind their
selection. The presentation of the problems was randomized,
with each problem appearing once, and equally likely to
appear on any page.
Participants were asked to look at each problem and
attempt to predict the path of the object as it fell to the
ground. They were then asked to select, by circling the
relevant number from the multiple choice answers, which of
the five responses: 1. Backwards, 2. Straight Down, 3. Out
& Down, 4. Curved forwards (Parabolic) and 5. Straight
Forwards, most closely resembled the path they had thought
of. Participants were also asked to write a short rationale for
their choice of path to make clear the connection between
their answer and their intuition. After completing all
problems participants returned the booklet and were thanked
for their contribution.

Results
The data of interest are the frequencies of each response
(1-5) provided for a given problem. Table 2 gives these
frequencies for each problem. The responses that might be
considered consistent with naïve physics (NP) for a given
problem are shown in green, those that are not and are better
explained by an appeal to associative memory (AM) are
shown in red.
Table 2

!
()#$*+&'!
,!
-!
.!
/!
0!
5!
1!
2!

"#$%&'$#! !!
,!
1!
/!
3!
3!
4!
,!
3!
3!

!!
-!
,2!
,-!
.!
-0!
-,!
.!
3!
0!

!!
.!
.!
-!
,,!
/!
3!
.!
,.!
-/!

!!
/!
.!
,1!
-,!
0!
-!
-2!
-,!
1!

0!
0!
,!
,!
-!
/!
,!
-!
3!

We took the view that for a “Carried” problem (Problems
1, 5, 2 and 6) the NP congruent response would be 2
(“Straight Down”) and the AM (or NP Incongruent)
response would be 3 (“Out & Down”) or 4 (“Curved
Forwards”). For a “Free” problem (Problems 3, 7, 4 and 8)
the NP responses we allowed as congruent were either 3
(“Out & Down”) or 4 (“Curved Forwards”). This was done

because, in practice, distinguishing between responses 3 and
4 was difficult. The AM (or Incongruent) equivalent
response for these problems was 2 (“Straight Down”).
Responses 1 and 5 were relatively rarely used, so when
computing Chi-Square values we collapsed responses 1 and
2 together, and responses 3, 4 and 5 together. This gave two
basic classes of answer, which we can characterise as
mostly straight down and certainly not forwards (1 and 2),
and mostly curved forwards (3, 4 and 5).
We first of all collapsed over the two problems per
condition, and then ran a !2 as a 4 x 5 contingency table (4
conditions by 5 responses) to see if there was any effect of
condition on responding. The resultant !2=157, 12df,
p<.005 suggests that there is. We then collapsed further so
that there were only two response classes as already detailed
(to ensure that the expected values in each cell were
sufficiently high), and carried out a series of !2 analyses to
investigate the basis of this effect. A 2 x 2 contingency table
(hence, 1df) analysis of congruency by response gave a
!2=0.95, p=ns, indicating no main effect of this factor.
Analysis of “Free” vs. “Carried” by response gave a
!2=26.13, p<.001, showing that this factor exerted a strong
influence over choice of response, with, as expected, “Free”
problems tending to produce mostly curved forwards
responses and “Carried” problems mostly straight down
responses. If we break this down further, then the !2=3.06,
p=ns for the Incongruent data suggested that there was no
significant difference in the distribution of responses caused
by this factor in these problems, but the !2=78.06, p<.001
for the Congruent data indicates that it is these problems
that drove the strong tendency for the two types of problem
to lead to different responses.
The data of main interest, however, are how the
Congruency factor influences performance on the “Free”
and “Carried” problems. Taking the “Free” problems first, a
2 x 2 contingency table analysis with congruency as a
factor, and collapsed response as the other, produced a
!2=28.66, p<.001, with Congruent problems favouring a
curved forwards response over straight down answers, and
Incongruent problems significantly reducing this tendency.
The “Carried” data show an even clearer effect, with
Congruent problems favouring straight down responses and
Incongruent data reversing this effect to show a strong
tendency to elicit curved forwards responses, !2 =34.09,
p<.001. It seems that we were successful in our attempt to
select problems that either favoured the response expected
on the basis of naïve physics (Congruent), or were not
congruent with this prediction and instead owed more to
associative memory (Incongruent). This effect was
particularly marked for the “Carried” problems, where there
is essentially a pure interaction, with the Congruent
problems behaving exactly as naïve physics would predict
and the Incongruent problems showing quite the opposite
pattern. The results corresponding to these analyses are
shown in an easily interpretable form in Figure 4.

1011

Both these problems are Carried Congruent scenarios. The
typical response selection was No. 2, "straight down", and
the explanation offered is the classic "an object has no
impetus of its own if carried" justification given on the basis
of a naïve physics. But if we now consider the explanations
given for the Carried Incongruent problems we have for
Problem 6: “From my experience of ball games, they don’t
just drop downwards.”
Which clearly indicates a reliance on experience that we
take to be mediated by associative memory. It might be
argued that the memory simply overrides the predictions of
the theory in this instance, and of course this is a possible
explanation of the forward path typically chosen for this
problem. But when we come to Problem 4, one of the Free
Incongruent scenarios, then the justification offered for
choosing the straight down response (No. 2) is in Problem
4: “That’s how skaters do it.”
So we would have to argue that once again recall based on
experience is overriding the predictions of the theory (which
would predict that the path is curved forwards). At this point
the reader will notice that in every case the answer chosen is
one consistent with generic experience of the world, and this
impression is confirmed by our final class of problem, Free
Congruent, where the typical response is curved forwards as
a naïve physics would predict, and the generic explanation
for offering this response is in Problem 7:
“Due to moving at speed.”
Which fits nicely with the idea that a freely moving object
has impetus. Thus we have two conditions where we have
the results and the rationale expected on a naïve physics
view, and two conditions where we have the opposite. But
in all cases, the responses and rationale seem grounded in
experience, and an explanation based on extrapolation from
experience is tenable. Surely in these circumstances it is
more parsimonious to attribute the answers given to
memory-based extrapolation from experience, rather than
invoke some abstracted theory that has to be overridden
much of the time?

Figure 4. This shows the response difference score for each of
the four conditions in our experiment. This score is simply the
difference between the aggregated responses, (3+4+5)-(1+2),
and measures preference for one response class over the
other, with a positive score denoting a bias in favor of the
curved forwards class over the straight down alternative.
In essence, Figure 4 demonstrates that whilst it is entirely
possible to get the pattern of results predicted by a naïve
physics model for how people solve this type of problem, it
is also possible to choose problems such that the effect is
eliminated.

General Discussion
What are we to conclude from these findings? Perhaps the
first, and most obvious conclusion, is that a simple naïve
physics theory that predicts the "straight down effect"
because carried objects do not have any impetus of their
own is not going to be able to explain these results. Either
the theory is wrong, or it is not being applied in these
situations. And this last is a real possibility. By giving
considerable context to the problems, we have definitely
biased participants in the way that they approach them,
perhaps they do not invoke a naïve physics in these
circumstances because the problems are not abstract
enough?
Our objection to this analysis would be that naïve physics
is exactly that which should be able to deal with these "real
world" situations. And furthermore, there is as good
qualitative evidence for naïve physics being used in our
experiment as there is in other studies that have used this
evidence to argue for a naïve physics theory. If we take the
CC class of problem first, we have the following quotes that
are typical of the approach taken to these problems by our
participants.
For Problem 1: “As soon as the seagull lets go there is no
forward momentum, so therefore it will drop straight
down.”
And for Problem 5: “The box dropped straight out of the
plane so would not have been affected by the movement of
the plane.”

But we do not think that just any memory-based
extrapolation from experience will serve to explain our
results. Instead, we believe that the memory involved is
associative in nature, so that it has captured the basic
statistical regularities embedded in experience and retrieves
them on the basis of a surface similarity to the problem. As
such, we believe that an error-correcting system (e.g.
McClelland and Rumelhart, 1985, Rumelhart, Hinton and
Williams, 1986, and see McLaren and Dickinson, 1990 for a
discussion) is required, as this will be able to extract the
necessary structure. A version of such a system that can then
function as a model of associative memory would be ideal
(e.g. see the model in McLaren, 2011, based on McLaren,
1993, and the most recent version of this in McLaren,
Forrest and McLaren, 2012). Finally, the ability to capture
structure over time will also be needed, and for this the SRN
(Elman, 1990) and it's more sophisticated variant the
Augmented SRN (Cleeremans and McClelland, 1991, see

1012

also Yeates, Jones, Wills, McLaren and McLaren, in press,
and the APECS variant in Jones and McLaren, 2001) fits the
bill.
This more primitive, associative system is only part of the
story, however, we also postulate another rule-based system
that takes the output of associative memory and then
constructs a story about the answer given around it. In doing
this we are advocating a dual-process theory of cognition
along the lines of that given in McLaren, Green and
Mackintosh (1994), and illustrated in Spiegel and McLaren
(2003, 2006) and Jones and McLaren (2009). It is this
combination of extrapolation based on experience, followed
by induction of some heuristic to explain why a particular
answer has been given, that we believe has led to the notion
of a naïve physics. It results in reliably incorrect answers to
physics problems, and a narrative that accompanies these
answers. The point of our research, however, is to show that
if we frame what is essentially the same problem in a
different way, so that we access a different type of
experience, then the answer changes and so does the
accompanying narrative. Clearly, if a deeper physical
analysis of the problems were involved in accessing
experience, the answer to all the problems studied here
would be the same, a parabolic path forwards. Hence we
have to postulate retrieval on the basis of surface similarity
for this aspect of our theory to work. We would then argue
that actually the inductive inference that suggests a naïve
physics is more a matter of an attempt to "make sense" of
our participants intuitive response to these scenarios.

Conclusion
We have arrived at a position where the statements made
by participants attempting to solve simple physics problems
and taken to support the existence of a naïve physics are
seen as post-hoc rationalization for the answer given rather
than causally implicated in that answer. We believe that it is
extrapolation based on experience, via retrieval from
associative memory (that is itself the product of associative
learning), which is responsible for the reliably incorrect
answers given to the problems studied here. We would go
further, and say that our position also applies to the more
abstract problems often studied in naïve physics
experiments, though clearly here the experiential memories
involved must be of a more generic nature. Take as an
example the problem shown in Figure 1. How are we to
explain that result? What memory could be accessed for that
problem? There are not many retrieval cues, just a curved
tube and a ball bearing. But this is enough to retrieve
memories of water emerging from a garden hose (as these
are often curved) – and the path the water takes is typically
curved as well. The analogy between hose and problem is,
of course, incorrect – but the superficial similarity exists and
this is what drives associative processing. The result is an
extrapolation to an incorrect, curved path, because it feels
right. And then we tell a story about why we gave that
answer. The great advantage of this explanation is that it

generalizes to the results reported in this paper. And so we
conclude that as a theory of why we seem to have the wrong
idea about how objects move, it is to be preferred to the
naïve physics point of view.

References
Cleeremans, A. & McClelland, J.L. (1991). Learning the structure
of event sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 120, 235-253.
Elman, J.L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science,
14, 179-211.
Jones, F.W., & McLaren, I.P.L. (2001). Modelling the detailed
pattern of SRT sequence learning. In J.D. Moore, & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the twenty-third annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 465-470). LEA: Mahwah, NJ.
Jones, F.W. and McLaren, I.P.L. (2009). Human Sequence
Learning Under Incidental and Intentional Conditions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 35, 538553.
McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A., and Green, B. (1980). Curvilinear
Motion in the Absence of External Forces: Naïve Beliefs about
the Motion of Objects. Science, 210, 1139-41.
McCloskey M, Washburn A & Felch L (1983) Intuitive Physics:
The Straight Down Belief and Its Origin, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
Vol 9 (4), 636-649.
McClelland, J.L. and Rumelhart, D.E. 1985. Distributed memory
and the representation of general and specific information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 159-88.
McLaren, I.P.L. and Dickinson, A. (1990). The conditioning
connection. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B, 329, 179-186.
McLaren, I.P.L. (1993). APECS: a solution to the sequential
learning problem. Proceedings of the XVth Annual Convention
of the Cognitive Science Society, 717-22.
McLaren IP, Green RE & Mackintosh NJ (1994) Animal Learning
and the Implicit/Explicit Distinction in Ellis N (ed) Implicit and
Explicit Learning of Languages, London, Academic Press.
McLaren, I.P.L. (2011). APECS: An adaptively parameterised
model of associative learning and memory. In Alonso, E. &
Mondragón, E. (Eds.). Computational Neuroscience for
Advancing Artificial Intelligence: Models, Methods and
Applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
McLaren, I. P. L., Forrest, C.L., and McLaren, R.P. (2012).
Elemental representation and configural mappings: Combining
elemental and configural theories of associative learning.
Learning and Behavior, 40 (3), 320-33.
Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E. and Williams, R.J. 1986. Learning
internal representations by error propagation. In D.E. Rumelhart
and J.L. McClelland (Eds.) Parallel Distributed Processing.
Vol. I. Cambridge. Mass. Bradford Books. pp. 318-362.
Spiegel, R. & McLaren, I.P.L. (2003). Abstract and associativelybased representations in human sequence learning. Phil Trans.
Roy. Soc B., 358.
Spiegel, R. and McLaren, I.P.L. (2006). Associative Sequence
Learning in Humans. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 32, 2, 156-63.
Yeates, F., Jones, F.W., Wills, A.J., McLaren, R.P. and McLaren,
I.P.L. (in press). Modelling human sequence learning under
incidental conditions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes.

1013

