UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Negative observations, induction and the generation of hypotheses

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xj517x5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Voorspoels, Wouter
Van Meel, Chayenne
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Negative observations, induction and the generation of hypotheses
Wouter Voorspoels (wouter.voorspoels@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Chayenne Van Meel (chayenne.vanmeel@student.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (gert.storms@ppw.kuleuven.be)
KU Leuven, Department of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat, 102
Leuven, 3000, Belgium.
Abstract
In category-based induction tasks, it is a robust finding that
positive observations raise the judged likelihood of a conclusion and negative observations lower judged likelihood.
We present evidence that negative observations can raise the
judged likelihood. In particular, we asked participants to judge
the likelihood of a conclusion after introducing them to different sets of premises either containing one positive observation
or the same positive observation and a negative observation.
We found that when the negative observation is dissimilar to
the positive observation, willingness to accept a conclusion is
raised. Moreover, results from a simultaneous hypothesis generation task suggest that the rise in judged conclusion likelihood is due to a peculiar shift in the hypothesis space of the
reasoner, in that the hypothesis with the largest extension, yet
still consistent with all premises gains disproportionate popularity when introducing dissimilar negative observations.
Keywords: induction; non-monotonicity; reasoning; sampling
assumptions;

Introduction
People often find themselves in situations that require judgments based on incomplete knowledge, derived from an incomplete set of observations. From experience with traffic
lights, we can conclude that red is diagnostic for dangerous
situations (positive observations), and we will refrain from
crossing the road. However, we have also encountered traffic
lights on lonely nights, when there is no traffic. In that situation, red does not necessarily indicate danger (negative observation). How do we combine these observations to make
a decision about crossing the road? The world is not sufficiently friendly to provide us with an exhaustive set of observations. But we do not want to stay on the same side of
the road all our lives. We want to see the other side of the
road! Therefore inference to uncertain conclusions, generally referred to as induction, is omnipresent in everyday life
and almost equally widely studied in cognitive science (Heit,
2000).
A common paradigm to study induction a is the categorybased induction task: Participants are asked to infer the presence of a feature in a conclusion category on the basis of a set
of observations. The observations are presented as premises
of the argument. For example:
Premise: Tigers have sesamoid bones
———————————————Conclusion: Lions have sesamoid bones

topic of the present paper. Following intuition, but also according to the main theories of inductive reasoning (see, e.g.,
Heit, 2000), there exists a monotonic relation between the
number of observations and the strength of an argument: As
more objects displaying the property are observed, a conclusion will be judged more likely (see, e.g., Osherson, Smith,
Wilkie, Lpez, & Shafir, 1990). Similarly, as objects are observed that do not have the property, the judged likelihood of
a conclusion decreases (e.g., Heussen, Voorspoels, Verheyen,
Storms, & Hampton, 2011). We will refer to this general finding as the monotonicity principle.
Put differently, the monotonicity principle predicts that a
positive observation1 raises argument strength, and a negative observation2 lowers argument strength. In case the observation is extremely dissimilar, and thus irrelevant to the
conclusion, argument strength remains the same. For example, the likelihood of the conclusion ’Lions have sesamoid
bones’ is raised by the observation that tigers have sesamoid
bones, is lowered by the observation that leopards do not have
sesamoid bones and remains the same following the observation that tea cups do not have sesamoid bones. Additional
relevant positive and negative observations will respectively
raise and lower the argument strength further (asymptotically,
obviously).
Recently we have presented evidence that suggests that
negative observations can in some cases increase argument
strength, contrary to what the monotonicity principle predict
(Heussen et al., 2011). In a forced choice paradigm, participants showed a preference for an argument of the following
form as compared to an argument without the second, negative premise:
Mozart’s music elicits alpha waves in the brain
Metallica’s music does not elicit alpha waves in the brain
——————————————————————
Bach’s music elicits alpha waves in the brain
A potential explanation for the results of (Heussen et al.,
2011) is that negative observations point the reasoner to a relevant dimension to base inference upon (Medin, Goldstone,
and Gentner (1993)). In the above argument, the negative
observation highlights a commonality between Mozart and
Bach, not shared by Metallica, i.e., that being classical music is the crucial feature to base inference upon. As a conse-

A number of regularities have been reported regarding how
people respond to such problems, one of which forms the

1 An
2 An

1552

object displaying the property.
object that does not display the property

quence, the argument will be considered stronger. In addition,
by explicitly contradicting some of the potential hypotheses
(e.g.,all music elicits alpha waves), negative evidence clearly
helps in reducing the number of hypotheses. This is expected
to raise believe in the hypotheses that remain consistent with
the premises after the negative observation.

B (e.g., Metallica’s music) or the premise presents information from category C (e.g., the sound of a waterfall). Table 1
presents an overview of the premises for the topic music.

Outline
The present study aims at further investigating the rise in argument strength following a negative observation. In particular, our aim is twofold. First, we want to replicate the effect in
a rating task, in which we compare generalization judgments
of participants who were not presented with negative observations to judgments by participants who were. This differs considerably from Heussen et al. (2011), where a forced
choice paradigm was used. Second, we ask participants to
generate hypotheses after introducing the observations. In
this way, we can examine how the hypothesis space of people
confronted with negative observation changes and how this
relates to their generalization judgments.
Following Heussen et al. (2011), we hypothesize that a
negative observation will raise the willingness to accept a
conclusion whenever it points to a dimension that can be used
to make the required generalization. In effect, we expect that
the projection of a feature from Mozart’s music to Bach’s music is facilitated when a negative observation excludes other
types of music, and points to classical music as the correct
extension of the novel feature. Similarly, when projecting a
property from Bach’s music to Nirvana’s music, the projection is expected to be facilitated by a negative observation
outside the category that entails both subcategories (music).
Adding the premise that the sound of a falling rock does not
have the property, is thus expected to increase the willingness to project the property to Nirvana’s music. Moreover,
we expect that the hypothesis space of participants will vary
accordingly.

Experiment
Method
Participants Participants were 172 bachelor students psychology who volunteered for course credits.
Materials We used 12 argument topics taken from Heussen
et al. (2011) (music, painters, public figures, types of ships,
types of glass, types of displays, water bodies, fruit, water
birds, insects, polar animals). In each topic, a hierachical
structure is present, comprising of a category (e.g., music),
two subcategories (A: classical music and B: rock music) and
a supordinate category (C: sound).
Each of the topics has a base argument built from one
premis from subcategory A (e.g., Mozart’s music has X). Depending on the condition, negative premises are added from
the other subcategory (B), or a different category (C). Thus,
either the additional premise contains information regarding
a member of subcategory A (e.g., Vivaldi’s music), or the
premise contains information on a member of subcategory

In Heussen et al. (2011), only one conclusion from subcategory A was used. For the present experiment, we added two
conclusion categories to each topic: One from subcategory
B (e.g., Nirvana’s music), and one from category C (e.g., the
sound of a falling rock). The properties that were to be generalized from premises to conclusions, were intuitively realistic
characteristics that participants were likely to have very little
knowledge about (e.g., contain lycopene; create conversion
currents; elicit alpha waves in the brain).

Table 1: an overview of the simtulus material for the topic
’music’. Entries in bold refer to items that are presented in
every condition (e.g., the base premise ”Mozart’s music elicits alpha waves”).
Type
subcategory (A)
subcategory (B)
superordinate (C)

Premise
Mozart, Vivaldi
Metallica
falling rock

Conclusion
Bach
Nirvana
waterfall

Procedure The experiment had the form of a web-based
survey. On each trial, participants were presented with a
short scenario describing that specialists in the domain of interest (e.g., neuroscientists) had recently made novel discoveries. This was followed with the premise (or premisses) of
an argument. For example, participants were given following
premise:
Mozart’s music elicits alpha waves in the brain.

(1)

After reading the information, participants received two
successive tasks. First, in the hypothesis generation task,
they were asked to come up with a rule underlying the observations, (e.g., ”classical music elicits alpha waves in the
brain”). They were asked to type their hypothesis in a textbox
in one or two sentences. Second, in the generalization task,
participants were asked to judge how likely the three conclusions associated with the argument were by moving a bar on
a continuous scale running from 1 to 100 for each of the conclusions.
For each topic, we constructed six premise sets, varying
the type of observations, and the ”‘sign”’ (positive or negative) . For each premise set the exact same three conclusions
were judged for likelihood, but the premise set varied across
condtions. Here, we will discuss only three conditions that
allow crucial comparisons to test for the effect of negative
observations. In the base condition, referred to as posA, participants were presented with the base premise, as in (1). In
condition posAnegB, a negative observation from a different
subcategory is added to the base premise:

1553

Mozart’s music elicits alpha waves in the brain.
Metallica’s music does not elicit alpha waves in the (2)
brain.
In a third condition, posAnegC a negative observation was
added to the base premise, disclosing information on a member of the same superordinate category:
Mozart’s music elicits alpha waves in the brain.
The sound of a falling rock does not elicit alpha waves (3)
in the brain
In total, 12 x 6 arguments were constructed. The 72 arguments were distributed across 6 lists so that each list contained each of the twelve topics (so participants did not see
the same topic twice), and a list contained 2 arguments for every type of premise set (so each participant got two arguments
from every condition). The lists were distributed randomly
across participants. The order of arguments within a list was
random for each participant, as well as the order of the conclusions in each argument. The same two practice items preceded each list in order to familiarize the participants with the
procedure. These two items were not included in the analyses. The experiment took no longer than 20 minutes
Premise sets posA, posAnegB and posAnegC form the object of the present examination. The structure of premise sets
4 to 6 is listed in Table 2, but will not be discussed in the
present paper. As can be seen in table 2, these premise sets
do not contain negative observations, except the “completely
saturated” premise set 6.
Table 2: Schematic overview of the experiment. ’+’ refers
to a positive observation, ’-’ to a negative observation. ’++’
means that two premises from the same subcategory were
presented in the corresponding condition. In the present paper we focus on the first three premise sets.
Cond
posA
posAnegB
posAnegC

subcat A
+
+
+

subcat B

cat C

4

++

5

+

+

2

6

++

-

3

-

# premises
1
2
2
2

Results
Generalization
To recapitulate, participant were shown a set of premises (observations), and asked to judge the likelihood of three conclusions. One conclusions concerned a member of the same subcategory as the base premise (subcategory A), a second conclusion concerned a member of a different subcategory (subcategory B) and a third conclusion a member of the shared
superordinate category (category C). In this section, we examine the manner in which these generalization judgments

vary as a function of the premise set that is presented, and
in particular, whether adding a negative observation to the
premise set can raise argument strength. In what follows, it is
informative to keep in mind that, according to the monotonicity principle, negative observations are expected to lower the
likelihood of a conclusion (or leave it unaltered).
Figure 1 presents the average scores of all three conclusion
likelihood judgments, averaged across participants and items,
as a function of the premise set. PosA introduces only the
base premise, posAnegB adds a negative observation of subcategory B to the base premise and posAnegC adds a negative
observation of category C. In the two following sections, statistical analyses are presented to test for the effects of adding
negative observations to a premise set.
Subcategory A

Subcategory B

category C

100
90
80

70
60
50
40
30
20

10
0

posA

posAnegB

posAnegC

Figure 1: Average judged conclusion likelihood for the three
types of conclusions, as a function of the premise set.
Generalizing to the same subcategory For the conclusions that concern a member of subcategory A (e.g., conclusions to Bach’s music if Mozart’s music is the base premise),
we are interested in two conditions that should lead to a
raise in conclusion likelihood as compared to the base argument, despite the negative observation in a premise set. As
in Heussen et al. (2011), we expect to observe a difference
between premise set posA and posAnegB, in which a negative observation from subcategory B is added to the premise
set. Additionally, we hypothesize that adding negative observation from an entirely different category, as in premise set
posAnegC, also raises argument strength. In Figure 1 the left
bars present the average judged likelihood of the conclusion
to a member of subcategory A as a function of the premise
set preceding the conclusion, and visual inspection confirms
our hypotheses.
We performed a mixed-effects model analyses with two
random effects (participants and topics), and two fixed effects
(list and premise set), and their interaction3 . Premise set is a
within subjects factor and list is a between subject variable.
Table 3 gives an overview of the main (fixed) effects of
3 For

the model formulation, we follow (Baayen, Davidson, &
Bates, 2008) in their discussion of mixed models for split plot designs. The analyses were carried out in R, using the lme4 package
(Bates & Sarkar, 2007).

1554

premise set, and can be interpreted as follows: For premise
set posA, participants on average judge the likelihood of a
conclusion to a member of subcategory A to be 75.14. For
premise set posAnegB, in which a negative observation from
subcategory B is added, the judged likelihood drops with 2.26
according to the model4 , a change that is not significant. For
premise set posAnegC, in which a negative observation from
a different category C is added, the judged likelihood is significantly higher 11.12 points (p = .016).
Table 3: Effects of premise set on generalizing to a member
of subcategory A.
premise set
posA (base level)
posAnegB
posAnegC

MCMC estimate
75.14
-2.26
11.12

MCMC p-value
< .001
.72
.016

In sum, we only find partial support for our hypothesis.
In particular, premise sets as used in (Heussen et al., 2011),
adding a negative observation from a different subcategory,
do not lead to a significant rise in argument strength. We do,
however, observe a strong rise in argument strength, when a
more distant negative observation – from a different category
– is added to the premise set.

premise set
posA (base level)
posAnegB
posAnegC

MCMC estimate
33.93
-16.55
33.61

MCMC p-value
< .001
.08
< .001

Table 4 summarizes the effects of premise set. When
adding a negative observation from subcategory B, judged
4 Note that the model estimate for posAnegB is negative, contrary
to what you would expect on the basis of Figure 3 due to addition of
list as a factor.

Conclusions Our analyses of the judged likelihood of the
conclusions have revealed convincing evidence that negative
observations can raise argument strength in some circumstances. In particular, we found that a negative observation
from a seemingly irrelevant category, can substantially raise
the judged likelihood of the conclusion to a member of the
same subcategory as the base premise as well as to a member
of a different subcategory.
Contrary to (Heussen et al., 2011), we do not find support
for a rise in judged likelihood of a conclusion to a member
of the same subcategory when a negative observation from a
different subcategory is introduced. Note that Heussen et al.
used a forced choice paradigm, and report effects that, while
significant, were very subtle. Perhaps our methodology was
not able to identify these effects.

Hypothesis generation

Generalizing to a different subcategory For the conclusion to a member of subcategory B (e.g., Nirvana has X; the
base premise is Mozart), we hypothesize that a negative observation from a different category (but shared superordinate
category, e.g., the sound of a falling rock) can raise judged
conclusion likelihood. In Figure 1 the average judged likelihood of conclusions to subcategory B for the relevant premise
sets is presented in the middle bar of every group, and a rise
in mean judged likelihood from premise set posA to premise
set posAnegC can be observed. A quantitative test of the difference was performed using mixed model analyses with two
random effects (items and participants) and two fixed effects
(list and premise set). As in the previous section, this model
was preferable to alternative models in terms of AIC and log
likelihood deviance.
Table 4: Effects of premise set on generalizing to a member
of subcategory B.

likelihood of the conclusion is lowered by 16.55, nearly significantly (p=.08). Note that in this case the premise set contains a negative observation form the same subcategory as the
conclusion. More interestingly, when adding a negative observation from a different category (the sound of a falling rock
does not have X), judged likelihood increases an impressive
33.61.

Before making the generalization judgments, participants
were asked to generate a hypothesis that they believed explained the observations in the premises. This allows us to
peak at the type of hypotheses participants entertained when
confronted with negative observations
We differentiated between four types of hypotheses: First,
a hypothesis can state that the property is only applicable to
the base premise (e.g., “only Bach has X”). Second, a hypothesis can generalize the property to the subcategory of which
the base premise is a member (e.g., “all classical music has
X”), or, the third type, to the entire category (“all music has
X”) or, in the fourth case, to the entire superordinate category
(“all sound has X”). We classified each rule according to its
consequential region following this scheme. Hypotheses that
did not fit the scheme, for example due to reporting another
subcategory, an unspecified subcategory (e.g., “some types of
music”) or a causal explanation, were coded as “other”5 .
Figure 2 presents the relative frequencies of each type of
hypothesis being generated as response to premise sets posA,
posAnegB and posAnegC. To quantify and test differences in
hypothesis generation between premise sets, we performed
logistic regressions with premise set and list as predictors and
a binary variable indicating whether the type of hypothesis
was generated as dependent variable. The regressions were
performed seperately for each type of hypothesis.
Figure 2 reveals three patterns. First, hypotheses that restrict the property to the base premise are significantly less
frequent when a negative observation is introduced (with
comparison level posA, for posAnegB: Wald = −2.4, p =
5 The criterion for classifying was the literal appearance of the
intended terms in the rule (and, obviously, in an unambiguous way).

1555

base premise

subcategory A

category

servations can indeed raise argument strength when they
come from a different category than the one shared by the
positive observation and the conclusion. Moreover, we found
a clear relation with the type of hypotheses that are generated to account for the premise observations. In general, there
seems to be a dramatic rise in the weight of the largest hypothesis that is consistent with both positive and negative observations in the premise set. In what follows, we will discuss
the relation of these findings to earlier violations of monotonicity in inductive reasoning, and in relation to the sampling assumptions that people have that is, ideas about how
the observations are presented to them.

supordinate

0,5

0,45
0,4

relative frequency

0,35
0,3
0,25

0,2
0,15
0,1
0,05
0

posA

posAnegB

posAnegC

Relation to positive non-monotonicity
Figure 2: Relative frequency of generating a certain type of
hypothesis as a function of the premise set.
.01; and for posAnegC: Wald = −4.7, p < .001). Second,
hypotheses that attribute the property to the entire subcategory A are more frequent when a negative observation from
subcategory B is introduced (but not significantly, Wald =
.76, p = .45), and significantly less frequent when a negative observation from category C is introduced (Wald =
−3.74, p < .001). Third, hypotheses that project the feature
to the entire category are less common when introducing a
negative observation from a subcategory (Wald = −6.23, p <
.001), yet more common when introducing a negative observation from a different category (Wald = 6.02, p < .001).
Conclusions The hypothesis space following arguments
with negative observations from subcategory B or category
C is substantially altered as compared to the one premise arguments (posA). Moreover, the shifts in generation frequency
seem to follow results in the generalization tasks. In particular the increase in subcategory B conclusion likelihood when
premise set posAnegC is observed, is clearly associated to an
increase in the hypothesis that music is the relevant category.
Not only do some hypotheses become more frequently
generated (as can be expected when a number of hypotheses are excluded due to a negative observation), the relative
differences between types of hypotheses change considerably across different conditions. In particular, for premise set
posAnegB, hypotheses that refer to subcategory A are disproportionately more popular. For premise set posAnegC,
hypotheses that refer to the entire category are disproportionately more frequent. Note that for these premise sets, other
hypotheses that are also consistent with the observations become less popular. This suggests that more is going on than
evenly redistributing the belief of excluded hypotheses across
remaining hypotheses. We will come back to this issue in the
discussion.

General discussion
We have presented evidence against the universality of the
monotonicity principle in inductive reasoning. Negative ob-

For positive observations, a violation of the monotonicity principle has already been documented Medin, Coley,
Storms, and Hayes (2003), in that under some circumstances
positive observations can lower conclusion likelihood. For
example, consider following two arguments:
Brown bears have X
——————————Goats have X

(4)

Brown bears have X
Polar bears have X
——————————Goats have X

(5)

Medin et al. (2003) report that participants judge argument
(4) stronger than argument (5). According to Medin et al., the
addition of the positive observation in (5) reinforces a property that is shared among the premises but is not applicable to
the conclusion. Put differently, by adding a positive observation, more weight is given to the hypothesis that the being a
bear is crucial for the novel property, and since this property
is not shared by the conclusion, it is judged less likely.
The non-monotonicity from adding a negative observation
is strikingly symmetric to the non-monotonicity reported by
(Medin et al., 2003). Consider following two arguments:
Mozart’s music has X
——————————–
Metallica’s music has X

(6)

Mozart’s music has X
The sound of a falling rock does not have X
——————————————————
Metallica’s music has X

(7)

In the present study, argument (6) was judged stronger than
(5). Following our analyses of the hypotheses generated by
participants, the addition of the negative observation from
outside the music category, drives people to think that “being
music” is the most likely hypothesis, rather than, e.g., classical music or Mozart’s music. By virtue of giving more weight
to the music hypothesis, belief is raised that Metallica’s music
has X as well.

1556

In sum, whereas in the positive case, a reasoner’s hypothesis ”tightens” to a small subcategory (e.g., bears) by introducing an observation that is very similar to the base premise
(e.g., another type of bear), in the negative case, a reasoner’s
hypothesis seems to “broaden” to a large category, by introducing an observation that is very dissimilar to the base
premise.

Sampling assumptions and non-monotonicity
The question then is how reasoners arrive at weighting exactly these hypotheses more. From a naive probability point
of view, excluding certain hypotheses by adding negative observations will automatically lead to a redistribution of the
probability mass from the excluded hypotheses to remaining
hypotheses. In effect, it makes sense that other hypotheses
would indeed become more likely, and as a consequence a
particular conclusion could also become more likely. However, it is important to appreciate that, in the naive case, the
probability mass would be distributed evenly across the remaining hypotheses, so relative differences between different
hypotheses remain. This does not seem to hold in the present
results. Indeed, when a negative observation from a different category is observed, as in (6), participants generated the
category hypothesis (all music has X) disproportionally more
frequently. While consistent with the observations in (6), the
subcategory hypothesis (all classical music has X) and the
base premise hypothesis (Mozart has X) experience a substantial drop in generation frequency, contrary to what one
would expect on the basis of naive probability theory.
Interestingly, the manner in which Bayesian models of induction (e.g., Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001) cope with the
positive non-monotonicty effect, is by reweighting the remaining hypotheses when an observation is made. More precisely, depending on assumptions on how the particular observation is sampled from the environment, a Bayesian model
would predict that reasoners give more weight as a consistent hypothesis is smaller (e.g., Navarro, Dry, & Lee, 2011;
Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001.
While technical adjustments to Bayesian inference in nature6 , sampling assumptions also represent a psychological
reality and implement what the reasoners’ assumptions are
on how the observations are presented to him . For example,
if a reasoner assumes that the observations in (5) are sampled from the correct hypothesis (for example, because he
or she thinks the experimenter intentionally is trying to reveal the correct hypothesis), it is rational to attribute more
believe to the hypothesis that it is about bears. Yet, if the
reasoner believes the observations are made randomly in the
world, and he or she might as well have observed a refridgerator (presumably not having the property in that case) instead
of a polar bear, the hypothesis that it is about bears does not
gain relative importance (for a more elaborate discussion, see
Navarro et al., 2011). Indeed, it would be bad luck on part

of the reasoner that he or she did not encounter a more informative observation. The non-monotonicity effects, both
positive and negative, suggest that reasoners do not share that
assumption.
While the specific implementation of sampling assumptions discussed does not yet apply to negative evidence, a
similar reweighting mechanism might be at work when a reasoner is presented with negative evidence. Perhaps reasoners
assume that a negative observation is intentionally presented,
in such a way that it does not only exclude inconsistent hypotheses, but is informative as to which hypothesis is the correct one.

Acknowledgments
Wouter Voorspoels is a postdoctoral fellow at the Research
Association - Flanders. We thank Steven verheyen for useful
comments.

References
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390-412.
Bates, D. M., & Sarkar, D. (2007). lme4: Linear mixedeffects models using s4 classes, r package version 0.998756. [Computer software manual].
Heit, E. (2000). Properties of inductive reasoning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 569–592.
Heussen, D., Voorspoels, W., Verheyen, S., Storms, G., &
Hampton, J. A. (2011). Raising argument strength using
negative evidence: A constraint on models of induction.
Journal of Memory /& Cognition, 39, 1496-1507.
Medin, D., Coley, J. D., Storms, G., & Hayes, B. K. (2003).
A relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 10(3), 517 - 532.
Medin, D., Goldstone, R., & Gentner, D. (1993). Respects
for similarity. Psychological Review, 100, 254–278.
Navarro, D. J., Dry, M. J., & Lee, M. D. (2011). Sampling assumptions in inductive generalization. Cognitive Science,
36, 187-223.
Osherson, D., Smith, E., Wilkie, O., Lpez, A., & Shafir, E.
(1990). Category-based induction. Psychological Review,
97, 185–200.
Tenenbaum, J. B., & Griffiths, T. L. (2001). Generalization,
similarity, and Bayesian inference. Behavioral and Brain
sciences, 24, 762-778.

6 More specifically, in a weak sampling scheme, hypotheses are
not reweighted. In a strong sampling scheme hypotheses with a
smaller extension are given more weight

1557

