UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Negotiation Strategies with Incongruent Facial Expressions of Emotion Cause Cardiovascular
Threat

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ps452nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Khooshabeh, Peter
de Melo, Celso
Volkman, Brooks
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Negotiation Strategies with Incongruent Facial Expressions of Emotion Cause
Cardiovascular Threat
Peter Khooshabeh (khooshabeh@ict.usc.edu) 1, 3
Celso de Melo (demelo@usc.edu) 2
Brooks Volkman (volkman@psych.ucsb.edu) 1
Jonathan Gratch (gratch@ict.usc.edu) 3
Jim Blascovich (blascovi@psych.ucsb.edu) 1
Peter J. Carnevale (carnevale@usc.edu) 2
1

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
2
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
3
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90094

affectively neutral; that is, they are associated with
interactants’ positive or negative emotional states. Clearly,
negotiations represent motivated performance situations to
interested partners. And, experimental negotiation tasks are
no exception, including those involving real human players
(Van Kleef, De Dreu, & Manstead, 2004) and digital agents
(i.e., player representations driven by computer algorithms,
de Melo, Carnevale, & Gratch, 2011).
The current work examines individuals’ motivational
responses, using physiological indexes, to emotionally
expressive virtual characters in a multi-issue negotiation
task. Specifically, we focus on the question of how
situational context affects emotion perception from facial
expressions. In person-to-agent negotiation tasks,
experimenters often insert communicative cues such as
agent facial expressions intended to strategically manipulate
user’s emotions. Agents that show emotion have now been
used in several domains such as education, entertainment,
training, therapy and commerce (for a review see Beale &
Creed, 2009). In a multi-issue negotiation task, de Melo and
colleagues (2011) reported that participants made more
concessions to a virtual human that displayed an angry
facial expression compared to a happy facial expression.
Most research on the effects of virtual characters’
emotional facial expressions has relied on subjective
responses from participants (e.g., Beale & Creed, 2009).
However, given the evidence that emotion is processed via
non-conscious pathways, perhaps more so than conscious
pathways (Tamietto & De Gelder, 2010), validated
physiological measures related to affect should provide
confirmation of the operation of non-conscious emotional
processes involved in motivated performance tasks such as
negotiation (Blascovich & Mendes, 2010).

Abstract
Affect is important in motivated performance situations such
as negotiation. Longstanding theories of emotion suggest that
facial expressions provide enough information to perceive
another person’s internal affective state. Alternatively, the
contextual emotion hypothesis posits that situational factors
bias the perception of emotion in others’ facial displays. This
hypothesis predicts that individuals will have different
perceptions of the same facial expression depending upon the
context in which the expression is displayed. In this study,
cardiovascular indexes of motivational states (i.e., challenge
vs. threat) were recorded while players engaged in a multiissue negotiation where the opposing negotiator (confederate)
displayed emotional facial expressions (angry vs. happy); the
confederate’s negotiation strategy (cooperative vs.
competitive) was factorially crossed with his facial
expression. During the game, participants’ eye fixations and
cardiovascular responses, indexing task engagement and
challenge/threat motivation, were recorded. Results indicated
that participants playing confederates with incongruent facial
expressions (e.g., cooperative strategy, angry face) exhibited a
greater threat response, which arises due to increased
uncertainty. Eye fixations also suggest that participants look
at the face more in order to acquire information to reconcile
their uncertainty in the incongruent condition. Taken together,
these results suggest that context matters in the perception of
emotion.
Keywords: facial expressions, negotiation, context in
emotion

Introduction
Negotiation is relatively common in personal and
professional settings. A child might ask a parent whether
she can leave the dinner table. The parent might sternly
command the child to finish her vegetables and the child
could make a counter offer to finish the peas but not the
broccoli. This could ensue into a strategic and emotionally
charged social interaction.
Emotion is an important human factor in motivated
performance situations (i.e., those that are self-relevant and
therefore task engaging and require instrumental cognitive
responses; Blascovich, 2008). Such interactions are rarely

Psychophysiological Measurement of
Motivational States
Psychophysiological research is now a well-established
technique to infer peoples’ affective reactions to various
situations (Blascovich, Vanman, Mendes, & Dickerson,

770

There is evidence that individuals’ explicit responses in
experimental tasks are not always congruent with
underlying physiological
ical markers (e.g., Blascovich,
Mendes, Hunter, Lickel, & Kowai--Bell, 2001). By utilizing
the physiological
al markers specified by the BPS model of
challenge and threat, one can identify motivational
responses to a stimulus that are not typically accessible to a
participant during a motivated performance situation.

Theoretical Motivation and Research
Questions
Previous work on cognition and emotion perception
proposes that context matters when people decode others’
emotions (Barrett, Mesquita, & Gendron, 2011; Lanzetta &
Englis, 1989; Singer et al., 2006).
2006) In their review of the
literature, Barrett and colleagues point out how the visual
scene in a stimulus can give rise to different interpretations
of an emotional statee conveyed by a facial expression. A
scowling face can convey anger or disgust depending on the
body posture with which it is paired. Individuals’ patterns of
behavior can also serve as context cues that affect emotional
processing.
Two similar individuals can give rise to different
emotional responses in their interaction partners based on
their behaviors and actions. For example, Singer and
colleagues (2006) led participants to believe that
confederate players in a Prisoner’s Dilemma game were fair
or not based on the confederates’ game investment strategy.
Experimenters then randomly cued participants that either
the (fair/unfair) confederate or the participant herself would
receive a painful shock. Participants
articipants exhibited more
empathic neural activity (fronto
onto-insular and anterior
cingular cortex) when they observed a fair player receive a
shock compared to the unfair player (Singer et al., 2006).
This is compelling because the only difference between the
individuals was the contextual information of their game
playing strategy.
On the basis of this research (i.e., Barrett et al., 2011;
Singer et al., 2006), we can infer that different contexts
context can
shape the perception of emotion as well as give rise to
different neurophysiological responses to facial expressions.
In particular, it is possible that an experimental confederate
that employs a fair strategy will be perceived
pe
differently as a
function of whether the individual smiles or scowls.
Similarly, a fair individual that smiles might be perceived
differently compared to an unfair smiling individual. In this
study, we utilized virtual humans as research confederates
confederat in
order to manipulate their facial expressions and negotiation
strategies while keeping other aspects of the interaction
under experimental control.
The research question driving this work was: Do
differences in virtual humans’ emotional facial expressions
coupled with their behavioral strategies in a negotiation task
affect neuropsychological processes related to motivation
and affect?
The contextual emotion hypothesis suggests that if the
confederate’s negotiation strategy affects perceptual process

Figure 1:: The angry (left) and happy (right) facial
expressions displayed by the virtual confederate.
2011). However, a lot of research involving peripheral
physiological markers has been based on unitary
physiological responses such as heart rate variability
(Rienerman-Jones,
Jones, Cosenzo, & Nicholson, 2010) or
electrodermal activity (Meehan, Insko, Whitton, & Brooks,
2002) mostly as indexes for workload and stress.
Motivational research suggests that relying on unitary
indexes can mask important processes. For example, the
physiological indexes
xes specified by the bio
bio-psychosocial
model (BPS; Blascovich, 2008) of challenge and threat
provide a much more informative index of task motivation.
Briefly, the BPS model is based on the neuroendocrine
underpinnings (i.e., Dienstbier, 1989) of cardiovascular
responses involving the sympathetic-adrenal
adrenal-medullary
(SAM) axis as well as the hypothalamic pituitary
pituitary-adrenalcortical (HPA) axis.
Psychologically, challenge motivation occurs when an
individual’s consciously and unconsciously evaluated
resources outweigh evaluated task demands.
ands. Threat occurs
when resources are evaluated as not meeting task demands.
Both states involve the activation of the SAM axis, while
only the threat state involves both the axes.
Accordingly, activation of common SAM axis
sympathetic neural and adrenal
nal medullary endocrine
processes affect cardiovascular responses underlying both
challenge and threat including increased heart rate (HR) and
increased ventricular contractility (VC; i.e., decreased pre
preejection period or “PEP”), and task engagement. However,
cardiac output (CO) and total peripheral resistance (TPR
(TPR)
differ depending on motivational state. A challenge state
results in decreased TPR and an increase in CO, whereas a
threat state leads little or no change or a decrease in CO and
little or no change
hange or an increase in TPR (Blascovich &
Mendes, 2010).

771

participants act as mobile phone sellers and have to
negotiate over three issues: a price, length of service
contract, and warranty duration with the virtual human (see
Figure 2, Payoffs). Each issue had a level that denoted its
worth to the participants. Given that the participant was the
seller, she would get the most points by selling the mobile
phones for the highest price ($150, level 9) in order to gain
400 points; the shortest warranty period (1 month, level 9)
corresponding to 120 points; and the shortest service
contract (1 month, level 9) corresponding to 240 points.
Participant’s maximum score was therefore 760 points.
The confederate was an intelligent agent that displayed
emotional facial expressions to convey anger or happiness.
The study employed a 2 X 2 fully-crossed factorial betweensubjects experimental design. The two factors were the
virtual human’s emotional facial expression (happy or
angry) crossed with his negotiation strategy (tough or soft).
When the virtual human used a tough strategy (competitive),
he made small concessions from his initial offer compared
to the larger concessions he made using a soft (i.e.,
cooperative) strategy.
Both the soft and tough negotiating confederates made the
initial offer to the participant, which was level 1 of price
($110, zero points to the participant), level 2 of warranty
period (8 months, 15 points to the participant), and level 1 of
length of service contract (9 months, zero points to the
participant). From this 1-2-1 initial offer by the confederate,
the soft and tough agent followed different counter offer
policies. In both cases, the confederate’s offer was not
contingent on the participant’s counter offers (see Table 1).

Figure 2: The multi issue bargaining negotiation task
interface with areas of interest.
of facial expressions, then individuals will show different
responses to the same facial expression depending on
context. Specifically, individuals will have a different
cardiovascular response to angry faces when paired with a
tough strategy compared to angry faces paired with soft
strategies.
Van Kleef and colleagues have argued that if partners in a
social interaction lack information about the other’s needs,
desires, and goals, then emotional displays help people
make sense of situations (Van Kleef, De Dreu, & Manstead,
2010). It follows then that people will tend to look more at
emotionally significant facial features when there is
uncertainty in social interactions. Therefore, with respect to
the eye tracking measure, the contextual emotion hypothesis
predicts that individuals will fixate more on diagnostic
facial features when the confederate’s negotiation strategy is
incongruent with his facial expression.
An alternative hypothesis suggests that emotion
perception is driven purely by the structural features of a
face alone. This hypothesis predicts that individuals will
show heightened threat responses to angry faces compared
to happy faces—regardless of the confederate’s strategy
with which they are coupled—and there should be more eye
fixations on threatening faces (Mogg, Garner, & Bradley,
2007; Tracy & Robins, 2008).

Table 1: Progression of Soft and Tough Negotiation
offers through the six round task
Round
2
3
4
5
6

Soft
1-2-3
1-4-3
3-4-3
3-4-5
5-4-5

Tough
1-2-2
1-3-2
2-3-2
2-3-3
3-3-3

While participants interacted with the virtual character
during the negotiation game, various measures related to
their
cardiovascular
states
were
recorded.
Electrocardiographic (EKG) and impedance cardiographic
(ZKG) signals were recorded continuously with a Biopac
MP150 system, using a standard lead II electrode
configuration (for EKG) and a tetrapolar aluminum-mylar
tape electrode system (for ZKG); blood pressure was
continuously recorded using an automated blood pressure
device. The automated blood pressure recorded readings via
a cuff placed around the participants’ wrists and fingers of
their non-dominant left hand. The EKG and ZKG signals
were scored using an interactive software program that
produces ensemble-averaged values for heart rate (HR), pre-

Method
Participants, Design, Materials, Apparatus
Eighty participants were recruited from university
undergraduate psychology courses. Participants played a
multi-issue bargaining task (Van Kleef, De Dreu, &
Manstead, 2004). The task involves a scenario in which

772

ejection period (PEP). Additionally, cardiac output (CO)
was calculated from stroke volume (SV) recordings via
impedance and heart rate; and total peripheral resistance
(TPR) was calculated using impedance and blood pressure
readings as a measure of vascular activity.
An SMI RED eye tracker was used with 60Hz sampling
rate and a 17” flat screen monitor. The eye tracking camera
was positioned to the monitor and as such was unobtrusive
to the participants during the task.

Cardiovascular Physiological Indexes
We predicted that individuals interacting with the virtual
confederate would exhibit task engagement, and that those
interacting with an incongruent virtual confederate (e.g.,
soft strategy but angry face) would experience threat.
Task Engagement
According to the Biopsychosocial Model, task
engagement is indexed by increases from baseline in
sympathetically driven cardiovascular responses. As is
common in this research, we calculated changes from
baseline in preejection period (PEP), a purely
sympathetically driven cardiovascular measure (Tomaka,
Blascovich, Kelsey, & Leitten, 1993).
We established average baseline values of HR and PEP
by averaging baseline minutes 4 and 5 for each of these
measures. PEP decreased during the task (M = 133.3 ms, SD
= 15.76) compared to the baseline (M = 135.8 ms, SD =
16.06), as predicted, two-tailed paired samples t-test, t(78) =
3.31, p = .001.

Procedure
Participants completed a health screening questionnaire
and informed consent was obtained prior to their
participation. No one refused to participate. Female research
assistants proceeded to apply the necessary sensors for
physiological recording including impedance tape
electrodes, EKG spot electrodes and blood pressure sensors.
A five point calibration was used to ensure proper eye
tracking measurement.
Next, the participant sat comfortably at rest for five
minutes prior to receiving any task instructions. Finally, the
participants were instructed to play 1 practice round to learn
the user interface, during which the virtual human was not
visible. Next, the criterion negotiation game commenced for
6 rounds. Afterwards, participants completed surveys that
recorded their subjective and open-ended responses to the
virtual human.

Challenge and Threat
Total Peripheral Resistance (TPR) scores were computed
by subtracting TPR during baseline from TPR during the
negotiation task. A univariate ANOVA did not show a main
effect of either strategy or emotion (both F’s < 1). There
was also no interaction, F(1, 62) = 1.47, p = .23.
Cardiac output (CO) reactivity scores were computed by
subtracting CO during baseline from CO during the
negotiation task. A univariate ANOVA, controlling for
baseline CO, with two factors showed no main effects of
emotion or strategy (F’s < 1). There was an interaction
between emotion and strategy, F(1, 76) = 8.34, p = 0.005,
ηp2 = .098.
Using a Bonferroni adjustment, simple effects analyses
revealed that participants in the soft strategy condition
significantly differed from each other, F(1, 77) = 5.34, p =
0.024, ηp2 = .065. Participants who interacted with the
virtual confederate that displayed an angry facial expression
while using a soft (more conceding) strategy had further
reduced cardiac output compared to those participants in the
soft-happy condition (see Figure 3).

Results
Negotiation Task
Performance on the negotiation task was calculated based
on how much the participants conceded to the virtual
confederate over the six rounds. Each issue in the
negotiation was summed at each round to compute a
demand score. The best outcome for the participant would
have been a demand score of 760 points. The final
performance measure was the difference between the first
and last round demand scores. If participants conceded more
over the six rounds, this difference score would be higher. A
univariate ANOVA with two factors (1. emotion: happy or
angry; 2. strategy: tough or soft) showed no main effects or
interactions (all p’s > 0.5, see Table 2 for means).
Table 2: Mean demand score difference from the first and
last round (SD). A score of zero indicates no concession.

Soft
Tough

Angry
150.2 (223)
113.3 (155)
131.8 (190)

Happy
129.4 (217)
142.5 (193)
136.3 (202)

Eye Tracking
BeGaze eye tracking analysis (SMI) software was used to
construct areas of interest (AOI) on different components of
the task interface as well as the virtual confederate’s facial
regions.

140.6 (217)
127.6 (173)
133 (195)

773

Soft

Tough

7
6

-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Angry
-0.8
Happy
-1

Percent of Time Fixated

(liters of blood ejected per minute)

0

5
4
Angry
3

Happy

2
1

-1.2
0

-1.4

Soft

Tough

Figure 5: Percentage of time on the mouth as a function
of the confederate’s emotion and strategy.

-1.6

Figure 3: Cardiac output reactivity scores in the two
virtual human strategy and facial expression conditions.

of strategy and emotion on the percentage of time fixated
on the mouth AOI.
There was no main effect of strategy or emotion, F’s < 1.
There was a marginal interaction of strategy and emotion,
F(1, 68) = 3.281, p = .074, ηp2 = .046. As Figure 5 shows,
participants in the soft-angry condition tended to fixate the
mouth for a longer time compared to participants in the softhappy condition.

A multivariate ANOVA was conducted with the eight
AOI (see Figure 2). The MANOVA showed a significant
difference among the different AOI, F(7, 504) = 77.06, p <
0.001, ηp2 = .517. As Figure 4 shows, participants fixated on
the offer section of the game interface the longest
percentage of time throughout the task. However, the results
suggest people also spend considerable time looking at the
face. In fact, the percentage of time fixated on the total
face—aggregate of eyes, mouth, and remainder of the
face—did not differ from the time fixated on the offer, t(72)
= .54, p = .6.

Discussion
Virtual human confederates in a negotiation game caused
a threat motivational response (reduced cardiac output)
when their facial expressions were not congruent with their
strategies. Specifically, participants had lower cardiac
output when the virtual human negotiated using a soft
strategy but displayed an angry facial expression.
Additionally, despite not reaching significance, similar
effects occurred when participants engaged with a tough
agent that showed happy facial expressions. This
incongruence could cause more uncertainty, which is related
to increases in task demands (Tomaka et al., 1993).
Eye tracking results provide converging evidence.
Participants in the incongruent strategy and emotion
condition (e.g., soft-angry) tended to fixate on the most
diagnostic facial region longer compared to participants in
the congruent condition (e.g., soft-happy). This result
suggests that participants tended to fixate longer at the
mouth in order to try to gain potential cues to reconcile their
uncertainty from the conflicting strategy and emotion
coupling.
These results are compatible with the suggestion that
people look at others’ facial expressions in an attempt to
reduce inherent uncertainty that occurs in social decision
making situations with counterparts that might have
different priorities and objectives (Van Kleef et al., 2010).
Our results show specific psychophysiological evidence for
this process, especially when there is an incongruence
between the counterpart’s strategy and the facial displays.
These results are also in line with other research which
suggests that context matters when people decode others’
emotions (Barrett et al., 2011; Lanzetta & Englis, 1989;
Singer et al., 2006; Szczurek, Monin, & Gross, 2012). An

Mouth AOI
The main differentiating facial feature for the angry and
happy expressions was the mouth area. Past work indicates

Figure 4: Percentage of time during the whole
negotiation fixated on different areas of interest.
that individuals from samples similar to ours tend to fixate
more on the mouth region (Blais, Jack, Scheepers, Fiset, &
Caldara, 2008; Jack, Blais, Scheepers, Schyns, & Caldara,
2009). Thus, we conducted an ANOVA with the two factors

774

Jack, R. E., Blais, C., Scheepers, C., Schyns, P. G., &
Caldara, R. (2009). Cultural confusions show that
facial expressions are not universal. Current
Biology, 19, 1543–1548.
Lanzetta, J. T., & Englis, B. G. (1989). Expectations of
cooperation and competition and their effect on
observers’ vicarious emotional responses. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 56(4), 543–
554.
Meehan, M., Insko, B., Whitton, M., & Brooks, F. P.
(2002). Physiological measures of presence in
stressful virtual environments (p. 645). ACM Press.
doi:10.1145/566570.566630
Mogg, K., Garner, M., & Bradley, B. P. (2007). Anxiety and
orienting of gaze to angry and fearful faces.
Biological
Psychology,
76(3),
163–169.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2007.07.005
Rienerman-Jones, L., Cosenzo, K., & Nicholson, D. (2010).
Subjective and objective measures of operator state
in automated systems. Presented at the Applied
Human Factors and Ergonomics, Miami, FL.
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J. P., Stephan, K. E.,
Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Empathic
neural responses are modulated by the perceived
fairness of others. Nature, 439(7075), 466–469.
doi:10.1038/nature04271
Szczurek, L., Monin, B., & Gross, J. J. (2012). The Stranger
Effect: The Rejection of Affective Deviants.
Psychological Science, 23(10), 1105–1111.
doi:10.1177/0956797612445314
Tamietto, M., & De Gelder, B. (2010). Neural bases of the
non-conscious perception of emotional signals.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(10), 697–709.
doi:10.1038/nrn2889
Tomaka, J., Blascovich, J., Kelsey, R. M., & Leitten, C. L.
(1993). Subjective, physiological, and behavioral
effects of threat and challenge appraisal. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 65(2), 248–
260. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.65.2.248
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2008). The automaticity of
emotion recognition. Emotion, 8(1), 81–95.
doi:10.1037/1528-3542.8.1.81
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R.
(2004). The interpersonal effects of anger and
happiness in negotiations. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 86(1), 57–76.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R.
(2010). An Interpersonal Approach to Emotion in
Social Decision Making. In Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 42, pp. 45–
96).
Elsevier.
Retrieved
from
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S006526
011042002X

identical angry facial expression gave rise to different
motivational states depending on the strategic context in
which it was displayed during the negotiation task.
Finally, the results can have practical implications for the
design of human-computer interaction systems. This work
suggests that cardiovascular measures are sensitive at
detecting incongruence and uncertainty in human users and
suggests that affecting the context in which emotions are
shown (for instance, in virtual humans) can lead to
concomitant changes to the user’s challenge/threat
motivational state.

Acknowledgments
Peter Khooshabeh performed this research while on
appointment as a U.S. Army Research Lab Postdoctoral
Fellow. We thank Kyle O’Donnell for help with analysis.

References
Barrett, L. F., Mesquita, B., & Gendron, M. (2011). Context
in Emotion Perception. Current Directions in
Psychological
Science,
20,
286–290.
doi:10.1177/0963721411422522
Beale, R., & Creed, C. (2009). Affective interaction: How
emotional agents affect users. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 67(9), 755–
776. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.05.001
Blais, C., Jack, R. E., Scheepers, C., Fiset, D., & Caldara, R.
(2008). Culture shapes how we look at faces. PLoS
ONE, 3(8).
Blascovich, J. (2008). Challenge and threat appraisal. In
Handbook of Approach and Avoidance Motivation
(pp. 432–444). CRC Press.
Blascovich, J., & Mendes, W. B. (2010). Social
psychophysiology and embodiment. In Handbook
of Social Psychology (5th Edition., pp. 194–227).
New York: Wiley.
Blascovich, J., Mendes, W. B., Hunter, S. B., Lickel, B., &
Kowai-Bell, N. (2001). Perceiver threat in social
interactions with stigmatized others. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80(2), 253–
267.
Blascovich, J., Vanman, E., Mendes, W., & Dickerson, S. S.
(2011). Social psychophysiology for social and
personality psychology. Los Angeles: SAGE.
De Melo, C. M., Carnevale, P., & Gratch, J. (2011). The
effect of expression of anger and happiness in
computer agents on negotiations with humans. In
The 10th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems - Volume 3 (pp.
937–944). Richland, SC: International Foundation
for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Retrieved
from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2034396.203440
2
Dienstbier, R. A. (1989). Arousal and physiological
toughness: Implications for physical and mental
health. Psychological Review, 96(1), 84–100.

775

