UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
New Frameworks of Rationality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3467j5hb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Charter, Nick
Fiedler, Klaus
Gigerenzer, Gerd
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

New Frameworks of Rationality
Nick Chater (Nick.Chater@wbs.ac.uk)
Behavioural Science Group, Warwick Business School, University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK

Klaus Fiedler (klaus.fiedler@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de)
Psychologisches Institut, Universität Heidelberg, Hauptstrasse 47–51
69117 Heidelberg, Germany

Gerd Gigerenzer (gigerenzer@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94
14195 Berlin, Germany

Karl Christoph Klauer (klauer@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Institut für Psychologie, Universität Freiburg, Engelberger Str. 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Mike Oaksford (m.oaksford@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London, Malet Street
London, WC1E 7HX, UK

Keith Stenning (k.stenning@ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, 10 Crichton Street
Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK
approach which assumes that players can resolve this problem by a process of “virtual agreement” – that is, the players
figure out what they would agree to do, if they could discuss or bargain. Where the answer is well-defined, the agreement can be reached “virtually”, i.e., without any information
being exchanged. Virtual agreement requires common aims
and knowledge – and can fail when players mis-estimate this
common ground. Interesting, the process of reaching agreement can, in some cases, be modeled by conventional game
theory.

Keywords: rationality; bounded rationality; reasoning; probabilistic reasoning; deductive reasoning; decision making;
heuristics

Introduction
The nature and extent of human rationality is an issue of ongoing debate. In the last two decades, this debate has been
enlivened by the development and application of new theoretical frameworks. These include Bayesian notions of adjusting and using uncertain beliefs in an inductive manner
as well as deductive probability-based logics as normative
guidelines against which to weigh human judgments and decisions; the notion of ecological rationality based on lean and
frugal heuristics well adapted to the structure of the environment; the notion of meta-cognitive myopia according to
which people are accurate and sensitive in the processing the
information in a given sample of observations, but are blind
and naive to the history and validity of the sampled data; and
game theory.

Cognitive Myopia (Klaus Fiedler)
What I have come to call “meta-cognitive myopia” (MM),
using a term once suggested by Robyn Dawes, is the phenomenon that people are pretty accurate in utilizing even
large amounts of stimulus information, whereas they are
naive and almost blind regarding the history and validity of
the stimulus data. This uncritical reliance on the information
given is the most conspicuous when the task context makes
it crystal-clear that the stimulus data should not be trusted.
In the introduction, MM is located within a broader framework of meta-cognition research, and several examples are
provided to illustrate the phenomenon. The central message
is laid out that MM offers an alternative account of many biases in judgment and decision making, which have been traditionally explained in terms of capacity constraints, limited
reasoning ability, motivational forces, or severely biased environmental input. The explanatory power of the MM construct, and its theoretical potential to predict new findings, is

Virtual Agreement: A Rational Framework for
Joint Action and Communication (Nick Chater)
Game theory typically models interactions between agents in
terms of players that are rational at the level of the individual.
But when people need to coordinate their behaviour, which
arises in joint action and communication, a vicious circle
arises. What is rational for each player depends on what the
other does; but figuring out what the other will do is no easier
than figure out what one should do oneself. I will describe an

59

What Linda Did Next: Relations Between an
Interpretative Approach to Reasoning and the
Judgment and Decision Literature (Keith
Stenning and Michiel van Lambalgen)1

then demonstrated in a major review section with reference
to five paradigms: inability to discard irrelevant information;
utilization of selectively sampled information; conditional inference biases; sample-size neglect; and myopia for the impact of aggregation levels. The final discussion is concerned
with the learning origins of MM and the question of why evolution did not equip Homo sapiens with more effective metacognitive tools. An analysis of the costs and benefits will
reveal that MM may serve important adaptive functions, and
that eliminating MM may have maladaptive effects. Nevertheless, in the context of many real decision problems, the
costs and irrational consequences of MM cannot be denied.
The final discussion therefore focuses on possible ways to
avoid and alleviate MM and its irrational consequences.

Stenning and van Lambalgen (2008) proposed that multiple
logics are necessary to model human cognition, prominently
a nonmonotonic logic known as Logic Programming (LP),
which provides a cognitive model of fast frugal automatic reasoning from large human knowledgebases, to interpretations
of current input. Much of the data from supposedly classical logical reasoning tasks (e.g. conditional reasoning, syllogisms, Wason’s Selection Task) is derived from mixtures
of subjects many of whom have nonmonotonic understandings and goals. This talk will position this program of research with regard to the judgment and decision literature on
heuristic reasoning as exemplified by the Heuristics and Biases (H&B) program of Kahneman and Tversky and the ecological fast and frugal heuristics of Gigerenzer and the ABC
Research Group (ABC).
A multiple logics approach shares concerns with the ecological heuristic reasoning of the ABC group: with multiple
methods of reasoning; with “automatic” rather than reflective reasoning; and with contextualisation. We illustrate with
the well known Linda problem. The problem gives a personality description of Linda appropriate to the beginning of a
story, but then asks a question (“Which is more likely? That
Linda is a bank teller, or Linda is a bank teller and an active feminist?”) from probability theory. Although there have
been disagreements between H&B and ABC, they share the
assumption that this task is interpreted as calling for extensional reasoning. Of course there is no doubt it is intended as
such an exercise, or that it is educationally important that students learn to recognise it as such. But we suggest that most
subjects initially regard this task as an intensional reasoning
problem, as readily developed within LP. This proposal points
to the neglect of theories of the rationality of intensional reasoning. We sketch how such a program might look, and draw
out some consequences for theories of reasoning, judgment
and decision, and for theories of rationality more generally.

Less Is More: Simple Solutions for Complex
Problems (Gerd Gigerenzer)
In worlds of known risks, probability theory can provide the
optimal course of action. In uncertain worlds, however, simple heuristics can result in smart solutions by focusing only
on a few cues and ignoring the rest. The heuristics in the
“adaptive toolbox” are anchored in the mind and the environment. They are embodied in the sense that they can exploit
capacities of the human mind (such as recognition memory),
which allow judgments to be quick. They are anchored in the
environment in the sense that they can exploit statistical or
social structures (such as signal-to-noise ratio). The study of
the ecological rationality of heuristics and the bias-variance
dilemma provides a general account to understand why and
when less can be more.

New Paradigms and Old Insights: Integrated
Theories of Reasoning and Dynamic Inference
(Mike Oaksford)
The new paradigm in reasoning, based on the probability conditional and dual process theory, offers new insights into human rationality. However, as with any psychological theory,
there are a range of algorithmic issues concerning representations and processes that the new paradigm must address.
We argue that doing so may require integrating these new
insights with old insights from previous theoretical frameworks. In particular, the cognitive system needs to build
small-scale models of the world which elaborate on information given in the premises and which are interrogated in reasoning. The nature of these processes has consequences for
the new paradigm. For example, elaborative processes mean
that conditional reasoning is most often dynamic and nonmonotonic involving changes in the probability distributions
over which inference is defined. We draw out these consequences and sketch an integrative theory for conditional inference.

Acknowledgments
This symposium was supported by the priority programme
SPP1516 “New Frameworks of Rationality” by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

References
Stenning, K., & van Lambalgen, M. (2008). Human reasoning and cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1 This work has benefited greatly from discussions with Laura
Martignon

60

