UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Robustness of Intuitions in the two best-known Trolley Dilemmas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98r9w19s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Wiegmann, Alex
Lippold, Matthias
Grigull, Robert

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Robustness of Intuitions in the two best-known Trolley Dilemmas
Alex Wiegmann (awiegma@gwdg.de)
Institute of Psychology, Gosslerstraße 14
37073 Göttingen, Germany

Matthias Lippold (matthias.lippold1@stud.uni-goettingen.de)
Institute of Psychology, Gosslerstraße 14
37073 Göttingen, Germany

Robert Grigull (robert.grigull@stud.uni-goettingen.de)
Institute of Psychology, Gosslerstraße 14
37073 Göttingen, Germany

Darley, & Cohen, 2001; Greene, Nystrom, Engell, Darley,
& Cohen, 2004) indicates that people’s decision in Switch is
made fast and without hesitation, while it takes them longer
and they are more hesitate to make a decision in Bridge.
Following this line of argument, Broeders and colleagues
(2011) claim that people’s judgments in Bridge can easily
be manipulated by priming them with rules as “save lives”
and “do not kill”, while this kind of priming supposedly has
no effect on people’s judgment in Switch. In three
experiments they seemingly confirm this claim.
In this paper we argue for an opposite claim: Judgments
concerning Switch can be manipulated rather easily while
judgments concerning Bridge are rather robust.

Abstract
The Bridge dilemma (pushing a heavy man from a bridge in
front of a train that would otherwise kill five persons) and the
Switch dilemma (redirecting a train that would otherwise kill
five persons onto another track where it kills one person) are
presumably the two best-known moral dilemmas in
philosophy and psychology. In this paper we claim that
people’s intuitions about what to do in Bridge are robust,
while intuitions about Switch can be influenced rather easily.
In doing so, we strongly disagree with Broeders and
colleagues (2011) who recently argued for exactly the
opposite claim. We discuss their interpretation of previous
findings that were supposed to motivate their claim, present
findings from previous studies that strongly support my
claim, and report on failed attempts to replicate and present
an experiment in which participants were willing to revise
their judgment for Switch but not for Bridge.

Arguing against Broeders and colleagues’
interpretation of previous findings

Keywords: moral judgment; trolley dilemmas; robustness of
moral intuitions; priming; transfer effects.

Introduction
Bridge and Switch are presumably the two best-known
hypothetical moral dilemmas. They were first extensively
used as thought experiments in moral philosophy and later
also in empirical studies in moral psychology (cf.
Waldmann, Nagel, & Wiegmann, 2012; Gräfenhain &
Wiegmann, 2012).
In both scenarios five people are threatened by an out of
control train. In Bridge the only possibility to save the five
persons is to throw a heavy person from a bridge in front of
the train, resulting in killing the heavy person and saving the
five (Thompson, 1985). In Switch the threatening train can
be redirected away from the five onto another track where
one person would die in the collision with the train (Foot,
1967). Research in moral psychology has shown that the
majority of people disapprove intervening in Bridge while
they tend to approve the action in Switch (Waldmann et al.,
2012).
In their recent paper, Broeders, Bos, Müller, and Ham
(2011) make extensive use of these two dilemmas. They
argue that previous research, especially the research by
Greene and colleagues (Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom,

Broeders and colleagues’ (2011) claim is motivated by the
following line of argument. Research by Greene and
colleagues (Greene et al., 2001, Greene et al., 2004)
suggests that when people have to deal with Bridge the
anterior cingulated cortex (ACC) shows increased activity.
Activation of the ACC is assumed to indicate people’s
feeling of uncertainty. Moreover, people’s longer reaction
times in Bridge, as compared to Switch, are also assumed to
indicate uncertainty. This uncertainty is then interpreted as
people’s struggling to choose between the two rules “Do not
kill” and “Save Lives”. Hence, by priming one of the rules
and thereby making it more accessible to subjects, their
intuition about what to do in Bridge allegedly follows the
primed rule. In contrast to Bridge, Switch elicits low ACC
activity and people respond fast to it, supposedly indicating
certainty. Hence, judgments concerning Switch are assumed
to be robust and not to follow the primed rule.
At first glance, this line of reasoning sounds plausible.
However, a closer look at the cited studies reveals that they
do not provide compelling evidence in support of Broeders’
and colleagues’ (2011) claim that people are uncertain of
what to do in Bridge. Remember that this claim is based on
two observations, namely people’s longer reaction times and
higher ACC activation in Bridge as opposed to Switch.
However, there is no evidence that people’s reaction-times

3759

were longer for Bridge. While in their first fMRI study,
Greene and colleagues (2001) did not report reaction times
for Bridge, they explicitly state in their follow up study
(Greene et al., 2004) that reaction times for Bridge were
short.
What about the other finding that was also interpreted as
people feeling uncertain about what to do in Bridge, namely
the high ACC activation when people respond to this
dilemma? First of all, the reported results in the fMRIstudies by Greene and his colleagues (2001, 2004) are based
on brain activity averages for groups of dilemmas (about
twenty in each group). Hence, to inferring conclusions from
these averages to specific cases are just not valid.
Secondly, Greene and colleagues (2004) do not interpret
high ACC activation as indicating uncertainty but as a
conflict of emotion and cognition or, more precisely,
cognitive effort to override a prepotent emotional response
(cf. Stroop effect, Stroop, 1935). Their interpretation
explains the aforementioned finding of people’s longer
reaction-times when choosing an utilitarian (cognitive)
option in personal moral dilemmas, because people have to
override a strong emotional response not to intervene
(Greene et al., 2001). In the same way, Greene’s et al.
interpretation of ACC activity as indicating a conflict of
emotional and cognitive (utilitarian) considerations can
explain why reaction times were only longer for people
under cognitive load, which were namely those who chose
the utilitarian option (Greene, Morelli, Lowenberg,
Nystrom, & Cohen, 2008). In contrast, interpreting ACC
activity as indicating uncertainty cannot account for these
findings because it would predict longer reaction times in
dilemmas with high ACC activity independently of the
option (cognitive vs. emotional) people choose.
Thirdly, it is simply not the case that the cited studies
provide any evidence for higher ACC activation in Bridge,
as compared to Switch. In their first fMRI study (Greene et
al., 2001) ACC activation is not measured at all. In the
follow-up study (Greene et al., 2004) ACC activity in
difficult and easy personal moral dilemmas was compared.
Since Switch was in neither of these groups, we do not have
any evidence on the level of ACC activation in this
dilemma. Moreover, due to relatively fast reaction times,
Bridge was classified as an easy personal dilemma and it
was found that ACC activity in these dilemmas was
significantly lower than in difficult moral dilemmas.

Previous research indicating intuitions about
Bridge to be robust - but not about Switch
So far, we have dismissed Broeders and colleagues’ (2011)
argument that was supposed to motivate their claim that
Bridge is easy to influence, as compared to Switch. Now we
shall present empirical findings that strongly speak in favor
of my claim, that is, if any of the two dilemmas can be
influenced rather easily then Switch is the one.
Lanteri, Chelini, and Rizello (2008) presented participants
with the Switch and the Bridge dilemma. In one condition,
participants first had to judge Switch and then Bridge

afterwards. In the other condition, Switch was preceded by
Bridge. Although responses to Bridge remained unaffected
by the order of presentation, fewer participants were willing
to intervene in Switch when Switch was preceded by
Bridge. The authors interpret their results as evidence that
Switch may be perceived in more than one way, while they
speculate that the emotions triggered by Bridge may be
evolutionarily sound and hard wired into our species,
making it more robust than reactions to Switch that are
assumed to be a result of moral reasoning.
Lombrozo (2009) conducted a very similar experiment.
The only difference to Lanteri et al. (2008) was that
participants were allowed to read both dilemmas before they
were asked to judge them. Again, participants who saw
Switch first provided higher permissibility ratings than
those who saw it after Bridge. Responses for Bridge were
unaffected.
Petrinovich and O’Neill (1996) conducted several
experiments in which participants were asked to judge a
sequence of moral dilemmas, among them Switch and
Bridge, where the order of presentation was manipulated
between subjects. While ratings for Switch often
significantly differed as a function of whether it was
presented as the first or last dilemma, ratings for Bridge
remained unaffected.
Finally, Wiegmann, Okan, and Nagel (2012) also found
that people’s judgments for Switch can be influenced by
first presenting other scenarios, while people’s judgments
for Bridge were not affected. Moreover, Wiegmann, and
Okan (2012) tried and failed to raise ratings in favor of the
proposed action in Bridge. In one experiment they urged
participants to justify their ratings in Switch, assuming that
subjects’ justification is something like “save as many lives
as possible” and that this forced justification would raise
subjects’ ratings for Bridge. In another experiment, they
tried to raise subjects’ ratings for Bridge by first presenting
them with a scenario in which there was only enough time
to pull one of two switches. One switch prevented one
person, the other three persons from being killed. Presenting
this scenario first was also supposed to make a rule like
“save the most lives possible” salient. However, neither
attempt succeeded in influencing ratings for Bridge.

Replication Experiments
What follows are two attempts to replicate Broeders and
colleagues’ (2011) findings of their first experiment. We
limit my replication attempts to their first of the total of
three experiments for the following reason. All three
experiments are based on the same rationale, namely to
prime participants with one of the two rules. The only way
the three experiments differ is how priming was
implemented. In their first experiment, priming was
implemented by asking participants to read a story and to
answer two questions about the rule “Save lives” or “Do not
kill”. In Experiment 2 participants were asked to solve a
sliding puzzle that resulted in a symbol supposed to prime
participants with one of the two rules. In the third

3760

experiment participants were subliminally primed. Hence,
their first experiment is very similar to the experiments
described in the preceding section. It might be possible, if
unlikely, that the findings in their second and third
experiment can be replicated even if it is not possible for the
findings in their first experiment. However, since priming in
their second and third experiment was implemented in a
rather subtle way, as compared to reading a story in the first
experiment, failing to replicate the findings in the first
experiment would already strongly limit the scope of the
claim that intuitions about Bridge can rather easily be
manipulated while intuitions about Switch are rather robust.
In the light of what has been said so far, what prediction is
to be made regarding Broeders and colleagues’ (2011)
experiment in which participants had to read stories
designed to prime them with the rule “Save lives” vs. “Do
not kill”? Surely, everything points to the prediction that
Bridge will not be affected by their manipulation. With
regards to Switch things are not that clear, because there are
no previous experiments in which it was tried to influence
ratings for Switch by priming rules.

First Replication Attempt
Participants 352 subjects, each receiving £ 0.50, were
recruited via an online database located in the U.K. They
were invited via an email. The email contained a link that
directed them to the experiment. Mean age of the
participants was 47 years and 4 months (SD=15 years, 7
months), 61% were female.
Design, Procedure, and Materials Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the conditions of a 2 (primed
rule: “Save lives” vs. “Do not kill”) × 2 (dilemma: Bridge
vs. Switch) factorial design.
After reading a cover story participants were asked to
read a short story which was supposed to prime them with
either the “save lives” or “do not kill”-rule. The “save lives”
story goes as follows:
During missions abroad soldiers have to apply to certain
rules. This is called a mandate. During a conflict in
1994 in Congo, Africa, the mandate of the UN peace
keeping force present in the country was to use armed
violence to end the conflict. As a result of several
warnings beforehand and during the conflict by the UN
commander in chief on the spot, the Canadian
lieutenant–general Roméo Dallaire, UN-soldiers were
allowed to conduct offensive actions. They were both
allowed to use their weapons to protect the civilian
population, as well as when they themselves were
attacked. The mandate was based on the principle “Save
lives”.
For the “Do not kill” version participants read:
During missions abroad soldiers have to apply to certain
rules. This is called a mandate. During a conflict in
1994 in Congo, Africa, the mandate of the UN peace
keeping force present in the country was not to use any
armed violence to end the conflict. Despite several

warnings beforehand and during the conflict by the UNcommander in chief on the spot, the Canadian
lieutenant–general Roméo Dallaire, UN-soldiers were
not allowed to conduct any offensive actions. They were
only allowed to use their weapons when they
themselves were attacked. The mandate was based on
the principle “Do not kill”.
Afterwards, they were first asked to write down how they
would act in line with the corresponding rule. Furthermore,
they were asked to write down what the specific rule meant
for them in their daily lives. Subsequently, participants were
asked to rate how they feel at the moment on the 20 items of
the PANAS, an instrument to collect self-report measures of
emotion (Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). The PANAS
was included as a filler task, as well as to determine whether
the primes triggered any unwanted positive or negative
affective reaction.
The PANAS was followed by asking participants to read
and respond to either the Bridge or the Switch dilemma.
Bridge reads as follows:
You are standing on a footbridge crossing a railroad
track. While you are standing next to a stranger,
suddenly a runaway trolley comes hurtling down the
railroad track. Further down the railroad track five
people are working and they cannot possibly leave the
railroad track in time. If the trolley proceeds on its
present course it will crash into the five railroad workers
and they will be killed in a fatal accident. The only way
to save the five people is to push this man off the bridge
and into the path of the trolley. The body of this person
will break the speed of the trolley as a result of this the
trolley will stop and the five persons will survive. The
person thrown from the footbridge will certainly die.
Switch reads:
You are standing beside the switch of a railroad track.
Suddenly a runaway trolley comes hurtling down the
tracks. Further-on down the railroad track five people
are working and they cannot possibly leave the railroad
track in time. If the trolley proceeds on its present
course it will crash into the five railroad workers and
they will be killed in a fatal accident. You can save
these five people by diverting the trolley onto a different
set of railroad tracks. The different railroad track has
only one person on it, into which the trolley will crash.
This person will be killed as a result of this.
After reading the dilemma participants were asked eleven
questions about their willingness to intervene which they
could indicate on a scale ranging from 1 (certainly not) to 7
(certainly yes). All items were then averaged to form a
reliable scale indicating the willingness to intervene in the
dilemma (α=.80).
Finally, participants were asked four questions to find out
whether they were aware of the purpose of the experiment.
Results and Discussion Eleven subjects were excluded
because at least one of two independent raters coded them
as being aware of the purpose of the experiment.

3761

As in the study by Broeders and colleagues (2011), the
prime did not have an effect on the positive or negative
subscale of the PANAS.
Figure 1 clearly shows that neither Bridge nor Switch was
affected by a priming scenario. A 2*2 ANOVA yielded the
typical main effect of dilemma, F(1, 337)=80.70,
p<.000001, ηp2=.19. However, there was no main effect of
prime (p>.75) and no significant interaction (p>.6). Hence,
Broeders and colleagues’ finding could not be replicated
although many more subjects participated in this
experiment, resulting in a higher test power

Broeders and colleagues’ and in my first replication attempt
was very high.
Participants 220 participants, mostly psychology students,
were recruited via the institute’s database. Participants were
credited with course credit or paid 7€/hour. Mean age of the
remaining N = 172 participants was 24 years and 7 months
(SD=6 years, 6 months), 77% were female.
Results and Discussion 48 participants were excluded from
the analysis because they knew the dilemmas (41) or
seemed to identify the purpose of the experiment. Figure 2
clearly shows that neither Bridge nor Switch was affected
by a priming scenario. A 2*2 ANOVA yielded the typical
main effect of dilemma, F(1, 168)=47.55, p<.001, ηp2=.22.
However, there was again no main effect of prime (p>.45)
and no significant interaction (p>.6).

Judgment Revision Experiment
This experiment aims to investigate the robustness of
Switch and Bridge by giving participants the chance to later
revise their initial judgment.

Figure 1: Willingness to intervene (on a scale from 1 to 7) in
Bridge and Switch as a function of manipulated accessibility
of the rules “Save lives” and “Do not kill”. Higher bars
indicate greater willingness to intervene. Error bars represent
standard error of means.

Second Replication Attempt
This time we tried to replicate Broeders’ et al. (2011)
findings in our experimental lab in Goettingen. This was
done to counter objections claiming that online experiments
are not reliable (although the typical main effect of dilemma
was found). The design and procedure was the same as in
the first replication attempt with two exceptions. The
PANAS was left out to strengthen the influence of the
primes, and participants were only asked two questions
concerning their willingness to intervene in Switch or
Bridge since the correlation of the eleven questions asked in

Participants 158 subjects, each receiving £ 0.50, were
recruited via an online database located in the U.K.
Design, Procedure, and Materials The experiment was
conducted on the Internet. Upon clicking on a link they
received via e-mail, participants were redirected to a website
containing the experiment. They read general instructions
familiarizing them with the rating scale and asking them to
read the following scenario carefully and to take their task
seriously. Afterwards, they were randomly assigned to one
of two conditions. In Bridge_Switch participants were first
presented with Bridge and then Switch, in Switch_Bridge ist
was the other way around. In both conditions participants
had the chance to revise their judgment for the first scenario
after they had seen the second scenario. Both scenario
descriptions were accompanied by an illustration of the
initial situation.
For each scenario participants were asked whether the
proposed action should be done. To indicate their judgment
participants could mark one point on a 6-point likert scale
ranging from 1 (“certainly no”) to 6 (“certainly yes”).
After participants were given the chance to revise their
judgment for the first scenario, they were asked some
demographic questions and a simple logical question to
identify participants who did not take the experiment
seriously.
Results and Discussion 27 participants were excluded from
the analysis because they did not finish the experiment,
finished it in less than 40 seconds, or failed to answer the
logical question. As it can easily be seen in Figure 3 the
aforementioned asymmetrical transfer effect between Bridge
and Switch was replicated. While the ratings for Bridge did
not differ significantly depending on whether it was

Figure 2: Willingness to intervene (on a scale from 1 to 7) in
Bridge and Switch as a function of manipulated accessibility
of the rules “Save lives” and “Do not kill”. Higher bars
indicate greater willingness to intervene. Error bars represent3762
standard error of means.

presented first (M=2.4, SD=1.51) or second (M=2.60, SD=
1.64), t(129)=.74, p=.46, ratings for Switch were
significantly decreased when Switch was presented second
(M=3.02, SD=1.50), as compared to ratings for Switch when
presented first (M=4.45, SD=1.36), t(129)=4.18, p<.00001.
When we consider the difference of a scenario’s first
rating vs. the revision rating a similar picture arises. The
first rating for Bridge (M=2.4, SD=1.51) did not
significantly differ from the revision rating (M=2.44,
SD=1.59), t=.35, p=.73. In contrast to this, the revision
rating for Switch (M=3.88, SD=1.63) did significantly differ
from the first rating for Switch (M=4.45, SD=1.36), t=4.32,
p<.0001.
The results strongly suggest that people’s intuitions about
Bridge are robust while their intuitions about Switch were
significantly influenced when Switch was preceded by
Bridge or when Bridge was presented after Switch and
people were then given the chance to revise their judgment
for Switch.
This pattern of results contradicts Broeder’s et al. (2011)
claim that people’s intuitions about Switch are robust but
not for Bridge.

Figure 3: Willingness to intervene (on a scale from 1 to 6) in
Bridge and Switch as a function of whether the scenario was
shown first or preceded by the other scenario (first vs.
second rating). The dashed lines represent revised ratings for
the first scenario after participants were presented with the
second scenario. Higher bars indicate greater willingness to
intervene. Error bars represent standard error of means.

Conclusion
In this paper we argued that people’s intuitions about Bridge
are rather robust while their intuitions about Switch are
rather easy to influence. This claim stands in sharp contrast
to Broeders and colleagues’ (2011) claims. We argued that
Broeders and colleagues’ interpretation of previous findings
that were supposed to motivate claim is not sound.
Moreover, we reviewed previous findings that strongly
point in the opposite direction.
In line with my claim, replicating the findings of
Broeder’s et al. first experiment failed online as well as in
the lab. Furthermore, the results the revision experiments
also count in my favor.

Given the important role that Bridge and Switch play in
philosophy as well as in psychology, it is important that
wrong claims about them are swiftly corrected to avoid that
new research is based on false premises.

Funding
This research was supported by a grant of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG WA 621/21-1), and the
Courant Research Centre ‘Evolution of Social Behaviour’,
University of Göttingen (funded by the German Initiative of
Excellence).

Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to Jonas Nagel, Michael Waldmann,
Gunda Johannes, Matthias Lippold, and Robert Grigull for
very helpful comments and proofreading.

References
Broeders, R., van den Bos, K., Müller, P. A., & Ham, J.
(2011). Should I save or should I not kill? How people
solve moral dilemmas depends on which rule is most
accessible. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
47(5), 923–934.
Foot, P. (1967). The problem of abortion and the doctrine of
the double effect. Oxford Review, 5, 5–15.
Gräfenhain, M., & Wiegmann, A. (2012). The Scientific
Study of Morals. In: Lütge, C. (Ed.), Handbook of the
Philosophical Foundations of Business Ethics (chapter
81). Springer Press.
Greene, J. D., Morelli, S. A., Lowenberg, K., Nystrom, L.
E., & Cohen, J. D. (2008). Cognitive load selectively
interferes with utilitarian moral judgment. Cognition, 107,
1144–1154.
Greene, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Engell, A. D., Darley, J. M.,
& Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural bases of cognitive
conflict and control in moral judgment. Neuron, 44, 389–
400.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley,
J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI study of emotional
engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293, 2105–2108.
Lanteri, A., Chelini, C. & Rizzello, S. (2008). An
experimental investigation of emotions and reasoning in
the trolley problem. Journal of Business Ethics, 83, 789804.
Lombrozo, T. (2009). The role of moral commitments in
moral judgment. Cognitive Science, 33, 273-286.
Petrinovich, L., & O'Neill, P. (1996). Influence of wording
and framing effects on moral intuitions. Ethology and
Sociobiology, 17, 145-171.
Stroop, J.R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology. 12, 643–
662.
Thomson, J. J. (1985). The trolley problem. Yale Law
Journal, 94, 1395–1415.
Waldmann, M. R., Nagel, J., & Wiegmann, A. (2012).
Moral judgment. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison

3763

(Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning
(pp. 364-389). New York: Oxford University Press.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988).
Development and validation of brief measures of positive
and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063.
Wiegmann, A., & Okan, J. (2012). Order effects in moral
judgments. Searching for an explanation. In N. Miyake,
D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the
34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1143-1148). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Wiegmann, A., Okan, Y., & Nagel, J. (2012). Order effects
in moral judgment. Philosophical Psychology, 25, 813–
836.

3764

