UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
One for all, all for one: Agents with social identities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3m02p02z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Dimas, Joana
Lopes, Phil
Prada, Rui

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

One for all, all for one:
Agents with social identities
Joana Dimas (joana.dimas@gaips.inesc-id.pt)
INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Technical University of Lisbon
Av. Prof. Cavaco Silva, 2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal

Phil Lopes (plopes@gaips.inesc-id.pt)
INESC-ID
Av. Prof. Cavaco Silva, 2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal

Rui Prada (rui.prada@gaips.inesc-id.pt)
INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Technical University of Lisbon
Av. Prof. Cavaco Silva, 2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal
Abstract
One of the challenges in developing multi-agent systems is
the creation of agents able to exhibit human-like behaviours in
complex social situations. In order to do so, agents need to be
socially aware of their environment and perceive other agents
not only as individuals but also as social group members. Following Social Identity and Self-Categorization theories, we developed the Dynamic Identity Model for Agents that provides
agents with the ability to adapt their identity and behaviour to
the social context. We then implemented it in a social dilemma
scenario where different situations were explored.
Keywords: Identity; Social Identity; Social Dilemmas;
Context-Situated Agents.

Introduction
With virtual worlds’ increasing complexity, where agents and
players are exposed to different scenarios and social contexts,
it has become even more important to develop agents whose
identity does not remain unaffected, and in turn reacts to its
environment in a believable way.
Although some works have been done on agent’s identity adaptability, either through the agent’s personality (Tan
& Cheng, 2007) or by their culture’s background (De Rosis, Pelachaud, & Poggi, 2004; Mascarenhas, Dias, Afonso,
Enz, & Paiva, 2009), these are adaptations to the player’s
traits, and does not address the influence of the social context. Moreover, each approach alone did not encompass both
individual and social concepts of identity working together
and dynamically.
In real life a person’s identity is not static and free of influences (Turner, Oakes, Haslam, & McGarty, 1994; Hogg
& Williams, 2000; Smith & Mackie, 2000). Instead, several
social context factors (Smith & Mackie, 2000) are known to
have an impact on an individual’s identity and behaviour, with
one of the most studied factors being the presence of in-group
or out-group members. In fact, Social Identity (Tajfel, 1972)
and Self-Categorization (Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher, &
Wetherell, 1987; Turner et al., 1994) theories explained this
process postulating that one’s identity can both be personal
and social. When in the presence of members of a person’s
in-group, the individual’s behaviour is going to be determined

by its personal identity, and one will relate to others in an interpersonal manner, dependent on his or her personality traits
and close personal relationships with others. However, when
in the presence of an out-group, a social identity becomes
salient, and the perception as group member strengthens, as a
person tends to focus his or her perception on the shared features with other in-group members. Consequently, there is a
shift of a person’s own motives and values from self-interest
to group interests (Brewer, 1991). When a social identity
emerges, people are more likely to see themselves and others
as interchangeable components of a larger social unit rather
than unique individuals.
According to (Tajfel, 1972; Turner et al., 1987, 1994), this
psychological process of social identification constitutes the
basis for in-group cooperation. Because in-group members
share the same attributes, they become part of a person’s identity and due to this, a person will want to treat all in-group
members as he or she would like to be treated. In fact, several studies have already demonstrated that social identity has
a positive effect in in-group cooperation and negative effect
in out-group cooperation (Goette, Huffman, & Meier, 2006;
McLeish & Oxoby, 2007), but more specifically that it has
an important role in eliciting cooperative behaviour in social
dilemmas (Wit & Wilke, 1992; Kollock, 1998; Weber, Kopelman, & Messick, 2004). Social dilemmas are, in broad terms,
social situations of individual rationality conflict where group
interests are at odds with individual ones (Dawes, 1974), and
thus making them an interesting application for agents with
social identities.
Nonetheless, while some authors have already been modelling the concept of social identity and used it on simulations
of crowd behaviour (Fridman & Kaminka, 2009) or opinion dynamics, such political views (Grier, Skarin, Lubyansky, & Wolpert, 2008; Lustick, 2002; Salzarulo, 2006), they
still did not handle the dynamics of identity, nor have worked
on its impact in social dilemmas situations. As such, we developed the Dynamic Identity Model for Agents (Dimas &
Prada, 2013) and implemented it in a social dilemma scenario
in order to evaluate it in a game environment.

2195

Characteristics

The paper is organized as follows. Next section we introduce the model, followed by the description of the model’s
implementation and the platform used to demonstrate the example scenarios we present on the following section. Finally
we present some conclusions and future work.

Each characteristic is defined in DIMA by a name and a
value:
• Type: a label used to identify the characteristic;
• Value: measurable attribute or feature.

Dynamic Identity Model for Agents
The Dynamic Identity Model for Agents (DIMA) aims at providing agents with a dynamic identity that is determined by
the social context.

Characteristics can be one of the two types: explicit or
implicit. Whereas explicit characteristics can be easily observed and obtained by other agents (e.g. skin or clothes
colour, symbols, skills and gender), implicit characteristic are
gleaned indirectly by observing the agent’s behaviour and expressions, requiring agents with inferring mechanisms. Implicit characteristics can be social values, norms, interests or
goals (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2001; Schwartz, 1992)

Agent’s Identity
In DIMA, the agent’s identity is not fixed, instead the agent
features a sub-set of characteristics that represents the part
of the identity that is currently salient on the agent. So in
the model each agent has a salient identity that will filter the
characteristics that will determine the agent’s decision, and
also a set of social groups that are known by the agent.

Social Context

• Salient Identity: representation of the agent’s active identity that is going to influence the agent’s decision making;
• Social Groups’ Knowledge Base: representation of the
agent’s known social groups (aggregation of agents that
share the same characteristics) and its prototypical characteristics (characteristics that represent the typical agent
of that group).
While personal identity is the part of the self-concept defined in terms of idiosyncrasies derived from the intra-group
differentiation (Tajfel, 1972), social identity refers to the aspects of a person’s self-concept that are derived from the
knowledge and feelings about his or her in-group (Tajfel,
1972). As such, the agent is not only going to be able to
express its individual identity, but also, for each social group
it belongs, the agent will hold a social identity that can be expressed if the situation leads it. In DIMA, an agent’s salient
identity can have two different levels. It can be social, if
an agent’s group membership becomes salient trough intergroup differentiation, or it can be personal when no social
identity is salient. Thus, the agent’s salient identity can be:
• Social: a set of characteristics that the agent shares with
the other members of the in-group;
• Personal: a set of characteristics that distinguishes the
agent from it’s in-group.
In order to represent these two levels, both social and personal identities are defined by:
• Characteristics: representation of the agent’s attributes or
features that are going to be taken into consideration on the
agent’s decision making, defined by a name and value.
When an agent’s salient identity is personal, the agent’s decision will be determined by its personal identity characteristics values, but when the salient identity is social, i.e., then
the agent’s expressed characteristics’ values are going to shift
towards the values of the prototypical characteristics of that
specific social group.

The social context the agent is in will have a great influence
on how the agent will perceive itself and others. It will increase the likelihood of the agent behave according to its personal identity or to its social identity, and will also determine
which type of identity is going to be salient and influencing
the agent’s behaviour.
In DIMA, two aspects from the social context are represented:
• Agents Present: agents that share the same space and
agents that are not in the space but are referenced in a conversation or by an event.
• Theme: set of characteristics that are relevant in the context, and can be manifested by a place, a talk or an event;
When a specific theme is introduced on the social context,
either by a place (e.g. a university), by a topic of a conversation (e.g. a talk about politics), by an event (e.g. travelling
outside), or by a task (e.g. cleaning the classroom), the theme
will bring out the characteristics that are relevant in that specific social context, and then this set of relevant characteristics is going to be processed by the agent.
It is while looking at each other agents’ characteristics that
the theme defines as relevant to the current situation, that the
agent calculates and perceives if it is in the presence of members with which it shares the same social group (in-group) or
not (out-group). If the agent perceives itself as in the presence
of only in-group members, its identity is going to be determined by its personal identity. But if the agent is in the presence of out-group members, its identity can be determined by
a social identity, according to a formula that we will see next.

Identity Salience
Fundamentally, the identity that the agent is going to take in
account when processing its decision-making and to generate
its behaviour, is going to be determined by the presence or not
of the the out-group (Brewer, 1979) but also by several other
aspects inherent to the social identity itself. These factors
are going to have an impact on the social identity salience

2196

strength, and the more salient a social identity is, more is its
influence on the agent’s behaviour.
According to Social Identity and Self-Categorization theories (Tajfel, 1972; Turner, 1985; Turner et al., 1987), the
salience of a particular social identity is determined by the interaction between how accessible in memory that social identity is to an individual (accessibility), as well as how well it
fits the social context (fit) (Turner et al., 1987, 1994). Following (Oakes, 1987), in this model a social identity salience is
the product of fit and accessibility (see equation 1).
Salience(Social Identity) = Fit ∗ Accessibility

there is actually a match between the social groups found by
the clustering algorithm, the agent will use the centroid from
the normative social groups that it already knows. The process for computing the value of the normative fit is similar to
the comparative fit described bellow.
Calculating the comparative fit of a social identity (SIi ) is
going to be done according to the equation 2 where the distance between the agent’s in-group (SGi ) and any other group
(SGo ) is going to be calculated (inter group differences), and
the dispersion of its own social group is measured (intragroup differences). Alfa (α) and Beta (β) are weighting values for both distance and dispersion, and since we want to attribute more weight to the distance than to the social group’s
dispersion, we set the default of α as 0.8 and β as 0.2.

(1)

Fit between a social identity and the context where the
agent is situated is composed by two aspects: comparative
fit and normative fit. Comparative fit is defined by the principles of the Meta-Contrast theory (Turner et al., 1987), which
states that:

ComparativeFit(SIi ) = α(distance(SGi ,SGo ) )+β(1−dispersion(SGi ) )
(2)

“any collection of people will tend to be categorized
into distinct groups to the degree that intra-group differences are perceived as smaller, on average, than inter
group differences within the relevant comparative context”, p.455, (Turner et al., 1994)
Normative fit refers to the content of that categorization and
how well does it match with the characteristics of a social
group from the agent’s knowledge base.
In order to determine the fit of a social identity with DIMA,
first the agent needs to define the social groups present in the
context given the actual theme.
All agents present in the social context are going to be clustered into categories, according to the relevant characteristics
given by the theme. For this to be possible, all characteristics
must have a numeric comparative function which returns the
distance between two vectors ranging from 0 to 100, where 0
means the absence of that characteristic and 100 means that
it highly represents the agent.
According to the clustering algorithm results, the agent
might perceive as being in the presence of one or more social groups. If the number of clusters is one, that means that
the agent is in the presence of one social group. In this case,
because of the absence of an out-group the salience of a social identity does not apply, and the agent will use its personal identity. Only in the presence of two or more groups,
the agent proceeds in calculating the fit.
In this situation, through normative fit, the agent will be
able to determine if it is in the presence of a social group that
it already knows and had experience with. So for all social
groups in the agent’s knowledge base that has those relevant
characteristics, the fit is computed by comparing them to all
the clusters resulted from the previous clustering process. If
no match is found, its because the agent is in the presence of
ad-hoc groups (groups who the agent does not have previous
knowledge or past experiences with). In those situations the
prototypical member, or centroid (Ct), of each social group
that is going to be used later by the fit is going to be determined by the prototypical member of the present clusters. If

The distance between the agent’s group and another group
present in the social context is going to be measured by
calculating the difference between the out-group centroids
(Ct(SGo ) ), that represent the group’s prototypical members,
and the in-group centroids (Ct(SGi ) ) (see equation 3). If the
agent recognizes the groups through the normative fit process
then the group’s centroids used will be the prototypical members’ characteristics from the social groups from the agent’s
social group’s knowledge base, if not, it will be the prototypical members’ characteristics of the clusters found trough the
clustering algorithm.
distance(SGi ,SGo ) =

Ct(SGo ) −Ct(SGi )
Kmd

(3)

The dispersion of the agent’s social group is measured by
calculating the average of absolute differences (MD) of all its
members from the prototypical member of the social group
(see 4).
dispersion(SGi ) =

MD(SGi )
Kmcw

(4)

Both distance and dispersion are normalized, using the
constants Kmd and Kmcw, where:
• Kmd: is the maximum distance two clusters can hold, and
can be calculated according to the equation 5, where N is
the number of characteristics used for clustering and MAX
is the maximum value a characteristic can have;
• Kmcw: is the maximum distance between the centroid
member and another member for it to be considered as
member of that group. It is a parametrizable value, which
is currently set to 50.
KmdSGi ,SGo =

√
N ∗ MAX

(5)

Social groups with higher fit are the ones with less clustering dispersion and higher distance from the other social
groups.

2197

Accessibility of a particular social group, reflects a person’s
past experience with that group (Turner et al., 1994). Identities have higher or lower accessibility depending on how accessible is that specific categorization in a person’s memory.
Identities that have been used more times and displace more
emotional valence are more accessible.
The accessibility from new social identities, as the ones
from ad-hoc social groups, is implied by the distance between
the agent values (< c1 , ..., cn >Ag ) and the centroid from its
in-group. As such, agents that are closer to the centroid have
higher accessibility while agents further from it have lower
accessibility, translating this way the connection strength between a agent and that ad-hoc social group (see equation 6).
Acc(SI)t=0 = 1 −

< c1 , ..., cn >Ag −Ct(SGi )
Kmd

(6)

In the presence of normative groups the agent’s social identity can have an accessibility value determined by the emotional memory and the easiness of bringing that social identity into the agent’s mind (Turner et al., 1994). The emotional
valence of a memory is defined by the emotional impact of
the actions taken by the agent supported by that identity.
For every time a social identity is salient its accessibility is
updated according to the equation 7. The sum of all agent’s
identities is normalized so when one identity accessibility increases all the others suffer a decay.
Acc(SI)t+1 = Acc(SI)t + Salience(SI)t ∗ EmotionalValence(SI)t
(7)

The salience of a social identity will be highest if both accessibility and fit are high. The higher a social identity, more
impact that will have on the agent’s behaviour.

Implementing DIMA
For the purposes of experimentation and analysis, DIMA was
implemented. The agent behaviour generation system consists of three components: The Characteristic Archetype, The
Clustering Algorithm, The Social Identity Calculation.
The Characteristic Archetype consists of an abstract class,
which allows the representation of multiple types of characteristics within the system.
In order to calculate the comparative fit and accessibility
we used as a clustering algorithm the K-Means algorithm
with a few modifications. The clustering algorithm takes into
consideration all of the players characteristics values. First it
will kick start itself with one K cluster, if there is at least one
point who’s distance is farther from the distance constraint X,
the algorithm will increment K adding one more cluster, forcing the optimization process to restart. The algorithm finishes
when the distance constraint heuristic is satisfied.
Figure 1 represents the program pipeline, which starts by
assembling a list of the other players known by the agent and
their characteristics. Using this list the agent will create a
K-Means cluster containing a list with centroids and points.
The number of centroids will be a direct representation of the

Figure 1: The Salience Calculation Pipeline.
number of clusters in the agent’s K-Means algorithm. The
comparative fit and accessibility are then calculated using this
K-Means as an input parameter. Finally the salience is obtained through both the comparative fit and the accessibility
value.

Platform
To explore the above, we used a multi-player game within the
Project INVITE 1 (social Identity and partNership in VIrTual
Environments) (Prada et al., 2012) where both humans and
virtual agents can participate. The game begins with players
stranded on an island due to a plane crash, where an active
volcano threatens their lives at any moment. Each player’s
personal objective is to obtain the largest amount of gold,
while at the same time help their campsite members collect
wood to build a raft (the team objective) so as to get off the
island. The players are faced with the dilemma of either helping their team by collecting wood or gathering gold and thus
become rich when saved. If everyone collects mainly gold
then the raft will not be built in time and everyone will loose
when the volcano erupts. The player who can get off the island with the most gold is the winner.
Although this project aims at exploring the role of social
identity and social dilemmas in mixed motive tasks, this platform is fully parametrized and allows the exploration of different scenarios and case studies. Some of the parametrizable
variables are: the number of turns until the volcano erupts
(end-game condition); number of campsites or teams; number of players per team (that could be a mix of humans and
agents); visual characteristics for each player; total wood necessary to finish the raft; number of resources (wood and gold)
each player can collect; among others.

Example Scenarios
For experimentation purposes a simulation of the game was
created. In our scenario the game was limited to 1 turn, 2
teams and 4 players for each of the both campsites, A and B.
Players were controlled by virtually intelligent agents. Since
different uniform colour has been known to prime differences
1 http://project-invite.eu/

2198

in social group perceptions (Frank, Gilovich, et al., 1988;
Peña, Hancock, & Merola, 2009), it was used a form of differentiation of the two teams, in form of characteristics. In that
order players were characterized by a shirt characteristic with
the values 0 (red) or 100 (blue), and a campsite characteristic
(A and B). Because this work’s intentions is the study of the
effects of an out-group, each player’s K-Means algorithm was
limited to a maximum of 2 clusters (i.e. the player’s in-group
and out-group). Due to the theme of the problem, the campsite will be the most influential characteristic of the clustering
algorithm.
The total wood collected by agents is obtained by multiplying the salience value by the total carrying weight, which
is 10. The gold is the difference of the obtained wood value
by the total weight. It is expected that agents with a higher
salience identity with the campsite (common coloured shirt),
will cooperate with more wood.

Equal Mixed Teams

Red versus Blue

One Team Only

In this scenario all campsite A members wear blue shirts
while all campsite B members wear red shirts. Because both
campsites have members with identical characteristics (i.e. no
dispersion) the salience value will be 1, it’s maximum value
(see table 1).

In this scenario there is only one campsite as such all four
agents are in the presence of in-group members. In this situation all agents share the same coloured shirt. Because there
is no presence of an out-group, the social identity salience
value is 0, and all members behave accordingly to their personal identity (see table 4).

In this scenario all campsite A and B members are equally
divided between red and blue shirts (i.e. two blue and two
red). From the perspective of one campsite, the presence of
the out-group will be particularly weak, resulting in a low
social identity salience. As such all members are going to
behave a little more greedily than in the previous scenarios
(see table 3).
Table 3: Equal Mixed Teams Scenario - Campsite A
Colour
Accessib.
Comp. Fit
Salience
Wood
Gold

Table 1: Red versus Blue Scenario - Campsite A
Colour
Accessib.
Comp. Fit
Salience
Wood
Gold

Agent 1
Blue
1
1
1
10
0

Agent 2
Blue
1
1
1
10
0

Agent 3
Blue
1
1
1
10
0

Agent4
Blue
1
1
1
10
0

Agent 1
Blue
0.65
0.57
0.37
4
6

Agent 2
Blue
0.65
0.57
0.37
4
6

Agent 3
Red
0.65
0.57
0.37
4
6

Agent4
Red
0.65
0.57
0.37
4
6

Total

16
24

Table 4: One Team Only Scenario - Campsite A

Total

Colour
Wood
Gold

Agent 1
Blue
0
10

Agent 2
Blue
0
10

Agent 3
Blue
0
10

Agent4
Blue
0
10

Total
0
40

50
0

Conclusion and Future Work
Unbalanced Teams
In this scenario, campsite A has one member wearing a red
shirt while the others wear blue shirts, as opposed to campsite
B, where one member wears a blue shirt and the others wear
red shirts. Although both campsites are similar in their shirt
colour distribution, in the perspective of campsite A, the presence of the out-group (campsite B) will be weaker for the red
shirt member than for the rest of its members (and vice versa
for campsite B). Still, because three of the other members
are similar, their salience identity values are strong enough to
bias their behaviour to help their team (see table 2).
Table 2: Unbalanced Teams Scenario - Campsite A
Colour
Accessib.
Comp. Fit
Salience
Wood
Gold

Agent 1
Blue
0.82
0.68
0.56
6
4

Agent 2
Blue
0.82
0.68
0.56
6
4

Agent 3
Blue
0.82
0.68
0.56
6
4

Agent4
Red
0.47
0.68
0.32
3
7

Total

21
19

Because social identity has a great impact in a wide range
of fields and settings such as group formation, cohesiveness,
prejudice, conformity, social influence and crowd behaviour
(Turner et al. 1994; Hogg, 2003), we believe the study of this
other phenomena could also benefit from DIMA.
Running the simulation we found that, as expected, agents
whose t-shirt colour matches the majority of their campsite,
expressed higher salience identity, cooperating with more
wood, while the opposite situation had reverse results. However, in the extreme situations such as Red versus Blue Scenario, or One Team Only Scenario, it was quite evident that
agents did not act rationally and presented extreme behaviour
(collecting all wood or all gold). In these situations, it looked
like they did not care about winning or surviving, respectively, as it would happen in a real situation with humans. As
such, for future work, we intent to introduce rational thinking
on agent’s decision-making in which the influence of social
identity salience will work upon. We are also, currently extending DIMA to calculate social identity salience in situations where three or more groups are present, as well as introducing the dynamics of the salience of multiple identities
and relations among themselves.

2199

Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the INVITE project
(ref. UTA-Est/MAI/0008/2009) funded by FCT under the
UT-Austin/Portugal cooperation agreement and by national
funds through FCT Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, under project PEst-OE/EEI/LA0021/2011, the PIDDAC
Program funds.

References
Brewer, M. (1979). In-group bias in the minimal intergroup
situation: A cognitive-motivational analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 86(2), 307.
Brewer, M. (1991). The social self: On being the same and
different at the same time. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17(5), 475.
Dawes, R. (1974). Formal models of dilemmas in social
decision-making. (Tech. Rep.). DTIC Document.
De Rosis, F., Pelachaud, C., & Poggi, I. (2004). Transcultural believability in embodied agents: a matter of consistent adaptation. Agent Culture: Human-Agent Interaction
in a Multicultural World, 75–106.
Dimas, J., & Prada, R. (2013). You are who you hang out
with: Agents with dynamic identity. In Proceedings of the
11th international conference on autonomous agents and
multiagent systems (aamas 2013).
Frank, M. G., Gilovich, T., et al. (1988). The dark side of
self-and social perception: Black uniforms and aggression
in professional sports. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 54(1), 74–85.
Fridman, N., & Kaminka, G. (2009). Comparing human and
synthetic group behaviors: A model based on social psychology. In International conference on cognitive modeling
(iccm-09).
Goette, L., Huffman, D., & Meier, S. (2006). The impact of
group membership on cooperation and norm enforcement:
Evidence using random assignment to real social groups.
The American economic review, 96(2), 212–216.
Grier, R., Skarin, B., Lubyansky, A., & Wolpert, L. (2008).
Scipr: A computational model to simulate cultural identities for predicting reactions to events. In Proceedings of the
second international conference on computational cultural
dynamics (pp. 32–37).
Hofstede, G. H., & Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, intitutions, and organizations across nations. SAGE Publications, Incorporated.
Hogg, M., & Williams, K. (2000). From i to we: Social
identity and the collective self. Group Dynamics: Theory,
Research, and Practice, 4(1), 81.
Kollock, P. (1998). Social dilemmas: The anatomy of cooperation. Annual review of sociology, 183–214.
Lustick, I. (2002). Ps-i: A user-friendly agent-based modeling platform for testing theories of political identity and
political stability. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulation, 5(3).

Mascarenhas, S., Dias, J., Afonso, N., Enz, S., & Paiva, A.
(2009). Using rituals to express cultural differences in synthetic characters. In Proceedings of the 8th international
conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systemsvolume 1 (pp. 305–312).
McLeish, K., & Oxoby, R. (2007). Identity, cooperation, and
punishment. IZA.
Oakes, P. (1987). The salience of social categories. Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory,
117–141.
Peña, J., Hancock, J. T., & Merola, N. A. (2009). The priming effects of avatars in virtual settings. Communication
Research, 36(6), 838–856.
Prada, R., Raimundo, G., Baptista, M., Dimas, J., Santos,
P. A., Martinho, C., et al. (2012). The role of social identity, rationality and anticipation in believable agents. In
Proceedings of the 11th international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems (aamas 2012).
Salzarulo, L. (2006). A continuous opinion dynamics model
based on the principle of meta-contrast. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 9(1), 13.
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content and structure of values: Theoretical advances and empirical tests in
20 countries. Advances in experimental social psychology,
25(1), 1–65.
Smith, E., & Mackie, D. (2000). Social psychology. Psychology Pr.
Tajfel, H. (1972). La catégorisation sociale (social categorization). Introduction à la psychologie sociale, 1, 272–
302.
Tan, C., & Cheng, H. (2007). Personality-based adaptation
for teamwork in game agents. In Proceedings of the third
conference on artificial intelligence and interactive digital
entertainment (Vol. 37).
Turner, J. (1985). Social categorization and the self-concept:
A social cognitive theory of group behavior. Advances in
group processes: Theory and research, 2, 77–122.
Turner, J., Hogg, M., Oakes, P., Reicher, S., & Wetherell, M.
(1987). Rediscovering the social group: A social categorization theory. B. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.
Turner, J., Oakes, P., Haslam, S., & McGarty, C. (1994). Self
and collective: Cognition and social context. Personality
and social psychology bulletin, 20, 454–454.
Weber, J., Kopelman, S., & Messick, D. (2004). A conceptual
review of decision making in social dilemmas: Applying a
logic of appropriateness. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8(3), 281.
Wit, A., & Wilke, H. (1992). The effect of social categorization on cooperation in three types of social dilemmas.
Journal of Economic Psychology, 13(1), 135–151.

2200

