UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Paradoxical cultural categories and paradoxical social relationships: The case of cooperation
and competition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vh8w72t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Keller, Josh
Loewenstein, Jeffrey
Kilduff, Martin
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Paradoxical Cultural Categories and Paradoxical Social Relationships:
The Case of Cooperation and Competition
Josh Keller (jwkeller@ntu.edu.sg)
Division of Strategy, Management & Organisation, Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Ave. S3-B2C-97, Singapore 639798

Jeffrey Loewenstein (jloew@illinois.edu)
College of Business, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
1206 South Sixth Street MC-707 Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Martin Kilduff (m.kilduff@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Management Science and Innovation, University College London
Gower Street London WC1E 6BT United Kingdom

Jin Yan (yanjin@zju.edu.cn)
School of Management, Zhejiang University
Gudun Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058 China
Abstract

outcomes and their group’s outcomes. Yet it is not clear
whether and why actors might choose to engage in both
cooperation and competition.
We will suggest that categories play a key role in the
choice to engage in both cooperation and competition. As a
result, we raise new issues in the study of culture,
categories, and complex social relationships. The specific
account that we develop centers on what we term
paradoxical categorization, or the classification of a single
situation as a member of both of two opposing categories. In
our case, the paradoxical categorization of interest is the
classification of a situation as both an instance of
cooperation and an instance of competition. We show that
culture influences whether individuals engage in
paradoxical categorization. Then we show that paradoxical
categorization predicts whether managers have working
relationships that are both cooperative and competitive.

How individuals think about opposing or paradoxical
categories influences their social relationships. We found that
Chinese managers were more likely than US managers to
categorize attempts to outperform others as an instance of
both competition and cooperation. Further, the Chinese
managers were more likely than the US managers to perceive
a given working relationship as being both cooperative and
competitive. The two findings were linked: culturally-guided
beliefs about whether the cooperation-competition paradox
should be integrated or kept separate influenced how
individuals understood their social relationships. More
broadly, the implication is that category membership and
relations between categories are guided by cultural influences
distinct from the particulars of the categories themselves that
normally enter into cognitive science research on categories.
In addition, those categorization choices are consequential for
the network of social relationships individuals form.
Keywords: Categories; paradox; cooperation; competition;
culture; relationships; China.

Paradoxical Cultural Categories
Multiple streams of work are now challenging longstanding
assumptions about the relation between cooperation and
competition, and they are converging to make the joint use
of cooperation and competition an important question. One
such longstanding assumption in research on cooperation
and competition, also implicit in the quote from Secretary
Clinton, is that cooperation and competition are separate.
Cooperation and competition have long been defined as
mutually exclusive types of relationship (Deutsch, 1949),
mutually exclusive types of behavior (Komorita & Parks,
1996), and mutually exclusive types of motivation
(McClintock & Allison, 1989). However, there are now
multiple proposals about why cooperation and competition
could be integrated (e.g., Brandenberger & Nalebuff, 1996;
Van de Vliert, 1999), suggesting that cooperation and
competition can co-occur.
Another longstanding assumption in research on
cooperation and competition (Fulop, 2004), also implicit in

Introduction
"[O]ur two countries gain far more when we cooperate with
one another than when we descend into an unhealthy
competition."
Hillary Clinton, US Secretary of State, Beijing, September
5, 2012, at a joint press conference with Chinese Foreign
Minister Yang Jiechi.
Choices to engage in cooperation and competition are
fundamental to a wide range of social life, ranging from
diplomacy between nations down to working relationships
between individuals. Actors form competitive relationships
as they seek to maximize their own outcomes and form
cooperative relationships as they seek to achieve group
goals. Further, most actors, most of the time, have mixed
motives—they are concerned with both their individual

740

the quote from Secretary Clinton, is that cooperation and
competition are the same for everyone. However, it is now
clear that, for example, individuals in the United States and
China view cooperation differently (Keller & Loewenstein,
2011), and that individuals in Hungary and Japan view
competition differently (Fulop, 2004). There are also strong
theoretical arguments suggesting that the relation between
cooperation and competition likely differs across cultures
(Chen, 2008): Western cultural philosophies (e.g., US, UK,
Australia) seem to emphasize the separation of cooperation
and competition and East Asian cultural philosophies (e.g.,
China, Japan, Korea) seem to emphasize the integration of
cooperation and competition. Accordingly, culturallyguided beliefs may affect when and why individuals choose
to engage in both cooperation and competition.
A third longstanding assumption in research in
cooperation and competition (Stanne, Johnson & Johnson,
1999), but that Secretary Clinton’s quote rejects, is that
there is only one kind of competition. Instead, there appear
to be distinct consequences to healthy or appropriate
competition, such as the attempt to outperform others, and
unhealthy or zero-sum competition, such as the attempt to
sabotage others (Stanne et al., 1999). Different kinds of
competition may be differently compatible with
cooperation. That is, the overall semantic relation between
cooperation and competition may be antonymic (Herrmann,
Conti, Peters, Robbins, & Chaffin, 1979), as noted in both
American (Merriam-Webster, 2006) and Chinese (He, 2009)
thesauruses. However, even if the categories as a whole are
antonyms, it is an open question as to whether the two
categories may still overlap and share members.
We generate a new account of the relation between
cooperation and competition consistent with the three new
possibilities just discussed. Our starting point is to
conceptualize cooperation and competition as cultural
categories (Atran, Medin & Ross, 2005; Douglas, 1986;
Keller & Loewenstein, 2011). Through social interactions,
people learn the conventions in their culture (Millikan 2005)
for categorizing interpersonal situations and relationships as
cooperative and as competitive. The question then is why an
individual might categorize an item as being both
cooperative and competitive. Two influences seem key:
beliefs about paradoxes and contradictions, and the type of
interpersonal situation.
There is ample evidence that individuals who are
members of Chinese culture are more likely than members
of American culture to hold dialectical beliefs (SpencerRodgers et al, 2010), meaning they tend to tolerate
contradictions, expect change, and seek to integrate
paradoxes. One consequence is that Chinese individuals
tend to be more likely than American individuals to engage
in paradoxical categorization. For example, they are more
likely to categorize themselves as both shy and outgoing
(Spencer-Rodgers, Boucher, Mori, Wang & Peng, 2009) and
as both happy and sad (Bagozzi, Wong & Yi, 1999).
These general tendencies should apply to cooperation and
competition. To be clear, we are not claiming that a general

tendency towards dialecticism, derived from one’s culture,
predicts a willingness to believe that any competitive
situation is also a cooperative situation, or even more
starkly, that Chinese individuals always engage in both
cooperation and competition and American individuals
never do. Rather, we are suggesting that dialecticism
licenses individuals to grant that cooperation and
competition could co-occur. Specifically, a general tendency
towards dialecticism, derived from one’s culture, should
predict an individual’s willingness to categorize a seemingly
contradictory situation with features of both cooperation and
competition as being both cooperative and competitive,
rather than being forced to pick one or the other.
The key situations with features of both cooperation and
competition are acts of healthy competition, such as
attempts to outperform another person. If attempts to
outperform others are interpreted as efforts to gain higher
relative standing (a key feature of competitive behavior,
Johnson & Johnson, 1989), these efforts could be classified
as competitive. If attempts to outperform others are also
seen as efforts to advance group gains (a key feature of
cooperative behavior, Tyler & Blader, 2000) then they have
the potential to be classified not only as competitive but also
as cooperative. By contrast, acts of unhealthy competition,
such as attempts to sabotage another person, are unlikely to
be seen as incorporating any feature of cooperation (they
lower group gains; Stanne et al, 1999), but are likely to be
seen as competitive (they are efforts to gain higher relative
standing). Thus, paradoxical categorization could occur for
attempts to outperform others but is unlikely for attempts to
sabotage others.
Taken together with the prior point about culture, the full
prediction is that because individuals who are members of
East Asian cultures are more likely than individuals from
Western cultures to hold dialectical beliefs, they should be
more likely to generate the paradoxical categorization that
attempts to outperform others are acts of both cooperation
and competition.

Paradoxical Social Relationships
Most research on social relationships has described a stark
choice between cooperative colleagues giving each other
advice versus rivals battling to get ahead (e.g., Burt, 1987).
Yet just as researchers examining the same data can
radically disagree concerning whether cooperation or
competition represents the best explanation of observed
patterns (Kilduff & Oh, 2006), individuals also sometimes
struggle to comprehend the meaning of their colleagues'
actions. We see people inventing terms like “coopetition”
and “frenemies” to account for such complex social
relationships.
Individuals are embedded in networks of cooperative
working relationships as they collaborate with others. But
people are also embedded in networks of competitive
relationships as they vie for status and resources (Burt,
1992; Lazega & Patterson, 1999). Because social
relationships are complex (Ingram & Zou, 2008), an

741

individual could have relationships that are both cooperative
and competitive. When are relationships likely to be
recognized as both cooperative and competitive? Two
concerns seem to be key: the frequency of interaction and
paradoxical categorization.
We focus on managers’ working relationships, as a subset
of social relationships. In managerial work contexts,
frequency of interaction typically implies that individuals
engage in reciprocal patterns of sharing knowledge
(McAllister, 1995). In addition, managers who work
together frequently are also more likely to have their
performance compared (Brown et al, 1998) and to contend
for resources (Burt, 1992). Thus, working together
frequently is likely to provide the opportunity for
individuals to experience and to reciprocate acts of
cooperation and acts of competition.
The cycles of reciprocated behaviors that individuals
experience in their social relationships should guide how
they interpret those relationships (Gouldner, 1960; Koster &
Sanders, 2006). So, for example, if individuals experience
others sharing knowledge, they may interpret those acts as
cooperation and reciprocate with cooperative behaviors of
their own, leading them to characterize their relationship as
cooperative.
Accordingly,
if
managers’
working
relationships involve frequent contact, then this should
provide the potential for developing relationships that are
both cooperative and competitive.
Frequent interaction only provides the potential for
forming working relationships that are both cooperative and
competitive because individuals might tend to reciprocate
mainly one as opposed to both kinds of behavior. Consistent
with our earlier arguments, we suggest that individuals from
different cultural groups and with differing cultural
categories should differ in how they resolve the paradoxical
tension (Miron-Spektor, Gino, & Argote, 2011; Smith &
Lewis, 2011) of encountering opportunities for, or behaviors
indicating, both cooperation and competition.
If Chinese individuals are more likely than American
individuals to categorize attempts to outperform others as
instances of both cooperation and competition, then this
may indicate a more general willingness to integrate and
reciprocate both cooperation and competition. That is,
Chinese individuals may be more likely than American
individuals to experience someone attempting to outperform
them, perceive it as cooperative and competitive, and
reciprocate with acts of cooperation as well as acts of
(presumably healthy) competition. In contrast, American
individuals may be more likely than Chinese individuals to
experience someone attempting to outperform them,
perceive it as competitive and not cooperative, and
reciprocate with acts of competition and non-cooperation.
The end result is a difference in the frequency of
experiencing both cooperation and competition within the
same working relationship. Thus, paradoxical categorization
should predict whether, for those working relationships with
frequent interaction that allow for developed chains of

reciprocity, individuals are likely to characterize those
working relationships as both cooperative and competitive.
In the study that follows, we examined Chinese and
American managers for their beliefs about the paradoxical
categorization of cooperation and competition. A week later,
we gathered their evaluations of their working relationships.
We expected that Chinese managers would be more likely
than American managers to endorse paradoxical
categorization and to characterize their frequent working
relationships as both cooperative and competitive.

Methods
Participants
A total of 111 managers in the United States and 139
managers in China participated in the study. The American
managers were, on average, 29 years old and the Chinese
managers were about 31 years old. The American managers
(76%) and the Chinese managers (63%) tended to be male.
All participants had earned college degrees and had at least
three years of full-time work experience. Within each
sample, each major industry, including technology, services,
and manufacturing, was represented. Participation in the
study was voluntary.

Procedure and Materials
Time 1 Survey Participants listed up to 24 people within
their organization with whom they had an ongoing working
relationship (as in, for example, Chua, Ingram, & Morris,
2008). Participants then completed a categorization task, as
described below. Finally, participants provided demographic
information about themselves and information about their
organization.
Categorization task The categorization task followed
protocols developed within cognitive anthropology (see
Weller, 2007 for a review). Using a separate sample from
the main study, we asked 40 participants from China and 40
participants from the United States to describe situations
that indicated competition. We used existing data on
cooperation from Keller and Loewenstein (2011). We
created 25 items describing situations that were mentioned
by members of both cultures as either cooperative or
competitive. All items were in Chinese in China and in
English in the US. To ensure language equivalence, we
engaged in a coding, translating and back-translating
process by coders not informed about the purposes of the
study (Brislin, 1970).
The key items concerned outperforming (5 items),
sabotaging (4 items) and knowledge sharing (2 items). We
included an additional 14 filler items to reduce demand
effects. The 25 situations were presented to participants
three separate times; once each for whether the situation
could be categorized as cooperation, as competition and as
commitment (to provide a filler between the cooperation
and competition categorization tasks). Half the participants
rated situations for cooperation first and competition third,

742

Table 1: Categorization of situations as cooperation and competition

USA
China

Knowledge Sharing

Sabotaging

Outperforming

Cooperation

3.83 (1.40) *

1.53 (0.55) *

3.10 (0.73)

Competition

2.25 (1.32) *

4.22 (0.70) *

4.16 (0.42) *

Cooperation

3.98 (1.18) *

1.61 (0.51) *

3.62 (0.55) *

Competition

2.01 (1.01) *

4.12 (0.64) *

4.26 (0.46) *

Standard deviations are in parentheses.
* p < .01 from one-way t-tests (min df = 110, min t = 13) for differences from 3, with above 3 indicating cooperation or
competition, and below 3 indicating non-cooperation or non-competition.
and half rated situations in the reverse order. We found no
effects of order of presentation.
Time 2 Survey One week later, participants evaluated
each working relationship they had listed on the Time 1
survey. They rated the level of competition, cooperation,
and the frequency with which they worked together, as well
as other information beyond the scope of the current paper.
The order of presentation of the questions about cooperation
and competition was counterbalanced, and we found no
effects of the order of presentation.

Results
Categorization data
Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations for the
categorization of each situation type (knowledge sharing,
sabotaging and outperforming) for respondents from the US
and China. As expected, Chinese managers and American
managers categorized knowledge sharing as cooperative and
non-competitive and sabotaging situations as competitive
and non-cooperative. Both Chinese and American managers
categorized outperforming situations as competitive. Finally
and most critically, Chinese managers categorized
outperforming situations as cooperative (M = 3.62, SD =
0.55) whereas American managers did not (M = 3.10, SD =
.73), t(249) = 6.35, p < .01. Thus, Chinese managers showed
greater willingness than American managers to engage in
paradoxical categorization.

Measures
Categorization Participants rated knowledge sharing,
sabotaging, and outperforming situations twice on scales
from 1 = non-cooperative/ non-competitive and 5 =
cooperative/ competitive.
Paradoxical categorization We used participants’ ratings
of how cooperative outperforming situations were as a
measure of paradoxical categorization. We found similar
patterns if we use measures based on their ratings of both
cooperation and competition.
Frequent interaction Working relationships with “at
least daily” interaction were coded as a working relationship
with frequent interaction.
Paradoxical working relationships Participants rated
each working relationship on a 5-point scale for cooperation
(1 = very non-cooperative, 2 = slightly non-cooperative, 3 =
neither cooperative nor non-cooperative, 4 = slightly
cooperative, and 5 = very cooperative) and a similar scale
for competition. A working relationship that was rated a 4 or
5 on both the “cooperative” and “competitive” scales was
coded as a working relationship that had both cooperation
and competition.
Number of working relationships Participants could
have reported up to 24 working relationships and we
included the number they listed as a control variable.
Demographic Variables Age and gender were included
as control variables because they commonly influence
interactions within organizations.

Working relationship data
Table 2 reports hierarchical non-linear logistic regression
models predicting paradoxical working relationships. We
found no effects of gender, age, and number of ties (second
level control variables) or cultural group (a second-level
variable). As expected, frequent interaction predicted
paradoxical working relationships (a first-level variable; B =
.77, SE = .15). Also as expected, there was an interaction
between cultural group and frequent interaction (B = .73, SE
= .30), as Chinese managers (M = .20) reported that more of
their frequent interaction relationships were paradoxical
working relationships than did American managers (M =
.14), t(2342) = 3.38, p < .01.
Paradoxical categorization helped to explain the effect of
cultural group. Paradoxical categorization predicted
paradoxical working relationships (a second-level variable;
B = .05, SE = .01). When including paradoxical
categorization with cultural group, frequent interaction and
the interaction of cultural group and frequent interaction, the
effect of the interaction was still significant yet reduced (B
= .51, SE = .30). A bootstrapped test of an indirect effect of
the interaction of cultural group and frequent interaction on

743

Table 2: Predictors of Paradoxical Working Relationships

Controls

Cultural
Group

Frequent
Contact

Interaction

Paradoxical
categorization

Full Model

B

SE

B

SE

B

SE

B

SE

B

SE

B

SE

Intercept

-2.18

0.61

-2.03

0.60

-2.21

0.06

-2.25

0.65

-0.04

0.09

-0.33

0.18

Gender (F)

0.16

0.17

0.15

0.17

0.02

0.02

0.15

0.18

0.02

0.02

0.16

0.19

Age

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.02

Number of Ties

0.00

0.01

-0.01

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.16

0.16

-0.37

0.26

-0.52

0.31

0.77

0.02

0.24

0.18

0.28

0.19

0.73

0.30

0.51

0.30

0.32

0.16

Cultural Group
Frequent Interaction
Cultural Group
*Frequent Interaction
Paradoxical
Categorization

0.05

0.01

Note: bold if p<.05.
paradoxical working relationships through paradoxical
categorization found support, estimating an effect of 0.04
(95% CI: 0.01-0.07). Therefore, the influence of Chinese
culture on paradoxical categorization is linked to the
particular likelihood of Chinese managers’ having
paradoxical working relationships among their frequent
interaction partners.

The robustness of the link between culture and paradoxical
categorization is suggestive of the importance of studying
culture to studying categories. The nature of the relation
people perceive between categories, and category
membership itself, is not just a function of the features or
properties of the categories, their members, or the categories
to which they are associated (e.g., Goldstone, 1996).
Whether attempts to outperform others are instances of
cooperation is ambiguous and appears to be resolved by
principled social convention.
The more general implication is that attempts at studying
category membership and relations among categories
without considering cultural influences has the potential to
be misleading. Part of individuals’ understandings of
categories—which tends not to be the focus of cognitive
science research—is shaped by cultural use of the specific
category and the culturally normative views about
categories more generally. Studying artificial categories is
wonderfully useful, as is studying concrete object categories
that are fairly consistent across cultural communities.
Cooperation and competition are not typical of the
categories cognitive science researchers tend to study (they
are relational categories; Gentner & Kurtz, 2005). Yet
cooperation and competition are arguably among the most
frequently used categories in social life, and relational
categories more generally account for much of our expert
knowledge. The culturally-guided aspects of these
categories’ meanings are, therefore, highly consequential
and so worthy topics of study.
Cultural factors shape categories because category use is
so often social. In the current case, beliefs about categories
are linked to perceptions of relationships. In other work, we
also show that these beliefs about cooperation and
competition predict behavior in a workgroup context. These
perceptions and behaviors are consequential. People’s
choices are guided by how they perceive others, and those

Discussion
Chinese managers, relative to American managers, were
more likely to categorize outperforming situations as both
cooperative and competitive, and in turn were more likely to
describe working relationships with frequent interaction as
both cooperative and competitive. Simultaneously
cooperative and competitive working relationships were not
randomly distributed rare occurrences. For those who
categorized outperforming situations as both cooperative
and competitive (a set of mostly Chinese and some
American managers), the median manager worked every
day with two people with whom they both cooperated and
competed. Yet for those who did not categorize
outperforming situations as both cooperative and
competitive (a set of mostly American and some Chinese
managers), the median manager did not work with anyone
with whom they both cooperated and competed. Thus,
cultural support for paradoxical categorization, combined
with enabling social situations, shape the social experience
of cooperation and competition and, more broadly,
opportunities for paradoxical working relationships.
Part of the account is about the influence of culture on
categorization. Our account, drawing on prior literature, was
that cultural philosophies can provide a basis for
dialecticism. Dialectical beliefs then enable paradoxical
categorization. In related research, we have documented the
mediating role of dialectical beliefs in the link between
cultural group membership and paradoxical categorization.

744

perceptions can be self-reinforcing because of reciprocity.
For example, a direct implication of the findings in this
paper are that general cultural beliefs about paradoxes
could, by shaping categories and relations between
categories, shape the networks of social relationships that
comprise our lives.

Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. 1989. Cooperation and
competition: Theory and research. Edina, MN:
Interaction book.
Keller, J., & Loewenstein, J. 2011. The cultural category of
cooperation: A cultural consensus model analysis for
China and the United States. Organization Science, 22(2),
299-319.
Kilduff, M., & Oh, H. 2006. Deconstructing diffusion: An
ethnostatistical examination of medical innovation
network data reanalyses Organizational Research
Methods, 9: 432-455.
Komorita, S. S., & Parks, C. D. 1996. Social Dilemmas.
Boulder, CO: Westview.
Koster, F., & Sanders, K. 2006. Organizational citizens or
reciprocal relationships? An empirical comparison.
Personnel Review, 35(5): 519-537.
Lazega, E., & Pattison, P. E. 1999. Multiplexity, generalized
exchange and cooperation in organizations: a case study.
Social Networks, 21(1): 67-90.
McClintock, C. G., & Allison, S. T. 1989. Social Value
Orientation and Helping Behavior<sup>1</sup>. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 19(4): 353-362.
Merriam-Webster. 2006. The Merriam-Webster Thesaurus:
Merriam-Webster.
Millikan, R. G. 2005. Language: a biological model OUP.
Miron-Spektor, E., Gino, F., & Argote, L. 2011. Paradoxical
frames and creative sparks: Enhancing individual
creativity through conflict and integration. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 116(2): 229240.
Smith, W. K., & Lewis, M. 2011. Toward a Theory of
Paradox: A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of Organizing.
Academy of Management Review, 36(2): 381-403.
Spencer-Rodgers, J., Boucher, H., Mori, S., Wang, L., &
Peng, K. 2009. The Dialectical self-concept:
Contradiction, Change, and Holism in East Asian
cultures. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35:
29-44.
Spencer-Rodgers, J., Williams, M. J., & Peng, K. 2010.
Cultural Differences in Expectations of Change and
Tolerance for Contradiction: A Decade of Empirical
Research. Personality & Social Psychology Review,
14(3): 296-312.
Stanne, M. B., Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. 1999.
Does competition enhance or inhibit motor performance:
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125(1): 133-154.
Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. 2000. Cooperation in groups :
procedural justice, social identity, and behavioral
engagement. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Van de Vliert, E. 1999. Cooperation and competition as
partners. European Review of Social Psychology, 10,
231-257.
Weller, S. C. 2007. Cultural consensus theory: Applications
and frequently asked questions. Field Methods, 19(4)
339–368.

References
Atran, S., Medin, D. L., & Ross, N. O. 2005. The Cultural
Mind: Environmental Decision Making and Cultural
Modeling Within and Across Populations. Psychological
Review, 112(4): 744-776.
Bagozzi, R. P., Wong, N., & Yi, Y. 1999. The Role of
Culture and Gender in the Relationship between Positive
and Negative Affect. Cognition & Emotion, 13(6): 641672.
Brandenburger, A., & Nalebuff, B. 1996. Co-Opetition.
New York: Doubleday.
Burt, R. S. 1987. Social Contagion and Innovation:
Cohesion Versus Structural Equivalence. American
Journal of Sociology, 92(6): 1287.
Burt, R. S. 1992. Structural holes: The social structure of
competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Chen, M.-j. 2008. Reconceptualizing the CompetitionCooperation Relationship: A Transparadox Perspective.
Journal of Management Inquiry, 17: 288.
Chua, R., Ingram, P., & Morris, M. W. 2008. From the
head and the heart: Locating cognition- and affect-based
trust in managers’ professional networks. Academy of
Management Journal, 51: 436-452.
Deutsch, M. 1949. A theory of cooperation and competition.
Human Relations, 2: 199-231.
Douglas, M. 1986. How institutions think. Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press.
Fulop, M. 2004. Competition as a culturally constructed
concept. In C. Baillie, E. Dunn & Y. Zheng (Eds.),
Travelling facts. New York: Campus Verlag.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman
& P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside
the lab (pp. 151-175). Washington, DC: APA.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and Interrelated Concepts.
Memory & Cognition, 24, 608-628
Gouldner, A. W. 1960. The Norm of Reciprocity: A
Preliminary Statement. American Sociological Review,
25(2): 161-178.
He, G. 2009. Xiandai Hanyu Fanyi Cidian: Shanghai Cishu
Chubanshe.
Herrmann, D., G. Conti, et al. 1979. "Comprehension of
antonymy and the generality of categorization models."
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 5(6), 585-597.
Ingram, P., & Zou, X. 2008. Business friendships. Research
in Organizational Behavior, 28: 167-184.

745

