UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
People, Place, and Time: Inferences from Diagrams

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9v4718gj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tversky, Barabara
Corter, James
Gao, Jie
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

People, Place, and Time: Inferences from Diagrams
Barbara Tversky (btversky@stanford.edu)
James E. Corter (jec34@columbia.edu)
Jie Gao (jg2902@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York, NY 10027 USA
Yuko Tanaka (yuko.tanaka@stevens.edu)
Jeffrey Nickerson (jnickerson@stevens.edu)
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA

elements in other boxes. Boxes create meaning by
creating categories. They indicate that everything within
the box is similar, sharing features, and different from
everything outside the box. Lines and boxes, like other
simple geometric marks, are replete with meaning. They
alter conclusions, inferences, and interpretations. The
same data, height of 8 and 10 year olds or height of
women and men, are interpreted as trends when displayed
as lines and as discrete comparisons when displayed as
bars (Zacks & Tversky, 1999). For example, when lines
connected the height of men and women, some people
said, “As you get more male, you get taller.”
Lines and boxes should also bias data exploration and
inferences from displays of people, place, and time.
Previous research evaluated production, preference, and
performance of displays of people, place, and time
(Kessell & Tversky, 2010). When asked to create ways to
keep track of movements of people across space and time,
most participants created matrices or tables; a minority
connected people over time with lines. Preference by
other participants followed the same pattern. Overall,
matrices with people as cell entries and time and place in
rows and columns respectively were most commonly
produced and preferred. This format has good
foundations. Place and time are fixed, immutable, but
people can move from cell to cell. Performance was
assessed by the time to verify many kinds of inferences
from the data. Lines facilitated inferences about time, but
all other kinds of inferences were faster from tables.
Displays of people, place, and time are frequently used
for data exploration, to generate conclusions from the data
and inferences about the underlying processes. Here, we
investigate the roles of lines and boxes in the spontaneous
generation of inferences from data displays. Because lines
connect people over time, lines should bias conclusions
and inferences about people, and secondarily about time.
Boxes emphasize their contents, the confluence of people,
place, and time, and should support a greater variety of
conclusions and inferences.

Abstract
Keeping track of things as they move in space and
time is a task common to scientists, marketers, spies,
coaches, and more. Visualizations of complex
information aid drawing inferences and conclusions
but there are many ways to represent data. Here we
show that the kinds of inferences people draw depend
on the kind of visualization, boxes in tables or lines
in graphs. Lines link and boxes contain; they both
direct attention and create meaning.
Keywords: diagrams; information visualization; inference;
data displays.

Introduction
People are always on the move. So are other living
things, and even inanimate things, not just tangibles like
packages, airplanes, and lava but also slang, fashion,
music, rumors. Tracking and understanding movements of
things in space and time is a task shared by scientists,
historians, football coaches, paparazzi, marketers,
physicians, spies, Facebook, event planners, Foursquare,
police, culture mavens, advertisers, gossip columnists,
friends, and more. The movements of beings and things
through space over time are valuable data to be explained
by theories. Why do people or things cluster in one place
or avoid another? Why did person X see Y and then Z?
Why did they meet there? Why is this place popular at
one time and not at another? Speculating about the
movements of people or things over time is endlessly
fascinating, and the number of queries, hypotheses, and
explanations that can be generated enormous.
Making sense of complex data like the movements of
things in space and time is made easier by organizing it
spatially into diagrams. Diagrams are composed of simple
geometric forms, dots, lines, boxes, and more that both
carry meaning and direct attention (e.g., Tversky, 2011;
Tversky, Zacks, Lee, & Heiser, 2000). Lines direct
attention by drawing the eye from place to place, point to
point, connecting the dots. Lines create meaning by
conveying relationships, connections from one place or
point to another, as in route maps or networks or line
graphs. Boxes also direct attention, by bringing the eye to
the contents of the boxes. Boxes are containers, they
enclose one set of elements and separate them from

1

3593

with several possible conclusions and inferences that
could be drawn from the display.

Method
Participants
Eighty-one people, 39 of them men, participated
through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk website. Their ages
ranged from 18 to 75, with a mean of 30.9. Forty-six
percent had a Bachelor’s degree or higher, 39.4% had
some college education, 12.2% went to high school, and
2.5% did not specify education level. Most (93.4%) were
native English speakers.

Figure 3. Example used in the instructions.

Stimuli
The stimuli (Figures 1 and 2) were taken from Kessell
& Tversky (2010). Both showed the locations of four
students at four times of day with time horizontal, place
vertical, and people as cell entries. For the boxes
condition (Figure 1) people were color-coded dots. For
the lines condition (Figure 2), people were coded as
colored lines going from cell to cell. Note that both
conditions have boxes, but in the box condition, they are
filled with the individuals. In the line condition, the boxes
are empty, in the background, acting as points that are
connected by lines.

The sample inferences given were: “The population in
both California and New York grew from 1900 to 2000.
In 1900, the population was greater in New York than in
California. In 2000, the population was greater in
California than in New York.”
Then either the box (Figure 1) or line (Figure 2)
diagram was presented and participants were directed:
“Please study the following graph and use the space
below to draw as many inferences as possible.” After this
task, participants were asked for demographic
information.

Results
Participants typically generated many inferences, often
several in a single phrase, complicating the coding and the
counting. Consequently, inferences and interpretations
were coded and analyzed in two ways: the primary and
secondary organizer used; and the number of different
types of statements/inferences produced. Two people
coded; in the few cases where they disagreed, they
discussed the cases and came to agreement.

Primary and secondary organizers
Figure 1: The box stimulus display

In order to capture the overall structure of the
organization of the interpretations and to compare the
organization produced for each diagrams, we coded the
primary organizer and secondary organizer for each
participant. The inferences could be organized by Time
People, or Location. Here is an example with People as
primary organizer and Time as secondary organizer:
“David went to the dorm in the morning, stayed at the
dorm until noon, went to the library at the afternoon, and
ended up at the bookstore at evening. Justin went to the
dorm in the morning, the bookstore at noon, the gym in
the afternoon and back to the bookstore at evening. Alex
went to the library in the morning, the bookstore at noon,
the gym at the afternoon and to the dorm at evening.
Sammy went to the gym in the morning, to the bookstore
and noon, to the dorm at the afternoon, and stayed at the
dorm until the evening.”
The results of this coding are shown in Figures 4 and 5.
The distribution of primary organizers differs between the
two conditions, χ2 (2; n=81) = 5.815, p=.043; However,

Figure 2: The line stimulus display

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to the box or line
condition. For both, the first screen, seen in Figure 3,
showed an example of a data display, a bar graph, along

2

3594

the secondary organizers did not differ between
conditions: χ2 (2; n=81) = 2.489, p=.288.

Generality: any statement that involves more than one
person, time, or place (but is not a parallel statement). For
example, “The bookstore is the most consistently visited
places for the guys” and “David and Sammy spent more
time in the Dorms that the others.” Generalities also
include many inferences.
Leap: any interpretation that went beyond the
information given. For examples, “David and Sammy are
friends,” “David is probably unfit,” “Alex manages his
time well and gets everything done,” and “Since Justin
does not return to the dorm in the evening I would infer
that he is probably dating a student who works at the
bookstore and spends evenings at her place.”
Negation: a negative statement from information given
in the diagrams. For examples, “David never goes to the
gym,” “No one goes to the bookstore in the morning,”
and “Students are not required to use the library or
gym.”
The mean numbers of statements in each category are
given in Figures 6 (error bars indicate standard error).

Figure 4. Distribution of primary organizer by condition.

Figure 5. Distribution of secondary organizer by condition

Figure 6. Frequencies of kinds of inferences given to box
and line displays.

For both box and line displays, the default primary
organizer was People, followed by Location and then
Time. However, people dominated far more for lines than
for boxes. The dominant secondary organizer for lines
was Time, whereas the dominant secondary organizer for
boxes was Place.

Differences in the frequencies of the statement
categories between the two displays were examined by a
generalized linear model with a Poisson distribution for
each dependent variable. The results (χ2 statistics and pvalues) are shown below in Table 1.
Table 1. Tests of differences between conditions
Inference type
Wald χ2 (1)
p-value
Single
17.828
< .001
Parallel
14.608
< .001
Generality
15.156
< .001
Leaps
0.771
.380
Negation
20.86
<.001
Word Count
30.413
<.001

Number of statements/inferences
As the previous example illustrates, the inference
statements were organized and structured. Careful
examination of the protocols revealed that most
statements could be categorized as follows.
Single statement: a statement that referred to a single
cell of the matrix, i.e., one person, one time and one
place. For example, “David is in the dorm in the
morning.”
Parallel: a set of related statements in the same format,
that is, organized by the same features in the same way.
Parallel statements contain many inferences, that is, they
refer to information in many cells. For example, the
following statement is counted as one parallel statement:
“Justin went to the dorm in the morning, the bookstore at
noon, the gym in the afternoon and back to the bookstore
in the evening.” Parallel statements invite repetition, and
were often repeated.

The analyses confirm that the box displays yielded
more single statements, generalities, and negations than
the line displays, and that the line displays yielded more
parallel statements than the box displays. There was no
significant difference in number of leaps.
Because of the diversity of statements, there is no
sensible way to count and compare the total number of
inferences drawn from each display. Some brief
statements summarized many information cells, and other
3

3595

statements conveyed none. However, the word count was
higher for lines (mean=90) than boxes (mean=79); this
may be due to the large quantity of parallel statements,
which are relatively long, for lines.

people as cell entries. Time and space are fixed
dimensions (place was not located dimensionally here, but
commonly is, in maps). Only people are movable, perhaps
the reason they were selected for the cell entries.
People was by far the most popular organizer for
inferences. This is most likely due to that fact that people
are agents, for the most part, they decide where to go and
when. People is also preferred to Place or Time for
organizing both episodic (e. g., Taylor & Tversky, 1997)
and autobiographical memory (e. g., Wagenaar, 1986). In
both cases, organization of memory is multiple and
flexible, but organization by People is privileged.
Location and time, like people, can be good predictors of
activities, but people are agentive, and for that and a
variety of other reasons, are better and preferred as
organizers of memory.
The display format, line graph or table, affected both
quantity and quality of inferences. The different patterns
of inferences suggest that tables and line graphs induce
different strategies for exploring the data. Those presented
with tables seemed to focus on the cells, producing more
single statements that described single cells. They noticed
when cells had many entries, producing relatively more
generalities, such as the crowd at the bookstore at noon.
They also noted empty cells, producing negations that
observed the absence of people in the bookstore in the
morning or the gym at night. By contrast, those presented
with lines used the lines to explore the data, focusing on
each person’s movements in turn across cells. Lines led
the eye and the mind from cell to cell; matrices led the
eye and the mind to the cells.
Which is better? Like almost everything, it depends. If
you are tracking parcels or thieves or spies or consumers
or celebrities, then lines will focus you on the important
information. On the other hand, if you’re entertaining
many hypotheses, then use tables. Just be aware that what
you choose makes a difference.

Discussion
Diagrams of complex information use marks and place
on the page to convey information effectively (e.g.,
Tversky, 2011; Nickerson, Corter, Tversky, Rho, Zahner
& Yu, 2013). Such diagrams are meant to spur a wide
range of conclusions, inferences, and hypotheses.
Designers of displays are faced with many decisions for
portraying the data, and those choices affect the kinds of
inferences that viewers make. In particular, data points
can be connected by lines or enclosed in boxes. Lines
suggest relationships and links whereas boxes contain and
suggest contrasts with other boxes.
Here, information about movements of people in place
and time were organized with lines or boxes,
corresponding to two common diagrammatic formats, line
graphs and tables. Participants were asked to make as
many inferences as they could from one of the displays.
Overall, participants produced a large number of
generalities that linked information that was separated in
the data, showing that they did attempt to integrate the
information. In general, People was the dominant
organizer of inferences. As predicted, the two spatial
organizations of data, lines and boxes, had dramatic
effects on the kinds of inferences drawn from the data,
movements of people in space and time. Lines connected
people over space and time. Although People was the
dominant organizer in both cases, People was far more
dominant when lines connected each person’s movements
over time, and Time was the dominant secondary
organizer. Lines also encouraged more parallel
inferences, inferences with the same structure and format.
These are sets of inferences structured in the same way: X
went to A at time 1, to B at time 2, etc. With boxes, people
dominated as first organizer, but Place rather than Time
dominated as secondary organizer. Boxes also encouraged
more statements about single features of the information,
more generalities involving many features, more leaps
that went far beyond the information given, and more
negations, that is, statements about empty cells.
Displays of this information are used for exploration
and understanding of the underlying phenomena driving
the movements as well as conveying them to others.
Visuospatial characteristics of information displays affect
the kinds of inferences drawn from the information,
factors like position in space, marks such as lines and
boxes, and content of the dimensions. People, place, and
time are three-dimensional data, and three-dimensional
displays are famously difficult to comprehend, biased
toward the variables on the axes (e. g., Carpenter & Shah,
1998). Based on previous research (Kessell & Tversky,
2010), we chose the consensus arrangement of the three
variables, time on the Y axis, place on the X axis, and

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge awards IIS0725223, HHC-0905417, IIS-0855995 and IIS-0968561
from the National Science Foundation, and the Stanford
Regional Visualization and Analysis Center for partial
support of the research or preparation of the manuscript.

References
Carpenter, P.A., & Shah, P. (1998). A model of the
perceptual and conceptual processes in graph
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 4, 75-100.
Kessell, A.M. & Tversky, B. (2010). Visualizing space,
time, and agents: Production, performance, and
preference. Cognitive Processing, 12, 43-52.
Nickerson, J. V., Corter, J. E., Tversky, B., Rho, Y-J.,
Zahner, D., & Yu, L. (2013). Cognitive tools shape
4

3596

thought: diagrams in design. Cognitive Processing,
published online Feb. 15, 2013.
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1997). Indexing events in
memory: Evidence for index preferences. Memory, 5,
509-542.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizations of thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 499-535.
Tversky, B, Zacks, J., Lee, P. U., & Heiser, J. (2000).
Lines, blobs, crosses, and arrows: Diagrammatic
communication with schematic figures.
In M.
Anderson, P. Cheng, & V. Haarslev (Eds.), Theory and
application of diagrams.
Pp. 221-230. Berlin:
Springer.
Wagenaar, W.A. (1986). My memory: A study of
autobiographical memory over six years. Cognitive
Psychology, 18, 225-252.

Zacks J & Tversky B. (1999) Bars and lines: a study of
graphic communication. Memory and Cognition, 27,
1073–1079.

5

3597

