UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonetic variation and the recognition of words with pronunciation variants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01z525wt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sumner, Meghan
Kurumada, Chigusa
Gafter, Roey
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonetic variation and the recognition of words with pronunciation variants
Meghan Sumner (sumner@stanford.edu), Chigusa Kurumada (kurumada@stanford.edu), Roey J. Gafter
(gafter@stanford.edu), Marisa Casillas (middyp@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Margaret Jacks Hall, Bldg. 460
Stanford, CA 94305-2150 USA

Abstract

with pronunciation variants typically compare a frequent
(commonly produced) variant (e.g., [ɾ] or [n_]) to an
canonical, but infrequent variant (e.g., [t] or [nt]).
Interestingly, in this area of research, two conceptuallyidentical studies have found evidence for lexical
representations that are specified for a particular
pronunciation variant. In one case, though, the data suggest
that the frequent variant is stored (Connine, 2004). In the
other case, the data suggest that the canonical variant is
stored (Pitt, 2009). We call this the representation paradox.
Specifically, these studies found:

Studies on the effects of pronunciation variants on spoken word
recognition have seemingly contradictory results – some find
support for a lexical representation that contains a frequent
variant, others, an infrequent (but idealized) variant. We argue
that this paradox is resolved by appealing to the phonetics of the
overall word. In two phoneme categorization studies, we
examined the categorization of the initial sounds of words that
contain either tap or [t]. Listeners identified the initial sound of
items along a voiced-voiceless continuum (e,g, bottom–pottom,
produced with word-medial [t] or tap). No preference for wordforming responses for either variant was found. But, a bias
toward voiced responses for words with [t] was found. We
suggest this reflects a categorization bias dependent on speaking
style, and claim that the difference in responses to words with
different variants is best attributed to the phonetic composition
of the word, not to a particular pronunciation variant.

(1) Frequency bias: A cost for words produced with [t],
like baiting produced like bay-ting, (Connine, 2004)
compared to those produced with the more common tap
([ɾ]) variant, and

Keywords: phonetic variation, pronunciation variation, speech
perception, phoneme categorization, lexical representation

Introduction
As listeners, we face a speech signal that is riddled with
variation, with countless acoustic realizations of any given
word. Words stream by listeners at a rate of about 5–7
syllables per second, further complicating the listener’s task.
How listeners understand spoken words despite this
variation is an issue central to linguistic theory.
The finding that lexical representations are rich with
phonetic detail along with associated theories of
representation and lexical access have greatly advanced our
understanding of this process (e.g., Goldinger, 1998;
Johnson, 2006). Incorporating variation into theory was a
major step toward a full explanation of spoken language
understanding.1 But, claims made by lexical-representationbased accounts are becoming increasingly difficult to
validate or falsify.
Studies that examine the effects of pronunciation variants
on spoken word recognition highlight this point. Two
different realizations of a sound are considered
pronunciation variants. For example, one can produce the
word baiting with a [t], sounding like bay-ting or with a tap
[ɾ], sounding more like bay-ding. Or, one can produce the
word center with a [t], sounding like sen-ter, or without [n_]
(though some acoustic residue is likely to remain), sounding
like sen-ner. Studies that examine the recognition of words
1

This is a move often discussed, but still largely absent from
theories of spoken word recognition; see McLennan & Luce
(2005) for related discussion.

(2) Canonical bias: A benefit for words with [t], like
center produced sounding like sen-ter (Pitt, 2009)
compared those produced with the more common postnasal deletion variant ([n_]) (sounding like sen-ner).
In this paper, we suggest that this paradox has resulted for
two reasons. First, pronunciation variants are typically
examined independent of the phonetic composition of the
entire word (see also Andruski et al., 1994). While it is true
that we may produce [t] or [ɾ] in a word like baiting, it is
also true that each variant co-varies with a different set of
acoustic correlates across the word. Second, in the examples
in (1) and (2), it is not clear that listener responses are
driven by stored lexical forms in this task, and not by these
co-present acoustic cues.
It is undoubtedly the case that detailed representations
exist. But, it is also the case that (1) listeners are highly
sensitive to acoustic fluctuations in speech (Clayards,
Tanenhaus, Aslin, & Jacobs, 2008; Green, Tomiak, & Kuhl,
1997; McMurray & Aslin, 2005; McMurray, Tanenhaus, &
Aslin, 2009), (2) low-level acoustic mismatches result in
major perceptual costs either from manipulations resulting
in incongruent cues (Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1996) or
from intentionally mispronounced sounds (Gow, 2001,
2003; Sumner & Samuel, 2005), and (3) acoustic cues
inform a listener not only about linguistic units, but provide
expectations about the style of a speech event (Labov, 1966;
among many others)
In this paper, we ground ourselves broadly in a phonetic
perspective and make two suggestions. First, we suggest
that different pronunciation variants are processed equally

3486

well when presented in a congruent phonetic word frame.
Note that this is not inconsistent with an exemplar account,
but suggests only that these representations are not at play
here, and the canonical bias in (2) results from an artificial
bias toward the canonical variant. Second, we suggest that
once we accept that all variants are processed equally well
by listeners, we need to reconsider the exaplanatory burden
placed on exemplars for theories accommodating variation
during spoken word recognition.

Categorization and pronunciation variants
As mentioned, current studies diverge on how listeners
respond to words with different pronunciation variants in
spoken word recognition. The frequent variant is the one
uttered by speakers with the highest frequency, and is often
regarded as a reduced form, (i.e., [ɾ] and [n_]; see Patterson
& Connine, 2001). The canonical variant is less common in
casual conversation, but is more likely to be produced in
careful speech, and may be more faithful to orthography
(e.g., [t] and [nt]).
Through a series of phoneme categorization studies,
Connine (2004) examined the perception of the initial
sounds of words that contain either tap or [t]. Creating
voiced-voiceless continua for words like baiting (baiting–
paiting, produced either with word-medial [t] or tap),
listeners were asked to identify the initial sound of items
along the continuum. Listeners made more word-forming
responses (in this case, “B” responses) to items with the
frequent tap than to items with canonical [t]. She argued that
in words like baiting, the tap is stored in the lexical form.
Consistent with exemplar accounts of lexical access
(Goldinger, 1998; Johnson, 1997, 2006; Pierrehumbert,
2001, 2002), the cost associated with [t] is argued to result
from access to a frequency-based lexical representation (see
also LoCasto & Connine, 2002).
Through his own series of phoneme categorization
studies, Pitt examined post-nasal [t]-deletion in words like
center. Comparing responses to items along a center–
shenter continuum ([nt]) to those along a cenner–shenner
([n_]) continuum, he found that listeners made more wordforming responses (in this case, “S” responses) to items with
the canonical [nt] than to items with the frequent [n_]. In
this case, the benefit associated with [t] is argued to result
from access to a canonical representation.
Maybe differences encoding words or word forms exist,
and there is no paradox at all. One would need to argue that
baiting and center are treated differently, and that
experience with one yields a surface-based representation
and experience with another yields a canonical
representation. In this case, tapping and post-nasal [t]
deletion are different processes which affect representations
differently (e.g. the former could be viewed as an altered
form, and the latter a phonological deletion (though a nasal
tap may be a residual phonetic cue to the t-deletion
process)). Here we offer another alternative explanation:
The apparent paradoxical dissolves when we consider the

phonetic composition of the word frame that houses a
particular pronunciation variant.

The phonetic perspective
Consider again the example of baiting. The use of the [t]variant is constrained by speech style, occurring (though
rarely) in extra careful speech (Shockey, 2003). When [t] is
used, the entire word (word-level phonetic variation) is
hyperarticulated, so that [t] co-occurs with other predictable
acoustic values (longer stop closure, longer duration of the
previous vowels, de Jong, 1998, p. 293). In contrast, the tap,
when produced in casual speech, co-occurs with cues
common to casual speech (short, centralized vowels, shorter
overall duration, reduced amplitude).
Interestingly, the usage patterns of each pronunciation
variant pair ([t]–[ɾ]; [nt]–[n_]) differ greatly. The production
of tap is nearly categorical in American English (AE),
produced nearly 97% of the time in running speech
(Patterson & Connine, 2001), typically uttered in a casual
frame with approximant-like characteristics, but is so often
pronounced that it can occur in a careful phonetic frame
(Tucker, 2011). The [t] variant is virtually never uttered, but
when uttered, it is paired with a careful phonetic frame. In
contrast, the same is not true for post-nasal t-deletion.
While rampant in AE, it is less likely as the onset of a
prominent syllable (Raymond et al., 2006), so as one shifts
to a careful speaking style, post-nasal t-deletion becomes
less likely. Critically, the stimuli used in both studies
involved different pronunciation variants uttered in
controlled, careful phonetic frames, biasing a listener
against the frequent-variant in the Pitt study.2
Consider Figure 1, which illustrates 6 different
productions of the word beating. Along a hyper-tohypoarticulation continuum (Lindblom, 1991), half of these
productions include the phonological variant [t], the other
half include the phonological variant [ɾ].3

2

Pitt (2009, page 903) mentions that the with-[t] production and
deleted-[t] production differ by 55 msec (605 vs. 550), which,
when carefully-articulated, is the approximate time needed to
produce a voiceless alveolar stop, including release. Connine
(2004) mentions that the two were phonetically-controlled, as she
spliced the variants into a single token that served as the base form.
3
These examples were created by asking a naïve speaker to
produce the word beating (extremely carefully; carefully; casually;
extremely casually). We created spectrograms for the longest and
shortest productions that contained [t] (1, 3; left column) and for
those that contained [ɾ] (3, 5; right column). We chose one of many
productions in between the endpoints to represent the gradient
productions along the continuum.

3487

typically co-vary with each variant. We do this for two
reasons: First, while this task is based on work by Ganong
(1980) showing that lexical status drives categorization
responses (listeners make more “T” responses on a taskdask continuum than a tesk-desk continuum), it is not
immune to low-level perceptual responses that may also
drive categorization (McMurray, et al., 2009; Sumner,
2011). Second, replicating within task as a first step enables
us to better interpret past work.

Methods

Figure 1. Sample productions of the word beating produced with
[t] (left column) or [ɾ] (right column). The schema represents a
categorical view of the pronunciation variants, with co-varying
phonetic patterns, but also shows that a variant may be natural or
forced in a particular phonetic frame.

Figure 1 illustrates the wide-range of variation that
appears not only in different productions of each
pronunciation variant, but also in the variation across word
utterances. The spectrograms in row 3 likely illustrate the
stimuli used in the studies discussed, as they are
phonetically similar independent of the variant examined.
We are interested in comparing variants, like [t] or [ɾ], in
different phonetic frames. In Figure 1, the spectrograms in
the middle of each variant-specific continuum reflect the
types of phonetic patterns we find in words uttered with one
variant or another. We investigate listener responses to
words with [t] that have a more carefully-articulated
phonetic word frame to words with [ɾ] that have a more
casually-articulated word frame. The stimuli that exemplify
this comparison are marked with black tabs.
Across two experiments, we examine the perception of
words with pronunciation variants dependent on the
phonetic composition of critical words and fillers.
Replicating the methods of prior studies, we examine the
perception of word-initial stops of words with either [t] or
[ɾ], but show that the effects can be attributed more to the
phonetic composition of words and fillers (and the
expectations and information those provide) than to the
pronunciation variants themselves.

Experiment 1
In Exp. 1, we investigate responses to words with [t] and tap
when the variants are embedded in phonetic frames that

Participants Thirty-five native monolingual speakers of AE
participated in this experiment for credit. All were Stanford
University undergraduate students. No participants reported
any hearing-related issues.
Materials Eight critical words were used in this study. Four
words were b-initial (e.g., bottom) and four were p-initial
(e.g., pattern). In addition to the critical words, we included
seven b-initial fillers, and seven p-initial (three for each
onset without /t/, believe, police; four for each onset with
final /t/, bait, put). Critically, the voiced/voiceless
counterpart of all words (critical and filler) resulted in a
pseudoword (e.g., bottom/*pottom, believe/*pelieve). The
inclusion of fillers served two purposes (1) to control for
response bias (Exp. 1) and to include word-external
phonetic support for a casual or careful speaking style (Exp.
2). Each word was recorded, along with its voiced/voiceless
pseudoword counterpart in two articulation types: Casual
speech and Careful speech. This resulted in eight Careful/[t]
and eight l Casual/[ɾ] critical words. A continuum was
created for each word, as described below.
Stimuli Creation From our recordings, we created b-p
continua, resulting in a word-pseudoword continuum for
each item. To avoid naturalness differences across onsets,
all items were manipulated from the nonword base. Using
PSOLA in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2008), we then
created a 10-step continuum for each item (from 0 to 45
msec in five msec steps) by increasing or decreasing the
amount of aspiration in each word. We should note here
that we expect an overall bias toward “P” responses, as on
this continuum, there are more responses that typically fall
within the English voiceless category.
Design This experiment was designed to examine the
proportion of word-forming responses (e.g., “B” for bottompottom continua; “P” for pattern-battern continua) resulting
from listening to Careful/[t] words and Casual/[ɾ] words.
The design was a 2x2 within-subjects design, where the
main factors were onset (p, b) and variant/articulation type
([t]/Careful, [ɾ]/Casual).
Procedure Participants completed the task individually or
in groups of two or three in a sound-attenuated booth. All
160 critical items (8 critical words X 2 articulation types X
10 continuum steps) were randomized with 140 filler items
and presented to participants one at a time in isolation over
Sennheiser 390 Pro headphones at a comfortable listening
level using E-Prime experimental presentation software.
Participants were instructed to listen carefully to each word

3488

presented, to decide whether the token they heard began
with a P or B, and then press the corresponding button.
Response categories were held constant for each participant,
but randomized across participants, so the “B” button
appeared equally on the right and in the left across
participants. A new trial began one second after a response
was recorded, and three seconds if no response was made.
Predictions Evidence for the frequency bias should result in
more word-forming responses to words with tap than to
words with [t]. Evidence for the canonical bias should
result in more word-forming responses for words with [t]
than words with tap. Evidence that this task better reflects
pre-lexical responses independent of specified lexical
representations should yield some pattern that reflects an
influence of the phonetic frame of the words.

Results and Discussion

Proportion of voiced responses

Proportion of word-forming responses

A mixed logit regression analysis was employed to predict
the participants’ word-forming responses. We report the
results for the model with maximum random effect structure
justified by the data based on model comparison (Jaeger,
2008), which contained random by-subject and by-item
intercepts. Initial analyses were based on the proportion of
word-forming responses, following past work, and show no
main effect of articulation type (β = .11 p >.47). A closer
look revealed that responses to b-initial words differed
dramatically from those to p-initial words. Specifically, binitial words resulted in a higher proportion of wordforming responses for Careful/[t] words than for Casual/[ɾ]
words (β = 1.1 p <.002). Mean proportions of word-forming
responses are provided in Figure 2. The onset-based
differences suggest that when collapsing across onset, the
effects cancel each other out.
1.0

Formality

1.0

0.8

Careful
Casual

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

B-initial

P-initial

B-initial

P-i nitial

Figure 2. Two plots for resulting data depending on
response label: Proportion word-forming responses (left);
Proportion voiced responses (right).
The data pattern is unexpected if responses are driven by
the pronunciation variant. Were these effects due to the
activation of a lexical representation with one pronunciation
variant or the other, we would expect the Careful/[t] and
Casual/[ɾ] items to behave similarly for each onset with
respect to word-forming responses. This is not the case.
Here, a “B” response to b-initial words is consistent with

both a “word” response and a “voiced” response (e.g., I
heard a [b] not a [p]). For p-initial words, a “P” response
corresponds with a word-forming response, but not a
“voiced” response.
The right panel of Figure 2 plots the data by proportion
voiced responses. Any influence of co-varying phonetic
cues present in the congruent word frames is likely to
surface independent of the lexicon—as a phonetic bias.
Analyzing the data in terms of proportion voiced responses
reveals that Careful [t] items result in a higher proportion of
voiced responses (“B” regardless of lexical status) than
Casual/[ɾ] items (β = -.5 p <.003). This suggests that listener
responses depend on the phonetics, not on access to a stored
lexical representation. A higher proportion of “B” responses
reflects a different categorization boundary between the two
articulation types, with more aspiration (longer VOT)
required to prompt a “P” response in careful speech,
resulting in a higher proportion of “B” responses.
One implication is that the pronunciation variants have
little to do with the response patterns in this paradigm. The
high number of “P” responses for p-initial words likely
reflects combined influences of the asymmetrical breakup of
the VOT continuum in English, and lexical status. In order
for the variant effects to be attributed to lexical
representations, the patterns of responses to words with [t]
and words with tap must behave similarly across onsets,
predicted by a view where the most accessible lexical
representation is the best match to the incoming signal
(Johnson, 2006). We would expect results analogous with
the lexical effect; which we do not find.
If this paradigm is capturing phonetic responses rather
than lexical responses, then we should reconsider claims
made about the nature and activation of variant-dependent
lexical representations more broadly. Certainly, it is now
fact that listener memory for auditory events is detailed.
But, this does not imply that all accommodation of variation
is handled at the level of the lexicon. One prediction a
phonetic account makes is that as the articulation type
becomes more predictable, the phonetic categorization bias
should be more robust. For example, if item presentation
were to be blocked by articulation type, listeners would
have information about the speech style well before each
critical item. We cast the effect as a category boundary
difference mediated by word-level phonetic variation.
Therefore, the effects are not due to lexical activation. We
predict, then, an increase in evidence of a speech style will
reinforce the different VOT thresholds, and will result in a
greater difference between the two articulation types.

Experiment 2
Our goal in Exp. 2 was to increase the predictability of a
particular articulation type. One prediction of our claim that
the basic effects are driven by the phonetic composition of
the words and not by the pronunciation variant is that effects
should fluctuate as evidence of a particular speech style
increases. Blocking the stimuli by articulation type enabled
us to test this prediction.

3489

Methods
Participants Thirty-four native monolingual speakers of
AE participated in this experiment for credit. All were
Stanford University undergraduate students. No participants
reported any hearing-related issues.
Materials The stimuli from Exp. 1 were used.
Design The design was identical to Exp. 1 with one
exception: Stimuli were blocked by articulation type
(careful vs. casual). Block order was randomized, as was the
presentation order of items within a block.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Exp. 1.

Results and Discussion
Using the same statistical approach as in Experiment 1, we
analyzed the data to predict proportions of voiced responses.
Proportions of voiced responses by condition are provided
in Table 1.
Table 1. Proportion of voiced responses from Exp. 2.
Typ e

Con d ition

N

Prop or tion Stan dar d S tan d ar d Con fid enc e
Voi ce d
De viati on
Err or
In ter val
Re sp on ses

B-initial

Cas ual /[_] 1119
Car eful/[t] 1117

0.235
0.286

0.424
0.452

0.012
0.013

0.024
0.026

P-initial

Cas ual /[_] 1141
Car eful/[t] 1141

0.105
0.175

0.306
0.380

0.009
0.011

0.017
0.022

!

We find that participants are more likely to respond “B” in
the Careful/[t] condition than in the Casual/[ɾ] condition (β
= -.76 p <.002). To investigate the phonetic effects across
experiments, we conducted an additional analysis on the
first 100 items for all conditions across Exp. 1 and Exp. 2.
The first 100 trials were examined to minimize the influence
of learning throughout the experiment. The first 100 trials
give us the best picture of participant responses dependent
on the nature of the filler items. The proportion of voiced
responses for the first 100 items across experiments and
conditions are provided in Figure 3
Proportion of voiced responses

0.35
0.30
0.25

Formality
Careful
Casual

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
Exp 1

Exp 2

Figure 3. Proportion voiced responses to Careful/[t] items
and Casual/[ɾ] items collapsed across onset type for Exp. 1
(left) and Exp. 2 (right) for first 100 trials.

The difference suggests that the word-external information
available serves to stabilize different categorization criteria,
resulting in a higher rate of voiced responses in the
Careful/[t] condition than that found in Exp. 1.

General Discussion
We began this study based on our observations that (1)
effects of pronunciation variants are typically examined
independently from the phonetic composition of the wordframe in which they are uttered and (2) accounts of opposite
pronunciation variant effects that intuitively seem
incompatible with each other are both viable under an
exemplar-theoretic interpretation. While it is accepted and
verified that lexical representations are rich with phonetic
detail, we sought to investigate phonetic effects in speech
perception independent of the lexicon.
To do this, we investigated pronunciation variants that are
embedded in congruent phonetic frames. We then examined
the responses made to voiced- and voiceless-initial words
when presented in a single block with careful and casual
speech styles mixed (Exp.1). Finally, we strengthened the
expectations based on speech style by blocking the stimuli
by articulation type (Exp.2).
In Exp. 1, considering responses made by listeners as
word-forming caused some difficulty. The data are more
easily accounted for by considering the responses as voicedvoiceless, not as word-forming or pseudoword-forming. In a
careful word frame, listeners require a longer VOT before
they will switch to a “P” categorization than in a casual
frame. Alternatively, this could be driven by an increased
likelihood to press “P” at the slightest hint of aspiration in
casual word frame.4 In Exp. 2, we found that increasing the
likelihood of a carefully-articulated word (via critical items
with phonetically-congruent fillers) increased voiced
responses compared to Exp. 1.
One implication of this work is that the canonical bias is,
in part, artificially bolstered by our comparisons. And,
reconsidering past work, there is support for this notion. A
number of studies that have found a canonical effect
examine a frequent variant embedded in an incongruent
phonetic frame (Andruski, et al., 1994; Gaskell & MarslenWilson, 1996). Our data show that the effects here, and
likely in some number of previous studies, are due more to
congruence between a phonetic frame and a pronunciation
variant and to expectation-based categorization than to the
activation of a particular lexical representation (or of a more
available lexical representation, if we assume there are
within-word phonetic clouds). The next step is to consider
how frequency-based accounts of lexical access are separate
from and integrated with the pre-lexical processes listeners
use to navigate a variable speech stream.

4

While we cannot distinguish the two here, both are compatible
with a phonetic explanation of the data rather than one dependent
on the pronunciation variants.

3490

Conclusion
We have discussed one limit of exemplar-accounts of
variation effects, and have tailored our investigation to
examine an apparent paradox in the literature in which two
representative studies account for opposing data with the
same broad representation-based interpretation. We
highlighted both the ways in which phonetic variation might
interact with pronunciation variants in speech production,
and presented two experiments aimed at understanding the
effects of this interaction. As listeners exhibited a strong
bias toward voiced responses for Careful/[t] tokens,
amplified by within-speech style blocking, we suggest that
the difference between the conditions is entirely due to the
phonetic composition of the word, absent the influence of
detailed lexical representations.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Benjamin Lokshin for his assistance with
data collection, and to Jason Grafmiller and Kyuwon Moon
for valuable comments and discussion. This material is
based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation Grant BCS - 0720054 to Meghan Sumner. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

References
Andruski J. E., Blumstein S., & Burton M. (1994). The
effect of subphonetic differences on lexical access.
Cognition, 52, 163-187.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2011). Praat: doing phonetics
by computer [Computer program]. Version 5.0.43,
retrieved from http://www.praat.org/.
Clayards, M., Tanenhaus, M.K., Aslin, R.N., and Jacobs,
R.A. (2008). Perception of speech reflects optimal use of
probabilistic speech cues. Cognition, 804-809.
Connine, C.M. (2004). It’s not what you hear but how often
you hear it: On the neglected role of phonological variant
frequency in auditory word recognition. Psychological
Bulletin and Review, 11, 1084-1089.
de Jong, K. J. 1998. Stress-related Variation in the
Articulation of Coda Alveolar Stops: Flapping Revisited.
Journal of Phonetics, 26, 283 –310.
Gaskell, M. G. & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1996).
Phonological variation and inference in lexical access.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 22, 144-158.
Goldinger, S. D. (1998). Echoes of echoes? An episodic
theory of lexical access. Psychological Review, 105, 25179.
Gow, D. W. Jr., (2001). Assimilation and anticipation in
continuous spoken word recognition. Journal of Memory
and Language, 45, 133–159.
Gow, D. W. Jr., (2003). Feature parsing: Feature cue
mapping in spoken word recognition. Perception &
Psychophysics, 65, 575–590.

Green, K. P., Tomiak, G. R., Kuhl, P. K. (1997). The
encoding of rate and talker information during phonetic
perception. Perception and Psychophysics, 59, 675-692.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical Data Analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards Logit
Mixed Models. Journal of Memory and Language 59,
434-446.
Johnson, K. (2006). Resonance in an exemplar-based
lexicon: The emergence of social identity and phonology.
Journal of Phonetics, 34, 485-499.
Labov, W. (1966). The social stratification of English in
New York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied
Linguistics.
Lindblom, B. (1990). Explaining phonetic variation: A
sketch of the H and H theory. In: Hardcastle, W &
Marchal, A (Eds.), Speech production and speech
modeling, (pp. 403-439). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
LoCasto, R. C., & Connine, C. M. (2002). Rule-governed
missing information in spoken word recognition: Schwa
vowel deletion. Perception & Psychophysics, 64, 208–
219.
Luce, P. A., & McLennan, C. (2005). Spoken word
recognition: The challenge of variation. In D. B., Pisoni &
R. E. Remez (Eds.), Handbook of Speech Perception, pp
591-609.
McMurray, B., and Aslin, R.N. (2005). Infants are sensitive
to within-category variation in speech perception.
Cognition, 95, B15-B26.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M.K., and Aslin, R.N. (2009).
Within-category VOT affects recovery from "lexical"
garden paths: Evidence against phoneme-level inhibition.
Patterson, D. & Connine, C.M. (2001). Variant frequency in
flap production: A corpus analysis of variant frequency in
American English flap production. Phonetica, 58, 254275.
Pierrehumbert, J.B. (2002). Word-specific phonetics.
Laboratory Phonology, 7, 101-139.
Pierrehumbert, J.B. (2001). Exemplar dynamics: Word
frequency, lenition and contrast. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper
(eds.), Frequency and the emergence of linguistic
structure (pp. 137–157). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Pitt, M.A. (2009). The strength and time course of lexical
activation of pronunciation variants. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 35, 896-910.
Shockey, L. (2003). Sound patterns of spoken English.
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Sumner, M. (2011). The role of variation in the perception
of accented speech. Cognition, 119, 131-36.
Sumner, M. and Samuel, A.G. (2005). Perception and
representation of regular variation: The case of final-/t/.
Journal of Memory and Language, 52, 322-338.
Tucker, B.V. (2011). The effect of reduction on the
processing of flaps and /g/ in isolated words. Journal of
Phonetics, 39, 312-318.

3491

