UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Picture-Word Interference with Masked and Visible Distractors: Different Types of Semantic
Relatedness Inhibit Lexical Selection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9rn64056

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Spalek, Katharina
Damian, Markus

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Picture-Word Interference with Masked and Visible Distractors:
Different Types of Semantic Relatedness Inhibit Lexical Selection
Katharina Spalek (katharina.spalek@staff.hu-berlin.de)
Department of German Language and Linguistics, Humboldt-University Berlin,
Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany

Markus F. Damian (m.damian@bristol.ac.uk)
University of Bristol, School of Experimental Psychology,
12a Priory Road, Bristol BS8 1TU, United Kingdom
Abstract
One question in word production is how the presence of a
semantically related word affects the naming process. It has
been suggested that semantic effects in picture-word
interference tasks are a net result of both inhibitory and
facilitatory processes that take place at different processing
levels. Finkbeiner and Caramazza (2006) argued that masking
distractor words removes the inhibitory component, leaving
only lexical facilitation. We investigated this claim by
comparing different types of semantic relationship –
categorical relatedness, associative relatedness, and a
combination of both – in picture-word interference with
masked and visible distractors. We observed inhibitory effects
in all conditions. In the visible condition, semantic category
coordinates exerted the strongest inhibition, while in the
masked condition, associatively related distractors interfered
most. These findings are not easily reconciled with previous
findings on polarity shifts of semantic effects with masked
distractors. We discuss how all present findings could be
explained within the same framework.
Keywords: lexical access, competition, response exclusion,
picture-word interference, unconscious access

Introduction
In the last decade, models of speech production that assume
a competitive process of lexical selection (e.g., Levelt,
Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999) have been subjected to strong and
sometimes heated criticism and equally passionate defense
(see, e.g., Spalek, Damian, & Bölte, 2012, for a summary of
the arguments). The majority of empirical findings for (and
against) the assumption of competitive lexical selection
comes from experiments using the picture-word interference
paradigm (e.g., Rosinski, 1977): Participants have to name
pictures presented on the screen. Pictures are presented
together with to-be-ignored distractor words (either in
written or in spoken form). An often-repeated finding is that
participants’ responses are slower when the distractor word
belongs to the same semantic category (e.g., fruit) as the
target word (e.g., Schriefers, Meyer, & Levelt, 1990) than
when it belongs to an unrelated category. This has been
taken as evidence for lexical competition: Target and
distractor word are connected at the conceptual level
through a common category node and prime each other.
This results in two strongly activated representations,
making the selection of the target representation more
difficult and hence, more time-consuming (e.g., Roelofs,
1992).

An alternative explanation for the effects observed in the
picture-word interference paradigm has been formulated in
the so-called response exclusion hypothesis (e.g., Mahon et
al., 2007): There is no competition between the lexical
entries of a target word (the picture name) and a coactivated competitor (the distractor word). Interference
arises at a later, post-lexical, processing level: Before a
word can be pronounced, it occupies a single-channel output
buffer. If the element in the buffer is the target word, it can
be articulated; if it is the distractor, it has to be removed
from the buffer before the target can enter the buffer and,
eventually, be produced. According to Mahon and
colleagues, the buffer knows about basic semantic
properties of its entries. A word which is relevant to the
experimental (or communicative) goal is more difficult to
remove from the buffer than a word that is irrelevant to the
task. Therefore, if the task is to name the picture of an
animal, for example “dog”, a distractor like “mouse” will be
more difficult to remove from the buffer than a distractor
like “pear”.
The idea that interference occurs at a post-lexical
processing level has received some support from findings
with masked distractor presentation in picture-word
interference studies: Finkbeiner and Caramazza (2006) had
participants name pictures with visible distractors,
replicating the semantic interference effect. When they
presented the same stimuli but masked distractors such that
participants weren’t consciously aware of the distractors’
identity, the semantic inhibition effect turned into a strong
and reliable facilitation effect. Finkbeiner and Caramazza
argue that the unconscious presentation prevented the
distractor word from occupying the response buffer.
Therefore, no competition effect was observed. However,
the distractor words were still active enough to prime
semantically related items in the mental lexicon, causing a
net effect of facilitation. The finding that masking a
distractor word turns inhibition into facilitation has been
replicated by Dhooge and Hartsuiker (2010).
As noted by several researchers (e.g., LaHeij, Dirkx, &
Kramer, 1990), studies on semantic inhibition effects
usually do not report the degree of association between
target and distractor word. Pairs such as cat and dog and cat
and horse are both related because they belong to the
category animals. However, cat and dog are also
associatively related because they often co-occur in the

1366

language, and if people are asked to freely associate words
in response to cat, dog is often one of the first associates
produced. Finkbeiner and Caramazza (2006) don’t provide a
list of their materials, but Dhooge and Hartsuiker (2010) do.
Perusal of their Appendix shows that they used categorically
related picture-distractor pairs that were only weakly
associated (e.g., spoon – knife; monkey – bear), but also
pairs that were strongly associated (lion – tiger; apple –
pear), and, most critically, pairs that can be thought of as
part-whole-relationships (farm – shed; pot – lid). The last
type of relationship has been shown to cause facilitatory
effects even in visible picture-word interference paradigms
(Costa et al., 2005). While the data pattern observed by
Dhooge and Hartsuiker is clear cut and shows a 15ms
interference effect in visible naming and a 12ms facilitation
effect in masked naming, it is possible that different items
are responsible for the effects observed in visible and
masked naming: If the inhibition observed with visible
distractors is driven by the categorically related items, then
a manipulation that makes them less salient competitors
might allow the facilitation caused by the associated and
part-whole relations to come to the fore.
In order to investigate this possibility, we used three
different types of semantic relationship in our study,
categorically related target-distractor pairs, associatively
related target-distractor pairs, and categorically and
associatively related (in the following: combined) targetdistractor pairs. Crucially, unlike in the study by Dhooge
and Hartsuiker (2010), the categorically related items never
were in a part-whole relationship, and strongly and weakly
associated pairs were distributed across two different
conditions. Before turning to our study, we will briefly
review the literature on the effects of categorically and
associatively related context words in picture naming.
Studies investigating categorical and associative
relationships at SOA 0 (with written distractors) mainly
found an effect of the former: Lupker (1979) used
categorically related distractors and associatively related
distractors in a picture-word interference study. He found
that while the former caused interference, the latter had no
effect. In a second experiment, he used distractors that were
either categorically related or categorically and associatively
related. He found that the inhibitory effect was exactly the
same for both types of distractors. He concluded that
categorical relatedness inhibits word production, and that
this effect is not modulated by the association strength of
the two category coordinates.
A study by LaHeij, Dirkx, and Kramer (1990) provides a
different finding: They selected categorically related targetdistractor pairs that were either highly associated or weakly
associated and used these items in a picture-word
interference paradigm with different SOAs. At SOA 0, they
observed inhibition for weakly associated category
coordinates but not for highly associated ones. They argue
that in the case of highly associated category coordinates the
inhibitory effect is offset by an associative priming effect.

Investigating the time-course of these effects more
closely, Alario, Segui, and Ferrand (2000) carried out an
experiment on picture naming primed by pre-exposed words
(in essence a picture-word interference paradigm with
negative SOA). They discovered that associatively related
words facilitate picture naming, but only if they are
presented around 200 ms before picture onset. By contrast,
categorically related words inhibit picture naming, but only
if they are presented 100 ms (or less) before picture onset.
So, it seems that associative relationships prime a target
word whereas categorical relationships compete with a
target word. However, these two mechanisms also seem to
have a different time-course.
In contrast to the findings by Alario et al. (2000), Abdel
Rahman and Melinger (2007) observed inhibition with
categorically related distractor words and facilitation with
associatively related distractor words with the same timecourse. In their study, spoken distractor words were
presented 150 ms before the target pictures.
To sum up, the findings on associative distractor words in
picture-word interference, while somewhat inconsistent,
support the assumption that an associative relation between
target and distractor facilitates target naming.
Given the observation that there is a facilitatory
component to both associative and categorical distractors
and that masking a distractor enhances the facilitatory
component, we wanted to investigate how masking affects
picture naming with categorically related, associatively
related, and combined distractors. Participants named the
pictures both with visible distractors and with masked
distractors. For visible distractor presentation we predict an
interference effect for categorically related distractor words.
For associatively related distractor words, we expect to see
either a facilitatory effect or a null effect. Finally, for
combined items, we expect to see either an effect of equal
size as for the categorically related items (as Lupker, 1979,
did) or an attenuation of the effect as in LaHeij et al. (1990).
If masking the distractor effectively prevents it from
entering a response buffer, no inhibitory effects are expected
in the masked condition. Instead, categorically related and
associatively related distractors should yield facilitation
which should be greatest for combined distractors.
A second aim of the study was to address a concern
formulated by Kouider and Dupoux (2004). They question
whether previous studies on unconscious priming truly
presented words in a subliminal manner, and argue that
participants are typically at least partially aware of a masked
stimulus and that this partial awareness causes the priming
effect. We carried out a lexical decision task on the
distractor words after the picture naming study. Distractors
were masked in the same way as during the picture naming
study. Assessing participants’ performance in the lexical
decision task gave us a tool to investigate in how much
(partial) awareness of the distractors modulated the effects.

1367

the two concepts is, using a scale from 1 (not associated) to
7 (strongly associated). The experiments were programmed
and run with Presentation (NeuroBehavioral Systems).

Method
Participants
Forty-eight native speakers of German (thirty-five women)
were recruited from the participant database of the Institute
of Psychology at the Humboldt-University Berlin. Their
mean age was 24.2 years. Participants received monetary
compensation for their participation.

Materials
Twenty pictures of animals and objects were chosen as
targets. For each of the pictures (e.g., picture LEMON),
three distractor words were selected: a semantically related
word (i.e., a category coordinate, e.g., kiwi), an associatively
related word (i.e., a word from a different category, e.g.,
vitamin), and a semantically and associatively related word
(e.g., orange). Distractor words were matched on length and
frequency. The associative relation was determined pre-hoc
by the intuitions of two native speakers of German and
backed up post-hoc by associative relatedness ratings of the
participants. Participants were asked to rate the strength of
the association of two words on a scale from 1 (not
associated) to 7 (very strongly associated). The categorically
related items had an association strength of 2.93, the
associatively related items an association strength of 4.00,
and the combined items had an association strength of 5.57.
As intended, the categorically related items were less
strongly associated than both the associatively related items
(t(19) = 4.09, p < .001) and the combined items (t(19) =
4.62, p < .001). What was not intended was that the
association strength was also higher for combined items
than for associatively related items (t(19) = 11.92, p < .001).
We created three unrelated conditions by recombining the
related distractors with different pictures. Therefore, in each
of the three conditions (categorically related, associatively
related, combined), the same pictures and the same words
were used in both the related and the unrelated condition.
Each participant saw a target word in all six conditions
(three critical conditions and three control conditions). A
different randomization was created for each participant to
avoid order effects.
For the lexical decision task (see below), 20 non-words
were created by using existing words and replacing one or
two letters. These letter changes could occur in any position
in the word. Care was taken to change each position equally
often. Non-words were matched in length to the word
targets.

Procedure
Participants carried out three different tasks: the pictureword interference study, a lexical decision task and a
questionnaire. Order of presentation for the picture-word
interference
studies
(visible
vs.
masked)
was
counterbalanced across participants. The questionnaire
contained all related target-distractor pairs. Participants
were asked to indicate how strong the association between

Visible Distractor Presentation. Participants were
instructed to name the pictures on the screen and to ignore
the superimposed distractor words. A trial started with a
fixation cross that was presented for 500 ms. The word was
presented centered on the screen for 53 ms. Picture and
word were presented together for 2000 ms. Participants’
responses triggered a VoiceKey and were recorded.
Delayed Distractor Presentation Participants were
instructed to name the pictures on the screen and to ignore
the superimposed distractor words. A trial started with a
forward mask (##########) that was presented for 500 ms.
The word was presented centered on the screen for 53 ms. It
was replaced by the picture and a non-pronounceable mask
consisting of a string of 10 consonants presented in the same
location as the distractor word. The use of a consonant
string as a backward mask was motivated by Finkbeiner and
Caramazza (2006) who refer to findings having shown its
particular effectiveness in eliminating phonological priming
effects. Picture and mask were presented together for 2000
ms. Participants’ responses triggered a VoiceKey and were
recorded.
Lexical Decision Task A forward mask (##########) was
presented for 500 ms centered on the screen. It was followed
by a letter string that was presented for 53 ms. The letter
string was replaced by the same mask as in the masked
picture-word interference paradigm. The mask stayed in
place until the participant had made a response. Participants
were instructed to decide whether the briefly presented word
had been an existing word of their language or not. They
were encouraged to make a guess if they felt they had not
seen a word at all. The results of the lexical decision task
will not be analysed in the present paper, we merely used
participants’ overall accuracy in order to split the group in a
“high-recognition” and a “low-recognition” group (see
below).

Results
We carried out an ANOVA on the mean reaction times and
error rates with the within-subject and within-item factors
Type of Relationship (Categorical, Associative, Combined)
and Relatedness (Related vs. Unrelated).
Table 1 presents the mean reaction times and error rates in
the visible distractor condition. Table 2 presents these
measurements in the masked distractor condition.
In the visible condition, for the reaction times, the effect
of Type of Relationship was highly significant (F1(2,94) =
16.61, MSE = 433, p < .001; F2(2,38) = 5.31, MSE = 537, p
< .01), as was the effect of Relatedness (F1(1,47) = 17.54,
MSE = 412, p < .001; F2(1,19) = 6.75, MSE = 498, p < .05),
showing faster reaction times for unrelated distractors than

1368

for related distractors. The interaction of the two factors was
not significant (both Fs < 1).
For the error rates, the effect of Type of Relationship was
not significant (F1(2,94) = 1.57, MSE = 0.04, p = .21, F2 <
1). The effect of Relatedness was marginally significant
with slightly higher error rates for related distractors
(F1(1,47) = 3.65, MSE = 0.05, p = .06, F2(1,19) = 1.82, p =
.19). The interaction was not significant (both Fs < 1).
Table 1: Reaction times and error rates (in brackets) in the
visible condition.

Related
Control
Effect

Categorical
646 (1.5)
631 (0.7)
15 (0.8)

Combined
631 (1.8)
622 (1.5)
9 (0.3)

Associative
625 (1.5)
619 (0.9)
6 (0.6)

Table 2: Reaction times and error rates (in brackets) in the
masked condition.

Related
Control
Effect

Categorical
622 (1.1)
616 (0.5)
6 (0.6)

Combined
613 (0.5)
610 (0.4)
3 (0.1)

Associative
615 (0.7)
608 (0.6)
7 (0.1)

In the masked condition, for the reaction times, the effect
of Type of Relationship was significant (F1(2,94) = 4.05,
MSE = 414, p < .05; F2(2,38) = 4.62, MSE = 166, p < .05),
as was the effect of Relatedness (F1(1,47) = 6.96, MSE =
297, p < .05; F2(1,19) = 6.00, MSE = 137, p < .05), again
showing inhibition for related distractors. The interaction of
the two factors was not significant (both Fs < 1).
For the error rates, the effect of Type of Relationship was
not significant (F1(2,94) = 1.44, MSE = 0.02, p = .24, F2 <
1). The effect of Relatedness was significant by items
(F1(1,47) = 1.54, MSE = 0.03, p = .22, F2(1,19) = 4.75,
MSE = 0.004, p < .05). The interaction was not significant
(F1(2,94) = 1.04, MSE = 0.02, p = .36, F2(2,38) = 2.02,
MSE = 0.004, p = .15).
In order to investigate if the masking manipulation
affected the critical effects, we pooled the data of both
experiments and carried out an ANOVA with the factors
Experiment, Type of Relationship, and Relatedness. We
observed a significant effect of Experiment with faster
reaction times for masked distractors (F1(1,47) = 5.43, MSE
= 5877, p < .05, F2(1,19) = 17.61, MSE = 772, p < .001).
The factors Type of Relationship (F1(2,94) = 19.01, MSE =
406, p < .001, F2(2,38) = 7.51, MSE = 426, p < .001), and
Relatedness (F1(1,47) = 21.37, MSE = 398, p < .001,
F2(1,19) = 12.25, MSE = 306, p < .01) also had a significant
effect. Importantly, we observed a marginally significant
interaction of Experiment and Type of Relationship by
participants (F1(2,94) = 2.62, MSE = 442, p = .08, F2(2,38)
= 1.52, MSE = 277, p = .23).
Because the interaction, albeit rather weak, suggests that
the effects for the different types of relationship might differ

in the visible and in the masked condition, we carried out
paired t-tests for all three types of relationship in the two
visibility conditions.
In the visible condition, the only reliable inhibition effect
(by participants) was observed with categorically related
distractors, t1(47) = 2.76, p < .01, t2(19) = 1.92, p = .07. In
the combined condition, there was only a trend by
participants, t1(47) = 1.97, p = .054 ; t2(19) = 1.47, p = .16.
Finally, the effect for the associatively related condition was
not significant, t1(47) = 1.63, p = .11, t2(19) = 1.04, p = .31.
In the masked condition, the pattern was reversed : The
categorical relatedness effect was not significant, t1(47) =
1.50, p = .14, t2(19) = 1.47, p = .16, and neither was the
combined effect, both ts < 1. By contrast, the associative
relatedness effect was significant by participants (t1(47) =
2.33, p < .05) and approached significance by items (t2(19)
= 1.83, p = .08).
Finally, we split the subjects in two groups, based on their
accuracy in the masked lexical decision task. We used a
median split, with the “low-recognition group” being correct
on 49%-73% of all trials and the “high-recognition group”
being correct on 73%-93% of all trials. We reanalyzed the
data set with the additional between-subjects variable
“Recognition” (high vs. low). There was no main effect of
recognition (both Fs < 1) and no higher-level interactions of
Type of Relationship and Relatedness with Recognition (all
ps > .20). Even though the ANOVA showed that
Recognition did not affect the data pattern, we present the
descriptive data for the high- and low-recognition group in
the masked condition in Tables 3 and 4.
Table 3: Results for the high-recognition group in the
masked condition

Related
Control
Effect

Categorical
621
617
4

Combined
609
610
-1

Associative
615
609
6

Table 4: Results for the low-recognition group in the
masked condition

Related
Control
Effect

Categorical
622
615
7

Combined
616
609
7

Associative
616
607
9

The descriptive data show that, if anything, those
participants who recognized the masked distractors less well
showed the stronger inhibitory effects in the picture-word
interference study.

Discussion
Overall, we found inhibitory effects of semantically related
distractors in both masked and visible distractor presentation
in a picture-word interference paradigm.

1369

The findings for the visible distractor presentation are in
line with many previous findings. We observed semantic
interference. The lack of a significant interaction between
Type of Relationship and Relatedness suggests that the
effect was equally strong for all types of relationship. The
post-hoc t-tests, by contrast, hint at a possible difference:
The interference is strongest for categorically related
distractors and statistically absent for associatively related
distractors, with categorically and associatively related
distractors patterning in-between. This finding is generally
in accordance with the result obtained by LaHeij et al.
(1990).
The observation that interference persists for masked
distractors is at odds with the two previous studies (Dhooge
& Hartsuiker, 2010; Finkbeiner & Caramazza, 2006)
discussed in the Introduction. Ignoring for the moment the
issue of how different types of semantic relationship might
affect the results and simply focussing on the categorical
condition, the results do not indicate the predicted polarity
reversal from inhibitory (visible) to facilitatory (masked)
effects. At a general level, our data show that the polarity
reversal for semantic effects dependent on distractor
visibility is less universal than suggested by the previous
studies.
A possibility is that in our “masked” experiment, the
specific masking procedure was not exactly identical to the
previous studies in terms of distractor visibility. Although
an effort was made to keep all relevant parameters (e.g.,
distractor duration, backward mask, etc.) as similar as
possible, relatively minor variations in, e.g., contrast or
display size could potentially affect distractor visibility. It is
also the case that our study used a different language from
the original studies (English and Dutch), and that words
perhaps had slightly different properties. For instance,
German words tend to be longer on average than English
words, therefore, the amount of information that can be
extracted from a word presented under masked conditions
might differ among languages. Hence, perhaps our masked
distractors were either too heavily masked, or not masked
well enough. The first scenario - masking of distractors was
too stringent - is refuted by the simple fact that we did
observe a significant effect of relatedness in that
experiment. Could it therefore be that our distractors were
not masked well enough, i.e., that they acted in the same
way as visible distractors, and hence induced similar
inhibitory effects? The strongest argument against this
possibility comes from the comparison of participants who
recognized more words during the visibility test with those
who recognized fewer words. If the inhibition effect
observed in the masked condition is due to the fact that
participants recognized the masked distractors too well, then
the inhibitory effect should be strongest for those
participants who recognized the distractors the best.
Contrary to this prediction, there was no significant
difference in the data pattern for “good” and “poor”
recognizers; indeed, descriptively the inhibitory effect was
larger for the “poor” than the “good” recognizers. This

renders it unlikely that heavier masking (or perhaps, a
reduction in distractor duration) would have resulted in the
predicted facilitatory effect of semantic relatedness.
While we cannot say at this point which differences in the
experimental procedure have caused the differences in
results, it is clear that the semantic facilitation effect with
masked distractors is much more susceptible to such
procedural differences than the semantic inhibition effect
with visible distractors. Therefore, caution is needed when
using this effect for theory-building and it is necessary to
better understand the experimental conditions that allow for
a polarity shift.
A second important finding is that while inhibition
occurred in both presentation conditions and was not
statistically modulated by the exact type of semantic
relationship, there were still some crucial differences. In the
visible condition, the categorically related condition caused
the greatest inhibition, whereas in the masked condition, the
associatively related condition caused the greatest
inhibition. Explanations for this pattern remain at present
speculative. One possible scenario derived from earlier
work on such relationships (Alario et al., 2000; La Heij et
al., 1990) is that associative pairings represent direct
interlexical links, perhaps at a “peripheral” level (i.e., the
orthographic or phonological lexicon). If so, it is
conceivable that links at such “shallow” processing levels
would be more dominant with masked distractor
presentation, compared to visible distractors whose effect
might emerge more clearly at “deeper” (i.e., lexicalsemantic or conceptual) processing levels. To our
knowledge, our study represents the first attempt to address
the possible dependency of effects of various types of
semantic relationships on distractor visibility, and more
research is clearly needed.
From a broader perspective, our data, combined with the
earlier studies in the literature reporting a polarity reversal,
contest the assumption that the inhibitory component in
speech selection is binary in the sense that either a distractor
will enter the competition or not. Rather, inhibition and
facilitation can be relatively stronger or weaker, modulating
the net outcome. Roelofs, Piai, and Schriefers (2011)
suggest that masking a distractor word results in this word
receiving a smaller weight in the competition process. Such
a mechanism, depending on the magnitude of the weight
change, could accommodate the entire continuum of effects.
That is, for clearly visible distractors, the distractor will
receive a high competition weight, resulting in an inhibitory
effect. As visibility decreases, the competition weight will
decrease, too, reducing the inhibitory component of the
effect. With a very low competition weight, the facilitatory
component of the effect (i.e., the target is primed by the
distractor) will result in a facilitation effect. The challenge
for future experiments would then be to precisely predict the
size of the competition weights in different contexts. The
response exclusion hypothesis is less able to explain such a
smooth transition from inhibition to facilitation.
Intermediate effects could be explained by the response

1370

exclusion hypothesis as an experimental artifact, if either
facilitation or inhibition is observed on a trial-by-trial basis
(i.e., if a participant observes a word in a given trial, it will
enter the buffer and interfere, if (s)he does not observe a
word in a different trial, it will not enter the buffer and
therefore, facilitation will result). While the sum of trial-bytrial inhibition and facilitation might result in anything from
facilitation to inhibition, too, this explanation is refuted by
our finding that, numerically at least, the inhibition effects
in masked distractor presentation were larger for those
participants, who perceived the masked words less well.
In conclusion, previous studies have reported a polarity
reversal of semantic effects in picture-word interference
tasks, such that clearly visible distractors which are
semantically related to the picture name generate
interference, whereas visual masking of such distractors
results in facilitation. This pattern was taken as supporting
different loci of the facilitatory and interfering components.
In our own experiments we were unable to replicate this
polarity reversal; instead, our findings suggest that
significant semantic interference can prevail even under
masked conditions, but that the precise pattern might depend
on the exact form of semantic relationship between
distractor and target.

Acknowledgments
The research presented in this paper was supported by DFGgrant SP1126/4-1 to KS. We thank Julia Knoepke and
Carsten Schliewe for their help in programming the
experiment and Julia Knoepke for testing the participants.

References

La Heij, W., Dirkx, J., & Kramer, P. (1990). Categorical
interference and associative priming in picture naming.
British Journal of Psychology, 81, 511-525.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1–75.
Lupker, S. J. (1979). The semantic nature of response
competition in the Picture–Word Interference Task.
Memory & Cognition, 7, 485–495.
Mahon, B., Costa, A., Peterson, R., Vargas, R. A., &
Caramazza, A. (2007). Lexical selection is not by
competition: A reinterpretation of semantic interference
and facilitation effects in the picture-word interference
paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 503-533.
Roelofs, A. (1992). A spreading-activation theory of lemma
retrieval in speaking. Cognition, 42, 107-142.
Roelofs, A., Piai, V. M., & Schriefers, H. (2011). Selective
attention and distractor frequency in naming performance:
Comment on Dhooge and Hartsuiker (2010). Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 1032-1038.
Rosinski, R. R. (1977). Picture–word interference is
semantically based. Child Development, 48, 643–647.
Schriefers, H., Meyer, A. S., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1990).
Exploring the time course of lexical access in production:
Picture-word interference studies. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 86-102.
Spalek, K., Damian, M. F. & Bölte, J. (2012). Is lexical
selection in spoken word production competitive?
Introduction to the special issue on lexical competition in
language production. Language and Cognitive Processes,
DOI: 10.1080/01690965.2012.718088.

Abdel Rahman, R., & Melinger, A. (2007). When bees
hamper the production of honey: Lexical interference
from associates in speech production. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 33, 604-614.
Alario, F.-X., Segui, J., & Ferrand, L. (2000). Semantic and
associative priming in picture naming. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 53A, 741-764.
Costa, A., Alario, F.-X., & Caramazza, A. (2005). On the
categorical nature of the semantic interference effect in
the picture-word interference paradigm. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 12, 125-131.
Dhooge, E., & Hartsuiker, R. J. (2010). The distractor
frequency effect in picture-word interference: evidence
for response exclusion. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36, 878891.
Finkbeiner, M., & Caramazza, A. (2006). Now you see it,
now you don't: On turning semantic interference into
facilitation in a Stoop-like task. Cortex, 42, 790-796.
Kouider, S., & Dupoux, E. (2004). Partial awareness creates
the “illusion” of subliminal semantic priming.
Psychological Science, 15, 75-81.

1371

