UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Placing Numbers in Behavioral Space: Activity-Specific Interactions between Number and
Space with a Single Response Button

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/775099ws

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Marghetis, Tyler
Kanwal, Jasmeen
Bergen, Benjamin

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Placing Numbers in Behavioral Space: Activity-Specific Interactions
between Number and Space with a Single Response Button
Tyler Marghetis* (tmarghet@ucsd.edu)
Jasmeen Kanwal* (jkanwal@ucsd.edu)
Benjamin K. Bergen (bkbergen@ucsd.edu)
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract

to reason about numbers as abstract concepts (Lakoff &
Núñez, 2000; Núñez & Marghetis, to appear). Mathematical
diagrams often associate numbers with particular locations.
And number interacts with space in less explicit ways
during the online performance of mathematical activities. In
a seminal study, Dehaene and colleagues (1993) asked
participants to judge the magnitude (greater or less than 5?)
or parity (even or odd?) of single digit numbers. Participants
were reliably faster to respond to smaller numbers when
responding with a button in left space, and to larger numbers
when responding in right space—as if they were
spontaneously thinking of numbers along a left-to-right
“mental number line.” This interaction between numerical
magnitude and spatial location has been dubbed the
“SNARC” effect.
In the two decades since, the literature on such numberspace associations has exploded (Hubbard et al., 2005;
Wood et al., 2008). Similar effects have been found with
bipedal responses (Schwarz & Müller, 2006) and saccades
(Fischer et al., 2003; Schwarz & Keus, 2004), further
reinforcing the genuinely spatial nature of this effect. While
the particular direction of this “mental number-line” is quite
flexible, shaped by such factors as habitual reading direction
(Shaki, Fischer, & Petrusic, 2009) and recent experience
(Fischer, Mills, & Shaki, 2010), there is a growing
consensus that number and space are intimately related.
But doubts remain. A number of authors have suggested
that the effects have less to do with a stable spatial
representation of number, and more to do with flexible or
non-spatial associations (e.g., Fischer et al., 2010; Gevers et
al, 2010; Santens and Gevers, 2006). Others have pointed
out that most studies force participants to respond spatially,
using buttons that are distinguished by their spatial location,
and thus implicitly inject space in virtue of the experimental
setup (Núñez, Doan & Nikoulina, 2011). Indeed, when other
response modalities are used—e.g., responding with higher
or lower pitches—participants exhibit interactions that are
SNARC-like but non-spatial (Marghetis et al., 2011).
Number-space associations, therefore, may be more flexible
and context-sensitive than first assumed.
Beyond these concerns, one additional question has been
largely unaddressed: the nature of the “space” that
sometimes, undeniably, interacts with number. Previous
work has conflated the multiple egocentric frames of
reference that we use to encode space, which include head-,

How are we able to reason about abstract concepts that lie
resolutely beyond the reach of perception? One strategy is to
ground understanding in space. Numbers, for instance, are
known to interact with egocentric space during rapid
numerical judgments. A range of experimental results have
demonstrated that, among literate Western people, this
“mental number-line” goes from left to right, with smaller
numbers associated with left space, and larger numbers with
right space. But what is the nature of this “space”? Previous
work has conflated multiple possible egocentric frames of
reference—head-based, eye-based, action-based—leaving it
unclear which space is interacting with number. In the present
paper, two studies investigated whether a single centrallylocated button, stationary in hand- and eye-based coordinates,
can nevertheless exhibit different spatial properties in virtue
of task-specific activity. In a go/no-go paradigm, participants
judged the magnitude (Exp. 1) and parity (Exp. 2) of singledigit numbers. Crucially, they responded only with the index
or middle finger of a single hand. While judging magnitude
(Exp. 1), participants were faster to respond to smaller
numbers with the more leftward finger, and larger numbers
with the more rightward finger, regardless of the hand being
used. This effect disappeared when judging parity (Exp. 2),
replaced by finger-specific associations on the left hand only.
In sum, in a task-sensitive way, participants associated
numbers with egocentric space—but a behavioral space
defined relative to embodied interaction rather than head- or
eye-based reference frames. We discuss implications for
number representation and the nature of “space” in embodied
activity.
Keywords: number; space; action; SNARC; embodiment;
go/no-go; frames of reference; Merleau-Ponty

Introduction1
“[The body’s] spatiality is not, like that of external
objects or like that of ‘spatial sensations’, a spatiality of
position, but a spatiality of situation.”- Merleau-Ponty
(1962, p. 114).
How are we able to reason about abstract concepts that lie
resolutely beyond the reach of perception? One strategy is to
ground understanding in space. Numbers, for instance, are
tightly linked with space across human activity. We recycle
the language of space to talk about numbers, counting up to
higher numbers and down to lower numbers, and use space
*

JK and TM contributed equally to this work.

972

eye-, object-, and action- based frames of reference (cf.
Cohen and Anderson, 2002). For instance, in the classic
SNARC paradigm, the response buttons are placed to the
left and right of the participant’s body, and thus are
distinguished similarly in multiple frames of reference: they
are lateralized relative to participants’ heads, eyes, and
motor responses. When space is forced on the subject in this
way, through a forced-choice paradigm where responses are
spatially distinguished, it remains unclear as to which
“space” is interacting with number.
One possibility is that numbers interact with behavioral
space, i.e. the space defined relative to task-specific
embodied activity. If this is the case, then observation of the
SNARC effect may not depend on the presence of spatial
responses distinguished externally in head- or eye-based
coordinates, but rather on some juxtaposition of taskrelevant actions within the specific context of the task.
Testing this possibility requires an experimental design that
can isolate effects of behavioral space from those due to
head- or eye-based coordinates. We took up this challenge
by investigating whether SNARC-like effects could be
elicited using only a single, centrally-placed response
button, which remained in the same location relative to
head- and eye-based spatial coordinates. By requiring
participants to press the button with different fingers of the
same hand, the stationary button can move relative to taskrelevant embodied activity—that is, in behavioral space.
In two studies, participants judged the magnitude (Exp. 1)
and parity (Exp. 2) of single-digit Arabic numerals.
Crucially, and in contrast to previous studies, we used a
go/no-go paradigm in both tasks: participants responded by
pressing a single centrally-located button with only their
index or middle finger. The finger used was manipulated
between blocks, as was the “go” response criterion, while
response hand was varied between subjects. By using a
central button, kept stationary relative to head- and eyebased frames of reference, and by using a go/no-go
paradigm in which different response fingers were never
juxtaposed spatially within a block, but only temporally
across blocks, we were able to focus on one particular
spatial frame of reference: behavioral space, the space
defined by the possible embodied actions within the task as
a whole. Moreover, by manipulating the response finger,

identified only by name (e.g. “index finger”), we were able
to avoid any explicit spatial instructions.
If the SNARC effect is driven entirely by visual head- or
eye-based frames of reference, then participants should not
exhibit any SNARC-like effects here, since at no point are
two response options spatially juxtaposed relative to head or
eye. If, on the other hand, number interacts with space as
enacted by task-specific interactions—that is, behavioral
space—then we may find numbers systematically associated
with space relative to activity-based frame of reference, with
the more leftward finger faster for smaller numbers, and the
more rightward finger faster for larger numbers.

Experiment 1: Magnitude Task
Participants
Undergraduate students (n=32, mean age = 20, 19 females)
from a major research university participated in exchange
for partial course credit.

Procedure
In a go/no-go paradigm, participants judged the relative
magnitude of visually-presented single-digit numerals,
responding only if the number presented was greater than
[/less than] 5. Participants responded by pressing a single,
centrally-located button on a Serial Response Box placed at
a comfortable distance in front of them, using either the
index finger or middle finger. Response finger (index or
middle) and response criterion (greater or less than 5) were
fully crossed within participants, so each run had four
blocks. Block order was counterbalanced, except that no
two consecutive blocks used the same response finger (to
avoid muscle fatigue). Response hand (left, right) varied
between participants, so each participant maintained the
same response hand throughout the experiment. Each
participant, therefore, responded with their index and middle
fingers for two blocks each.
Each trial began with a central fixation cross (500 ms.),
followed by a centrally-presented single-digit number
between 1 and 9 (excluding 5). If participants responded, the
number would disappear; otherwise it would remain on the
screen for 3 s., after which the trial would end
automatically. See Figure 1. Each block began with 8
practice trials, followed by 80 experimental trials.

Results
One participant was removed for failing to complete the
experiment. Accuracy for the remaining 31 participants was
high (M>.99, SD=.004). Mean accuracy was analyzed with
a 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 mixed ANOVA, with Magnitude (greater or
less than 5), Parity (even, odd), and Response Finger (leftfinger, right-finger) as within-subjects factors, and Response
Hand (left or right) as a between-subjects factor2. There
were no significant effects on accuracy.

Figure 1: Paradigm for Experiments 1 and 2. Here, the
"Go" criterion would be to respond with the index finger
of the left hand, if less than 5 (Exp. 1) or even (Exp. 2).

2

Initial analyses found no effects of participants’ handedness
(Dehaene et al, 1993); it was thus removed from further analyses.

973

Before analyzing response time, incorrect trials were
removed, followed by trials with reaction times that were
slower than three standard deviations above each
participant’s mean response time, or faster than 200ms
(n=83, 1.7% of total trials).
Reaction times were analyzed with a 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 mixed
ANOVA, with Magnitude (greater or less than 5), Parity
(even, odd), and Response Finger (left-, right-finger) as
within-subjects factors, and Response Hand (left, right) as a
between-subjects factor. There was a main effect of Parity,
with responses to odd numbers significantly faster than
responses to even numbers (Modd = 382ms, Meven = 398ms,
F(1,29) = 54.8, p < 0.001; cf. Dehaene et al, 1993, who
found no effect of Parity). There was also a marginally
significant—but difficult to interpret—interaction between
Parity and Response Hand (F(1, 29) = 4.1, p = .053).
Crucially, the only other significant effect was an
interaction between Magnitude and Response Finger (F(1,
29)=4.95, p=0.034, η2p=.015). Responses with the leftfinger (i.e. index finger of right hand, or middle finger of
left hand) were faster for numbers less than 5, while
responses with the right-finger were faster for numbers
greater than 5 (Fig. 2). There was no three-way interaction
between Magnitude, Response Finger, and Response Hand
(F(1, 29) = 0.5, p=0.46), suggesting that the effect is due not
to finger-specific associations, but to the location of the
response fingers in each participant’s behavioral space. The
interaction between Magnitude and Response Hand,
notably, was not significant (F(1,29)=2.94, p=0.10).

Figure 2: Interaction between magnitude and finger-side
in Experiment 1. (Error bars = SE)
hands, therefore, were not contrasted within participants’
task-internal embodied activity.
Does this effect arise automatically? The classic SNARC
is often found even when magnitude is task-irrelevant, for
instance when determining parity (even vs. odd) (Dehaene
et al, 1993). This is taken to show that the interaction
between magnitude and space is automatic and taskindependent, at least when responses involve lateralized
buttons. Is this new action-based SNARC similarly
automatic, or does it require explicit magnitude processing?
Experiment 2 was designed to answer this question.

Experiment 2: Parity Task

Discussion
When judging the magnitude of single-digit numbers,
participants systematically associated smaller numbers with
the left, and larger numbers with the right, even though the
response button did not change location relative to head- or
eye-based coordinates. Rather, magnitude was associated
with locations in behavioral space, defined by the possible
actions within the task: responding with one of two possible
fingers. This was confirmed by the lack of a three-way
interaction with Response Hand. In other words, numbers
were not associated with particular fingers, as we might
expect if participants were using a body-based frame of
reference (e.g. DiLuca et al, 2006). Instead, they were
associated with particular actions relative to task behavior:
responses with the leftmost finger compared to responses
with the rightmost finger. Moreover, this interaction arose
despite the fact that left- and right-fingered responses were
never juxtaposed within a single trial or block, but only
manipulated between blocks and thus juxtaposed within the
experiment as a whole.
Notably the interaction between Response Hand and
Magnitude was not significant, contra the results of studies
that have used bimanual responses (e.g. Dehaene et al,
1993; for review, see Wood et al, 2008). We attribute this to
the fact that we manipulated response hand between
subjects, not within. Responses with the left- and right-

Participants
Undergraduate students (n=32, mean age = 21, 22 females)
from a major research university, who had not participated
in the first experiment, participated in exchange for partial
course credit.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Experiment 1, except
participants had to respond based on the parity (even vs.
odd) of each number, rather than the magnitude. For a given
block, therefore, participants would only respond if the
number was even [/odd] (Fig. 1). All nine numbers from 1
to 9 were used as stimuli, so each block began with 9
practice trials followed by 90 experimental trials.

Results
Accuracy was high (M=.99, SD=.01). Mean accuracy was
analyzed with a 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 mixed ANOVA, with
Magnitude (greater or less than 5), Parity (even, odd), and
Response Finger (left-finger, right-finger) as within-subjects
factors, and Response Hand (left or right) as a betweensubjects factor. The only significant effect was a main effect
of Parity (F(1,30)=10.1, p<0.01), with responses to odd
numbers more accurate than those to even numbers
(Modd=98.6%, Meven=97.6%).

974

Once again, before analyzing response times, incorrect
trials were removed, followed by trials with reaction times
that were slower than three standard deviations above each
participant’s mean response time (n=85, 1.7% of trials).
Finally, trials where the target numeral was 5 were also
removed, so we could include Magnitude (greater or less
than 5) as a factor in our analysis.
In contrast with Experiment 1, numbers were not reliably
associated with response side. Instead, while there was a
marginal interaction between Magnitude and Finger Side
(F(1, 30)= 3.3, p=.08), this was complicated by a significant
three-way interaction with Response Hand (F(1,30)=9.3,
p=0.005). There was a similar effect for Parity: while there
was no two-way interaction between Parity and Finger Side
(F(1,30)=2.1, p=0.16), there was a significant three-way
interaction with Response Hand (F(1,30)=4.9, p=.035). For
both Magnitude and Parity, the effect was driven by the left
hand, where the index finger was faster for odd or smaller
numbers, and the middle finger was faster for even or larger
numbers (Fig. 3). The only other significant effects were
main effects of Parity and Magnitude (F(1,30)=9.0,
p=0.005, and F(1,30)=5.05, p=0.03, respectively), and a
hard-to-interpret three-way interaction between Magnitude,
Parity, and Hand (F(1,30)=4.2, p=0.05).
That the effect was driven by the left hand was confirmed
by separate repeated-measures ANOVAs for each hand,
with Response Finger (index, middle), Parity, and
Magnitude as factors. For the right hand, Response Finger
did not interact with Parity (F(1,15)=0.2, p=0.90) or with
Magnitude (F(1,15)=0.02, p=0.88). But for the left hand
there were significant interactions between Response Finger
and Magnitude (F(1,15)=5.07, p=0.039), and between
Response Finger and Parity (F(1,15)=7.1, p=.02).

effect found in Experiment 1. Instead, we found fingerspecific associations with both parity and magnitude, but
only on the left hand. A change in task, therefore, induced
new associations with numbers, tied to specific fingers
rather than to a more general behavioral space. We return to
the possible origins of these finger-specific associations in
the General Discussion.

Discussion

Task differences and finger-based representations

General Discussion
What space do numbers inhabit? We conducted two studies
to investigate the possibility that the form of “egocentric”
space with which number interacts is behavioral space, the
space of possible embodied interaction with the world.
Indeed, contrary to what we would expect if number-space
interactions are driven entirely by head- or eye-based
coordinates, we found that numbers interacted with space
even when participants responded with only a single,
centrally-located button. This effect, moreover, was not
driven entirely by body-based representations, since they
were not specific to particular fingers or hands. Instead,
responses to smaller numbers were faster with the more
leftward finger of either hand, while responses to larger
numbers were faster with the more rightward finger—a leftto-right “mental number line” defined entirely in terms of
the embodied interaction between finger and apparatus.
This effect, however, was task-dependent, and
disappeared when magnitude was not task-relevant. Instead,
when participants were attending to parity, they associated
specific fingers of the left hand with parity and magnitude:
the index finger with odd or small numbers, and the middle
finger with even or large numbers. The space with which
numbers interacted, therefore, was flexibly tied to body and
activity in a task-specific way.

When tasked with determining the parity of single-digit
numbers, participants no longer exhibited the SNARC-like

What might account for the different results of Experiments
1 and 2? One possibility is that parity and magnitude tasks
require participants to attend to different information. Parity
tasks, for instance, may activate linguistic and categorical
representations, while magnitude tasks may activate analog
visuospatial representations (van Dijk, Gevers & Fias,
2009). It may be that the rather subtle spatial difference
between fingers is sufficiently small that an interaction
between magnitude and space requires the explicit
activation of analog visuospatial representations of
magnitude. Alternatively, since the classic bimanual Parity
task explicitly distinguishes the response options by their
positions on the left and the right, those linguistic labels
may interact with categorical representations of numerical
magnitude (cf. Proctor and Cho, 2006), explaining why the
SNARC effect is seen in these types of Parity tasks but not
in our deliberately modified setup.
Why, then, did magnitude and parity interact with specific
fingers during the Parity task? One possibility is that the
associations exhibited in Experiment 2 originate in
culturally-specific gestures for numbers. In Quentin
Tarantino’s film Inglourious Basterds, an American spy

Figure 3: Interactions between finger and parity (top)
and magnitude (bottom), found on the left hand only, in
Experiment 2. (Error bars = SE).

975

posing as a German is exposed when he orders two beers
with the American rather than the German gesture: index
and middle finger extended, instead of thumb and index
finger. The participants at our American university,
therefore, may have finger-specific associations as a result
of the fingers they use to gesture for numbers: a single
extended index finger for one, adding the middle finger for
two. Within our task, these index-one and middle-two
associations may have been extended to the rest of the
numbers, with smaller or odd numbers associated with the
index finger, and larger or even numbers associated with the
middle finger—much like the relation between one (smaller
and odd) and two (larger and even). This is only
speculation, of course, although it does make a specific
prediction: German participants should behave differently
on our Parity task, responding faster with the thumb for
smaller or odd numbers, and faster with the index finger for
larger or even numbers, if we test these two fingers instead.
The results of Experiment 2 are illuminated further by
recent research on finger-based representations of numbers.
Fischer and colleagues, for instance, have suggested that
stable finger-counting routines may explain cross-cultural
variability in the direction of the SNARC; native English
speakers, for instance, may count from left-to-right on their
fingers, and also exhibit a left-to-right SNARC (Fischer,
2008; Lindemann, Alipour, and Fischer, 2011). Others,
however, have found right-handed native English speakers
to be ten times more likely to start counting on their right
hand than on their left (Tschentscher et al., 2012), a pattern
that we have also observed in pilot studies. Additionally,
associations have been found (in the form of response-time
facilitation effects) between specific numbers and the
fingers used for those numbers in a habitual finger-counting
routine (e.g. di Luca et al., 2006). The current study, by
contrast, found categorical (i.e. magnitude and parity) rather
than number-specific associations with finger. It may be that
specific finger-number associations are only salient when
multiple fingers are spatially juxtaposed at a single time.

peripersonal space and number bisection, perhaps related to
biases in lateral spatial attention (Longo and Lourenco,
2010), although the precise mechanism for this interaction is
still unknown. In a study that contrasted finger-based and
space-based representations of number, Riello & Rusconi
(2011) examined the possibility of a unimanual SNARC
using a Two Alternative Forced Choice paradigm.
Participants responded with the index and middle finger of
the same hand, pressing buttons on either side of
participants’ midline. Response hand and orientation (face
up or down) were also manipulated. They found co-existing
hand-based and space-based representations of number,
which were either complementary or incompatible
depending on the hand and its orientation.
Two conditions in Riello & Rusconi (2011) are of
particular interest: responses with downward-facing left and
right hands. In contrast with the results of the current
studies, Riello and Rusconi only found a classic left-to-right
SNARC effect on the right downward-facing hand. They
explained this by positing an interaction between handbased (from thumb to little finger) and space-based (left to
right) representations of number, which would be in conflict
on the left hand when facing downward, but in accord on
the right hand. The difference between our results and theirs
may be due to a number of factors. For one, participants in
Riello and Rusconi (2011) responded with two adjacent
buttons—pressed by the index and middle finger of the
same hand—that were placed on either side of the
participants’ midline, and thus were distinguished in
multiple frames of reference (head-, eye-, hand-, and actionbased). Additionally, the simultaneous spatial juxtaposition
of the two response options—unlike our design, in which
different response options were only juxtaposed temporally
between blocks—may have highlighted hand-based
representations. Our results suggest that, when fingers are
not spatially juxtaposed within a single block, behavioral
space interacts spontaneously with number during
magnitude judgments. Moreover, unlike previous studies
(e.g. Dehaene et al, 1993), we did not find an interaction
between hand side and magnitude. We attribute this to the
fact that hand side was not contrasted within the task, but
only manipulated between subjects, and thus this was not a
salient distinction for the individual. Living organisms, after
all, “enact a world as a domain of distinctions” (Varela,
Thompson & Rosch, 1993, p.140).
Previous attention to space, furthermore, has eclipsed
attention to time. Existing studies have juxtaposed spatial
responses within a single block, so that on any given trial
there were always multiple spatial responses available. In
our studies, which used a go/no-go paradigm, the different
response options were contrasted across the experiment as a
whole, rather than within a block, and so any particular trial
involved only one possible spatial response (or lack of
response). Said otherwise, the different possible spatial
responses in our tasks were not juxtaposed at any particular
slice of time in which a response was made. In spite of this,
reliable associations between number and space emerged.

Which spaces?
The current results do not rule out the possibility that
other spatial frames of reference also contribute to known
interactions between number and space. Head- and eyebased coordinates may also play a role, and future studies
should contrive to situate response-buttons in ways that
tease apart the contributions of head- and eye-based
coordinates, both from each other and from an action-based
frame. Indeed, the classic SNARC effects may have been so
pronounced exactly because they conflated multiple
complementary frames of reference, which conspired to
produce particularly strong effects.
Moreover, number may be associated with still other
“spaces,” including distinctions between peripersonal and
distal space, although interactions between these spaces are
still under-theorized and starkly under-explored. One study
on the relation between peripersonal space and number
bisection found an interaction between distance in

976

The relevant units of analysis, we conclude, are the
behavioral contrasts within the temporally- and corporeallyextended cognitive ecology circumscribed by the task.

Lindemann, O., Alipour, A., & Fischer, M. H. (2011).
Finger Counting Habits in Middle-Eastern and Western
Individuals: An Online Survey. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 42, 566-578.
Longo, M. R., & Lourenco, S. F. (2010). Bisecting the
mental number line in near and far space. Brain and
Cognition, 72, 362-367.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception.
Trans. by C. Smith. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Marghetis, T., Walker, E., Bergen, B., & Núñez, R. (2011).
Making SNAP judgments: Rethinking the spatial
representation of number. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, &
T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 17811786). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Núñez, R., Doan, D, Nikoulina, A. (2011). Squeezing,
Striking, and Vocalizing: Is Number Representation
Fundamentally Spatial? Cognition, 120, 225-235.
Núñez, R., & Marghetis, T. (to appear). Cognitive
Linguistics and the Concept(s) of Number. In R. CohenKadosh and K. Dowker (eds.), Oxford Handbook of
Numerical Cognition. Oxford University Press.
Proctor, R.W., &
Cho,
Y.S.,
(2006).
Polaritycorrespondence: A general principle for performance of
speeded binary classification tasks, Psychological
Bulletin, 132, 416-442.
Riello, M., Rusconi, E. (2011). Unimanual SNARC effect:
hand matters. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 372.
Santens, S., & Gevers, W., (2006). The SNARC effect does
not imply a mental number line, Cognition, 108, 263-270.
Schwarz, W., & Keus, I.M. (2004). Moving the eyes along
the mental number line: comparing SNARC effects with
saccadic and manual responses. Perception &
Psychophysics, 66, 651–664.
Schwarz, W., & Müller, D. (2006). Spatial associations in
number-related tasks: A comparison of manual and pedal
responses. Experimental Psychology, 53, 4-15.
Shaki, S., Fischer, M, Petrusic W.M. (2009). Reading habits
for both words and numbers contribute to the SNARC
effect. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 328-31.
Tschentscher, N., Hauk, O., Fischer, M. H., & Pulvermüller,
F. (2012). You can count on the motor cortex: Finger
counting habits modulate motor cortex activation evoked
by numbers. NeuroImage, 59(4):3139–3148.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizations of thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 499-535.
van Dijck, J.P., Gevers, W., & Fias, W., (2009). Numbers
are associated with different types of spatial information
depending on the task, Cognition, 113, 248-253.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1993). The
embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wood, G., Willmes, K., Nuerk, H.-C., & Fischer, M. (2008).
On the cognitive link between space and number: a metaanalysis of the SNARC effect. Psychology Science
Quarterly, 50, 489-52.

Conclusion
In two experiments, we found that number interacts with
space even when responses are not distinguished by their
location in head- or eye-based spatial frames of reference.
Numbers were associated with locations in behavioral
space, enacted by the participant within the context of the
task. This association between number and behavioral
space, however, was task-specific, appearing only when
numerical magnitude was directly task-relevant. While
space is a ubiquitous and powerful cognitive resource (e.g.,
Kirsh, 1995; Tversky, 2011), it is neither fixed nor
monolithic. The spaces of human activity are multiple,
defined relative to varied frames of reference, and we
deploy them flexibly during abstract though. As MerleauPonty (1962) argued a half century ago, the space that we
inhabit is not pre-given, but constituted by the motility of
the body. Our reasoning about abstract concepts is not
grounded in some single, static, or stable representation of
space, but in the space we enact through embodied activity.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Anthony Chan, Sarah Saturday, and Luke Eberle
for data collection, and to Rafael Núñez for discussion.

References
Cohen, Y.E., & Anderson, R.A. (2002). A common
reference frame for movement plans in the posterior
parietal cortex. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 553-562.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and numerical magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Di Luca, S., Grana, A., Semenza, C., Seron, X., and Pesenti,
M. (2006). Finger-digit compatibility in arabic numeral
processing. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 59:1648–1663.
Fischer, M.H. (2008). Finger counting habits modulate
spatial-numerical associations. Cortex, 44, 386-392.
Fischer, M.H., Mills, R.A., & Shaki, S. (2010). How to
cook a SNARC: Number placement in text rapidly
changes spatial-numerical associations. Brain and
Cognition, 72, 333-336
Fischer, M.H., Castel, A.D., Dodd, M.D., Pratt, J. (2003).
Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of attention.
Nature Neuroscience, 6, 555–556.
Gevers, W, Santens, S, D’Hooge, E, Chen, Q, Van den
Bossche, L, Fias, W, & Verguts, T (2010). Verbal-spatial
and visuo-spatial coding of number-space interactions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 139:180-90
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence 73, 31–68.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes
from. New York: Basic Books.

977

