UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Planning ahead through space and time: from neuropsychology to motor control

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9xp737bq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Dione, Mariama
Ott, Laurent
Delevoye-Turrell, Yvonne

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Planning ahead through space and time: from neuropsychology to motor control
Mariama C.Dione (mariama.dione@univ-lille3.fr)
Laurent Ott (laurent.ott@univ-lille3.fr)
Yvonne Delevoye-Turrell (yvonne.delevoye@univ-lille3.fr)
URECA EA 1059, University Lille Nord de France, rue du Barreau, BP 60149
Villeneuve d’Ascq, 59653, France
Abstract
The executive functions have been studied separately in the
fields of neuropsychology and of motor control. However, it
is not clear whether across fields one is referring to similar
cognitive functions. In the present study, we compared the
performance scores obtained in a motor spatial-tapping task
with those scores obtained in a battery of three
neuropsychological tasks which assess respectively the
executive functions of updating (N-back task), inhibiting (GonoGo task) and switching (Letter-number task). Multiple
regression analyses revealed significant and specific effects
between the motor task and the classical neuropsychological
tasks: the timing error measured at slow tempi in the tapping
task predicted the scores observed in the updating task only;
the spatial error at faster tempi predicted the scores obtained
in the switching task only; the contact times at intermediate
tempi predicted the scores obtained in the inhibiting task only.
Hence, we introduce this easy-to-use non-verbal task as a
novel paradigm to assess executive functioning.
Keywords: planning; executive functions; motor control;
neuropsychology; regression; space; time.

Introduction
Neuropsychological approach of Planning
Research on the executive functions has historical roots in
the study of patients with frontal lobe damage. These
patients were the first to demonstrate disruptions to control
and organize daily activities independent of any language or
memory disorders (Damasio, 1994; Harlow, 1868). The socalled 'frontal' or 'executive' tasks were specifically
developed to assess how the main functional deficit
encountered by frontal patients, i.e. the planning of daily
activities, was affected following brain injury. For example,
the Tower of London (Shallice, 1982), a task inspired by a
logical reasoning game (the Tower of Hanoi) was proposed
to evaluate the ability to inhibit a routine schema – that
consisted in producing each move in an isolated and
impulsive fashion in response to the true visual
configuration of the Tower – in order to define and adopt a
cognitive plan to achieve the puzzle in fewer moves (see the
model of SAS/GOC, Shallice, 1988). The Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test (WCST, Grant & Berg, 1948), on the other
hand, was proposed to target individuals’ inability to switch
efficiently from an ongoing plan to a novel one. In this task,
perseverating errors were measured and used as indicators
of cognitive flexibility (Milner, 1963). Finally, working
memory tasks, e.g., the n-back task, were developed to

target a person’s ability to maintain a cognitive plan active
and to update between relevant parts of the plan in function
of a given situation. Hence, the executive functions are here
directly related to the abilities to inhibit a routine schema in
order to adopt and adapt a novel more cognitive plan, to
maintain and update parts of a given plan across time and/or
to switch flexibly from one plan to another. In the last
decade, these cognitive abilities have been referred to in the
literature as the inhibiting, the updating, and the switching
executive functions (Miyake & Friedman, 2012; Miyake et
al., 2000) and it is common today to use a multiple-test
battery to assess the well functioning of the executive
functions related to planning abilities.
However, it is the case that the neuropsychological tasks
that are classically used to assess the executive functions
suffer from a number of validity problems that limits
severely the possibility to compare the functions between
them. Indeed, the tasks are known to have impurity issues
because of the presence of non-executive demands
specifically related to the various contents that are used in
the tasks (e.g., language, limb displacements, object
identification, etc., Burgess, 1997; Phillips, 1997). Second,
they present a lack of test-retest reliability, i.e. people can
adopt different executive strategies to perform the same task
across sessions (Rabbitt, 1997). For example, although the
WCST has been designed to reveal a lack of cognitive
flexibility, subjects may perform the task by inhibiting
certain responses that are no longer appropriate (Miyake et
al., 2000). Thus, scores in different sessions may reflect
different cognitive strategies, with participants who are
sometimes switching between rules and at other times using
inhibition to solve the task. The difficulty to characterize the
possible relationships between the executive functions is in
itself a motivator to consider today a different approach to
the evaluation of executive functioning.

Planning in the Motor Control domain
A major interest in the field of motor control is to
understand how actions are coordinated to enable the
execution of complex sequential motor activities, e.g.
playing a musical instrument or dancing in rhythm. This
question has been particularly studied in the context of
sensorimotor synchronization (for a review on SMS, see
Repp, 2005). Even if synchronized behaviors require motor
coordination both through space and time, research has
focused historically on the timing aspects of motor planning
and experimental findings have led to the acceptance today
1

2207

of the existence of two distinct timing modes related to the
control and execution of rhythmical action sequences
(Robertson et al., 1999; Zelaznik, Spencer, & Ivry, 2002).
The event-based timing mode is primarily involved in tasks
that have a clear temporal goal, e.g. trying to keep the beat
of a metronome, and is assumed to require an explicit
internal representation or memory of the referential
temporal interval to produce (Wing & Kristofferson, 1973).
By contrast, emergent timing is assumed to arise implicitly,
i.e. from the extraction of temporal regularities emerging
naturally from the dynamics of movement control when
actions are repeated in smooth oscillatory cycles (Ivry,
Spencer, Zelaznik, & Diedrichsen, 2002; Turvey, 1977). For
example I can infer that "I will be late given the speed of my
successive footsteps". While finger tapping is the prevailing
paradigm to reveal event-based timing, circle drawing has
been proposed as the exemplar task to reveal emergent
timing (Zelaznik et al., 2002). In terms of statistics, negative
lag-1 autocorrelation values are typically observed in fingertapping tasks suggesting that motor responses are controlled
through an internal timekeeper (Vorberg & Wing, 1996;
Wing & Kristofferson, 1973). In contrast, positive or nearto-zero AC-1 values are classically reported in circle
drawing tasks suggesting that other mechanisms of control
enter into play and enable the implicit emergence of a
certain sense of rhythmicity (Lemoine & Delignières, 2009;
Torre & Delignières, 2008; Zelaznik et al., 2002).
Anchoring has been described as a possible mechanism that
could explain how timing emerges when movements are
continuous rather than discrete. This phenomenon,
commonly observed in cyclical movements, consists in a
local reduction in spatial and/or temporal errors at a specific
location along the trajectory path and is often observed
around reversal points, i.e. at points of transition between
flexion/extension movements (Beek, Turvey, & Schmidt,
1992; Roerdink, Ophoff, Peper, & Beek, 2008). This
specific point of transition could be used as a referential to
infer timing regularities in the case of continuous
movements (Repp & Steinman, 2010).
In a recent study (Dione & Delevoye-Turrell,
unpublished) the use of a unique task designed as a hybrid
of finger tapping and circle drawing was suggested to
reveal, assess and compare the two modes of timing
between them. In this 'spatial-tapping' task, a picture
composed of six discrete visual targets (disposed around a
virtual circle) was displayed on a tactile screen. Participants
were asked to produce discrete taps on each target, one after
the other and to follow the circular trajectory with the arm at
the regular pace of a metronome (from 1100 to 300 ms of
inter-tone intervals, ITI). The motor actions were assumed
to be discrete at slower tempi with the need of cognitive
control to maintain long timing intervals through
timekeeping at slow tempi; motor actions were proposed to
be continuous at faster tempi through the capacity to
anticipate only the point of transition between
flexion/extension movements when the tempi were too fast.
Autocorrelation values were measured up to ten lags to

reveal event-based timing at slow tempi (negative AC-1)
and emergent timing at faster tempi (positive AC-6).
Furthermore, a detailed spatial analysis was conducted on
the spatial endpoint distributions to assess whether the
cognitive strategy was turned towards the need to anticipate
the point of transition between flexion and extension
movement at faster tempi. Spatial ellipses were first
measured for each target. The mean area and the angular
orientation of each ellipse were then computed. An
orientation error was finally calculated as the angular
difference between the orientation of the ellipse and the
tangent to the circle measured at each target. Performance
results revealed first that both the timing (% of IRIerror) and
the spatial accuracy (mean spatial area) were perfectly
maintained at slowest tempi (from 1100 to 900 ms). A first
small but significant decrease in the performance arose at
800 ms and was maintained until 600 ms. For tempi that
were faster than 500 ms the performance was the worst with
rather large spatial and timing errors. As predicted for the
timing strategies, significant negative autocorrelation values
emerged at lag-1 at slow tempi only (from 1100 to 700 ms)
and significant positive AC emerged at lag-6 at faster tempi
only (from 500 to 300 ms). In order to assess whether the
actions were controlled or not through an internal
timekeeper (event-based timing), the motor delays were
measured for each tempo and both lags according to the WK model. Results revealed that the motor delays increased in
function of tempi at lag-1 only, suggesting that the timing
was event-based at slow tempi only in this spatial-tapping
task and that other mechanisms entered into play to explain
the correlation factors observed at lag-6. Finally, the spatial
analysis confirmed that the endpoint distributions were
more oriented in relation to the tangent to the circle at faster
tempi, with the emergence of an anchor point at the point of
maximal extension in the fastest tempi only.
Overall, these results suggested that in the spatial-tapping
task, the timing mode was changed from event-based timing
at slow tempi towards emergent timing at faster tempi.
Consequently, it is possible to presume that in this motor
task the cognitive demands depended on different
behavioral strategies in function of the cognitive needs to
actively maintain a referential timing interval in working
memory (from 1100 to 900 ms), and to anticipate the spatial
point of transition between the two movements of flexion
vs. extension involved in the sequence (from 500 to 300
ms). An intermediate phase was here observed for those
tempi between 800 to 600 ms in which the performance was
decreased in space and time but in which at the same time
the event-based timing strategy was efficiently maintained
for 2/3 of the trials. It is thus possible that in this phase
motor inhibition was used in order to avoid a too fast
transition from discrete to continuous movement by making
an effort to maintain attention on each discrete action in
spite of the increase in temporal pressure.

2

2208

From neuropsychology to motor control

interval was increased by 100 ms between each trial with
the fastest one being at an ITI of 300 ms. Participants were
required to produce sixty taps for each trial. The total
duration of the session was 10 minutes, approximately.

In the present study, we suggest that the spatial-tapping
task, a task in which several motor actions need to be
planned and executed both in space and time could be an
interesting method to assess the so-called executive
functions. Indeed, the spatial-tapping task requires: (1)
working-memory at slow tempi in order to produce discrete
tapping actions in reference to memorized timing intervals,
(2) the active reduction of a switching cost related to the
motor switching between the two biomechanically distinct
movements of flexion and extension that compose the
movement sequence with the idea that bad switching will
lead to poor spatial control of movement trajectory, (3) and
finally inhibition of a too fast transition from discrete to
continuous actions at intermediate tempi, with finger contact
times that are too short to maintain high timing levels of
performance.
In order to test this hypothesis performance scores were
measured both in a spatial-tapping task and in a battery of
neuropsychological tests assessing the three main executive
functions. Multiple regression analyses were then computed
to explore and reveal specific relationships between the
functions.

Performance measures.
Timing performance. Inter-response intervals (IRIs) were
measured as the time interval between the start of two
successive taps. Long intervals (> 2*ITI) were omitted from
all calculations. The IRIerror was then computed as the
percentage of absolute difference between each IRI and the
reference ITI of a given trial. This measure served as an
indicator of the magnitude of the timing error.
Spatial performance. The endpoint distributions of the
pointing actions were plotted in function of each visual
target position. All taps were used (ten data points per
ellipse). Through vector calculations, spatial ellipses were
then calculated. The mean area of the spatial ellipses was
finally measured in mm2 as an indicator of the magnitude of
the spatial error (SE).
Motor Fluency. The Contact time (CT) was defined as the
time of finger contact with the touch screen. This measure
(in ms) was used to assess the level of control of the motor
response output, with shorter CTs being related to a more
fluent gesture.

Methods

Planning indicators.
Event-based vs. emergent timing. After having suppressed
the first six IRIs of each trial, autocorrelation (AC) values
were calculated at lag-1 and lag-6 (for details, see Vorberg
& Wing, 1996). These measures served as an indicator of
the timing mode that was used to guide the pointing actions
with event-based timing being revealed through negative
AC-1 values, and emergent timing through positive AC-6
values.

Participants
Twenty-six right-handed students between 18 to 21 years of
age and recruited from the University of Lille3 participated
voluntarily in the study. All participants received an
information letter and provided written informed consent.
All participants performed the task with their right hand and
reported having normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The
protocol received approval of the ethics committee in
human sciences of the University of Lille3.

The spatial-tapping task
Material & Stimuli. A picture composed of 6 black targets
was displayed on a touch screen Elo Touch 19’’ 1915L. The
targets (10 mm of diameter, distanced of 100 mm) were
placed around a virtual circle of 100 mm of radius. The
participants were invited to stand in front of the screen that
was placed upon a table and titled at 90 degrees of angle.
Procedure. The subjects’ task was to touch each visual
target one after the other, starting from the bottom right
target, and moving counter-clockwise using the right index
finger (fist closed). Participants were instructed to
synchronize each pointing action to a series of regular
auditory tones (beep duration = 100 ms) that was played
through classic computer speakers. Participants were
encouraged to maintain their left arm relaxed along the body
side. They were clearly instructed of the goal of the task that
was to be at best synchronized with the metronome. Each
subject performed a total of ten trials. The initial tempo was
an inter-tone interval (ITI) of 1200 ms. The temporal

Statistical Analyses. Performance measures and planning
indicators were first calculated for individual trials and then
averaged across participants. Second, analyses of variances
(ANOVA) were conducted with ITI as a repeated measure
on measures and indicators. Fisher LSD post hoc tests were
used when required and the alpha level was set to 0.05. The
performance measures were then averaged within three
phases for each subject according to the moment of change
in planning strategy: slow or updating phase, intermediate or
inhibiting phase, fast or switching phase.

Neuropsychological tasks
Material & Stimuli. The tasks were all selected from a
French version of the TAP computerized battery of tests
(Zimmermann & Fimm, 1994). Participants were seated in
front of the computer. The experimenter provided
instructions orally. The same instructions were then
displayed on the screen. A familiarization trial was
performed before each task. One or two response keys were
used, in function of task requirements. When only one
response key was presented, subjects were asked to respond
3

2209

with their right hand only. When two response keys were
required, participants were asked to respond with their right
hand on the right key, and their left hand on the left key. For
each task, participants were asked to respond as rapidly as
possible while maintaining a low error-rate.

control of the motor response (CTs) as required in the
intermediate phase of the spatial-tapping task should be an
indicator of inhibition abilities (go-no-go); (3) decrease in
the spatial error in the faster phase of the spatial-tapping
task (area) should be an indicator of the switching abilities
(letter-number task).

Tasks procedures.
Updating & N-back task. A series of one-digit numbers
were presented one after the other, in the centre of the
screen (100 items that 15 target items). The subjects’ task
was to press the response key as fast as possible when the
item on the screen was the same as the item presented two
times before. Subjects were scored according to the median
of their reaction times (RT).
Inhibiting & Go-noGo task. A straight or a diagonal cross
(‘+’ or ‘x’) appeared briefly in the centre of the screen, for a
total sequence length of 40 items. The participant's task was
to press a response key as fast as possible for the diagonal
cross (‘x’) only. The target item was present 50% of the
time. Participants were scored according to the number of
false responses.
Switching & The Letter-number task. A letter and a
number were simultaneously presented on the computer
screen, for a total sequence of 100 items. Two control
conditions and one alternation condition were performed.
Two response-keys were used. In the first control or pure
block condition, the participants’ task was to press the
response key that was in the same hemi-field than the letter
(for example, if the letter was presented on the left side of
the screen, subjects had to press the left response key). In
the second control condition, participants had to press the
response key that was in the same hemi-field than the
number. In the alternation condition, the participants were
instructed to alternate a response to a letter, and a response
to a number, from trial-to-trial, by pressing the response key
that was located in the corresponding hemi-field.
Participants were scored according to a switching cost that
was measured as the difference in reaction time between the
pure blocks (that were pooled together) and the alternation
condition.

Results

Statistical Analyses. Performance scores were calculated
for each individual in each task and then averaged across
participants. Descriptive results (mean, standard, deviation,
min & max values) were then computed. χ2 tests were then
performed to ensure that performance scores were normally
distributed across tasks.

Multiple regression analyses: ST vs. classical tasks
Standard multiple regression analyses were conducted to
evaluate how well each performance scores (IRIerror, CTs,
area) obtained in each phase of the spatial-tapping task
(regressors) could predict the scores obtained in each of the
neuropsychological tasks (dependent variables). The alpha
value was set at 0.05. Following our hypotheses, (1) the
timing accuracy in the slow phase of the spatial-tapping task
(IRIerror) should require WM abilities (n-back task); (2)

The Spatial Tapping task
Performance results.
Timing performances. Results revealed that all participants
closely followed the tempo even at fast tempi, with a
maximum mean error of 8% across the ITI spectrum. As an
example, the greatest errors were observed in the fastest
tempo of ITI=300 ms, with IRIs contained between 276 and
324 ms. ANOVA on the IRIerror revealed nevertheless that
the timing errors were significantly different in function of
ITI (F(9;225) = 7.685; p <0.001). Post hoc tests revealed
that timing errors were larger at faster tempi, i.e. for
ITI=400 to 300 ms (Mean = 7.6%; SD = 2.8%) and these
values were significantly different from that measured at
slower tempi (Mean = 5.9%; SD = 1.7%).
Spatial performance. ANOVA conducted on the spatial
area revealed an increase in the spatial errors at faster tempi
(F(9; 225) = 83.678; p <0.001). More specifically, the mean
area of the endpoint ellipses were the smallest at slower
tempi, i.e., at ITI=1100 to 800 ms (Mean = 42.9 mm2; SD =
23.7mm2), with all other tempi being characterised by
significantly larger errors. Spatial areas were the largest at
faster tempi (from ITI=500 to 300 ms) and these results
were significantly different from all other ITIs (Mean =
126.8 mm2; SD = 73.96 mm2).
Motor fluency. ANOVA conducted on the mean contact
times revealed that the CTs were shorter with increasing
tempi (F(9; 225) = 31.14; p < 0.001). Post Hoc tests
revealed that the decrease in CT was linear with increasing
tempi, with significant differences between the nth trial and
the trial (n+2). Nevertheless, no differences between
neighbouring ITIs emerged at the slower tempi, i.e. between
ITIs=1200 to 1000 ms for which the largest contact times
were measured.
Overall, motor actions were precise in space and time at
the slowest tempi (≥800 ms), less accurate in space but more
fluent at intermediate tempi (at 700 and 600 ms of ITI), less
precise in both space and time but much more fluent at
faster tempi (from 500 to 300 ms of ITI).
Planning indicators.
Event-based timing. To note first is the fact that all AC-1
values were negative. Repeated ANOVAs on the AC-1
values showed that these values were significantly different
in function of ITI (F(9; 225) = 5.933; p <0.001). Post Hoc
tests confirmed that the AC-1 values were the largest at
slower tempi, i.e. for ITI=1100 to 900 ms of ITI (Mean = 0.28; SD = 0.15) and significantly smaller with increasing
tempi, i.e. from ITI=800 to 400 ms (Mean = -0.17, SD =
0.18). The AC-1 value was finally the smallest at the fastest
4

2210

ITI of 300 ms (Mean = -0.02, SD = 0.21). These results
suggest that the timing mode was event-based for slow
tempi (1200 to 900 ms) in this task.
Emergent timing. To note first that all AC-6 values were
positive. Repeated ANOVAs on the AC-6 values revealed
that these values were significantly different in functions of
ITI (F(9,225) = 8.524; p<0.001). Post Hoc tests revealed
that the AC-6 values were the smallest at slower tempi, i.e.
for ITI=1200 to 900 ms (Mean = 0.08; SD = 0.15). At faster
tempi (ITI=500 ms to 300 ms), the positive AC-6 values
were the largest (Mean = 0.31, SD = 0.20) and not
significantly different between each other. At intermediate
tempi (from 800 to 600 ms), the AC-6 values were all
significantly smaller than at least one of the faster ITIs and
larger than at least one of the slower ITI. These results
indicate that the timing mode became emergent at fast tempi
of 500 to 300 ms of ITI.
Overall, these results suggests that the timing was eventbased at slowest tempi (from 1200 to 900 ms), emergent at
fastest tempi (500 to 300 ms) and in a transition phase at
intermediate tempi (from 800 to 600 ms).

Table 1: Performance scores in the classic executive tasks

Table 2: Multiple regression analyses. Significant results
are bolded.

Neuropsychological tasks
Performance scores observed in the neuropsychological
tasks are presented in table 1. χ2 tests revealed that
performance scores were normally distributed across tasks.

Multiple Regression Analyses: ST vs. classical tasks
Beta coefficients and corresponding p-values are presented
in table 2 for each regressor in function of each dependent
variable. Results confirm our hypotheses: (1) small timing
errors in the slow phase of the ST task predict short reaction
times in the WM task, (2) short contact times in the ST-task
predict larger number of inhibition error in the go-no-go
task, (3) smaller are in the fast phase of the ST-task predict
smaller switching cost in the letter-number task.

Discussion
In this study, we asked whether a simple motor sequencing
task could be used to assess the executive functions of
planning described in the neuropsychological literature. This
motor task was assumed to involve updating in working
memory at slowest tempi, inhibiting at intermediate tempi,
and switching at faster tempi. This hypothesis was tested by
comparing performance scores in the spatial-tapping task to
those scores obtained in three neuropsychological tasks
selected to target each specific executive function. The
findings reported here confirmed our working hypothesis.
Indeed, in the slow phase of the spatial tapping task, results
suggested that the motor actions were triggered through an
internal representation of time intervals, with larger negative
auto-correlations at slow tempi (from 900 to 1200 ms). To
perform the task adequately, subjects were required to
maintain actively in working memory the target time
interval to produce, across the entire duration of the trial.

Regression analyses confirmed furthermore the existence of
a relationship between these motor results and those
performances obtained in a cognitive WM task, suggesting
similar WM functions in the cognitive and in the motor
domains. In the faster phase of the spatial-tapping task
(from 500 to 300 ms), with actions becoming more circular,
it was suggested that the action sequence was divided in two
biomechanically distinct movements that compose the
sequence, i.e., flexion vs. extension movement patterns. The
cognitive goal in this case was then geared towards the need
to coordinate smoothly the distinct movements composing
the sequence towards a more global trajectory pattern that
binds them together, here a circle. In circle drawing, this
phenomena is actually measurable through the emergence of
an anchor point that is a kinematic reduction in the timing
and/or spatial variability at the point of transition between
flexion/extension movements (Beek et al., 1992). It has been
shown that the anchor point is effectively reduced through
explicit anticipatory processes. Indeed, orienting the gaze in
advance towards the anchor point significantly reduces the
spatial variability observed at this point. In the same vain,
flexing and extending the wrist in an anticipatory rhythmic
fashion significantly reduces both the spatial and temporal
errors respectively at the points of maximum flexion vs.
extension related to the movement pathway (Roerdink et al.,
2008). In the present results, we observed an anchor point
within our circular trajectory at the point of maximal
extension (upper left target); point in space at which smaller
spatial variability was measured but only in the faster phase
of the task, which confirms the role of emergent timing at
fast tempi. In reference to the cognitive tests, our results
revealed furthermore that the performances at fast tempi in
the spatial tapping task were effectively related to smaller
switching cost in a classical switching task, suggesting that
5

2211

switching between two biomechanical movements may be
in fact controlled by those similar functions used for
cognitive switching. Finally, in the intermediate phase of the
spatial-tapping task, it was suggested that motor inhibition
of a too fast transition from discrete to continuous actions
entered into play to maintain high levels of spatial and
timing accuracy in spite of the increase in temporal
pressure. This hypothesis was confirmed here with longer
contact times in the intermediate phase of the spatialtapping task being significantly related with the ability to
inhibit impulsive response in a classical go-no-go task.
In conclusion, we propose the spatial-tapping as a novel
paradigm (1) to assess the executive functions in an easy
and non-verbal context, (2) to gain a better understanding of
the relationships between the distinct executive functions.
This approach may be a promising way to reconsider
cognitive strategy in broader context and offers a starting
point for the study of the functional relationships between
motor and cognitive control.

References
Beek, P. J., Turvey, M. T., & Schmidt, R. C. (1992).
Autonomous and nonautonomous dynamics of coordinated
rhythmic movements. Ecological Psychology, 4(2), 65–95.
Burgess, P. W. (1997). Theory and methodology in
executive function research. In P. Rabbitt (Ed.),
Methodology of frontal and executive function (pp. 81–116).
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion,
rationality and the human brain. Avon, New York: Random
House.
Dione, M., & Delevoye-Turrell, Y. (unpublished). The
spatial-tapping task to reveal the coexistence of event-based
and emergent timing for the control of rhythmic sequences.
Grant, D. A., & Berg, E. A. (1948). A behavioural
analysis of degree of reinforcement and ease of shifting to
new responses in a Weigl-type card-sorting problem.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38, 404–411.
Harlow, J. M. (1868). Recovery from the passage of an
iron bar through the head. Publications of the Massachusetts
Medical Society, 2, 327–347.
Ivry, R., Spencer, R., Zelaznik, H., & Diedrichsen, J.
(2002). The Cerebellum and Event Timing. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 978(1), 302–317.
Lemoine, L., & Delignières, D. (2009). Detrended
windowed (lag one) autocorrelation: A new method for
distinguishing between event-based and emergent timing.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62(3),
585–604. doi:10.1080/17470210802131896
Milner, B. (1963). Effects of different brain lesions on
card sorting: The role of the frontal lobes. Archives of
Neurology, 9(1), 90–100.
Miyake, A., & Friedman, N. P. (2012). The Nature and
Organization of Individual Differences in Executive
Functions Four General Conclusions. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 21(1), 8–14.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A.

H., Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. (2000). The unity and
diversity of executive functions and their contributions to
complex “Frontal Lobe” tasks: a latent variable analysis.
Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 49–100.
Phillips, L. H. (1997). Do “frontal tests” measure
executive function  ? Issues of assessment and evidence from
fluency tests. In P. Rabbitt (Ed.), Methodology of frontal
and executive function (pp. 191–213). Hove, UK:
Psychology Press.
Rabbitt, P. (1997). Introduction: Methodologies and
models in the study of executive function. In P. Rabbitt
(Ed.), Methodology of frontal and executive function (pp. 1–
38). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Repp, B. (2005). Sensorimotor synchronization: a review
of the tapping literature. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
12(6), 969–992.
Repp, B., & Steinman, S. (2010). Simultaneous eventbased and emergent timing: synchronization, continuation,
and phase correction. Journal of Motor Behavior, 42(2),
111–126.
Robertson, S., Zelaznik, H., Lantero, D., Bojczyk, K.,
Spencer, R., Doffin, J., & Schneidt, T. (1999). Correlations
for timing consistency among tapping and drawing tasks:
evidence against a single timing process for motor control.
Journal of experimental psychology. Human perception and
performance, 25(5), 1316–1330.
Roerdink, M., Ophoff, E., Peper, C., & Beek, P. (2008).
Visual and musculoskeletal underpinnings of anchoring in
rhythmic visuo-motor tracking. Experimental Brain
Research., 184(2), 143–156.
Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B, Biological Sciences, 199–209.
Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental
structure. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Torre, K., & Delignières, D. (2008). Distinct ways of
timing movements in bimanual coordination tasks:
Contribution of serial correlation analysis and implications
for modelling. Acta Psychologica, 129(2), 284–296.
Turvey, M. (1977). Preliminaries to a theory of action
with reference to vision. Perceiving, acting and knowing,
211–265.
Vorberg, D., & Wing, A. (1996). Modeling variability and
dependence in timing. In Herbert Heuer and Steven W.
Keele (Ed.), Handbook of Perception and Action (Vol.
Volume 2, pp. 181–262). Academic Press.
Wing, A., & Kristofferson, A. (1973). The timing of
interresponse
intervals.
Attention,
Perception,
&
Psychophysics, 13(3), 455–460.
Zelaznik, H., Spencer, R., & Ivry, R. (2002). Dissociation
of explicit and implicit timing in repetitive tapping and
drawing movements. Journal of experimental psychology.
Human perception and performance, 28(3), 575–588.
Zimmermann, P., & Fimm, B. (1994). Tests d’évaluation
de l’attention (TEA)-Version 2.1. Würselen, Germany:
Psytest.
6

2212

