UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Playing for Us: The Influence of Joint Action on Planning in Three-year-olds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rj2b24d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gerson, Sarah
Hunnius, Sabine
Bekkering, Harold

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Playing for Us: The Influence of Joint Action on Planning in Three-year-olds
Sarah A. Gerson (s.gerson@donders.ru.nl)
Sabine Hunnius (s.hunnius@donders.ru.nl)
Harold Bekkering (h.bekkering@donders.ru.nl)
Radboud University Nijmegen
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Montessorilaan 3
Nijmegen, 6500HE, The Netherlands

Abstract
Learning to plan sequences of actions and appropriately adapt
our actions during interactions with others are both critical
skills upon which much of human society is built. We know
that children’s joint action and planning skills are both
undergoing development during the preschool years, but not
much is known about how the joint action context influences
young children’s planning. In this study, we examined the
effect of playing alone or with a joint partner on sequence
planning during a problem-solving game in three-year-old
children. We found that children were better at planning
ahead in the individual than the joint condition of the game
despite the joint condition requiring fewer actions on the part
of the child. In contrast, children were equally good at
problem-solving (i.e., correcting an error) in both conditions.
The possible reasons for this difference and directions of
future research are discussed.
Keywords: joint action; planning; cognitive development

Working together with others is important across a variety
of everyday tasks, ranging from simple, mundane actions to
considerably complex plans and action sequences. When we
interact with a partner in a work or athletic setting, the
complexity of coordinating our actions with another’s is
quite clear. In contrast, when we perform simple everyday
actions such as passing a cup of milk to another person, we
likely do this with ease and do not dwell on the coordination
with the other or the expectations about the others’ action.
When acting with another person, planning our own actions
requires coordinating our actions with another individual,
whether this coordination is conscious and complex or
seemingly automatic. Planning our actions when interacting
with another is a task that spans many domains and is
critical for much of cognitive and social development.
Examining the developmental emergence of this skill can
shed light on how and when the factors necessary to
working with others are integrated.
When performing a task by ourselves, we can create a
plan internally and carry out the task without interruption.
When jointly acting with another, however, we need to take
the other person’s actions into account. According to Sebanz
and Knoblich (2009), intentional coordination of actions
with another requires representing both one’s own and one’s
partner’s roles in the task. They suggest that adults engaged
in joint actions predict a partner’s actions in a joint action
task by representing the action of a partner and one’s own
actions in a functionally equivalent way. In fact,

incorporating a partner’s task “affects one’s own action
planning and performance even when there is no need to
take the other’s part into account at all” (p. 357). One
mechanism thought to underlie the representation and
prediction of another’s actions is simulation (Gallese &
Goldman, 1998). That is, when one perceives someone else
acting in a goal-directed manner, one’s own motor system is
activated as if one was performing the action oneself
(Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004). Simulating a partner’s
action from a first-person perspective can then be used to
make predictions about upcoming events (Wilson &
Knoblich, 2005). Additionally, the motor system is
preferentially activated for predictions of others’ actions
within a joint action context (Kourtis, Sebanz, & Knoblich,
2010). What is simulated and how perceptual information
available can be transferred into a motor simulation is still a
topic of vivid discussion (see for example Uithol et al.,
2011).
The necessity of incorporating another agent’s actions in
a similar way to one’s own actions when interacting with a
joint partner suggests that the ability to represent other
agents’ actions in a similar way to one’s own would be a
developmental prerequisite for appropriately planning one’s
actions within a joint context. One piece of behavioral
evidence that young children seem to represent others’
actions in a similar way to their own actions is that infants’
ability to produce particular actions is directly related to
their perception, prediction, and motor activation when
viewing others perform the same actions (e.g., Cannon et
al., 2012; Gerson & Woodward, in press, van Elk et al.,
2008). Meyer and colleagues (2011) found neural evidence
that this is especially so in joint action contexts. Greater
activation in the motor system was found in three-year-old
children watching a joint action partner than when these
same children watched someone with whom they were not
collaborating. Further, variation in performance on the joint
game and in the amount of motor activation observed when
the child watched the partner act were related, suggesting
that the child’s motor system activation was likely related to
the integration of their partner’s and their own actions.
In addition to a representation of others’ actions, the
incorporation of others’ actions into one’s own planning is
critical to acting appropriately in joint contexts. In order to
address how the presence of others affects planning,
research must examine differences in planning one’s own
actions during individual and joint tasks. A recent study

2380

with adults (Meyer, van der Wel, & Hunnius, 2013)
measured planning of actions that could be performed alone
or with another person. It was found that participants
learned to initiate actions based on predictions about the
subsequent steps in a task after they gained experience
acting in the task. This was true in both the individual and
joint contexts, suggesting that participants were able to use
their experience to predict their own or a partner’s actions
and plan their actions accordingly.
The research reviewed above indicates that motor
activation during the observation and prediction of others’
actions is heightened within joint action contexts and that
the simulation of others’ actions facilitates motor planning
in joint contexts. Although motor planning is one important
aspect of planning sequences of actions, sequence planning
also requires higher-order processes such as future thinking
and cognitive control. That is, when performing an initial
action that propagates a series of embedded actions, one
must plan not only the motor aspects (such as movement,
timing, and spatial location) but also consider the
consequence of these actions on the future steps in the
sequence. Adults are proficient sequence planners, but
planning skills are still undergoing development throughout
early childhood (Carlson, Moses, & Claxton, 2004;
McCormack & Atance, 2011). Difficulties in planning and
other higher-order cognitive skills have been linked to the
relatively prolonged development of the prefrontal cortex
(see, for example, Welsh, Pennington, & Groisser, 1991).
Previous research examining the development of
sequence planning within joint action contexts has largely
measured children’s planning when engaged in a game with
a parent or another adult. These studies have found that the
development of planning with others is a prolonged process,
in that older children (e.g., between 6 and 11 years) often
outperformed younger children (e.g., between 3 and 5 years)
on planning tasks (e.g., de la Ossa & Gauvain, 2001;
Gauvain, 1992; Gauvain & Rogoff, 1989). This research,
however, focused largely on the role parents played in
guiding the joint actions through bids for joint attention,
scaffolding of the child’s actions, and teaching of strategies
or rules. Because parents were involved and influencing
children’s actions during the joint planning games, measures
of the child’s planning skills were often measured after the
joint task. The lack of planning measurements during joint
actions does not take into account whether planning in a
joint context adds more cognitive demands to a planning
task. In the current study, we explore the planning skills of
three-year-old children during a problem-solving task when
playing alone or with a partner who acts in a predictable,
uniform manner.
We created a game in which the child was required to
plan ahead in order to accurately solve a matching game. If
he or she did not plan ahead, the child had the chance to
correct the error during a subsequent step of the game. All
children played this game both alone and in alternating turns
with a joint partner, “Kip.” The joint partner was a hand
puppet introduced during the joint action condition and kip

always acted predictably so that we could assess the
influence of a social partner’s presence without the social
partner’s actions directly influencing any of the child’s
actions. Kip was introduced as separate from the
experimenter and the experimenter used a different voice
when acting as Kip so that the child did not expect Kip to
scaffold his or her actions. We then examined differences
between children’s accuracy in planning and problemsolving during the individual versus joint conditions. If
simulating a person’s actions in order to motorically plan
one’s own actions is the key difference between individual
and joint planning, then children’s performance during the
joint condition should not be hindered. In fact, because
children took turns playing with Kip, the joint condition
required less motor planning than the individual condition;
children only had to place two balls in the correct buckets
during each trial instead of four. Therefore, if all planning
was carried out through the motor system, children’s
planning should be better in the joint condition than the
individual condition. If, however, other cognitive processes
are necessary in order to integrate one’s own plans with
another person’s actions, plans, and goals, then children
should perform worse in the joint condition than in the
individual condition. That is, if the presence of another actor
increases the cognitive demands of higher-order
functioning, such as cognitive control, future thinking, and
sequence planning, children should perform better in the
individual condition than the joint condition.

Method
Participants
Thirty-two 37-month-olds (mean age = 3 years, 38 days)
were included in the final data set for this study (15 females,
17 males). All children were recruited from a database of
families who volunteered to participate in child studies. An
additional 10 children participated but were not included
due to equipment malfunction (n = 2), experimenter error (n
= 2), not completing all trials (n = 3), or lack of learning of
the rules of the game or refusal to play with Kip (n = 3).

Stimuli and Procedure
Each trial consisted of a set of four balls, four buckets, and a
clear, plastic tube that held the balls. There were always two
buckets of one color (e.g., green) and two buckets of another
color (e.g., yellow). In all but the first training trial, there
were two balls of one color (e.g., green), one ball of a
second color (e.g., yellow), and one ball that was
multicolored (e.g., half green and half yellow). The tube was
created to dispense the balls one at a time in a particular
order while still allowing participants to see the colors of the
upcoming balls (see Figure 1). The multi-colored ball
always came out of the tube in the second position, and the
three solid-colored balls were pseudorandomly distributed
in the first, third, and fourth positions. Except in the
demonstration trial, different color combinations (consisting
of red, light blue, dark blue, green, and yellow) were used

2381

frequently reminded the child that all the balls had to “fit” in
the buckets (and pointed to the balls in the tube). If the child
struggled, the experiment gave a series of hints. If the child
encountered a solid-colored ball that had no matching
bucket, the experimenter first gave him or her time to try to
solve the problem themselves. Then she gave the participant
a series of hints, allowing time for the child to recognize the
solution between each hint. As in the demonstration trial,
hints increased in detail, ranging from asking what the
arrow meant to reminding the child that the multi-colored
ball could go in either bucket. If the child still did not
respond to the hints, the experimenter moved the mixed ball
and demonstrated the solution to the problem. In this way, at
the end of the training trials, the experimenter always
ensured that the balls were matched with an appropriate
bucket at the end of the trial. After these two trials, the
experimenter told the child he or she was ready to play
without help. Individual or joint play trials then began
(counterbalanced between participants).

across trials so as to minimize learning specific rules about
colors and to keep the children’s attention. In joint play
trials, the experimenter wore a hand puppet of a chicken
(called “Kip”). The experimenter used a different voice so
as to differentiate herself from the puppet.

Figure 1: Example of the game setup. Each trial involved
three-solid colored balls, a multicolored ball, and two
buckets in each of two colors.
Training Children were taught how the game worked via a
set of training trials. First, the experimenter placed a set of
four solid-colored balls (brown and black) into matching
buckets. This short phase was to teach children that balls
had to go into matching buckets. Next, one of the solid balls
(the one in the second position) was replaced with a multicolored ball. When the experimenter extracted the multicolored ball, she showed the child that it could go in either
the brown or the black bucket. After showing them this, she
always left the ball in the inappropriate bucket in terms of
meeting the end goal. That is, if there were two brown balls
in the tube, the multi-colored ball would be placed in a
brown bucket (and vice-versa if there were two black balls).
This “mistake” was made in order to show participants the
importance of considering the upcoming balls in the tube
and to indicate how errors could be corrected. The
experimenter then placed a black and brown arrow in front
of the bucket to indicate which bucket held the multicolored ball. After the incorrect placement of the multicolored ball, the experimenter would show the child that one
of the remaining solid-colored balls no longer had an
appropriate bucket in which to be placed. She would talk to
the child about how this could possibly be fixed and remind
them about the meaning of the arrow and hint about a
possible solution: “Do you remember what this arrow
means? This means that the multi-colored ball is in this
bucket. And where can the multi-colored ball go?” She
would then extract the multi-colored ball and place it in the
opposite colored bucket. She moved the arrow to the new
bucket and then placed the solid-colored ball in the
appropriate bucket. After having done this, she would
remind the child of how the problem had been solved.
Two training trials followed this demonstration in which
the experimenter scaffolded the child throughout the game.
These two trials consisted of two different sets of colored
balls, randomly assigned. During these trials, the
experimenter handed the participant each of the balls and
asked him or her to place them in the matching bucket. She

Individual Play The individual condition consisted of six
trials. In each of these trials, the child retrieved each ball
from the tube, one at a time, and placed it into a bucket. The
experimenter did not participate except to ensure that the
child did not retrieve the following ball before placing the
one in his or her hand into a bucket. If the child encountered
a problem (i.e., a solid-colored ball without a matching
bucket), the experimenter did not interfere unless the child
looked to the experimenter for help. When the child
expressed uncertainty and enquired for help, the
experimenter would give the same hints as during the
training trial, again giving the child time to solve the
problem at each step. After all of the balls were placed in
buckets, the experimenter asked the child if they were all
correct (regardless of whether or not they were). If the child
realized then that there was a problem, the experimenter
again only helped (as above) if the child enquired.
Joint Play First, a small hand puppet was introduced to the
child. The child was told the name of the puppet (Kip) and
that Kip wanted to play with him or her and they could take
turns (see Figure 2). The joint play session consisted of nine
trials. In the first, fourth, and seventh trial, Kip let the child
place the first (and third) ball and Kip placed the
second/multi-colored (and fourth) ball. Kip always placed
the multi-colored ball in the bucket that allowed all
forthcoming balls to be placed correctly. In the other six
trials, Kip placed the first and third balls and the child
placed the second and fourth balls. This ensured that the
number of trials for which the child had to plan (by placing
the multi-colored ball correctly) was matched across the
individual and joint conditions. If the child incorrectly
placed the multi-colored ball and realized this error when
later attempting to place a solid-colored ball, the
experimenter followed the same procedure as in the
individual play trials as far as waiting for the child to
enquire in order to give any hints. If Kip had to place the

2382

solid-colored ball that had no matching bucket, she would
knock on the full buckets and say “uh oh—this ball can’t go
in this one” while looking at the empty bucket and would
ask for the child’s help. If the child did not immediately
solve the problem, the experimenter followed the same
pattern for giving hints as in other trials.

Figure 2: During the joint action condition, children
alternated taking turns with Kip, the hand puppet.
Coding The focal question in this study concerned
children’s ability to plan where to place the multi-colored
ball so that all following balls could fit in matching buckets.
For each trial in which the child placed the multi-colored
ball (six individual play and six joint play trials), a trained
coder judged whether the child placed the multi-colored ball
in the correct bucket (for the end goal achievement) before
the following ball was retrieved from the tube. This factor
will be referred to as planning. The proportion of trials
within the individual and joint condition for which the
child’s planning was correct was calculated and used as a
dependent variable. A second question was whether children
would correct errors if their initial ball placement was
incorrect. For this factor (called problem solving), coders
judged whether the child removed the mixed ball and placed
it in a correct bucket. If so, the coder noted whether the
child carried out this action with or without needing the
assistance of hints from the experimenter. The proportion of
trials correct after problem solving without hints from the
experimenter were calculated for each condition (note: this
gave children credit both for initially correct and correctly
solved trials without assistance). A second trained coder
coded 25% of the videos and agreed on 99% of trials.

individual or joint condition first) was also included to
account for possible learning effects across time. This
analysis revealed a main effect of Solution Stage (F(1,30) =
93.33, p < .001, ɳp2 = .76), a Solution Stage X Condition
interaction (F(1,30) = 5.15, p = .031, ɳp2 = .15). No other
main effects or interactions were found (ps > .13, ɳp2s <
.08). The main effect of Solution Stage indicated that the
proportion of trials that children successfully planned was
significantly lower than their problem solving performance.
The interaction suggests that the extent of this difference
was affected by condition (individual vs. joint). The lack of
main effect or interactions with Order suggests that children
who engaged in the joint versus individual task first did not
differ from one another in their performance.
In order to follow up on this interaction, we examined
pairwise comparisons of estimated marginal means. The
difference between individual and joint conditions was
significant for planning (md = .11, SE = .048, p = .031; see
Figure 3) in that children were significantly better at
planning during the individual than the joint condition. This
difference between conditions was not present for problemsolving (md = .001, SE = .035, p = .98). That is, children
were equally able to solve the problem in both conditions.
Additionally, children performed significantly better during
problem-solving than planning within both individual and
joint conditions (ps < .001).
In order to examine planning and problem-solving
performance relative to chance levels (50% of trials correct),
we conducted one-sample t-tests. In the individual
condition, children were better at planning than would be
expected by chance (M = .61, SE = .028, t(31) = 3.95, p <
.001, Cohen’s d = 1.42). Children were not above chance
levels of planning in the joint condition (M = .50, SE = .037,
t(31) = .034, p = .97, Cohen’s d = .012). When children had
the opportunity to correct their errors (i.e., problem solve),
they performed at above chance levels in both conditions (ts
> 12.3, ps < .001).

Results
As described above, the variable of interest for planning
was the proportion of trials for which children were initially
correct in their placement of the multi-colored ball and the
variable of interest for problem solving was the proportion
of trials in which the child had correctly placed all balls
(without hints) by the end of the trial. Initially, we
conducted a repeated-measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with Condition (i.e., individual or joint play) and
Solution Stage (planning vs. problem-solving) as within
subjects factors. The between-subjects counterbalancing
factor of Order (i.e., whether the child participated in the

Figure 3: Children were significantly better at planning in
the individual than joint condition (*p = .031), but were
above chance in problem solving in both conditions.

Discussion
Children were significantly better at planning their actions
appropriately when they played alone than when they took
turns playing with a social partner. That is, when playing

2383

alone, they were more likely to take into account the colors
of the remaining balls when choosing where to place the
mixed ball. When playing with a partner, children’s initial
placement of the mixed ball was seemingly random (i.e., the
placement was correct about half the time [at chance level]).
Importantly, this was true despite the fact that children had
fewer actions to carry out during the joint condition. In the
individual condition, children were responsible for placing
all four balls correctly. In the joint condition, however,
children only needed to place two of the four balls. The joint
partner always played correctly on her trials, so the task of
placing half the balls should have, in principle, been easier.
The fact that children did not perform as well in this case
suggests that something about sharing the task with a
partner made it more difficult for the children to plan. That
is, motor planning alone was not sufficient for carrying out
the task; the demands of sequence planning were made more
difficult by the presence of another actor.
In contrast to the difference found in planning, when
children encountered a proceeding ball for which there was
no matching bucket, they were equally competent at solving
this problem regardless of whether they were playing alone
or with a partner. The fact that children could and did solve
the problem without hints from the experimenter (or Kip) in
both conditions suggests that children understood the goal
of the task and what actions were necessary in order to
achieve this goal. Thus, it was not a lack of understanding of
the task that prevented children from planning appropriately
during the joint condition. This is impressive given the
complexity of the task carried out by the children.
Further, children’s planning and problem solving did not
change as a function of the order in which they played the
individual and joint conditions. This indicates that children
did not learn the task over time, regardless of which
condition they played first. Additionally, the fact that
children who played the joint condition first did not plan
more effectively during the individual condition than
children who played the individual condition first
suggesting that children were not learning how to plan from
Kip’s turns placing the mixed ball. Given that Kip always
placed the mixed ball correctly (on the three trials in which
she placed this ball), it was possible that children could have
used their partner’s correct actions to improve their own
planning, but the lack of order effect suggests this was not
the case in this study.
An important question to address in future studies is why
children were better able to plan during the individual than
the joint condition. Several possibilities remain to be
examined, including aspects of attention, inhibition, and the
social nature of the task.
One possibility is that attention to the future balls to be
placed differed when children were playing alone or with
Kip. If attention does differ, it suggests that the presence of
a partner made it more difficult for children to concentrate
on the task at hand and control their attention according to
the task goal. Baron (1986) has suggested that the presence
of others causes shifts in cognitive processing. This might

be particularly true during early development when
attentional control is still developing.
Similarly, children may have struggled to maintain
attentional control because of the timing differences
between the two task conditions. That is, children could play
continuously during the individual condition of the task but
were required to pause their own play while their partner
acted during the joint condition. It is possible that, it was not
simply the presence of the other, but the fact that the child’s
play was interrupted that made planning more difficult.
Whether the break in play led to disrupted attention control
or directly to difficulty with planning is unclear, and may be
driven by other mechanisms such as inhibitory control or
working memory. Ongoing studies in our laboratory aim to
address this possibility.
Finally, the mere presence of a social partner, rather than
the pauses in play or attention, may have undermined
children’s planning. Sebanz, Knoblich, and Prinz (2003)
suggest that the presence of others influences task
performance, regardless of whether one is acting with the
other person. They argue, “social facilitation effects are not
moderated by the specific actions carried out by others” (p.
12). Instead, they suggest that the presence of another
improves performance on simple tasks but impairs
performance on more complex tasks. This possibility would
be interesting to explore developmentally because of shifts
in complexity of particular tasks as children gain both
domain-general and domain-specific skills.
The current findings shed light on the difficulties
encountered when first attempting to incorporate predictions
of a partner’s actions with one’s own planning. It suggests
that planning for two individuals, even when they share a
common goal, is more difficult than planning for oneself.
The relative complexity of the planning task in this study
may have provided the ideal setting in which to examine
planning differences across contexts at this age. It is
possible that, given a less demanding task (or this task at an
older age), children would have performed similarly in both
conditions. On the other hand, a more difficult task may
have created floor effects in which children would not have
performed at above chance levels in either condition. The
variability in planning in this study was likely due to an
interplay between task difficulty and developmental period.
Whether and how individual versus joint planning differs in
different developmental periods and at different levels of
task complexity should be explored further.
The joint action condition in this study was minimally
“joint” in that it involved a turn-taking task in which the
social partner always performed correctly. Turn-taking
reduced timing and coordination demands common in other
joint action tasks. Further, if children learned that the joint
partner always acted correctly, he or she could have simply
ignored the partner and continued to play without taking
him or her into account. The fact that children did perform
differently in individual and joint conditions suggests that
they likely viewed these conditions differently (but see
possibility of timing differences above). Future research

2384

should consider the differential influences of more or less
involved interactions with the social partner.
Findings from the current study suggest differences in
three-year-old children’s planning, but not problem-solving,
when they play alone or jointly play with a partner. The
mechanisms underlying this difference should be addressed
in future research. Given that children of this age have the
ability to view a partner as an intentional agent, predict
another’s actions, and plan their own actions, it seems that
the integration of these skills is still undergoing
development. How this differs when playing with parents,
who may scaffold their actions, or with peers, who are less
predictable in their actions, is an interesting avenue of future
work. A better understanding of how planning within joint
actions develops is important in order to further explore
educational consequences, underlying neural mechanisms,
and individuals who show a prolonged or atypical
developmental pattern.

Acknowledgments
We would like to extend our gratitude to Angela Khadar,
Dirkje van der Aa, Marlene Meyer, Denise Janssen, Celeste
Peereboom, Barbarien Bruens, and other members of the
Nijmegen Baby Research Center for their help with data
collection and thought-provoking discussions. We are
especially grateful to the parents and children who
participated in this study. This work was funded by a Brainand-Cognition-Excellence-Grant from NWO (433‐09‐253).

References
Baron, R. S. (1986). Distraction-conflict theory: Progress
and problems. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology,
19,
1-39.
doi:
10.1016/S00652601(08)60211-7
Cannon, E. N., Woodward, A. L., Gredebäck, G., von
Hofsten, C. & Turek, C. (2012), Action production
influences 12-month-old infants’ attention to others’
actions. Developmental Science, 15: 35–42. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01095.x
Carlson, S. M., Moses, L. J., & Claxton, L. J. (2004).
Individual differences in executive functioning and theory
of mind: An investigation of inhibitory control and
planning ability. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 87, 299-319. doi: 10.1016/j.jecp.2004.01.002
De la Ossa, J. L. & Gauvain, M. (2001). Joint attention by
mothers and children while using plans. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 25, 176-183. doi:
10.1080/01650250042000168
Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences,
2,
493-501.
doi:
10.1016/S13646613(98)01262-5
Gauvain, M. (1992). Social influences on the development
of planning in advance and during action. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 15, 377-398. doi:
10.1177/016502549201500306

Gauvain, M., & Rogoff, B. (1989). Collaborative problem
solving and children's planning skills. Developmental
psychology,
25,
139-151.
doi:
10.1037//00121649.25.1.139
Gerson, S. A., & Woodward, A. L. (in press). Learning from
their own actions: The unique effect of producing actions
on infants’ action understanding. Child Development.
Kourtis, D., Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2010).
Favouritism in the motor system: social interaction
modulates action simulation. Biology Letters, 6, 758-761.
doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2010.0478
McCormack, T., & Atance, C. M. (2011). Planning in young
children: A review and synthesis. Developmental Review,
31, 1-31. doi: 10.1016/j.dr.2011.02.002
Meyer, M., Hunnius, S., Elk, M. van, Ede, F.L. van, &
Bekkering, H. (2011). Joint action modulates motor
system involvement during action observation in 3-yearolds. Experimental Brain Research, 211, 581-592. doi:
10.1007/s00221-011-2658-3
Meyer, M., van der Wel, R. P R. D., & Hunnius, S. (2013).
Higher-order planning for individual and joint object
manipulations. Experimental Brain Research, 225, 579588.
Sebanz, N. & Knoblich, G. (2009). Prediction in joint
action: What, when, and where. Topics in Cognitive
Science,
1:
353–367.
doi:
10.1111/j.17568765.2009.01024.x
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Representing
others' actions: just like one's own?. Cognition, 88, B11B21. doi: 10.1016/S0010-0277(03)00043-X
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169-192.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144230
Uithol, S., van Rooij, I., Bekkering, H., & Haselager, P.
(2011). Understanding motor resonance. Social
Neuroscience, 6, 388-397. doi: 10.1080/17470919.
2011.559129
van Elk, M., Van Schie, H. T., Hunnius, S., Vesper, C., &
Bekkering, H. (2008). You'll never crawl alone:
neurophysiological evidence for experience-dependent
motor resonance in infancy. Neuroimage, 43, 808-814.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.057
Welsh, M. C., Pennington, B. F., & Groisser, D. B. (1991).
A normative‐developmental study of executive function:
A window on prefrontal function in children.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 7, 131-149. doi:
10.1080/8756564910954048
Wilson, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005). The case for motor
involvement in perceiving conspecifics. Psychological
Bulletin,
131,
460-473.
doi:
10.1037/00332909.131.3.460

2385

