UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Polarity correspondence does not explain the SNARC effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/96d2m1m0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Santiago, Julio
Lakens, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Polarity correspondence does not explain the SNARC effect
Julio Santiago (santiago@ugr.es)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada
Campus de Cartuja, 18071 Granada, Spain

Daniel Lakens (D.Lakens@tue.nl)
School of Innovation Sciences, Eindhoven University of Technology
Postbus 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Abstract
Conceptual metaphor congruency effects have been
interpreted as evidence for the notion that the representation
of abstract conceptual dimensions (e.g., power, evaluation)
rests on more concrete dimensions (e.g., space, brightness).
However, an alternative account based on the notion of
polarity correspondence has recently received empirical
support from studies about the mapping between affective
evaluation and morality on vertical space. We tested the
polarity correspondence account in the domain of number,
which shows well-known congruency effects with lateral
left-right space (the SNARC effect). Response polarity was
manipulated by varying keyboard eccentricity in both parity
(odd-even) and quantity (larger-smaller than 5) tasks.
Response eccentricity did not modulate the SNARC effect. In
a final experiment, the orthogonal Simon effect was
modulated by the manipulation of response eccentricity. We
conclude that polarity correspondence does not provide an
adequate explanation of conceptual congruency effects in the
domain of number.
Keywords: conceptual metaphor; polarity correspondence;
SNARC; number; space; response eccentricity; orthogonal
Simon.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a strong interest in the
possibility that the mental representation of abstract
concepts relies in a deep sense on more concrete concepts
(see Landau, Meier, & Keefer, 2010, and Santiago, Román,
& Ouellet, 2011, for reviews). Under this view, an abstract
concept or conceptual domain imports structure and content
from a better understood, more clearly delineated, more
concrete conceptual domain. For example, time is
understood as physical motion from one location to another
(Clark, 1973), and power is linked to physical size
(Sorokowski, 2010). Such a view suggests that the mental
representation of concepts is hierarchically structured, such
that more concrete concepts are more directly linked to
perceptual-motor experiences, and these in turn are used to
support the understanding of more abstract levels.
Therefore, the whole human conceptual structure is
anchored to, or founded upon our embodied interaction with
the external world, which is why Santiago, Román, and
Ouellet (2011) called it the Solid Foundations view.
An important source of evidence for such a view comes
from conceptual congruency tasks. In these tasks, a concrete
and an abstract dimension are factorially crossed.

Participants' main task requires the processing of the
abstract dimension, and the effects of the concrete,
task-irrelevant dimension are measured. Typically, both
dimensions interact, such that a particular combination of
concrete and abstract conditions shows better performance.
This metaphorical congruency effect is often interpreted as
revealing the use of underlying concrete representations to
support the abstract judgment. A well-known example is the
Spatial-Numerical Association of Response Codes
(SNARC) effect (Dehaene et al., 1993). In a typical SNARC
task, the participant has to make a numerical discrimination,
such as deciding whether a number is odd or even, by means
of key presses. The responding hand (left or right) is the
task-irrelevant concrete dimension: in some blocks the
“odd” response is given by a left-hand key press and the
“even” response by a right-hand key press. In other blocks,
the mapping is reversed. The standard result, now widely
replicated, consists in better performance when responding
to a small number with the left hand and to a large number
with the right hand versus using the reverse mapping (see
Wood, Willmes, Nuerk, & Fischer, 2008, for a review). The
SNARC effect has most often been interpreted as evidence
for the use of a spatial left-right line to mentally represent
number magnitude.
However, Lakens and coworkers (Lakens, Semin, &
Foroni, 2012; Lakens, 2012) have proposed that it may not
be necessary to resort to concrete representations of any
kind in order to account for many of the published
metaphorical congruency effects. Their view rests on purely
structural features of dimensional concepts based on the
concept of markedness and on the principle of polarity
correspondence proposed by Proctor and Cho (2006), which
applies when two or more dimensions are simultaneously
manipulated in a task. The concept of markedness has a long
standing tradition in linguistics (Greenberg, 1963) and
psycholinguistics (Clark, 1969). The two poles of most
conceptual dimensions (e.g., happiness or tallness) do not
seem to enjoy the same representational status. One of them,
which we will refer to as the +pole, is used to refer to the
whole dimension, whereas the other, the -pole, is used to
refer only to itself (e.g., compare “how tall is John?” versus
“how short is John?”: the former does not presuppose that
John's height is in any specific range, whereas the second
question suggests that John is short). The +pole is more
frequent in language and enjoys a processing advantage
compared to the -pole (Clark, 1969). Proctor and Cho

1259

(2006) proposed a polarity correspondence principle that
predicts an extra processing advantage in those conditions
where the pole signs match. Thus, a polarity correspondence
account of conceptual congruency effects does not require
the postulation of concrete mental representations.
One key piece of evidence for Proctor and Cho's
argument (2006) relies on how response eccentricity
modulates the orthogonal Simon effect. In a typical
orthogonal Simon task, participants are presented with a
stimulus in one of two vertical locations (e.g., above or
below fixation) and are asked to discriminate its location by
means of a left or right key press or a leftward or rightward
response. The standard result is that the mapping of the
upper location with the right response and down with left
produces better performance than the up-left down-right
mapping (e.g., Proctor & Cho, 2003). Proctor and Cho
(2006) proposed that the up-right advantage is due to
polarity correspondence, being up and right the +poles of
the vertical and lateral spatial dimensions, respectively.
Supporting this conclusion, response eccentricity interacts
with the up-right advantage. Response eccentricity refers to
the lateral displacement of the response set. Placing the
response box, keyboard, or joystick to the right of the screen
makes the up-right advantage to grow stronger, while it
turns into an up-left advantage when the response set is
located on left space (Proctor & Cho, 2003). Proctor and
coworkers suggested that response eccentricity changes the
saliency of the right and left poles of the lateral spatial
dimension, effectively turning the left pole into the +pole
when the responses are placed on left space and thus
generating the up-left advantage through polarity
correspondence.
These results illustrate an important characteristic of the
polarity correspondence account: polarities are not fixed,
but can be changed by attentional and saliency factors,
which opens the possibility of manipulating them
experimentally. Lakens (2012) and Lakens et al. (2012)
applied this perspective to conceptual congruency effects
between the concrete dimensions of vertical location
(up-down) and brightness and the abstract dimensions of
power and affective evaluation. They showed that those
conceptual congruency effects require the simultaneous
presence of the two contrasting poles in the task and that it
is possible to change the effect by changing the frequency of
use of each pole.
To summarize the argument so far, there seems to be
good support for the idea that conceptual congruency effects
are of a flexible and contextual nature (Lakens et al., 2012;
see also Santiago, Ouellet, Román, & Valenzuela, 2012),
thus contradicting their interpretation as indexes of stable
semantic memory mappings favoured by the Solid
Foundations view. There is also evidence that suggests that
polarity differences and cross-dimensional polarity
correspondence can account for some conceptual
congruency effects without resorting to underlying concrete
dimensions, or even to any internal alignment of the
relevant dimensions. However, the relevant evidence so far

has concentrated on a small set of conceptual dimensions,
namely morality, power and affective evaluation. Can these
conclusions be generalized to other abstract dimensions?
Such is the question that we seek to answer in the present
experimental series.
In order to increase the contrast with already available
studies, and therefore the generalizability of our results, we
decided to test the abstract dimension of numerical
magnitude. In contrast to morality, power and evaluation,
which are thought to be associated to vertical space,
numbers have been linked to lateral left-right space. Proctor
and Cho (2006) explicitly argued that polarity
correspondence might explain the standard SNARC effect
that obtains in parity tasks. They argued that number
processing in parity judgment does reveal markedness
effects. Responding “odd” is slower than responding
“even”, especially in contexts that foster a comparison
between odd and even numbers (Hines, 1990). Moreover,
responding “odd” with the left hand and “even” with the
right hand is faster than vice versa (Nuerk, Iversen, &
Willmes, 2004, called it the Markedness Association of
Response Codes, or MARC effect). The SNARC effect
would arise because large numbers would be +polar and
small numbers -polar and these polarities would match with
the +polar right response and the -polar left response.
Therefore, Experiment 1 used a parity judgment task on
Arabic numerals.
In contrast to parity tasks, Proctor and Cho (2006)
suggested that magnitude comparison tasks (e.g., to say
whether the number is smaller or larger than 5) induce a
continuous representation and, as a result, neither a SNARC
nor MARC effect are observed in them (they cite Ito &
Hatta, 2004, Experiment 3, as a relevant case). However,
other studies have successfully reported SNARC effects in
magnitude judgments, including some which have
interpreted their results as support for the polarity
correspondence hypothesis (Santens & Gevers, 2008). We
believe that, if polarity correspondence effects underlie the
SNARC effect in parity judgments, they should be even
clearer when the task explicitly asks participants to
categorize the stimuli into the two polar opposites “small”
and “large”. So, we decided to extend our observations to a
magnitude judgment task in Experiment 2.
The rationale of the current set of experiments relies on
the manipulation of response eccentricity, thereby
influencing the polarities of the left or right hand response
alternatives. We manipulated response eccentricity in a
procedure that closely followed the procedure used by
Proctor and Cho (2003, Experiment 1), but instead of
presenting stimuli in upper or lower locations, digits were
presented in the centre of the screen. Participants
discriminated their parity (Experiment 1) or magnitude
(Experiment 2) by means of left or right key presses.
Response set location was manipulated within-participants
by placing the input device left, centre, or right of the
computer monitor. If the left-right numerical and/or
temporal congruency effects are due, in all or in part, to

1260

polarity correspondence, then changing the polarity of the
response dimension should influence the observed reaction
time pattern. The polarity correspondence account predicts
standard congruency effects when the response set is either
central or to the right. Crucially, it predicts a reduced or
inverted effect when the response set is located on the left
side. Under this condition, the left response would be
+polar and the right response -polar. Therefore, the polarity
correspondence principle should induce an advantage for
up-left and down-right mappings. To preview the results,
response eccentricity failed to interact with the SNARC
effect in any task. We concluded this series of experiments
by showing that it is possible to replicate the interaction
between response eccentricity and the orthogonal Simon
effect when upper and lower stimuli are used instead of
numbers (Experiment 3).

Parity (odd-even) X Magnitude (smaller-larger
than 5) X Response (left-right) X Keyboard
location (left-centre-right). Counterbalance group
was also included as a factor in the design in order
to exclude noise due to order of conditions, but
because its effect and interactions are theoretically
uninteresting, they will not be reported below (but
note that the inclusion of this factor in the analyses
leads to a reduction in the degrees of freedom of
the error). Markedness effects would be evident in
the main effects of Parity (with faster responses to
even than odd numbers) and Magnitude (with
faster responses to larger than smaller numbers). A
main effect of Response (with faster responses with
the right than left hand) could also be interpreted as
a markedness effect, although it could just be due
to greater perceptuo-motor fluency of the preferred
hand. Potential polarity correspondence effects
would consist in significant interactions between
Parity and Response (MARC effect) and
Magnitude and Response (SNARC effect).
Three-way interactions of either the MARC and/or
the SNARC effects with Keyboard location would
support the conclusion that polarity correspondence
is indeed their underlying cause.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 used centrally presented single digits from 1
to 9 (with the exception of 5) in a parity judgment task.
Responses were left and right key presses in a keyboard
which could be located at either the left, centre, or right of
the screen.

Method
Participants Twenty Psychology students (17 women, all
right-handed, age range 18-39 y.) from the
University of Granada volunteered to participate,
and received course credit in return.
Materials and Procedure The single digits 1 to 4 and 6 to
9 were centrally presented on a computer screen. A
single digit was presented in each trial, and the
participant's task was to decide whether the digit
was odd or even. The participant responded by
pressing the keys F (left) or J (right) on a standard
computer keyboard. Each trial consisted of a
central fixation cross (1000 ms) followed by the
target digit (until response). Incorrect trials were
followed by the word “Incorrecto” for 500 ms in
red font, also at the same location. Each was
followed by a 1000 ms blank screen. Experimental
trials were divided into six blocks of 54 trials. All
digits were presented once every eight trials. The
mapping of responses (odd-even) to keys
(left-right) was kept constant during three blocks,
and then reversed in the following three blocks.
The order of presentation of the two mappings was
counterbalanced over participants. Keyboard
location was varied within-participants. In the left
and right locations, the keyboard was moved 30 cm
to each side (as in Proctor & Cho, 2003). Half the
participants experienced the three locations in the
order left, centre, and right, and the other half in
the reversed order. The sequence of keyboard
locations was repeated twice over the six blocks.
Design and Analysis Data were analyzed using a factorial
ANOVA with the following factors and levels:

Results
Errors occurred in 280 trials (4.32%). Latencies in correct
trials were trimmed by means of fixed cut-off points, set at
300 and 1300 ms after inspection of the RT distribution,
which led to the rejection of 100 trials (1.54%) as outliers.
Average latency and accuracy were analyzed independently.
The analysis of latency showed a very clear pattern. There
were main effects of Parity (F(1,16)=13.52, p<.01) and
Response (F(1,16)=9.30, p<.01), both in the direction
predicted by a markedness effect (faster latencies for even
and right-handed responses). There was a clear interaction
between Magnitude and Response (F(1,16)=8.12, p=.01),
which took the standard form of the SNARC effect. No
other effect had a probability level smaller than 0.10. In
particular, the interaction between Parity and Response (the
MARC effect) and any second order interactions between
either the SNARC and the MARC effects with Keyboard
location were far from significance (all Fs < 1). Figure 1
(upper panel) shows the main results. These results were not
qualified by the analysis of accuracy.

Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that keyboard location did not
modulate the SNARC effect, what contradicts the
predictions from a polarity correspondence account. The
data also showed main effects of parity and response side
such that the +pole (even and right) was easier to process.
However, there were no interactions between these
dimensions and keyboard location. Moreover, there was
neither an interaction between parity and response side

1261

(MARC effect) nor a modulation of this interaction at
different keyboard locations.

Thus, the full pattern of results shows no support for a
polarity correspondence account. Experiment 2 extended
these results to a magnitude judgement task.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was an exact replication of the Experiment 1
with a single difference: participants judged whether the
central digit was smaller or larger than 5.

Method
Participants Twenty new participants (17 women, 1
left-hander, age range 18-39 y.) from the same
population took part in the study and received
credit course in return.
Materials and Procedure Everything was kept identical to
Experiment 1 with the main exception of the task:
participants judged whether the digit was smaller
or larger than 5. Additionally, there were 56 trials
in each block (exactly 7 presentations of each
digit).
Design and Analysis Data were analyzed using a factorial
ANOVA comprising Parity (odd-even) X
Magnitude (smaller-larger than 5) X Response
(left-right) X Keyboard location (left-centre-right)
X Counterbalance group (not reported).

Results

Figure 1: Average latencies (in ms) in the congruent vs.
incongruent conditions in Experiment 1 (SNARC, parity
task), Experiment 2 (SNARC, magnitude task), and
Experiment 3 (orthogonal Simon task). Congruency in the
SNARC experiments is defined with respect to numerical
magnitude (smaller or larger than 5) and response (left or
right), assuming a standard SNARC effect (smaller-left,
larger-right). Congruency in the orthogonal Simon
experiment is defined with respect to vertical location (up or
down) and response (left or right), assuming a standard
orthogonal Simon effect (up-right, down-left).

There were errors in 216 trials (3.32%). Latencies of correct
trials were trimmed by fixed cut-off points (300 and 1300
ms): 120 trials (1.78%) were rejected as outliers.
The analysis of latencies once again rendered a clear
pattern. Only the main effect of Parity was significant
(F(1,16)=20.34, p<.001), with faster responses to even
numbers. Out of all possible two-way interactions, only
Magnitude by Response was significant (F(1,16)=6.55,
p=.02), taking the shape of a standard SNARC effect. These
were the only findings that reached standard reliability
levels. Keyboard location did not modulate the SNARC
effect at all. Figure 1 (middle panel) shows the main results.
The accuracy measure showed a clear effect of Parity
(F(1,16)=10.15, p<.01) which went in an unexpected
direction: even numbers had more errors than odd numbers.
However, an inspection of accuracy means for each number
indicated that this is due to a distance effect that
concentrates on the two numbers that surround 5 (4 and 6),
which are both even. Because this reduced accuracy was
associated to faster latencies, it may be revealing a
speed-accuracy trade-off. There was also a significant
interaction between Parity and Response (F(1,16)=7.32,
p=.02), which was in the direction expected for a MARC
effect: greater accuracy for the even-right and odd-left
mapping. No other effect added to or qualified the findings
from the latency analysis.

1262

p<.001; see Figure 1, lower panel). The up-left advantage
was present when the keyboard was located on the left and
on the centre, and turned into a slight up-right advantage
when the keyboard was moved to the right. Other significant
findings of less theoretical importance were the interaction
between Vertical location and Keyboard location
(F(2,28)=5.56, p<.01) and the main effect of Keyboard
location (F(2,28)=6.81, p<.01) due to slower latencies with
the keyboard on the left. Accuracy data supported the
findings of the latency measure.

Discussion
Experiment 2 found a clear SNARC effect. In contrast to the
prior experiment, there was also a MARC effect on
accuracy. None of those potential polarity correspondence
effects where modulated by the location of the keyboard.
There was also a main effect of parity, both in latency and
accuracy, but its interpretation is complicated because it
went in opposite directions (even numbers were both faster
and less accurate), what may suggest a speed-accuracy
trade-off.
Summing up, Experiments 1 and 2 found SNARC effects
which did not show any trace of being modulated by
keyboard location. Other significant main effects and
interactions also failed to provide clear indications of being
related to markedness or polarity correspondence. Before
turning to discuss the general implications of the present
results, a final possibility must be discarded: that
eccentricity effects on orthogonal Simon tasks cannot be
replicated. Thus, our final experiment used a procedure that
mirrored Proctor and Cho (2003, Experiment 1).

Discussion

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 was an exact replication of our two first
experiments with the single difference that the stimulus was
a rectangle made of asterisks (as in Proctor & Cho, 2003,
Experiment 1), which could be presented either above or
below fixation. Participants' task was just to discriminate its
location by pressing the right or left key.

Method
Participants Participants were 18 Psychology students from
the University of Granada (all female, 2
left-handers, age range 18-30 y.), who received
course credit for their participation.
Materials and Procedure The target stimulus was an array
of 3x3 asterisks that looked like a rectangle. The
target was presented horizontally centred midway
between fixation and either the upper or lower
border of the screen. Participant's task was to judge
whether the target appeared above or below
fixation.
Design and Analysis The design included Vertical location
(up-down) X Response (left-right) X Keyboard
location (left-centre-right) X Counterbalance group
(not reported).

Results
There were errors in 137 trials (2.26%). Cut-off points were
set at 250 and 1250 ms, which led to the rejection of 119
(1.85%) outliers.
The analysis of latency revealed an interaction between
Vertical location and Response (F(1,14)=11.05, p<.01).
Unexpectedly, this interaction took the form of an up-left
advantage (possible causes are discussed below). However,
the crucial aspect of the data is that such interaction was
strongly modulated by Keyboard location (F(2,28)=25.73,

Experiment 3 allows very clear conclusions: an up-left
advantage was observed both in latency and accuracy when
the keyboard was placed at midline and on the left, and this
turned into a small up-right advantage when the keyboard
was placed to the right of the computer monitor. Proctor and
Cho (2003) found an up-left advantage with the keyboard
on the left, a very small up-right advantage with keyboard
on the centre, and an up-right advantage with the keyboard
on the right side. Therefore, we take the present results to
constitute a successful replication of their findings (as well
as those by Cho, Proctor, & Yamaguchi, 2008): keyboard
eccentricity affects the saliency of the side of space where
the keyboard lies, and the most salient side of the left-right
dimension attracts the mapping of the +pole of the vertical
dimension (up).
The main contrast between present results and those
reported by Proctor and Cho (2003) and others is the finding
of an up-left (instead of up-right) advantage when the
response set is placed at midline. As a post-hoc speculation,
we think that the cause may be related to the spatial
arrangement of the experimental equipment with respect to
the whole room. The computer and keyboard were located
on a corner of the lab, with a window to the right of the
participant, and the room extending to the left. This may
have made the participant to conceptualize the equipment as
being located to the left of the wall. Both Weeks, Proctor,
and Beyak (1995) and Proctor and Cho (2003) have shown
that environmental factors can increase the saliency of either
left or right space: placing an unused response apparatus to
the right of the response keyboard was enough to turn the
up-right advantage into a (very small) up-left advantage. A
similar phenomenon may have occurred in the present
experiment with the highly salient window located on the
right side of the participant. Alternatively, the wall on the
right may have provided a clear boundary to lateral space,
which may have made the unbounded left space +polar,
conforming existing explanations for the asymmetry in
vertical space (Clark, 1973; Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter,
1991).

General Discussion
The present experiment series clearly showed that the
SNARC effect, both in parity and magnitude judgements, is
not modulated by response eccentricity. This occurred in the
context of a successful modulation of the orthogonal Simon

1263

effect by our manipulation of response eccentricity. Proctor
and coworkers (Cho et al., 2008; Proctor & Cho, 2003,
2006; Weeks et al., 1995) accounted for eccentricity effects
in the orthogonal Simon task as a consequence of a change
in polarity in the spatial left-right dimension: Placing the
response set on one side increases the saliency of that side,
turning it effectively into the +pole. Then, that side now
matches the +pole of the vertical dimension (up). If this
interpretation is correct, and the SNARC effect is due to
polarity correspondence between larger numbers and right
responses, placing the response set on the left should reverse
the SNARC. However, we found no traces of any influence
of response eccentricity on the SNARC effect. This
complete absence of eccentricity effects suggests that
polarity correspondence is not affecting this particular
congruency effect whatsoever, not even as an additional
source of influence that acts together with other factors on
number tasks. Many questions remain. As a first step,
current work in our labs is focusing on extending present
results to a different conceptual dimension which is also
known to generate congruency effects with left-right space:
the dimension of time.

Acknowledgements
This research has been funded by grants P09-SEJ-4772
(Consejería de Innovación, Ciencia y Empresa, Andalusian
Government) and PSI2012-32464 (Spanish Ministery of
Economy and Competitivity).

References
Cho, Y. S., Proctor, R. W., & Yamaguchi, M. (2008).
Influences of response position and hand posture on the
orthogonal Simon effect. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 61(7), 1020–1035.
Clark, H. H. (1969). Linguistic processes in deductive
reasoning. Psychological Review, 76(4), 387–404.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language (pp. 27–63). New York:
Academic Press.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122(3), 371–396.
Greenberg, J. H. (1963). Some universals of grammar with
particular reference to the order of meaningful elements.
Universals of language (Vol. 2, pp. 73–113). MIT Press.
Hines, T. M. (1990). An odd effect: Lengthened reaction
times for judgments about odd digits. Memory &
Cognition, 18, 40–46.
Ito, Y., & Hatta, T. (2004). Spatial structure of quantitative
representation of numbers: evidence from the SNARC
effect. Memory & Cognition, 32(4), 662–73.
Lakens, D. (2012). Polarity correspondence in metaphor
congruency effects: Structural overlap predicts
categorization times for bipolar concepts presented in

vertical space. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38(3), 726–736.
Lakens, D., Semin, G. R., & Foroni, F. (2012). But for the
bad, there would not be good: Grounding valence in
brightness through shared relational structures. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 141(3), 584–594.
Landau, M. J., Meier, B. P., & Keefer, L. A. (2010). A
metaphor-enriched social cognition. Psychological
Bulletin, 136(6), 1045–67.
Nuerk, H.-C., Iversen, W., & Willmes, K. (2004).
Notational modulation of the SNARC and the MARC
(linguistic markedness of response codes) effect. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57A(5),
835–63.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2003). Effects of response
eccentricity and relative position on orthogonal
stimulus-response compatibility with joystick and
keypress responses. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 56A(2), 309–327.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity
correspondence: A general principle for performance of
speeded binary classification tasks. Psychological
Bulletin, 132(3), 416–442.
Santens, S., & Gevers, W. (2008). The SNARC effect does
not imply a mental number line. Cognition, 108(1),
263–270.
Santiago, J., Ouellet, M., Román, A., & Valenzuela, J.
(2012). Attentional factors in conceptual congruency.
Cognitive Science, 36(6), 1051–1077.
Santiago, J., Román, A., & Ouellet, M. (2011). Flexible
foundations of abstract thought: A review and a theory. In
A. Maass & T. W. Schubert (Eds.), Spatial dimensions of
social thought (pp. 41–110). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sorokowski, P. (2010). Politicians’ estimated height as an
indicator of their popularity. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 40(7), 1302–1309.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991).
Cross-cultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515–557.
Weeks, D. J., Proctor, R. W., & Beyak, B. (1995).
Stimulus-response compatibility for vertically oriented
stimuli and horizontally oriented responses: Evidence for
spatial coding. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48A(2), 367–383.
Wood, G., Willmes, K., Nuerk, H.-C., & Fischer, M. H.
(2008). On the cognitive link between space and number:
A meta-analysis of the SNARC effect. Psychology
Science Quarterly, 50(4), 489–525.

1264

