UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pragmatic priming and the search for alternatives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9wr510rh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bott, Lewis
Chemla, Emmanuel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pragmatic priming and the search for alternatives
Lewis Bott (Bottla@Cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University
Park Place, CF10 3AT, Cardiff, UK

Emmanuel Chemla (Chemla@ens.fr)
Ecole Normale Supérieure, LSCP
29 rue d’Ulm, Paris, France
Abstract

alternatives for some would be many and all. More liberally,
Rooth’s (1992) work on focus suggests that alternatives can
be any item in the same semantic category as the target
(type <e,t> etc.). Intermediately, Katzir (2007) has
suggested that alternatives are any items that are less than or
equally complex than the trigger, or that are particularly
salient in the context. In our study we take a slightly
different approach, however. Rather than identifying a set of
structural principles for defining the alternatives, we ask
whether there is a single procedure that enriches the basic
meaning in different linguistic contexts. In doing so, we also
seek to find evidence that the seemingly diverse linguistic
phenomena share a common root in how they are derived.
Table 1 shows the set of phenomena that we used in our
experiments. All of them involve a basic meaning that can
then be enriched by negating alternatives. The first column
refers to the name of the phenomenon (the expression), the
second to the basic (or weak) meaning, the third to a
plausible alternative, and the fourth to the result of enriching
the basic meaning with the alternative.

Meanings of basic expressions can be enriched by considering
what the speaker could have said, but chose not to, that is, the
alternatives. We report three experiments testing whether
there is a single enrichment procedure that stretches across
diverse linguistic phenomena. Participants were primed to
understand either the basic meaning or the enriched meaning
of a sentence. We found that the enrichment mechanism could
be primed across some expressions but not others, arguing
against a universal enrichment mechanism. Our results have
implications for understanding the processing of implied
meaning and how linguistic phenomenon should be grouped
together.

Keywords: Pragmatics; psycholinguistics; alternatives;
implications; structural priming.

Interpreting a sentence requires taking into consideration
the combination of words that have been uttered, but also
words that have not been uttered, that is, the alternatives.
For instance, if a speaker says, “John has read some of the
books”, the listener can use the alternatives to derive the
meaning that John has read some, but not all, of the books.
The derivation procedure would be something like (i) accept
that John read some (or all) of the books; (ii) identify “John
read all the books” as a relevant alternative; and (iii) select
this alternative to negate. In this paper we consider how the
processor derives the alternatives. Our approach is to apply
a structural priming technique (e.g., Raffray & Pickering,
2010) to test whether the search for alternatives can be
primed across and within different inferences.
Enrichment by negation of alternatives is a large
phenomenon. There is always some phrase or item that may
generate an alternative, and furthermore, there is an infinite
range of potentially relevant alternatives. Consider the
example above again. In the right context, “John has read
some of the books” could imply that Bill/Helen/Mary etc.
have not read some of the books, or that John has read the
books but not seen the films, or even that John has not
written some of the books. The wide variety of possible
alternatives raises a serious processing question, however:
How does the processor know which alternatives to negate?
There have been several theories in the linguistics literature
that provide partial answers to this question. Horn (1972)
suggested that certain expressions are grouped together in
the lexicon to form semantic scales, and the alternatives for
a given item are its scale mates. With some for example,
some, many, and all form a semantic scale, and the

Expression
Some

Semantic
some or all

Alternative
All

Number n

at least n

Number n+1

Result
some but not all

n but not n+1=
exactly n
Plural
vacuous
singular
not singular
morphology
morphology
=plural
Ad hoc
There is an There is an
There is an A
A
A and a B
and not a B.
Table 1. Experimental phenomena. The semantic form of
each expression can be enriched using the negation of
alternatives.
The table summarizes the following cases:
(i) some, which trigger the archetypical scalar implicature
and for which there exist arguments for the alternatives to
be stored in the lexicon (see Horn, 1984, or Levinson,
2000).
(ii) Numbers, which are claimed by some authors to
operate in a similar manner to the some cases (e.g., Horn,
1989, van Rooy & Schulz, 2006) but not by others (e.g.,
Breheny, 2008). According to the former group, when a
speaker says, e.g., “Dave has three children”, the weak
meaning of the expression, “three,” is at least three, but this
meaning can be enriched to negate the alternatives, (at least)

227

Overview of Experiments

four, (at least) five, etc. to form the exactly three reading.
(iii) plural morphology, which have been contentiously
linked to the some case, by providing arguments showing
that plural morphemes are semantically vacuous,
surprisingly, and that the plural reading is obtained via
negation of the singular alternatives (e.g., Spector 2007).
(iv) ad hoc implicatures, for which the alternatives are
only specifiable given an appropriate context. For example,
if a speaker says, “There is an elephant,” and the context
suggests that it would have been relevant for him to say,
“There is an elephant and a lion,” the listener is licensed to
infer the alternative is not true, suggesting that the speaker
meant that there was an elephant but no lion.
In summary, the phenomena are of diverse kinds: the
root alternative trigger may be lexical (some and numerals),
morphological (plurals) or contextual (ad hoc), and the
motivation for these claims may be more or less intuitive
and debated, as we described above. They are nonetheless
similar in a way that is important for our experiments. The
enrichments shown in the Results column are optional. In
each case, the listener must derive the basic meaning, but
then has a choice about whether to enrich the statement and
interpret the meaning with the negated alternatives.
Our experiments test whether the enriched meanings
shown in Table 1 are all computed by a single, universal
mechanism, or whether separate, individual procedures are
applied in each case. There is good reason to suppose either
of these possibilities might be true. First, in favour of a
universal mechanism, all of the cases shown in Table 1 are
arguably derived using the same negation-of-alternative
procedures. Grice’s Quantity maxim, for instance, could be
invoked to generate reasoning along the lines of, “well, if
the speaker had meant [alternative], they would have said
so,” (see Chierchia, 2004, for a wider range of views) and
the linguistic contexts that give rise to the enrichment are
similar across phenomena. The most simple processing view
would be that if these phenomena can be grouped together
linguistically, then they should share similar processing
mechanisms. Conversely, there are also arguments for
different enrichment procedures for different phenomena.
For example, numbers may behave differently to quantifiers
(see e.g., Breheny, 2008), and Katzir’s (2007) theory
distinguishes the alternatives involved in ad hoc
implicatures from those involved in the some and number
cases (as we describe in more detail in Experiment 2).
Furthermore, different types of expressions vary in how
frequently they are enriched. For example, Zevakhina &
Geurts (2011), show that adjectives in scalar implicatures,
such as, “John’s cake is ok” (implying John’s cake is not
delicious) are less likely to undergo enrichment than
quantifiers, such as “Some of John’s cakes were eaten”
(implying not all of John’s cakes were eaten). The variation
in enrichment could be because different enrichment
mechanisms are involved across different cases.

To test between universal and individual enrichment
procedures, we used a structural priming paradigm (see,
e.g., Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). We reasoned that if there
were a universal mechanism, it should be possible to prime
the procedure, that is, make it more likely that the enriched
meaning would be derived. Priming across different
phenomena would provide support for a universal procedure
for searching alternatives, but priming restricted to
particular expressions would support individual enrichment
procedures.
There are many different versions of structural priming
but we modeled our experiment on Raffray and Pickering
(2010), who tested priming of scopal relations. In their
experiments, participants had to match one of two pictures
to a sentence. The sentence always involved every and a,
but let the scopal relation free to create an ambiguous
sentence, as in Every child climbed a hill (which can be
interpreted either as there being a single hill that every child
climbed, or multiple hills where every child climbed a
separate hill). In the prime trials, the pictures were
consistent with only one reading of the sentence. For
example, for the Every child climbed a tree sentence, one of
the pictures was of a single hill with multiple children
climbing it, and the other picture was of something
unrelated like cows in a field. In the trial that immediately
followed it, the probe trial, participants saw a different every
sentence and a further two pictures. One picture was
consistent with wide scope reading and one with the narrow
scope reading. Participants chose which interpretation best
matched the sentence. Raffray and Pickering hypothesized
that wide scope prime trials would prime a wide-scope
reading in the probe trials and vice versa, which is exactly
what they found.
Our experiments were very similar except that we used
sentences that involved the constructions shown in Table 1,
rather than every. Just like the every sentences, our
sentences were ambiguous because implicatures are
optional. We hoped to be able to prime whether participants
interpreted the sentence with or without the enriched
meaning. If either a universal enrichment or an individual
enrichment procedure can be primed, we would expect
priming within each of the expressions in Table 1. More
interestingly, if there is a universal enrichment process, we
should observe priming across the different expressions.

Experiment 1
Participants saw a sentence and had to match the sentence
with one of two pictures. All of the sentences referred to the
presence of letters in a set, such as “All of the letters are
As.” In the experimental trials, the sentences invited
enrichment, as shown in Table 1. However, because the
enrichment was optional, participants could choose to
interpret the sentence in its basic form. This meant that the
sentences could have either a weak meaning (without
enrichment) or a strong meaning (with enrichment). For a

228

given sentence, three types of pictures were possible: (a)
false pictures, that made both readings false, (b) weak
pictures, that made the weak reading true but the strong
reading false, and (c) strong pictures that made both
readings true.
There were two types of prime trials. First, weak primes,
which displayed a false picture and a weak picture, so that
participants would click on the weak picture and access the
weak reading. Second, strong primes, which displayed a
weak picture and a strong picture. We reasoned that
participants would access the strong reading (the one that
makes the two pictures different in a relevant way) and click
on the strong picture. An example of the weak some prime
is shown in the upper-panel of Figure 1.

which the target enriched meaning was there is more than
one A. The weak picture involved a single A, whereas the
strong picture involved multiple A’s.
If (a) all three expressions are related, (b) involve
alternatives, and (c) there is a universal enrichment
procedure, then priming should be observed within and
between the three expressions. If the enrichment mechanism
depends on specific structures, priming should be observed
only within each expression. We tested within-expression
priming by presenting sequences of trials in which the prime
from one phenomenon was followed by a probe from the
same phenomenon. For example, a some prime, such as
“Some of the letters are As” would be followed by a some
probe, such as “Some of the letters are Bs”. We tested
between-expression priming by presenting the prime from
one expression followed by the probe from a different
expression. For example a plural prime, such as “There is an
A” might be followed by a some probe, such as, “Some of
the letters are Bs”.
Method
Participants. In each experiment reported in this paper,
we used 50 participants, all recruited online using Amazon
Turk and all claiming to be native speakers of English. A
different set of participants was used for each experiment.
They were paid for their participation.
Design and materials. All trials were either probe trials,
prime trials, or bias trials. An experimental sequence of
trials was two prime trials followed by one probe trial, i.e.,
prime-prime-probe. We thought the effect of the prime
would be greater if the prime trial was doubled. The prime
and probe trials were completely crossed so that each
participant saw prime-probe sequences of all possible
combinations, e.g., some (weak)-number; number (strong)some; some (weak)–plural. This meant that for each
expression, there were 6 possible sequences (2 withinexpression trials, and 4 between-expression trials), and
hence 18 sequences in total. We replicated this set 4 times
and so there were 72 probe trials and 144 prime trials.
We also added bias trials to encourage participants to (a)
select the “better picture” box, and (b) consider appropriate
alternatives to the experimental sentences. For example, we
included all trials so that participants would realise the
speaker sometimes said all instead of some. There were 12
bias trials per set, and 48 in total.
Sentences were all statements about letters, as shown in
Figure 1. The particular letters were randomly chosen for
each experimental sequence. Each experimental sequence
was presented in a random order.
In the prime trials the expected answer (weak or strong)
was on the right for half the trials. In the probe trials, the
“better picture” box was always on the right.

Figure 1. Weak some prime (upper-panel), and some
probe (lower-panel).
In the probe trials, participants read another experimental
sentence and saw two more pictures. One of the pictures
was a weak picture, and the other picture was a box with
“Better Picture?” written inside it. Participants were
instructed that the “Better Picture” option should be selected
if they did not feel that the other picture sufficiently
captured the sentence meaning. The lower panel of Figure 1
shows the probe trials. We expected that participants should
click on the weak picture if they accessed the weak reading,
and opt for the “Better Picture” option if they accessed the
strong reading. Probe trials immediately followed prime
trials. Consequently, priming of the enriched meaning
would be observed when a participant selected the weak
interpretation option more often after the weak prime than
after the strong prime (and vice versa).
In Experiment 1 we used the first three expressions shown
in Table 1: (1) some sentences, for which the weak
interpretation picture was a box in which pictures were all
one type of letter, namely As, and the strong interpretation
picture involved a set filled partly with A’s and partly with
B’s. (2) Number sentences, such as “Three of the letters are
As,” where the target enriched meaning was no more than 3.
The weak picture was a box in which 6 letters were A’s, and
the strong picture was a box in which exactly 3 of the letters
were A’s. (3) Plural sentences, such as, “There are As,” in

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows the proportion strong interpretations
during probe trials. The within-expression effect is shown
on the left, and the between-expression effect is shown in

229

the right. A large within-expression priming effect can be
seen by the difference between the weak and strong primes,
such that there were more strong interpretations after the
strong primes than after the weak primes, F(1,46) = 63.25, p
< .001. There was no significant difference in the size of the
effect across expressions, however, F < 1. More interesting
was the priming effect between expressions. The betweenpriming effect was marginally significant using an ANOVA
with probe type and interpretation (weak vs strong), F(1,50)
= 3.063, p = .086, and fully significant using a
nonparametric bootstrapping test, p < .05 (we also replicate
a similar between-expression priming effect in Experiments
2 and 3).

in Experiment 1, we could only draw conclusions about the
general enrichment process, not the negation of the
alternatives.
In Experiment 2, we introduced ad hoc sentences into the
priming design from Experiment 1. The ad hoc sentences
were sentences like There is an A, which, given the visual
context, invited enrichments like There is an A but not a B.
The weak ad hoc prime and an ad hoc probe are shown in
Figure 3. The design was exactly the same as Experiment 1
except that we replaced the plural expressions with the ad
hoc expressions, which meant that we had some, number,
and ad hoc expressions.

Figure 2. Experiment 1 results.
Figure 3. Weak ad hoc prime (upper-panel), and ad hoc
probe (lower panel).

Our findings suggest that for these sorts of linguistic
expressions, there is a universal mechanism that enriches the
basic meaning. If the mechanism were tied to individual
phenomena, we would not have observed betweenexpression priming. In Experiment 2, we consider the
enrichment mechanism in more detail.

Results and Discussion
Proportions of strong responses to the probe are shown in
Figure 4. The upper panel shows within-expression priming.
For each expression, there were more strong interpretations
after the strong prime than after the weak prime, all t’s(49)
> 4.11, p’s < .001, but there was a marginal interaction
between probe expression and interpretation, p = .087,
suggesting less within-expression priming in the ad hoc
expressions. The lower-panel shows between-expressions
priming. Here, there was robust priming between some and
number expressions, F(1,47) = 5.58, p = .022, but not
between some and ad hoc expressions, F < 1, or number and
ad hoc sentences, F < 1. There was also an interaction
between the degree of between-expression priming for ad
hoc expressions and the other combinations, F(2, 98) =
4.42, p = .015.
We did not observe between-expression priming for the ad
hoc expressions in Experiment 2. However, the withinexpression priming effect was marginally smaller for the ad
hoc expressions than for the others, and there were far fewer
strong interpretation responses. Participants might therefore
have had more difficulty identifying the alternatives for the
ad hoc sentences and consequently, even if betweenexpression priming was occurring, priming effects would
have been smaller and more difficult to observe.

Experiment 2
The enrichment mechanism involves two procedures: (1)
identifying the appropriate alternatives, and (2) negating
them. The results of Experiment 1 are consistent with either
(or both) of these: we could have primed the search for
alternatives, or the procedure that negates them. To
investigate this in more detail we tested the ad hoc
expressions shown in Table 1. The ad hoc expressions are
similar to those used in Experiment 1 in that they involve
negation of alternatives (see Hirschberg, 1991). However,
they are different in that the alternatives for the ad hoc
expressions must be determined with reference to the
context, whereas the alternatives for the other expressions
can be determined lexically (they are context-free). It
follows that if we were to observe priming within the ad hoc
expressions, but not between the ad hoc expressions and the
lexical expressions, we could conclude that the effects of
Experiment 1 were at least partly due to priming of the
search for alternatives and not priming of the negation
process. We would also conclude that there were separate
processes computing the alternatives for the ad hoc
expressions compared to the lexical expressions. Of course,
if we found priming across all of the expressions, as we did

230

the degree of within-expression priming appears larger. As
in Experiment 2, significant within-expression priming is
observed in each expression, all t(49)’s > 4.76, p’s < .001,
but we found no evidence that the within-expression
priming varied among expressions, F < 1. The lower-panel
of Figure 5 shows the between-expression priming trials. As
in Experiments 1 and 2, there was robust priming between
some and number expressions, t(50) = 2.12, p = .036.
Critically however, there was no between-expression
priming for combinations involving the ad hoc expressions,
t’s < 1, and there was a significant interaction between the
three combinations, F(2,100) = 3.39, p < .05.
In this experiment we observed the same sized withinexpression priming effect for ad hoc expressions compared
to the other expressions. This suggests that the alternatives
for ad hoc expressions were just as available too. Yet we
failed to observe any between-expression priming effects
involving the ad hoc sentences. These findings suggest that
between-expression priming was due to priming of the
search for alternatives, and not priming of the mechanism
that negates the alternatives. Furthermore, our results
suggest that there are separate mechanisms for determining
context-free alternatives (the lexical expressions) and
context-dependent alternatives.

Figure 4. Experiment 2 results. The figure shows
responses for each probe expression for within-expression
priming (upper panel) and each combination of betweenexpression priming (lower panel).

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3 we hoped to remedy the low rate of
strong interpretations in the ad hoc condition by introducing
additional items to increase the salience of the alternatives.
We reasoned that participants were always selecting the
weak interpretation because they were unsure what might
make a “better picture” (i.e., whether the alternative would
have any relevance). We therefore introduced 20 extra bias
trials at the start of the experiment of the form, “There is an
A,” with the target picture being a single letter.

General Discussion
Our studies investigated how the processor enriches basic
meanings with negated alternatives. An intuitive and
parsimonious processing prediction was that there is a
single, universal mechanism across diverse linguistic forms.
After all, the enriched meanings that we used could all
arguably be derived using the same reasoning. Contrary to
this prediction, however, we found that whilst enriched
readings of some, number, and plural morphology
expressions can prime each other, they cannot prime
enriched readings of ad hoc expressions, even though all the
expressions can prime enriched meanings of their own form.
This suggests that there are multiple procedures for
enrichment based on alternatives, and that these are split
between context-free and context-dependent expressions.
We conceive of context-free enrichment procedures as an
instruction to the processor to search a part of the lexicon
for the appropriate alternatives. For example, with some, the
instruction would be to retrieve appropriate alternatives,
such as all, which could then be negated. The contextdependent procedure is different in that it does not involve
instructions to search the lexicon, but to search out plausible
alternatives from the context. While there might be some
overlap between these procedures, the failure to observe
priming between the different expressions also provides a
robust test that distinguish them.

Results and Discussion

Figure 5. Experiment 3 results.

What is being primed?

Within-expression priming is shown in the upper-panel of
Figure 5. The proportion of strong interpretations for the ad
hoc expressions is much higher than in Experiment 2, and

We explain our results by referring to the priming of the
search for alternatives. Here we consider other explanations.
One that we can eliminate is that we have primed a
general acceptance of weak statements. Our items are

231

constructed in such a way that there were informationally
weak interpretations (e.g., some and possibly all) and
informationally strong interpretations (e.g., some but not
all), and a possible explanation of Experiment 1, therefore,
is that participants were primed to accept the
weaker/stronger interpretation (and also a potential
explanation for Raffray & Pickering, 2010). Experiments 2
and 3 rule out this explanation, however, because the ad hoc
sentences also had the weak/strong distinction but were not
primed by the other expressions. More generally, the failure
to observe between-expression priming effects with the ad
hoc sentences eliminates any explanation that would apply
across all of the expressions.
Another possibility is that our findings could be explained
by the priming of alternatives, rather than priming of the
search for alternatives. Our within-expression priming
effects could indeed be explained in this way. For example,
the strong primes of some could make the alternative all
more salient to the participant, and therefore when presented
with the probe, such as “some of the letters are As,” the
participant might have been more likely to realise that the
sentence could have read, “all of the letters are As.” This
would then have led them to choose the “better option” box
more often. This cannot be the whole story, however,
because we also observed between-expression priming.
Here, the alternatives were different across expressions and
so the salience of alternatives from one expression should
not influence the rate of strong responding from other
expressions. For example, a some strong prime might make
all more salient, but the salience of all should not influence
the salience of the exactly N reading of the numbers. The
between-expression effect cannot be explained by priming
of alternatives; it requires priming of the search for the
alternatives more abstractly.

generation. In essence, Katzir argues that there are two
separate procedures for calculating alternatives. The first
involves replacing a phrase by a simpler, related phrase,
e.g., some => all, or ate a lot=>ate, and the second involves
replacing a phrase by a contextually salient phrase which
may or may not be simpler (A => A and B). Interestingly,
Katzir specifies different procedures for the computation of
ad hoc alternatives and alternatives related to the other three
phenomena. This is exactly how our results split the
landscape as well (see also Fox 2012 for converging
developmental data). Hence, we obtain both a confirmation
of the theory, and a natural interpretation of our results.

Conclusion
We set out to investigate whether there are abstract
procedures for enriching basic meanings considering words
that were not pronounced, much like the structural priming
research has investigated whether there are abstract
representations of syntactic structure. Our results show that
the scope of the enrichment procedure is wide (e.g.,
affecting the interpretation of numbers as well as of the
plural morphology), and confirm finer-grained properties of
the system by distinguishing contextual and non-contexutal
alternatives.

References
Breheny, R. (2008) A new look at the semantics and
pragmatics of numerically quantified noun phrases Journal
of Semantics 25(2): 93-140.
Katzir, R (2007). Structurally-defined alternatives.
Linguistics and Philosophy 30:669–690.
Fox, D. (2012) Children’s Interpretation of Disjunctive
Sentences and the Theory of Scalar Implicature. Joint work
with Singh, Wexler, Astle, Kamawara. Talk presented at
MIT colloquium.
Horn, L. (1989) A Natural History of Negation.
University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
Hirschberg, J (1991). A Theory of Scalar Implicature.
New York: Garland Press.
Pickering, M.J., & Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Structural
priming: A critical review. Psychological Bulletin, 134,
427–459.
Raffrey, C. & Pickering, M.J. (2010). How do people
construct logical form during language comprehension?
Psychological Science, 21, 1090-197.
Spector, B (2007). Aspects of the pragmatics of Plural
Morphology: On Higher-Order Implicatures Published in U.
Sauerland & P. Stateva (eds.), Presuppositions and
Implicatures in Compositional Semantics, PalgraveMacmillan, 2007.
van Rooy, R. & K. Schulz (2006). Pragmatic meaning
and non-monotonic reasoning: The case of exhaustive
interpretation. Linguistics and Philosophy 29:205–250.
Rooth, (1992). A theory of focus interpretation. Natural
Language Semantics 1, 75-116.
Zevakhina, N. and B. Geurts. (2011). Scalar diversity.
Manuscript.

Similarities and differences between phenomena
Our results show that some, the numbers, and plural
morphology can be grouped together, but that ad hoc
expressions behave differently. This pattern can be related
to the linguistic literature that investigates how these
particular phenomena are derived.
First, consider the similarity between some, the numbers
and plurals. These phenomena are very diverse. For
instance, some theorists have argued that the numbers and
some should be considered different phenomena (e.g.
Breheny, 2008). Our results provide evidence against an
extreme form of this view (that the numbers and some are
completely unrelated) or the idea that numbers would not
involve alternatives. Furthermore, the claim that plurals may
be related to the others is an audacious one, which relies on
the fully counterintuitive hypothesis that plural morphology
is semantically vacuous. Our results provide further striking
evidence in favor of this counterintuitive view of plural
morphology.
Second, our results also distinguish different phenomena
in a meaningful way. Katzir (2007) provides the most
precise and complete implementation of alternative

232

