UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers’ Trust is Sensitive to Variable Intentions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5t25x1mn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hoicka, Elena
Butcher, Jessica
Malla, Felicity
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preschoolers’ Trust is Sensitive to Variable Intentions
Elena Hoicka (elena.hoicka@stir.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2PT, UK

Jessica Butcher, Felicity Malla
Psychology, School of Natural Sciences, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK

Paul L. Harris (paul_harris@gse.harvard.edu)
Harvard Graduate School, Harvard University, Appian Way, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA

Abstract
This research demonstrates that preschoolers flexibly trust and
mistrust the same individuals, as preschoolers recognize that
their intentions may vary. In Study 1 (N=101) 3- and 4-yearolds trusted speakers based on their current, rather than
previous, intentions to give in/correct information. Thus
preschoolers infer the meanings behind different intentions
and recognize that intentions change within individuals over
time. In Study 2 (N=80) 3- to 5-year-olds trusted speakers
who were currently sincere, but previously intentionally
inaccurate, rather than currently sincere, but previously
ignorant, showing that preschoolers infer current knowledge
from prior intentions. Preschoolers also trusted speakers who
were currently knowledgeable, although previously ignorant,
showing that they recognize knowledge is variable within
individuals.
Keywords: Trust, Intention, Knowledge, Frame Problem,
Preschoolers, Humor

Introduction
A growing body of research suggests that children do not
blindly trust just anyone; children consider whom to trust
(e.g., Clément, Koenig & Harris, 2004; Corriveau, Meints &
Harris, 2009; Koenig & Harris, 2005). However, in a world
where people have variable knowledge and intentions, an
important question is whether children are prepared to trust
individuals on some occasions but not others (e.g., Nurmsoo
& Robinson, 2009; Scofield & Behrend, 2008; Shafto, et al.,
2012). Thus, the question becomes not just whom to trust
but also when to trust a given person. This is important not
only for how we acquire information, but also for how we
dismiss uninformative or irrelevant information. This is the
Frame Problem (e.g., Dennett, 1984), which is still proving
difficult to solve in Artificial Intelligence (AI, e.g., Ekbia &
Maguitman, 2001; Scherl & Levesque, 2003), but which
may be a relatively easy problem for preschoolers to solve.
Preschoolers consider past behaviors when deciding
whom to trust. For example, when learning new words, both
3- and 4-year-olds trust a speaker who previously labeled
familiar objects correctly over a speaker who labeled them
incorrectly. Thus, children trust accurate over inaccurate
speakers (e.g., Clément, et al., 2004; Koenig & Harris,
2005). Children also trust knowledgeable over ignorant
actors (Einav & Robinson, 2011).

Our first goal was to discover whether preschoolers trust
an informant’s claims depending on their current intentions
and not just on their previous accuracy or apparent
knowledge. More specifically, we asked: (1) whether
preschoolers are flexible when they trust others; (2) whether
mental states, specifically intentions, play a role in trust; and
(3) whether preschoolers understand that people’s intentions
can change over time. Most of the research to date suggests
that people who were previously accurate or knowledgeable
can be trusted in future, whereas people who were
previously inaccurate or ignorant cannot. However people
are not statically trustworthy or untrustworthy (e.g.,
Nurmsoo & Robinson, 2009; Scofield & Behrend, 2008;
Shafto et al., 2012). Rather, a person can be trustworthy at
times, but not at others.
Joking is a clear example of intentionally saying or doing
the wrong thing (e.g., Hoicka, Jutsum, & Gattis, 2008;
Leekam, 1991), and so it is an occasion when the audience
should not trust the information provided. Indeed, jokers
want their audience to know about their falsehood, and they
do not expect the audience to believe any part of it (e.g.,
Leekam, 1991). Thus, people provide cues when they are
joking (e.g., Hoicka & Gattis, 2012; Mireault, et al., 2012).
In particular, parents express greater disbelief when joking
as compared to acting literally (Hoicka, et al., 2008).
Additionally, everyone jokes. For example, all 3-year-olds
in a survey were reported by their parents to have produced
novel jokes (Hoicka & Akhtar, 2012). Therefore, joking is
an ideal way to examine whether preschoolers use intent to
say or do the wrong thing as a cue not to learn.
Research has started to consider whether young children
understand the various contexts in which others intend to
say or do the wrong thing. From 25 months, toddlers copy
wrong actions marked as jokes (laughter), but correct the
same wrong actions marked as mistakes (“Whoops!”;
Hoicka & Gattis, 2008). From 30 months, toddlers copy
jokers who mislabel familiar objects, but they do not copy
people who sincerely mislabel (Hoicka & Akhtar, 2011). In
the case of trust, children as young as 3 years understand
that pretending is not a reliable cue for acquiring correct
information compared to, for example, having direct
experience with the relevant information (Koenig, 2012).
A critical aspect of intention is that it is not a stable
mental state. People’s intentions change over time (e.g.,

591

Cohen & Levesque, 1990; Roy, 2009; van der Hoek,
Jamroga, & Wooldridge, 2007). According to Cohen and
Levesque (1990, p. 214), people “keep (or commit to)
intentions, but not forever; [they] discharge those intentions
believed to have been satisfied”. Thus, people can revise or
complete their intentions, moving onto new intentions.
When joking, the goal is to get a laugh at a moment in time,
but not at everything forever.
Our first goal – examined in Experiment 1 – was to find
out if children trust someone who currently intends to give
correct information over someone who intends to give
incorrect information, regardless of their past accuracy or
intentions. A major goal of Experiment 2 was to discover
whether children can infer a speaker’s knowledge from his
or her intention. When people intend to do or say the wrong
thing, through joking, lying, or pretending (e.g., Hoicka &
Gattis, 2008), the speaker knows the correct information,
but chooses not to say it (e.g., Leekam, 1991). Thus, if a
joker previously said the wrong thing, he or she likely knew
what the right answer was. By contrast, if an ignorant
person said the wrong thing, this suggests that the person
did not know the right answer. If children understand that
joking is more likely to involve intentionally saying the
wrong thing compared to being ignorant, then they should
later trust a previous joker over a previously ignorant person
when learning new information. Thus they may infer that
the joker was more likely to know the information than the
ignorant speaker, but withheld prior information.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined whether preschoolers base their
trust on speakers’ current intentions rather than their past
accuracy or intentions. In the final test trials, one actor
named novel objects while giving sincere cues whereas the
other named them while giving joking cues. Depending on
the condition, children had previously seen the actors
display the same intentions (i.e., sincere versus joking), a
switch in intentions, or they had had no prior exposure to
the actors’ intentions. The experimental question was
whether children would be swayed by the actors’ current
intentions – as expressed in the test trials – or by their past
intentions.

Method
Participants Fifty-three 3-year-olds (33 females, M = 3
years, 5 months, range = 3 years, 0 months – 3 years, 11
months) and 48 4-year-olds (25 females, M = 4 years, 4
months, range = 4 years, 0 months – 4 years, 11 months)
were randomly assigned to one of three conditions:
Consistent Intentions, Inconsistent Intentions, and No Prior
Intentions. Children were of similar ages across conditions.
Materials The objects in the familiarization trials included a
spoon, a bottle, a doll, and a brush. The objects in the action
videos included a cookie, a cup, a scarf, and a hat. The
objects in the test trials included a brown feathery cat toy, a

red, black and silver DIY object, a blue and white dog toy,
and a red and white kitchen utensil. PowerPoint slideshows
were made with each slide showing an object and/or actors,
or a video (see procedure). Children’s responses were videorecorded directly onto the laptop computer.
Design This study was a between-subjects design in which
there were three conditions. In the Consistent Intentions
condition, one actor was consistently joking and one actor
was consistently sincere throughout the familiarization
trials, action videos, and test trials. In the Inconsistent
Intentions condition, one actor joked in the familiarization
trials but was sincere in the action videos and test trials. The
other actor was sincere in the familiarization trials but joked
in the action videos and test trials. By showing that actors
had switched intentions in the action videos, we anticipated
that children would be prepared to recognize their new
intentions in the test trials. In the No Prior Intentions
condition, children saw the objects but not the actors in the
training trials, and then participated in the full test trials.
The dependent variable was whether children trusted the
joker or sincere actor at test trials when learning new labels.
Procedure
Familiarization Trials: At the start of the familiarization
trials in the Consistent Intentions and Inconsistent Intentions
conditions, children were shown a video of the two actors
being asked to name an object (e.g., spoon). The joker
laughed, named it incorrectly (e.g., duck) using a humorous
intonation pattern (Hoicka & Gattis, 2012) and said, “I’m
being silly, only joking.” The sincere actor labeled it
correctly using a sincere intonation pattern (Hoicka &
Gattis, 2012) while smiling. After watching the video
children were shown a slide with pictures of the object and
the two actors who had named it and were asked, “She
called it a [e.g., duck] and she called it a [e.g., spoon]. Can
you tell me what it’s called?” This repeated for the
remaining three trials with different familiar objects. In the
No Prior Intentions Condition, children were instead shown
a slide with a picture of the familiar object, given two names
for the object and then asked to name it. For example for the
spoon, they were asked, “Is this a duck or a spoon?”
Action Videos: In the Consistent Intentions condition, the
actor who had joked in the familiarization trials also joked
in the action videos. Similarly, the sincere actor stayed
sincere. In the Inconsistent Intentions condition, the actor
who had joked in the familiarization trials became sincere
during the action videos. Similarly, the actor who had been
sincere in the familiarization trials became humorous.
For each action, each actor said the same line before
performing an action such as, “I’m going to put this hat on”.
The sincere actor then did the correct action (e.g., putting
the hat on her head) and the joker did the action incorrectly,
(e.g., putting the hat under her arm) and saying, “I’m being
silly, I’m only joking” and laughing. This continued for the
other three actions. The No Prior Intentions condition did
not include action videos.

592

Test Trials: Children watched four videos where a third
actor asked the two actors what a novel object was called.
The sincere actor smiled and said, e.g., “That’s a mogo”
with a sincere intonation pattern. The joker said, e.g.,
“That’s a sepa” in a humorous intonation pattern, then, “I’m
being silly, only joking” and laughed. Following the video
the child was shown a slide with a photo of the object and
the two actors and told, “She called it a sepa and she called
it a mogo. Can you tell me what it’s called?” This continued
for the remaining three trials. In the Consistent Intentions
condition, the actors played the same roles as they had for
the familiarization trials and action videos. In the
Inconsistent Intentions condition, the actor who had joked
during the familiarization trials was now sincere (just as she
had been during the action trials). By contrast, the actor who
had been sincere during the familiarization trials was now
joking (just as she had been during the action trials). In the
No Prior Intentions condition, the test trials were the first
time the children had seen the actors.

Results
Data were analyzed with logit mixed effects models. Only
significant effects and interactions are reported.
See Figure 1 for the percentage of trials on which children
chose the sincere actor’s label over the joker’s, by Condition
(Consistent Intentions, Inconsistent Intentions, No Prior
Intentions) and Age. The base model was improved by
Condition, X2(2) = 13.91, p = .0010, and Age, X2(1) = 3.84,
p = .0501, as fixed effects. The resulting model (loglikelihood = -149.17, N = 340) found children were
significantly more likely to trust the sincere actor over the
joker at test trials in the Consistent Intentions versus
Inconsistent Intentions and No Prior Intentions conditions
(both Odds-Ratio, OR > 2.43, p < .0256). Four-year-olds
were marginally more likely to trust the sincere actor than 3year-olds (OR = 1.78, p = .0526).
When each condition was tested individually, children in
the Consistent Intentions and No Prior Intentions conditions
(both log-likelihood > -59.22, N = 127/101) were
significantly more likely to trust the sincere actor than the
joker at test trials (both OR > 2.66, p < .0012). Age
improved the model for the Inconsistent Intentions
condition, X2(1) = 6.03, p = .0141. The overall model (loglikelihood = -49.84, N = 112) found 4-year-olds were more
likely to trust the sincere actor than the joker at test trials
than 3-year-olds (OR = 3.61, p = .0180). Follow-up tests
found that both 3- and 4-year-olds (both log-likelihood > 31.41, N = 54/58) were more likely to trust the sincere actor
than the joker at test trials (both OR > 2.85, p < .0160).

Discussion
Across all three conditions, both 3- and 4-year-olds were
more likely to trust the actor who was sincere at test trials
over the actor who was joking. This suggests children take
into account the current intention of a speaker when
deciding whether to learn from him or her. If the speaker’s
intention is sincere, children will learn. If the speaker’s

intention is to joke, children will not learn. Thus, selective
trust is not purely based on past experience with a speaker –
it is also based on a speaker’s current intentions.

Experiment 2
During the familiarization trials in both conditions in
Experiment 2, one actor mislabeled familiar objects due to
ignorance, while the other actor mislabeled familiar objects
because she was joking. During test trials, the previously
ignorant actor gave cues suggesting that she was now
knowledgeable, whereas the joker continued to give joking
cues (Knowledge Inconsistent condition). Alternatively,
both actors gave cues that they were sincere (Knowledge
Inferred condition).
The first experimental question concerned the Knowledge
Inconsistent condition. Would children recognize that
someone who was once ignorant could become
knowledgeable, and would be better to trust than a previous
joker who intended to continue saying the wrong thing? The
second experimental question concerned the Knowledge
Inferred condition. Would children distinguish the two types
of inaccuracy during familiarization trials; more
specifically, would they recognize that a previous joker was
more likely to know the correct labels compared to an
ignorant speaker, but chose not to say them. If so, during
test trials children should trust a previous joker who
becomes sincere, and intends to say the right thing, over a
previously ignorant actor, who is also sincere, but is less
likely to be knowledgeable.

Method
Participants Thirty 3-year-olds (14 females, M = 3 years, 5
months, range = 3 years, 1 month – 3 years, 11 months), 28
4-year-olds (13 females, M = 4 years, 5 months, range = 4
years, 0 months – 4 years, 10 months), and 22 5-year olds
(13 females, M = 5 years, 6 months, range = 5 years, 1
month – 5 years, 11 months) were randomly assigned to one
of two conditions: the Knowledge Inconsistent condition
and the Knowledge Inferred condition. Children were of
similar ages across conditions.
Materials Same as Study 1, except that there were an
additional two familiarization objects (car, pig).
Design This study was a between-subjects design in which
there were two conditions. In the Knowledge Inconsistent
condition, one actor was ignorant during training, but
knowledgeable during testing, whereas the other actor
consistently joked. In the Knowledge Inferred condition,
again, one actor was ignorant during training whereas the
other joked. During action and test trials, both actors were
sincere. Action trials were included to show a change of
intentions in the joker, as in Experiment 1.
There were six training trials in both conditions. The joker
joked for four trials, and was knowledgeable for two trials.
The ignorant actor was ignorant for four trials, and

593

knowledgeable for two trials. By showing that the ignorant
actor could switch knowledge states during training, we
anticipated that children would be prepared to recognize the
ignorant actor’s new knowledge in the test trials in the
Knowledge Inconsistent condition. Jokers also had two
knowledgeable trials in order to keep (in)accuracy
consistent between actors. Training was the same in the
Knowledge Inferred condition in order to ensure conditions
were comparable. The dependent variable was who children
trusted when learning new labels – the previous joker, or
previously ignorant actor.
Procedure
Familiarization Trials: The task proceeded in the same way
as in Experiment 1. In both conditions, the joker gave
incorrect labels paired with joking cues for four out of six
familiarization trials and correct labels paired with
knowledge cues for two familiarization trials. The ignorant
actor gave incorrect labels paired with ignorance cues for
four out of six familiarization trials and correct labels paired
with knowledge cues for two familiarization trials.
Humorous cues were the same as in Experiment 1. For
ignorance cues, the actor shrugged her shoulders and labeled
the object incorrectly saying, e.g., “I don’t know, that’s a
train?” Knowledgeable cues involved displaying their
knowledge and labeling an object correctly, e.g., “I know
this one. That’s a spoon.”
Action Videos: In the Knowledge Inferred condition only,
children were shown action videos which were the same as
those used in Experiment 1. The actor who had joked during
the familiarization trials carried out the four sincere actions.
The actor who had been ignorant during familiarization also
carried out the four sincere actions.
Test Trials: The test trials were the same as in Experiment
1. In the Knowledge Inconsistent condition, the previous
joker continued to joke during test trials saying, e.g., “That’s
a sepa, I’m being silly, only joking” and laughing, whilst the
previously ignorant actor was now knowledgeable saying,
e.g., “I know this one. It’s a mogo”. In the Knowledge
Inferred condition, both actors labeled the novel object
giving sincere cues, where they would smile and say,
“That’s a mogo” or “That’s a sepa”.

Results
We built logit mixed effects models as in Experiment 1.
No gender or age (over, under 4.5 years) differences were
found. See Figure 2 for the percentage of trials on which
children chose the previous joker over the previously
ignorant actor, by Condition (Knowledge Inconsistent,
Knowledge Inferred). The base model was improved by
Condition, X2(1) = 50.05, p < .0001 as a fixed effect. The
resulting model (log-likelihood = -177.49, N = 307) found
an effect of Condition (OR = 6.21, p < .0001). When each
condition was tested individually, children in the
Knowledge Inconsistent condition (log-likelihood = -73.42,
N = 157) were significantly more likely to trust the
previously ignorant actor (now knowledgeable) versus the

previous joker (still joking) at test trials (OR = 4.77, p <
.0001). In the Knowledge Inferred condition (log-likelihood
= -93.02, N = 137) children were significantly more likely to
trust the previous joker over the previously ignorant actor
when both were sincere at test trials (OR = 1.40, p = .0505).

Discussion
Experiment 2 shows that children consider intentions in
combination with knowledge when deciding whom to trust
for information. When both actors were sincere during test
trials in the Knowledge Inferred condition, children were
more likely to trust the previous joker than the previously
ignorant actor. Because both actors were equally inaccurate
during the training trials, accuracy could not be used as a
cue. Moreover, children in Experiment 1 did not trust the
joker, even when no previous training was given, suggesting
that children do not simply prefer jokers. Thus, children
inferred that despite the joker previously being inaccurate,
she likely actually knew the correct information, at least
compared to the ignorant actor, and would thus express the
correct information when being sincere.
Another possible way to explain the results is that
children avoided learning from someone who was
previously ignorant. However, this cannot be the case
because children chose to learn from the previously ignorant
actor rather than the previous joker when she showed signs
of knowledge in the test trials in the Knowledge Inconsistent
condition. This demonstrates that children are flexible in
their trust, and understand that people’s knowledge can
vary. They acknowledge that sometimes people know
words, and sometimes they do not.

General Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that children trust speakers based on
the speakers’ current intentions, rather than their previous
intentions or accuracy. Children trusted the actor who was
currently being sincere versus joking when learning new
labels, even when the actors’ previous intentions were
different or had not been made available to the preschoolers.
Thus, preschoolers recognized that when speakers joke, they
intend to say the wrong thing, and so should not be trusted
to provide accurate information.
Experiment 2 showed that preschoolers combine intention
and knowledge states to determine whether information is
trustworthy. Specifically, children inferred that when both
actors were sincere at test trials, the actor who previously
said the wrong thing in the context of a joke was more likely
to know the correct labels compared to the actor who
previously said the wrong thing due to ignorance. Thus,
children recognized that a joker is more likely to know the
truth compared to an ignorant speaker, but chooses not to
say it. However, when the previous joker continued to joke,
and the previously ignorant actor showed that she was
knowledgeable at test trials, children were flexible and
preferred the previously ignorant actor, recognizing a
change in the ignorant actor’s knowledge.

594

Stable Traits

Knowledge

Much of the research to date has portrayed children’s trust
as involving the attribution of a stable trait concerning
previous accuracy or knowledge (e.g., Clément, et al., 2004;
Corriveau, et al., 2009; Einav & Robinson, 2011; Koenig &
Harris, 2005). This is the first empirical research to show
that children consider not only previous accuracy or
knowledge, but also the speaker’s past and current
intentions, when deciding whom to trust. This is an
important skill to have because speakers shift rapidly in
their intentions, joking at one moment and being sincere the
next. This adds to a body of research showing that children
are flexible in their trust (e.g., Nurmsoo & Robinson, 2009;
Scofield & Behrend, 2008; Shafto, et al., 2012).
In the case of intentionally saying the wrong thing, such
as joking, it is highly unlikely that someone would always
joke, even if most people do joke at certain times (e.g.,
Hoicka & Akhtar, 2012) to trust them. The current findings
converge with evidence from computational models, which
suggest children consider intention and knowledge, and not
just accuracy, when deciding whom to trust (Shafto, et al.,
2012).

Analysis based in philosophy and AI shows that intention is
not a stand-alone mental state. Rather, to have an intention,
one must also have other mental states such as beliefs and
knowledge (Cohen & Levesque, 1990; van der Hoek, et al.,
2007). Thus, for children to truly understand others’
intentions, they must also understand others’ beliefs or
knowledge. Experiment 2 provides the first experimental
evidence that children as young as 3 years infer knowledge
from intentions, and use inferred knowledge to learn from a
previously inaccurate person later on.
Although past research demonstrates that children can
infer intentions to do the wrong thing when joking (e.g.,
Hoicka & Akhtar, 2011; Hoicka & Gattis, 2008), it was not
clear from this research whether children understood that
the actor actually knew the correct information. The current
research shows that they consider intention alongside other
mental states, specifically knowledge.
Experiment 2 also suggests that preschoolers can attribute
knowledge to people who were previously ignorant if they
later demonstrate cues showing knowledge. This is
consistent with previous findings on perceptual access.
Children did not trust an informant who could not perceive
the information that they needed, but later trusted the same
informant when he or she could perceive that information
(Nurmsoo & Robinson, 2009; Robinson, et al., 2011). This
flexibility makes sense. For example, sometimes people
forget information, but not always. Sometimes people have
some knowledge in a domain, but not all knowledge, for
example vocabulary, for which there is variation amongst
parents (e.g., Huttenlocher, 1998). Thus, a speaker may
know some labels, but not all labels. Being sensitive to cues
which suggest when someone has knowledge and when they
do not, even within the same domain, would thus be a useful
tool in selectively trusting, and acquiring information, from
others.

Intention
Although much research has considered toddlers’
understanding that people intend to do the right thing (e.g.,
Carpenter, Akhtar, & Tomasello, 1998), understanding
complex intentions, such as intentions to do the wrong
thing, may be a more refined test of intention understanding
as it involves considering why, and not just whether,
someone would do something intentionally. Our
experiments show that preschoolers respond appropriately
to complex intentions from 3 years. Specifically, they
recognize that people can intend to do different things for
different reasons. They can intend to say the right thing to
teach others, or they can intend to say the wrong thing to
joke.
A growing body of research suggests that preschoolers
understand that people can intend to do the wrong thing
(Hoicka & Akhtar, 2011; Hoicka & Gattis, 2008; Rakoczy,
Tomasello, & Striano, 2004). The current experiments
extend this prior research by showing that preschoolers can
make use of this insight when learning new information.
Children are thus flexible learners, accepting new
information only when appropriate. Preschoolers are
therefore able to solve the Frame Problem (e.g., Dennett,
1984) to a relatively sophisticated degree, tracking speakers’
prior and current accuracy, knowledge, and intentions to
decide when to accept versus reject information. An
important question that follows is how they solve the Frame
Problem. In the current studies, social cues clearly helped.
Indeed, in the case of humor and humorous intentions,
parents scaffold infants’ and toddlers’ understanding
through cues and explicit expressions of disbelief (Hoicka &
Gattis, 2012; Hoicka, et al., 2008; Mireault, et al., 2012).
Thus, the Frame Problem may be solved to some extent
through social cues and parental scaffolding.

Figures

Figure 1: Percentage of test trials for which children trusted
the currently sincere actor over the current joker in Study 1.
*p < .05. Lines indicate where differences were examined.
Parentheses indicate results summed across groups.

595

Figure 2. Total percentage of test trials during which
children trusted the previously ignorant actor over the
previous joker, by condition. *p ≤ .05

Acknowledgments
We thank parents and toddlers for participating in our
research. This research was supported by a British Academy
Small Research Grant SG110479 awarded to Elena Hoicka.

References
Carpenter, M., Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1998).
Fourteen- through 18-month-old infants differentially
imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Behavior
& Development, 21, 315-330.
Clément, F., Koenig, M., & Harris, P. (2004). The
ontogenesis of trust. Mind & Language, 19, 360-379.
Cohen, P. R., & Levesque, H. J. (1990). Intention is choice
with commitment. Artificial Intelligence, 42, 213-261.
Corriveau, K. H., Meints, K., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Early
tracking of informant accuracy and inaccuracy. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 27, 331-342.
Dennett, D. C. (1984). Cognitive wheels: The frame
problem of AI. In C. Hookway (Ed.), Minds, machines
and evolution. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press.
Einav, S., & Robinson, E. J. (2011). When being right is not
enough: Four-year-olds distinguish knowledgeable
informants
from
merely
accurate
informants.
Psychological Science, 22, 1250-1253.
Ekbia, H. R., & Maguitman, A. M. (2001). Context and
relevance: A pragmatic approach. In V. Akman (Ed.),
Modeling and using context. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Hoicka, E., & Akhtar, N. (2012). Early humor production.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 30, 586603.
Hoicka, E., & Akhtar, N. (2011). Preschoolers joke with
jokers, but correct foreigners. Developmental Science, 14,
848-858.
Hoicka, E., & Gattis, M. (2012). Acoustic differences
between humorous and sincere communicative intentions.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 30, 531549.

Hoicka, E., & Gattis, M. (2008). Do the wrong thing: How
toddlers tell a joke from a mistake. Cognitive
Development, 23, 180-190.
Hoicka, E., Jutsum, S., & Gattis, M. (2008). Humor,
abstraction, and disbelief. Cognitive Science: A
Multidisciplinary Journal, 32, 985-1002.
Huttenlocher, J. (1998). Language input and language
growth. Preventive Medicine: An International Journal
Devoted to Practice and Theory, 27, 195-199.
Koenig, M. A. (2012). Beyond semantic accuracy:
Preschoolers evaluate a speaker’s reasons. Child
Development, 83, 1051-1063.
Koenig, M. A., & Harris, P. L. (2005). Preschoolers mistrust
ignorant and inaccurate speakers. Child Development, 76,
1261-1277.
Leekam, S. R. (1991). Jokes and lies: Children's
understanding of intentional falsehood. In A. Whiten, &
A. Whiten (Eds.), Natural theories of mind: Evolution,
development and simulation of everyday mindreading.
Cambridge, MA US: Basil Blackwell.
Mireault, G., Poutre, M., Sargent-Hier, M., Dias, C., Perdue,
B., & Myrick, A. (2012). Humour perception and creation
between parents and 3- to 6-month-old infants. Infant and
Child Development, 21, 338-347.
Nurmsoo, E., & Robinson, E. J. (2009). Children's trust in
previously inaccurate informants who were well or poorly
informed: When past errors can be excused. Child
Development, 80, 23-27.
Rakoczy, H., Tomasello, M., & Striano, T. (2004). Young
children know that trying is not pretending: A test of the
'behaving-as-if' construal of children's early concept of
pretense. Developmental Psychology, 40, 388-399.
Robinson, E. J., Butterfill, S. A., & Nurmsoo, E. (2011).
Gaining knowledge via other minds: Children's flexible
trust in others as sources of information. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 29, 961-980.
Roy, O. (2009). A dynamic-epistemic hybrid logic for
intentions and information changes in strategic games.
Synthese, 171, 291-320.
Scherl, R. B., & Levesque, H. J. (2003). Knowledge, action,
and the frame problem. Artificial Intelligence, 144, 1-39.
Scofield, J., & Behrend, D. A. (2008). Learning words from
reliable and unreliable speakers. Cognitive Development,
23, 278-290.
Shafto, P., Eaves, B., Navarro, D. J., & Perfors, A. (2012).
Epistemic trust: Modeling children’s reasoning about
others’ knowledge and intent. Developmental Science, 15,
436-447.
van der Hoek, W., Jamroga, W., & Wooldridge, M. (2007).
Towards a theory of intention revision. Synthese, 155,
265-290.

596

