UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Proactive and Retroactive Interference Effects in Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9b1306hc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Darby, Kevin
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Proactive and Retroactive Interference Effects in Development
Kevin Darby (darby.60@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Abstract
Infants and children are avid learners. This constant
aggregation of new knowledge, however, can interfere with
past and future learning. Proactive interference (PI) occurs
when past learning interferes with new learning, while
retroactive interference (RI) is the attenuation of memory for
previous learning as a result of new knowledge. Previous
work has demonstrated that adults and children display PI and
RI effects, but the developmental trajectories of these effects
are less clear. The current study developed a new associative
learning paradigm to concurrently test PI and RI in
preschoolers and adults. Results demonstrated the presence of
RI, and these effects were stable across age groups,
suggesting that the mechanisms that modulate RI effects may
already be mature in these age groups. No PI effects were
found in either group, however. This surprising result
suggests the role of associative complexity as a possible
modulator of PI in these age groups.
Keywords: Learning; memory development; proactive
interference; retroactive interference.

Interference effects have been the focus of a great deal of
research. It is clear, for example, that interference occurs in
many different learning systems, including connectionist
networks (French, 1999; Ratcliff, 1990) and human adults
(Bower, Thompson-Schill, & Tulving, 1994; Wixted, 2004).
In adults, RI effects may be modulated by similarity
between learning sets as well as mental effort, such that
more interference is demonstrated with greater similarity
and increased cognitive load (Dewar, Cowan, & Della Sala,
2007; French, 1999; Wixted, 2004). Additionally, RI seems
to be modulated by the engagement of networks in the
hippocampal region and surrounding cortices (McClelland,
McNaughton, & O’Reilly, 1995; Wiskott, Rasch, &
Kempermann, 2006). Conversely, PI effects seem to be
modulated by executive functions such as attentional control
and inhibition of prepotent responses (Baker, Friedman, &
Leslie, 2010; Dick, 2012; Kiesel et al., 2010), and appear to
be attenuated by activity in prefrontal regions of the cortex
(Badre & Wagner, 2005).

Interference effects

Interference in development

Infants and children are avid learners: they constantly
acquire new knowledge. This new knowledge not only
expands their sense of the world, but also affects what they
already know and what they will learn in the future (Wixted,
2004). Some of these effects are counterintuitive: (1)
acquired knowledge may interfere with future learning, the
process known as proactive interference (PI), and (2)
acquired knowledge may attenuate memory for previously
learned information, the process known as retroactive
interference (RI). PI and RI effects are particularly
important to study in early development because doing so
will help determine what factors benefit or detract from the
aggregation of early knowledge.
These sources of forgetting may play a role in many early
cognitive domains, such as categorization (Mareschal,
Quinn, & French, 2002) and word learning (Levy-Gigi &
Vakil, 2010). Imagine, for example, that a child with
bilingual parents learns the word “cat,” but is later
introduced to the word “gato.” Mapping “gato” onto the
child’s category of cats may be more difficult than learning
an entirely new concept in Spanish since the category is
already associated with “cat” (PI). Additionally, the
mapping between the word “cat” and the category of cats
will likely be weakened as a result of learning to associate
the category with a second word (RI).

Although the majority of research concerning PI and RI has
focused on adults, some evidence suggests that interference
effects may also be present early in human development.
For example, infants demonstrate RI in a visual recognition
task (Turati, 2008) as well as a mobile reinforcement
paradigm (Rossi-George & Rovee-Collier, 1999), and
demonstrate PI in visual facial recognition (Tyrrell,
Snowman, Beier, & Blanck, 1990).
Despite the fact that interference occurs across
development, the development of the ability to resist each
kind of interference is less clear. There is some evidence
that RI effects are relatively stable between preschool and
school years. Howe (1995) demonstrated that RI effects
were similar in preschoolers (approximately 4.5 years) and
kindergarteners (approximately 6 years old) in a pairedassociate recall task. Similar findings were reported in 4and 7-year-olds, using a game-based paradigm (Lee &
Bussey, 2001). It is unclear, however, whether there are
developmental differences in RI if a wider age range is
considered. In contrast, developmental differences in PI
have been reported. Kail (2002) performed a meta-analysis
on PI effects in children ages 4-13 years old, as well as an
experiment with children in grades 3-6 and undergraduate
adults. Both the meta-analysis and experimental results

2130

indicated a decrease in PI effects across these
developmental time scales.
The current study was conducted to investigate any
differences in PI and RI between preschoolers (5-year-olds)
and adults. To do so, we developed a new associative
learning paradigm that would be appropriate to measure
interference effects in both children and adults (Experiment
1) as well as provide a control for memory decay when
specifically measuring RI (Experiment 2). This paradigm
has the advantage of testing for both types of interference in
a manner that is appropriate for children and adults.

Experiment 1
To examine developmental differences in PI and RI, we
developed a new associative learning task that allows us to
study both types of interference within a single paradigm. In
this task pairs of objects were associated with an outcome in
three phases. In the first phase, participants learned to
predict outcomes based the identities of paired objects; in
the second phase, objects were re-paired to stimulate new
learning, while in the final phase participants were presented
again with the original pairs.
We expected to finds both types of interference in
children, whereas the extent to which these effects are
present in adults was less clear. Previous research suggests
that RI effects are present in adults, to the extent that the
learned material is sufficiently similar and cognitively
challenging across phases (Dewar et al., 2007; French,
1999; Wixted, 2004). Also, given that cognitive control
abilities are substantially more advanced in adults and given
that PI effects depend on cognitive control (Baker et al.,
2010; Dick, 2012; Kiesel et al., 2010), we expected that PI
effects, if found, should be greater in children than in adults.

consisted of the presentation of a pair of objects and a visual
occluder that resembled a pipe splitting into two ends (see
Figure 1). This occluder design was implemented such that
an object disappearing behind the occluder could reappear
on either side. Crucially, the outcome of the trial (i.e. where
the object reappears) depended on the identities of the object
pairings.
The object pairings, color of the visual occluder, and
color of the background varied by phase: In the first phase,
four object pairs were presented along with a white occluder
on a dark grey background. In the second phase, objects
were repaired and presented with a black occluder on a light
grey background. Stimuli in the third phase were identical to
those presented in the first phase. The purpose of varying
the object pairings was to create interference between
learning sets, while contextual information was varied so
that new learning would not be too difficult to encode.

Figure 1: An example trial in phase 1

Method
Participants Twenty-six undergraduates at The Ohio State
University (20 females) and 34 children (m = 5.2 years, SD
= 0.23 years, 14 females) from the surrounding Columbus
community participated in this experiment. Children were
tested at local preschools. Adults received course credit and
children received stickers for their participation.
Six children did not complete the task due to fatigue (n=5)
or computer error (n=1). The data from these children were
removed from all analyses. Additionally, since the focus of
this study was on interference between new and previous
learning, we required that participants demonstrate accuracy
greater than 70% in the initial learning phase of the
experiment to be included in the analysis. In this way, we
only included participants who demonstrated learning that
could induce PI or be subject to RI. This learning criterion
resulted in the removal of three adults and ten children. Our
final experimental sample, therefore, consisted of 23 adults
(17 females) and 18 children (m = 5.3 years, SD = 0.27
years, 8 females).
Stimuli Experimental stimuli consisted of eight objects with
common shapes and colors (e.g. blue circle). Each trial

Procedure The task was computer-based, and stimuli were
presented using E-Prime. To encourage interest in the task,
children were tested using a touch-screen computer (adults
were tested with a standard screen). In each trial two objects
were presented with a visual occluder as described above.
One object was situated directly above the second object,
and the relative position of each object in the pair was
counter-balanced across trials. The participant was told that
one object would move into the occluder and come out on
one side, and was asked to predict on which side of the
occluder the object would reappear. Responses were made
using the left or right arrows on a keyboard (adults) or by
touching the relevant area of the touch-screen (children).
Immediately after a response was given, the bottommost
object would rise and hit the topmost object, which would
move directly into the occluder before reappearing on one
side approximately one second later. In addition to seeing
the outcome of the object movement, participants were
given explicit feedback: adults heard a high or low tone
corresponding to correct and incorrect responses,
respectively, while children were given explicit verbal
feedback by the experimenter (e.g. “That’s right, it does go

2131

to that side!”) in addition to the tone. The side of the
object’s reappearance was predicted by the object pair. In
this way, subjects were able to learn the contingency
between object pairs and outcomes.
The identity of the object pairings depended on the phase
of the experiment: phase 1 consisted of learning four pairs
of objects (such that two pairs reappeared on the left side of
the occluder and two on the right). The objects were repaired in phase 2, such that new learning required subjects
to create new associations with the same objects and
potential outcomes. The third phase was identical to the first
phase, except that order of stimulus presentation varied
between phases. Table 1 illustrates the abstract structure of
object and outcome pairings in this experiment. For phases
1-3, each letter represents an object, while the outcome
indicates the side of the object’s reappearance from the
occluder. Note that each pair in phase 2 includes an object
that was associated with the opposite outcome in phase 1.
As noted above, the visual context of these stimuli
changed between the phases to facilitate learning and
recognition of different learning outcomes in the different
phases. Participants were not informed that the context
would change between the phases, nor were they told that
they would be learning new associations in phase 2 or that
they would be relearning the associations from phase 1 in
the third phase. Forty trials (10 per pair of objects) were
presented to each participant per phase, for a total of 120
trials. Subjects were invited to take short breaks between
phases.
Table 1: Abstract object and outcome structure for
Experiment 1.
Phase 1
A–B
C–D
E–F
G–H

Phase 2
A–F
C–H
E–B
G–D

Phase 3
A–B
C–D
E–F
G–H

Outcome
Left
Left
Right
Right

Figure 2: Accuracy in Experiment 1 by block for each phase
in children (top) and adults (bottom), with standard error
bars.

Results
The central question of interest was whether children and
adults would demonstrate differing amounts of proactive
and retroactive interference effects. To address this
question, trials in each phase were divided into 5 blocks (8
trials per phase) to closely examine the learning trajectories
of these groups (see Figure 2).
To measure PI we compared the beginning (i.e. first
block) of phase 1 to the beginning of phase 2: a decrease in
accuracy in the second block would indicate PI. To measure
RI we compared the end (i.e. last block) of the first phase to
the beginning of phase 3: since the object pairs were
identical in the two phases, a decrease in performance
between these blocks would indicate RI. A series of
analyses of variance (ANOVAs) and t-tests was used to
statistically measure PI and RI.

Proactive Interference To test PI effects, an ANOVA with
block as a within-subject factor and age as a betweensubject factor was performed on the proportion of accurate
responses for the first block of the first and second phases
(see Figure 3). There were no significant main effects of
block or age, and no interaction between these factors
(p’s>.2). To more directly test PI effects we conducted
paired-sample t-tests between the first blocks of phases 1
and 2 separately for children and adults. The difference
between blocks was not significant for children, t(17)=1.17,
p>.2, or adults, t(22)=.49, p>.6. These results suggest that PI
was not a factor in this experiment in children or adults.
Retroactive Interference To test RI effects, an ANOVA
with block as a within-subject factor and age as a betweensubject factor was conducted on accuracy scores in the last
block of phase 1 and the first block of phase 3 for children
and adults. A significant main effect of block,
F(1,39)=20.53, p<.001, indicated that accuracy decreased in

2132

the beginning of phase 3 across age groups. There was also
a main effect of age, F(1,39)=4.07, p=.05, suggesting that
overall accuracy in these blocks was higher in adults No
interaction, however, was found between block and age,
p>.3, suggesting that the difference between blocks did not
vary as a function of age. The strong main effect of block
suggested that RI may be found in individual age groups.
Indeed, separate paired-samples t-tests revealed a significant
difference in accuracies between the end of phase 1 and the
beginning of phase 3 for children, t(17)=2.94, p<.01,
d=0.69, as well as adults, t(22)=3.55, p<.01, d=0.74. These
results suggest that RI did occur in both children and adults,
and that interference did not differ between groups.
One possible explanation for these retroactive interference
effects is that subjects simply forgot the relevant
associations learned in phase 1 as a result of the time passed
between phases 1 and 3. If this is the case, then the
information learned in phase 2 did not interfere with
performance in phase 3 but merely served a placeholder for
the passage of time. To determine if this was the case, a
second experiment was performed to control for memory
decay.

*
*

attenuated in this experiment in the absence of new learning.
If accuracy has not declined at the start of phase 3, however,
we can be confident that the results of Experiment 1 were
indeed due to interference and not decay.

Method
Participants Twenty-six adult undergraduates (17 females)
and 21 5-year-old children (m = 5.3 years, SD = 0.21 years,
13 females) participated. Three children did not complete
the experiment due to fatigue (n=2) or because they were
unable to complete the task before the end of the preschool
session (n=1). Using the same learning criterion described
above, three adults and eight children were further removed
from the analysis for failure to demonstrate sufficient
learning in the first phase of the task. The final analysis,
then, included 23 adults (14 females) and 10 children (m =
5.2 years, SD = 0.13 years, 6 females).
Stimuli The stimuli presented in phases 1 and 3 were
identical to those in Experiment 1. In the second phase,
however, pairs of objects were replaced with horizontally
oriented arrows pointing to the left or right side of the
screen. This was done so that participants could easily
predict the outcome of each trial based on the direction of
the arrows. In this way, participants continued performing
the same task but with minimal new learning. The occluder
and background colors in phase 2 were the same as in
Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1:
participants were presented with two objects (phases 1 and
3) or two arrows (phase 2), and predicted on which side of a
visual occluder an object or arrow would reappear.

Results

Figure 3: PI and RI effects in Experiments 1 and 2. PI
effects were calculated as the difference in accuracy
between block 1 of phase 1 and block 1 of phase 2; RI
effects were calculated as the difference in block 5 of phase
1 and block 1 of phase 3. Positive values indicate
interference; negative values indicate facilitation. * p<.05

Experiment 2
One potential interpretation of the RI effects found in
Experiment 1 is that participants did not experience
interference from learning new associations in phase 2 but
simply forgot the associations learned in the first phase due
to memory decay. To determine if this was the case,
Experiment 2 minimized new learning while retaining the
same task structure in the second phase of the task. If the RI
effects found in Experiment 1 were due to memory decay,
then performance in the beginning of phase 3 should also be

The purpose of this experiment was to determine if the
attenuation of performance in Experiment 1 could be
explained by memory decay. As such, accuracies in the last
block of phase 1 and the first block of phase 3 were
compared, as in Experiment 1 (see Figure 4 for the learning
curves of each phase for children and adults, and Figure 3
for the differences between the target blocks). An ANOVA
with block as a within-subject factor and age as a betweensubject factor revealed a main effect of block that was
approaching significance, F(1,31)=3.77, p=.06. However, in
contrast to Experiment 1 (where performance dropped in
phase 3 compared to phase 1), in this experiment,
performance actually improved in phase 3. There was a
significant main effect of age, F(1,31)=6.5, p<.05,
indicating that adults’ accuracy was higher across blocks, as
in Experiment 1. The interaction between block and age was
approaching significance, F(1,31)=3.77, p=0.6, possibly
reflecting a greater improvement in children’s accuracy in
the beginning of phase 3 from the end of phase 1. Individual
t-tests indicated that the difference between these blocks
was not significant in children (p>.1), or adults (p=1). These

2133

findings suggest that simple forgetting cannot explain
interference effects observed in Experiment 1.

Figure 4: Accuracy in Experiment 2 by block for each phase
in children (top) and adults (bottom), with standard error
bars.

General Discussion
This study investigated proactive and retroactive
interference effects in preschoolers and adults. Results
indicated comparable levels of RI in children and adults, but
demonstrated no PI in either group. These results support
recent claims that RI seems to be a particularly potent
source of forgetting in humans (Wixted, 2004).
Additionally, our findings replicate and extend previous
demonstrations that RI seems to produce consistent levels of
interference across age groups. Specifically, these results
provide new evidence that RI effects are stable from the
preschool years into adulthood. This consistency may be the
result of the early development of the neural systems
involved in modulating RI, specifically the hippocampal
formation (McClelland et al., 1995; Wiskott et al., 2006).
Recent work suggests that the hippocampus and

surrounding areas in the medial temporal lobe have
functionally developed by the age of five years (Alvarado,
2000; Bauer, 2008), which is consistent with our findings of
stable RI effects following this age.
The results of this study are inconsistent, however, with
the previous literature suggesting the presence of PI in
children (e.g. Baker et al., 2010) and adults (e.g. Kiesel et
al., 2010), as well as its decline with development (Kail,
2002). Why was PI not a factor in this task? One possibility
is that the structure of the learned associations was not
conducive to this type of interference. Each object in the
stimulus set appeared only in a single pair (which was
associated with a single outcome), such that each object in a
pair was perfectly predictive of a given trial’s outcome (see
Table 1). As such, it was not necessary to encode an
association between the two objects in the pair. This simple
structure may have reduced demands on executive function,
which might not have been the case if more complex
structures were presented. Recall that PI is typically linked
to executive functions (Baker et al., 2010; Dick, 2012;
Kiesel et al., 2010), which are sub-served by the prefrontal
cortex (Badre & Wagner, 2005). Also recall that the areas of
the prefrontal cortex sub-serving executive function mature
relatively late (Bunge & Zelazo, 2006). Therefore, it is quite
surprising that PI effects did not transpire in young children.
Perhaps the task was too easy to yield such effects (although
it was not too easy to yield RI effects).
More broadly, the study of interference effects in
development can potentially shed light on a number of
important developmental phenomena. Word learning, for
example, may depend in large part on associations between
sounds and referents (Smith, Jones, Yoshida, & Colunga,
2003). Recent work has suggested that 12- and 14-month
old infants raised in a monolingual or bilingual environment
do not differ in their ability to learn simple word-object
pairings (Byers-Heinlein, Fennell, & Werker, 2013). An
intriguing possibility is that language background may
instead influence the ability to form more complex
associations (e.g. between words, referents, and identity of
the language).
Many questions await future research. For example,
creating more complexity in the structure of associations,
such that three-way bindings between object1, object2, and
the outcome are necessary for learning, will help us test the
hypothesis that PI is modulated by associative complexity,
possibly through increased demands on executive function.
Additionally, mapping interference effects in more
(particularly younger) age groups will allow us to determine
whether interference effects are subject to developmental
change and the time scales at which such change occurs.
Understanding the mechanisms and developmental time
course of these effects will allow us to understand a
potentially fundamental aspect of learning and memory and
how these processes interact early in life.

2134

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a National Science
Foundation (NSF) grant (BCS-0720135) to Vladimir
Sloutsky. We thank the children, parents, and preschools
that participated in this research.

References
Alvarado, M. C. (2000). Revisiting the maturation of medial
temporal lobe memory functions in primates. Learning &
Memory, 7(5), 244–256.
Badre, D., & Wagner, A. D. (2005). Frontal lobe
mechanisms that resolve proactive interference. Cerebral
Cortex, 15(12), 2003–2012.
Baker, S., Friedman, O., & Leslie, A. (2010). The opposites
task: Using general rules to test cognitive flexibility in
preschoolers. Journal of Cognition and Development,
11(2), 240–254.
Bauer, P. J. (2008). Toward a neuro-developmental account
of the development of declarative memory.
Developmental Psychobiology, 50(1), 19–31.
Bower, G. H., Thompson-Schill, S., & Tulving, E. (1994).
Reducing retroactive interference: an interference
analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20(1), 51–66.
Bunge, S. A., & Zelazo, P. D. (2006). A brain-based
account of the development of rule use in childhood.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(3), 118–
121.
Byers-Heinlein, K., Fennell, C. T., & Werker, J. F. (2013).
The development of associative word learning in
monolingual and bilingual infants. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 16, 198-205.
Dewar, M. T., Cowan, N., & Della Sala, S. (2007).
Forgetting due to retroactive interference: A fusion of
early insights into everyday forgetting and recent research
on anterograde amnesia. Cortex, 43(5), 616–634.
Dick, A. S. (2012). Sources of cognitive inflexibility in setshifting tasks: Insights into developmental theories from
adult data. Journal of Cognition and Development, 13(1),
82–110.
French, R. (1999). Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist
networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(4), 128–135.
Howe, M. L. (1995). Interference effects in young
children’s long-term retention. Developmental
Psychology, 31(4), 579–596.
Kail, R. (2002). Developmental change in proactive
interference. Child Development, 73(6), 1703–1714.
Kiesel, A., Steinhauser, M., Wendt, M., Falkenstein, M.,
Jost, K., Philipp, A. M., & Koch, I. (2010). Control and
interference in task switching--a review. Psychological
Bulletin, 136(5), 849–874.
Lee, K., & Bussey, K. (2001). Children’s susceptibility to
retroactive interference: The effects of age and degree of
learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
80(4), 372–391.
Levy-Gigi, E., & Vakil, E. (2010). Developmental
differences in the impact of contextual factors on

susceptibility to retroactive interference. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105(1-2), 51–62.
Mareschal, D., Quinn, P. C., & French, R. M. (2002).
Asymmetric interference in 3- to 4-month-olds’ sequential
category learning. Cognitive Science, 26(3), 377–389.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the
successes and failures of connectionist models of learning
and memory. Psychological Review, 102(3), 419–457.
Ratcliff, R. (1990). Connectionist models of recognition
memory: constraints imposed by learning and forgetting
functions. Psychological Review, 97(2), 285–308.
Rossi-George, a, & Rovee-Collier, C. (1999). Retroactive
interference in 3-month-old infants. Developmental
Psychobiology, 35(3), 167–177.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1992). Count
nouns, adjectives, and perceptual properties in children’s
novel word interpretations. Developmental Psychology,
28(2), 273–286.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Yoshida, H., & Colunga, E.
(2003). Whose DAM account? Attentional learning
explains Booth and Waxman. Cognition, 87(3), 209–213.
Turati, C. (2008). Newborns’ memory processes: A study
on the effects of retroactive interference and repetition
priming. Infancy, 13(6), 557–569.
Tyrrell, D. J., Snowman, L. G., Beier, J. A., & Blanck, C.
M. (1990). Proactive interference in infant recognition
memory. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 28(3), 188–
190.
Wiskott, L., Rasch, M. J., & Kempermann, G. (2006). A
functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal
neurogenesis: avoidance of catastrophic interference in
the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus, 16(3), 329–343.
Wixted, J. T. (2004). The psychology and neuroscience of
forgetting. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 235–269.

2135

