UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Probabilistic reasoning in the two-envelope problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xc8j6dk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Burns, Bruce

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Probabilistic reasoning in the two-envelope problem
Bruce D. Burns (bruce.burns@sydney.edu.au)
School of Psychology, The University of Sydney
NSW 2006 Australia

does not claim authorship of it, Zabell (1988) stated a twoenvelope version with the following characteristics: the
contents of the two envelopes are x and 2x; no distribution
or limit is given for x; the reasoner is handed an envelope
(randomly) and opens it; however then the reasoner is given
a choice: keep the amount observed, or trade it for the
contents of the other envelope. Before the envelope is
opened the expected outcome is:

Abstract
In the two-envelope problem a reasoner is offered two
envelopes, one containing exactly twice the money in the
other. After observing the amount in one envelope it can be
traded for the unseen contents of the other. Until recently it
was argued that it did not matter whether the envelope was
traded or not, but Abbott, Davis & Parrondo (2010) showed
that gains could be made if trading was a probabilistic
function of amount observed. Three experiments varied where
the observed and maximum amounts fell in a possible
distribution and tested whether this affected choices. Trading
was less likely for lower observed amount than higher, but
this effect differed depending on the stated distribution. This
suggests that participants’ trade decisions were affected by
where observations fit in the distribution, and thus their
probabilities. The modeling tools used here may be applicable
to other reasoning phenomena.

(1)

E = ½(x + 2x) = 3x/2

Opening an envelope cannot change the amounts in the
envelopes so it should not matter whether you keep or trade
envelopes because to trade is equivalent to changing your
initial random choice. However, opening an envelope
containing y means that trading yields either 2y or ½y. If
each is a 50% possibility then trading appears to result in an
expected outcome equal to 5y/4. Worse, if the two
envelopes were held by two different people (as Zabell
proposed), then after opening their own envelopes both
would expect to gain from trading. This cannot be true so
the problem has sometimes been called a paradox. As Zabell
and others have pointed out, the resolution of this paradox is
that the envelopes contain two possible pairs of amounts
[2y, y] or [y, 1/2y] but they are not equally likely. The
p(y|pair) is not equal to p(pair|y); the first probability is
known but it is the second that the reasoner needs.
Analyzing what that probability is, and thus what the
reasoner should do, has defied a satisfactory mathematical
solution (Albers, Kooi, & Schaafsma, 2005). So the paradox
was resolved but the problem of whether to trade remained.
McDonnell and Abbott (2009) point out that the envelope
problem has attracted wide interest in game theory and
probability theory, and that it is paradigmatic of recent
problems in physics, engineering and economics which
involve probabilistic switching between two states. For
example, it has been shown in stochastic control theory that
random switching between two unstable states can result in
a stable state (Allison & Abbott, 2001). Maslov and Zhang
(1998) modelled how switching between volatile assets and
non-performing cash reserves can produce a net gain.
There is only one published paper on how people respond
to the envelope problem. Butler and Nickerson (2008)
presented participants with six different versions of the
problem. They were told that Envelope 1 (E1) contained a
random amount between $1 and $100, and Envelope 2 (E2)
contained either twice or half that amount depending on the
result of a coin toss. They varied whether the participant
was given E1 or E2, whether the participant knew which it
was, and whether they opened the envelope. If participants

Keywords: Probabilistic reasoning, two-envelope problem,
mathematical modelling, decision making.

Introduction
The overwhelming evidence of heuristics and biases
affecting people’s reasoning has often been seen as evidence
of irrationality in human thought (Stanovich, 1999).
Stanovich pointed out that this conclusion relies on the
apparent gap between normatively correct decisions and
actual behaviour. However that such a gap indicates
irrationality has been challenged by those suggesting that
such norms are inappropriate. For example, Oaksford and
Chater (1994) suggested that what is seen as an error in the
well-known Wason’s 4-card selection task is not an error in
terms of information gain if you make appropriate
assumptions about the distribution of the relevant variables
in the environment. Such probabilistic reasoning approaches
have gained increasing acceptance (Oaksford & Chater,
2007). Setting normative standards against which to judge
rationality is especially difficult when formal analysis of a
problem is difficult, such as has been the case for the twoenvelope problem (Zabell, 1988). However a recent analysis
(Abbott, Davis & Parrondo, 2010; McDonnell & Abbott,
2009) supported by simulations suggests that distributions
are critical to analysing that problem, so it is reasonable to
ask whether people act rationally by showing sensitivity to
distributions when faced with what has sometimes been
considered a paradox.

The two-envelope problem
Versions of the two-envelope problem were proposed by
Kaitchik (1953, pp. 133-134) and attributed by the
mathematician Littlewood to the physicist Erwin
Schödinger (Littlewood, 1953/1986, p. 26). Although he

257

Figure 1: Markov model based on Abbott el al’s (2010) analysis. P(x) representing the probability of trading if the value in
the opened envelope is x, and P(2x) representing the probability of trading if the observed value is 2x.

observed the amount then Butler and Nickerson asked them
what they would do if it had various values ($1, $20, $40,
$60, $80, $100). Nickerson and Falk’s (2006) analysis of
these different versions showed whether it was optimal to
always trade, trade depending on the observation, always
keep, or to be indifferent. For example, if you know you
have been given E1 then it is optimal to trade because E2
was generated from E1 with a 50% chance of two outcomes.
They found that if participants observed the amount then
there was a tendency towards trading when the amount was
less than $50 and keeping when it was above $50, but this
was irrespective of whether the conditions should influence
their decision. Consistent optimal decision making was rare,
so Butler and Nickerson concluded that participants were
largely insensitive to the logical structure of the problem;
instead they applied simple heuristics or folk wisdom.

starting point was Cover’s (1987) switching function used to
solve the pick the largest number problem and the analysis
of Parrondo’s games in which two losing strategies can be
combined to produce a winning strategy if the current state
of the problem is used as a criterion (Harmer & Abbott,
1999). Solving these types of problems requires
probabilistic switching between states.
Abbott et al (2010) supposed that opening the envelope
reveals y dollars, and the player then trades envelopes with a
probability P(y) є [0,1]. Figure 1 converts their analysis to a
Markov model. From the model it can be seen that the
expected return (E) when x represents the smaller of the two
amounts and 2x the larger, will be:
(2)

E = ½[2x P(x) + x [1-P(x)] + xP(2x) + 2x[1-P(2x)]]
= ½[3x + xP(x) – xP(2x)]
= 3x/2 + x/2[P(x) – P(2x)]

A general mathematical solution
Equation 2 shows that probabilistic trading as a function of
x can raise the expected value above that expected from
either trading or keeping regardless of the observed amount
(i.e., Equation 1). Returns can be only be improved if P(x) >
P(2x), that is, when the trading function is such that trading
is less likely the higher the observed amount is (i.e., the
more likely it is to be 2x rather than x). Abbott et al (2010)
show that a monotonically decreasing function will increase

Different predictions regarding human performance in the
two-envelope problem may arise if there was an accepted
mathematical analysis of it. Recently McDonnell and
Abbott (2009) and Abbott, et al (2010) propose a strategy
that can increase the expected outcome above that in
Equation 1. The key to their approach is to recognize that
once an envelope is opened the information of what it
contains breaks the symmetry that leads to Equation 1. Their

258

the expected outcome, and that this does not presuppose any
particular probability density function for x. Calculating the
optimal trading function requires knowing the probability
density function, but their analysis demonstrates that a
simple negative monotonic tendency to trade as a function
of observed amount can increase expected outcomes.

Log(odds) = 1.355 + -0.385*limit + -2.128*observed +
1.39*limit*observed
The parameter for limit was not significant, Wald χ2(1) =
0.525, p = .469, but that for observed was, Wald χ2(1) =
16.224, p < .001, and so was the interaction, Wald χ2(1) =
3.885, p = .049.
As predicted, these results showed that participants’
choices were affected by the observed contents of the
envelope, in that overall there was a strong effect of
observed amount. However there was also a significant
interaction in that trading was least likely if the highest and
observed amounts were such that the largest amount
possible was at the limit. This suggests that people’s
responses were affected by where they saw the possible
amounts as falling in the distribution of amounts.

Goals
Abbott et al’s (2010) model shows that the higher an
observed amount sits within the distribution of amounts, the
less likely trading should be. Thus adaptive behavior for
people faced with the two-envelope problem would be to be
less likely to trade the higher the observed is within the
distribution of possibilities. This prediction was tested in
two experiments. A third tested whether the distribution
itself was critical. Participants may be acting more rationally
than Butler and Nickerson (2008) suggested.

Table 1: Proportion of participants in each condition of
Experiment 1 choosing to trade (with sample sizes).
$10 in opened
$100 in opened
envelope
envelope
$200 limit
.80 (n=39)
.32 (n=38)
unlimited
.73 (n=40)
.56 (n=43)

Experiment 1
Where the observed contents of an envelope sit in a
distribution of possible amounts depends both on what the
amount is and what are the upper and lower limits of
possible amounts. So in Experiment 1 both the observed
amount ($10 or $100) and the limit ($200 or no limit) were
manipulated. It was predicted that trading rates would be
affected by the interaction of the observed and limit factors,
such that they would be least likely to trade when the
observed was $100 and the upper limit was $200.

Experiment 2
An alternative explanation for the interaction between
observed amount and limit in Experiment 1 could be that the
observed is perceived as worth less in the context of a limit
that it is close to. Butler and Nickerson (2008) alluded to
such a context effect. So in Experiment 2 participants were
directly asked to judge the prior probability of the amount in
the envelope. These probabilities should also be lower when
the observed amount is half the limit, but such a pattern
could not be due to perceptions of monetary value.
Other changes were also made to help generalize the
results of Experiment 1. Having a definite limit changes
some analyses of the two-envelope problem, so instead of
“no limit” a large limit ($10,000) was used. It is unlikely
this makes much difference to participants but it removes a
potential difference between the two limit conditions.
Another possibility is that using such a small amount ($10)
for the lower observed amount may have led to trading
because it was perceived as a trivial amount. So in
Experiment 2 the lower observed amount was set to $50.
The 2x2 design of Experiment 2 was the similar to that
for Experiment 1, with factors for limit ($200 or $10,000)
and observed ($50 or $100). Again I predicted an interaction
between trading and observed such the lowest rate should be
when the observed amount was close to the limit.

Method
Participants. A total of 160 senior psychology students at
the University of Sydney participated during a practical
class focused on reasoning.
Materials and Procedure. Participants read and responded
to the following scenario on paper (the italicized text in the
squared brackets replaced the underlined text in the relevant
condition):
Imagine that you given a choice between two envelopes
each containing a sum of money. You are told that neither
envelope could hold more than $200 [You are told that the
envelopes could contain any amount of money], but one
envelope contains exactly twice as much money as the other.
You randomly choose one of the envelopes and open it,
revealing that it contains $100 [$10]. You are told that you
can either keep the $100 [$10] or take whatever is in the
other envelope. What would you do?
Participants circled whether they would keep the $100 [$10]
or trade it for whatever was in the other envelope.

Results & Discussion

Method

Table 1 presents the proportion of participants choosing to
trade in each condition. A logistic regression analysis (using
the “Logistic Regression” procedure in SPSS) was
performed on choice (0=keep, 1=trade) entering the factors
of limit, observed amount, and their interaction. This
yielded the following equation for trading:

Participants. A total of 235 senior psychology students
participated during practical classes focused on reasoning.
Materials and Procedure. Unlike Experiment 1, the task
was presented on a computer. Participants read on-screen
instructions that were the same as in Experiment 1 (with
appropriate variations for the condition) except that now the

259

envelope they opened was referred to as “Envelope A” and
the unopened as “Envelope B”.
Participants were asked the following four questions ($50
replaces $100 in the appropriate condition):

8.420, p = .004. So the Experiment 1 interaction pattern was
replicated despite changing the lower observed amount, the
specification of the higher limit, and mode of presentation.
In response to Question 3 most participants (92.2%)
thought there was exactly a 50% chance that the other
envelope would contain more money. The overall mean
response was 49.49%, and there were no effects of
condition. Thus, despite choosing to keep or trade their
envelope, very few participants seemed to think the odds of
the other envelope containing more was other than 50%.
Even if participants act as though sensitive to a distribution,
this does not necessarily mean they are aware of it (e.g.,
Bargh & Ferguson, 2000).

QUESTION 1. First, to check if you understand the
instructions correctly, can you type what is the MAXIMUM
dollars that Envelope B could contain: $_______
QUESTION 2. What would you do? (click one)
Keep the $100 [$50] in Envelope A
Take whatever is in Envelope B
QUESTION 3. Approximately what do you think is the
percentage chance that Envelope A (the one you FIRST
opened) contains the LARGER amount of money?
________%

Table 3: Mean judgments (with standard deviations) of prior
probabilities (percentages) for each condition.
$50 in opened
$100 in opened
envelope
envelope
$200 limit
57.25 (sd=17.3)
46.70 (sd=14.1)
$10,000 limit
54.41 (sd=29.1)
58.22 (sd=25.5)

QUESTION 4. In this situation, before any envelopes had
been opened, what do you think would have been the
probability that the first envelope opened contained $100
[$50] or more? _______%

In response to Question 4 most participants thought that
there was about a 50% probability that their envelope could
have contained an equal or higher amount before it was
observed, but Table 3 shows that this varied with condition.
A 2x2 ANOVA found no main effects of limit, F(1,194) =
1.980, p = .161, no effect of amount observed, F(1,194) =
1.190, p = .277, but a significant interaction, F(1,194) =
5.409, p = .021. Thus consistent with the observed $100 and
limit $200 condition being the one least likely to lead
participants to favour trading envelopes, participants in this
condition were also least likely to think that their envelope
could have contained more a priori. Why Question 4 but not
3 showed a difference may be because it does not so starkly
ask participants to contradict their intuition that two coinflip like choices should mean 50% each.
By replicating the interaction found in Experiment 1,
Experiment 2 further supported the hypothesis that
participants are less likely to trade when the higher amount
would be at the end of the distribution. Adding support to
the claim that this was because of where they felt the
observed amount fell in the distribution the manipulations
had a similar effect on a direct measure of how likely they
thought that the observed amount could have been higher.

Results & Discussion
Question 1 was designed to check that participants had
correctly understood the problem. Most participants (84.3%)
gave the correct answer (either $100 or $200, depending on
condition), but rates of correctness were not affected by
condition. It was decided that participants who did not
answer this question correctly either misinterpreted the
instructions or were not paying attention. Either way their
responses could not be relied on, so only the 198
participants who answered correctly were analysed.
Table 2: Proportion of participants in each condition of
Experiment 2 choosing to trade. Samples sizes are in
parentheses.
$50 in opened
$100 in opened
envelope
envelope
$200 limit
.65 (n=51)
.30 (n=61)
$10,000 limit
.55 (n=38)
.60 (n=48)
Table 2 shows the proportion of participants in each
condition choosing to trade envelopes in response to
Question 2. (Sample sizes varied because participants were
randomly assigned to a condition by their individual
computer.) A logistic regression analysis was performed on
choice (0=keep, 1=trade) entering the factors limit, observed
amount, and their interaction. This yielded the following
equation for trading:

Experiment 3
Abbott et al’s (2010) solution suggests that people may be
less likely to trade when the observed amount is higher in
the distribution, but working out the optimal trading strategy
would depend on knowing the details of the distribution of
amounts. If people act consistent with this analysis, then
people’s tendency to trade should be affected by what they
believe about the distribution. So far the results suggest that
that people’s responses reflect a sensitivity to the
distribution of amounts, so explicitly stating a different
distribution could affect their choices.

Log(odds) = 0.534 + -0.483*limit + -1.374*observed +
1.728*limit*observed
The parameter for limit was not significant, Wald χ2(1) =
1.190, p = .275, but that for observed was, Wald χ2(1) =
11.190, p = .001, and so was the interaction, Wald χ2(1) =

260

In Experiment 3 participants were told that the envelope
amounts had either a flat or a bimodal distribution. It is
likely that many participants assumed an essentially flat
distribution in the previous experiments, in which case
explicitly stating that the distribution is flat should produce
similar results to Experiments 1 and 2. However explicitly
stating that there was a bimodal distribution could lead to a
different pattern of results. By increasing the chances of
high amounts in envelopes this distribution should increase
trading when the other envelope potentially contains an
amount at the top of the distribution. A 2x2 design was used
with factors for distribution (flat or bimodal) and observed
($50 or $100). The limit was always $200.

The observed amount in the opened envelope was either $50
or $100, but the maximum possible was always $200.

Results & Discussion
Most (83.5%) participants correctly identified the maximum
amount the unopened envelope could contain, but as in
Experiment 2 only these 86 were analysed. The proportion
in each condition choosing to trade is presented in Table 4.
Table 4: Proportion of participants in Experiment 3
choosing to trade. Maximum amount was always $200.
$50 in opened
$100 in opened
envelope
envelope
Bimodal distribution
.25 (n=20)
.42 (n=24)
Flat distribution
.58 (n=19)
.26 (n=23)

A. Diagram for Bimodal distribution

For the flat distribution the trading proportions were
similar to the same conditions in Experiment 2 in which no
distribution was specified, with more trading when the
observed amount was $50 than when $100, χ2 (1) = 4.37, p
= .037. In the bimodal condition, the direction of the effect
of revealed amount was the opposite, but this effect was not
significant, χ2(1) = 1.35, p = .246. A logistic regression
analysis was performed on choice entering the factors
distribution (0=bimodal, 1=flat), revealed amount, and their
interaction. This yielded the following equation for trading:
Log(odds)= -1.099+1.417*distribution + 0.762*observed +
-2.122*distribution*observed

B. Diagram for flat distribution

The parameter for distribution was significant, Wald χ2(1)
= 4.161, p = .041, but not that for observed, Wald χ2(1) =
1.326, p = .250. The interaction parameter was significant,
Wald χ2(1) = 5.120, p = .024.
These results indicated that people were sensitive to the
distributions of amounts when deciding whether to trade.
For the same amount with the same limit their propensity to
trade was influenced by what they were told about the
distribution of amounts. When the distribution was flat they
responded similarly to how they did in Experiment 2,
suggesting that participants had previously assumed a flat
distribution. However a bimodal distribution changed the
pattern of their responses implying that they took into
account the prior probabilities of different amounts.
It should be noted that the Figure 2 distributions are only
possible for either the higher or the lower amounts, not the
sum of their distributions. Given that participants do not
know if they observe the higher or the lower amount they
may have been confused as to what exactly was the
distribution represented by their diagram. However the main
point of the experiment was to test whether the distribution
plays a role in participants’ choices, and confusion about the
distribution should not affect their choices unless they see
the distribution as important.

Figure 2: Diagrams accompanying the instructions for the
bimodal (Panel A) and flat (Panel B) distributions.

Method
Participants. One hundred and three first-year psychology
students completed the experiment for partial course credit.
Materials and procedure. Materials and procedure were
identical to Experiment 2 except for the addition of the
distribution manipulation. In the flat condition participants
read that “the probability of any amount is equal to any
other” and saw the graph in Panel B of Figure 2. In the
bimodal condition they read “the probability of any amount
is not equal, in that amounts closer to the minimum or
maximum amounts are more likely” and saw the graph in
Panel A of Figure 2. These graphs were intentionally vague
in order to give a general shape to the distribution rather
than provide a precise way to calculate the probabilities.

261

are uncertain, for example, choices between different market
options. The demonstration here that the mathematical
analysis of such choices can lead to supportable behavioural
predictions suggests that these mathematical tools may have
value for analysing other types of decisions.

General Discussion
Abbott et al’s (2010) analysis suggests that a probabilistic
strategy for trading can lead to gains in the two-envelope
problem unobtainable by a pure strategy. In general, such a
probabilistic strategy can increase expected outcome over an
absolute strategy if the probability of trading is a
monotically decreasing function of the observed amount.
This suggests that people given the two envelope problem
may have a tendency to trade that is sensitive to the
distribution of amounts. The results of Experiments 1-3
support the claim that people do this when faced with the
two-envelope problem. Participants were consistently least
likely to trade when the higher alternative would be at the
top of the distribution, except in Experiment 3 when the
bimodal distribution increased the likelihood of such an
amount. Furthermore, in Experiment 2 it was found that
participants’ assessments of the prior probabilities of
amounts had the same pattern. Thus the results suggest that
people are consistent with what Abbott et al’s model
suggests optimizes responses to the two-envelope problem:
trading as a function of the observed amount and being
sensitive to the distributions. Experiment 3 is critical in
showing that not just the size of the observed amounts but
their perceived distribution affected choices. However this
conclusion is weakened by possible limitations of its
methodology, therefore more research is required.
These experiments did not systematically manipulate the
amount in the revealed envelope to see what shape there
might be to any monotonic function to trade. Inspection of
Butler and Nickerson’s (2008) data suggests that there is a
trend within the large effect of greater/lesser than $50
towards less trading as observed amounts increase. However
their sample size is not large enough to expect a post-hoc
analysis to show a significant effect. Overall, the results do
not dispute Butler and Nickerson’s finding that participants
often make fundamental errors in analysing the twoenvelope problem. The errors they revealed were in
understanding the logical implications of the details of
different versions, and in this way they are analogous to
Wason’s (1968) finding that people were poor at
understanding the logical implications of his selection task.
However Oaksford and Chater’s (1994) analysis showed
that people’s responses may make sense if seen in terms of
how information is distributed in the world. Thus my results
fit with a more general trend of finding that people are poor
at applying formal logic but can be sensitive to the
implications of probability distributions. Applying
probabilistic inference may be seen as the computational
goal of cognition.
McDonnell and Abbott (2009) saw the two-envelope
problem as interesting because it embodies a phenomenon
that comes up in many domains, that of probabilistic
switching between two states. Their analysis demonstrates
that an appropriate probabilistic function may improve
outcomes even when important characteristics of the
distributions are unknown. A number of decision making
tasks require a choice between functions whose properties

References
Abbott, D., Davis, B. R., & Parrondo, J. M. R. (2010). The
two-envelope problem revisited. Fluctuation and noise
letters, 9, 1-8.
Albers, C. J., Kooi, B. P., & Schaafsma, W. (2005). Trying
to solve the two-envelope problem. Synthese, 145, 89–
109.
Allison, A., & Abbott, D. (2001). Control systems with
stochastic feedback. Chaos, 11, 715–724.
Bargh, J. A., & Ferguson, M. J. (2000). Beyond
behaviorism on the automaticity of higher mental
processes. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 925-945
Butler, S. F., & Nickerson, R. S. (2008). 'Keep or trade? An
experimental study of the exchange paradox. Thinking &
Reasoning, 14, 365 – 394.
Cover, T. (1987). Pick the largest number. In T. Cover & B.
Gopinath (Eds.), Open Problems in Communication and
Computation (p. 152). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Harmer, G. P., & Abbott, D. (1999). Losing strategies can
win by Parrondo’s paradox. Nature, 402, 864.
Kraitchik, M. (1953). Mathematical Recreations (2nd
edition). New York: Dover.
Littlewood, J. E. (1953/1986). Littlewood’s Miscellany (B.
Bollobas, Ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Maslov, S., & Zhang, Y. (1998). Optimal investment
strategy for risky assets. International Journal of Theory
and Applications of Finance, 1, 377–387.
McDonnell, M. D., & Abbott, D. (2009). Randomized
switching in the two-envelope problem Proceedings of
the Royal Society A, 465, 3309-3322.
Nickerson, R. S., & Falk, R. (2006). The exchange paradox:
Probabilistic and cognitive analysis of a psychological
conundrum. Thinking and Reasoning, 12, 181–213.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of
the selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101, 608-631.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality:
The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational?: Studies in
individual differences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wason, P. C. (1968). Reasoning about a rule. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20, 273-281.
Zabell, S. L. (1988). Symmetry and its discontents. In B.
Skyrms & W. L. Harper (Eds.), Causation, chance, and
credence (Vol. I, pp. 155 – 190). Dordrecht, the
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

262

