UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Programming of saccades to double-step targets in scene viewing: A test of assumptions
present in the CRISP model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5b95s04c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Walshe, R. Calen
Nuthmann, Antie

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Programming of saccades to double-step targets in scene viewing: A test of
assumptions present in the CRISP model
R. Calen Walshe (r.c.walshe@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Antje Nuthmann (antje.nuthmann@ed.ac.uk)
University of Edinburgh, Psychology Department,
7 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ
Abstract
Several computational models explaining fixation durations
in scene viewing (Nuthmann, Smith, Engbert, & Henderson,
2010) and in reading (Engbert, Nuthmann, Richter, & Kliegl,
2005; Reichle, Pollatsek, Fisher, & Rayner, 1998) assume that
saccade programming is completed in two stages: an initial,
labile stage that is subject to cancellation and an subsequent,
non-labile stage in which the program can no longer be cancelled. This distinction is motivated by findings from doublestep experiments that used much simpler situations than scene
viewing or reading. Here, we adopt a classic double-step
paradigm to a scene-viewing context. In a Static condition targets are presented to the left or right of a central fixation cross
along a horizontal axis while in a Scene condition targets are
presented in a gaze contingent manner along a trajectory defined by the location of recent fixations. We found evidence in
support of the claims that saccade cancellation occurs within
a naturalistic scene-viewing context and that saccade cancellation can account for increases in observed fixation duration distributions. The duration of the non-labile stage was estimated
to be longer in the Scene condition compared to the Static condition.
Keywords: Double-step; Scene viewing; Saccade programming; Mixed-effects modelling

Introduction
There is a long history of utilizing the double-step paradigm
to explore the lower level details of the programming and execution of eye-movements (Westheimer, 1954). Classic variations of the double-step paradigm involve presenting participants with two targets along a horizontal axis with a varying inter-stimulus interval separating the two targets. For instance, in one classic study of saccade programming that utilized double-step stimuli, Becker and Jürgens (1979) had a
condition in which a first target was presented at 15◦ to the
left or right of fixation with a second target presented at 30◦
in the same direction at delays of 50, 100, 150 and 200 ms.
The participants task was to fixate the target as quickly as
possible, which meant that in order to fixate the more distal
target, a saccade program initiated to the first target was put
in competition with a program to the second target.
By studying the characteristics of the response pattern, the
paradigm affords numerous avenues to investigate the processes underlying the programming of saccades. One method
of formalizing double-step data has been to produce what
is called an amplitude transition function (ATF) (Becker &
Jürgens, 1979). The ATF provides a measure of the saccade
amplitude resulting from the stimuli as a function of the delay
(D) which measures the time elapsed between the onset of the
second target step and the first measured response saccade.
Therefore, in this analysis only those trials in which both targets appeared prior to the first response saccade are analysed.

D can therefore be thought of as the amount of time available
to the saccadic system to reprogram an eye-movement to the
second target. Frequently replicated results demonstrate that
when reprocessing time in low (short values of D) saccades
are typically directed towards the first target step, and when
reprocessing time is high (high values of D) then saccades
compensate for the updated target position and move to the
second target step (Ludwig, Mildinhall, & Gilchrist, 2007).
From inspection of the ATF it is also apparent that there is
a point at which the appearance of the second target step can
no longer have an influence on saccade programming. This
region of the distribution represents a “point of no return”
in the saccade processing to the first target and as such the
program to the first target is executed despite the availability
of countermanding information from the second target. The
point in processing at which a saccade program can no longer
be modified by a second target is also referred to as saccadic
dead time (SDT) and has been estimated at approximately 80
ms prior to the execution of a saccade (Ludwig et al., 2007).
The double-step paradigm has been a fruitful one in elucidating the basic properties of the occulomotor system. The
principles derived from such investigations have formed the
basis of several models of eye-movement control in a variety of fields. These investigations have proven particularly
useful in models that attempt to explain the mechanisms that
control how long aspects of the visual environment are fixated. For instance, Nuthmann et al. (2010)’s CRISP model
which explains fixation durations in scene viewing, utilized a
two stage saccade programming mechanism. In the first labile stage of programming a saccade could be cancelled and
reprogrammed, while a program that had moved into the nonlabile stage could no longer be cancelled. In the CRISP model
architecture saccade cancellation acts as a causal mechanism
that accounts for systematic delay in fixation durations. The
theoretical dichotomy between a labile and nonlabile stage of
programming was first introduced in Reichle et al. (1998)’s EZ Reader model of eye-movement control in reading. While
these models borrow the distinction from classic double-step
results, it has never been formally tested within the domains
to which the models apply. In the current study, a classic
approach to studying double-step stimuli is adapted to a naturalistic scene viewing context.
In summary, the scene-based double step experiment has
several concrete aims. Firstly, the assumption that is inherent in several influential models both in scene viewing and
in reading is that delays in the latency of fixations can be

1569

partially accounted for by the time required to cancel and
reinitiate a saccade program to a novel stimulus. These models often cite basic research into saccadic programming although little work has been done to verify these findings for
the more naturalistic case. Therefore, our study investigates
saccade programming within scene viewing by adapting a
classic double-step paradigm to the scene viewing context.
Secondly, by including a classic version of the double-step
paradigm as an experimental condition we are able to directly
compare performance across tasks.

in which only a single target was presented to the first target
location. These single steps also provide a baseline for saccade response parameters that can be compared to those on
the double-step trials. The first target was always presented
at exactly 7◦ on the horizontal axis and the second target was
always presented at 14◦ along the same axis.

Method
Participants were all University of Edinburgh undergraduate students that were paid £7 in compensation for their
time. Each participant was presented with 100 trials in each
condition (Static vs Scene). In the scene condition 100
unique colour photographs were presented at a resolution of
800x600. Stimuli were presented on a 21-inch CRT monitor
and participants were seated at a distance of 67cm from the
monitor. Eye-movements were recorded with an SR Research
Eyelink 1000 desktop system operating at 1000Hz. Out of the
16 subjects tested, 4 were rejected for poor data quality. Of
the remaining 12 participants the mean age was 23 and 10
participants were female and 2 were male.

Figure 1. Target steps in the Static condition move in the horizontal
plane either to the left or right of fixation cross. The first target step
moves to an eccentricity of 7◦ and the second target step moves in
the same direction to an eccentricity of 14◦ . The second step follows
the first at a delay of either 50, 100, 150 or 200 ms. In no-step trials,
the first target step to 7◦ is not followed by a movement to the second
target step at 14◦ .

Experiment Overview
Double-step experiments typically involve having a participant fixate to a location while a stimulus is displayed at a
distal location. At varying delays, this target is then shifted
to a new location. The participant is instructed to make a
fixation to the final location of this double-stepped stimuli.
At short delays, the participant is frequently able to interrupt
whatever processing may have been made to the first target,
and instead program a saccade to the second target location.
Important aspects of the saccade motor system can be derived
by looking at the time course of the response. In order to investigate double-step performance in a more naturalistic environment we adapted a single experimental condition from
a classic double-step experiment (Becker & Jürgens, 1979)
to a context in which participants received the double-step
stimulus while they were actively viewing a natural scene.
Furthermore, a replication of the Static double-step condition
was included as a baseline measure.

Static Condition
Participants fixated a cross located in the centre of the screen.
The first target step was presented after a variable delay of
between 2000-3000 ms. The first target step was presented
to either the left, or to the right of the fixation cross. The
target step delay (TSD), the duration elapsed between presentation of the first and second targets, was either 50, 100,
150, or 200 ms. The presentation side and delay durations
were counterbalanced. Furthermore, in order to ensure that
participants did not simply postpone their responses and wait
until the presentation of the second target step had appeared
before making a response, 20% of trials were single step trials

The instructions to the participant were that they were to
“chase the pink box” with their eyes. Their task was to fixate
the box as quickly as possible.
After 1000 ms the trial was terminated and a new trial was
initiated once the fixation detection procedure had assured
that the participants’ gaze was directed towards the central
fixation cross.

Scene Condition
The instructions to the participant in the scene condition were
that they would be required to memorise a scene for a later recall test. However, this recall test was never applied. Furthermore, participants were instructed that they would see pink
boxes appear while memorising the image, and that when
they see these pink boxes that they should “chase the pink
box” with their eyes. The memorisation task was included
in order to observe performance in a more naturalistic and
cognitively demanding context. All temporal characteristics
of the double-stepped stimuli were identical to those of the
Static condition. In the scene condition 20% of trials only
had a single step at an eccentricity of 7◦ in order to avoid participants making anticipatory saccades to the second target
location at 14◦ . The first target step was presented once 15
saccades had been made and the scene had been viewed for
at least 4 seconds. The first target step was always presented
while a fixation was in progress, and this fixation could be
at any possible location on the screen. A further difference
from the Static double-step condition is that steps were not
simply placed on the central horizontal plane as was done in
the Static condition. In order to maximize the similarity be-

1570

tween the Static and Scene conditions, while also adapting
the study to a naturalistic context, the double-step manipulation trajectory was determined by the line intersecting the
current fixation and the last recorded fixation. The first target
was presented at 7◦ along this line in the same direction as the
eye-movement plotted from the nth and n-1th saccade. The
second target was presented at 14◦ on the same line. As was
done in the Static condition the second target was presented
in the same direction as the first (See Figure 2 for details). In
circumstances such that projecting the targets along the line
of presentation would result in a target being presented off
the dimensions of the screen, the presentation procedure was
delayed until a fixation occurred such that the presentation of
the targets would not occur off screen.
The decision to place the targets along any trajectory intersected by the most recent two fixations was done for two
reasons. Firstly, we wanted to control for the effect that angular changes of successive saccades has on resulting fixation
durations (Tatler & Vincent, 2008). Furthermore, it is known
that saccades in scene viewing are primarily executed along a
horizontal axis (Nuthmann & Henderson, 2010). Due to such
a bias it was expected that manipulations would primarily be
placed along the horizontal axis and this was confirmed with
a post-hoc analysis.

Figure 2. In the scene condition targets are presented at 7◦ and 14◦ .
Unlike the Static condition targets can be placed on any axis within
the image. The angle at which the boxes are presented is determined
by the location of the current and previous fixations and was presented in the direction of the eye-movement. The delay between
target presentations is either 50, 100, 150 or 200 ms. As in the Static
condition 20% of trials consisted of only a single step to 7◦ .

Gaze contingent fixation detection
In order to present targets to participants within the scene condition it was necessary to accurately detect the presence of a
fixation with as much temporal precision as possible. The native Eyelink gaze contingent algorithms were used in order to
detect the onset of fixation. Once the conditions for presenting the first target had been met, and the Eyelink detected a
fixation, the first target was presented to the participant. Delays in the online detection of fixations resulted in the targets
being presented after the onset of fixation at a delay (ms) of

µ = 45.2; σ = 19.0.

Results
Amplitude transition function in the Scene condition
The aim of the first analysis is to provide evidence in support of the hypothesis that saccade cancellation does indeed
occur within a more natural scene viewing context than is typically studied with double-step stimuli. In order to construct
an ATF, only trials in which both the first and second target
steps occurred during a single critical fixation were analysed.
Trials were also rejected when the response saccade was not
made in a direction consistent with the target steps. Therefore, in the Scene condition 33 trials were removed due to
movement of the eyes prior to presentation of the second target, and 6 were removed due to detection of a misdirected
saccade. In the Static condition 22 and 2 trials were removed,
respectively.
The amplitude transition function for the scene condition
was constructed by fitting a four parameter logistic function
with a form:
b−a
(1)
y = a+
1 + ec(d−x)
where a represents a lower bound for the sigmoid, b represents an upper bound, c scales the response to x (Delay) about
the midpoint and d is the inflection point of the sigmoid.
Model fitting The data were fit with a nonlinear mixed effects model (NLME) (Pinheiro & Bates, 2000). Firstly, we
added fixed effects which allow us to directly estimate the
effect of experimental condition (Static vs Scene) on the parameters of the nonlinear response function described in (1).
Secondly, random effects were included in the model in order
to reduce the effect of unreliable differences between participants due to unbalanced observations and individual variability in task performance.
In the analysis of the Scene condition we fit a model which
included the effect of only a single condition on the parameters a, b, c and d. Random effects of participant on the parameters a, b, c and d were also included in the model. For
the comparison between the Static vs Scene conditions the
model was extended to include a fixed effect of condition on
the four model parameters. The R statistical programming
language (R Development Core Team, 2008) and the nlme
package (Pinheiro, Bates, DebRoy, Sarkar, & R Core Team,
2013) were used to conduct the analysis.
Effect of Scene on model parameters The parameters of
the best fitting model are reported in Table 1. From the scatter the typical ATF evoked by double-step stimuli is observed
with a characteristic sigmoidal shape. The horizontal dotted
lines indicate the location of target 1 at 7◦ and target 2 at 14◦ .
Furthermore, the scatter confirms that within the Scene condition lower values of D are typically associated with saccades
directed towards the location of the first target step whereas
at larger values of D reprogramming occurs and saccades are
directed towards the second target location.

1571

Table 1. Mixed effects model parameters

Effect

M

SE

t

p

a
b
c
d

6.47
12.35
0.12
113.18

.160
.351
.027
5.46

40.48
35.23
4.33
20.72

(< 0.01)
(< 0.01)
(< 0.01)
(< 0.01)

elapsed time (ms) from the appearance of the 7◦ target and
the first observed response saccade. For trials of all other delays, latencies were analysed for saccades in which the first
response saccade occurred after the second target step had
appeared and in addition that the first response saccade compensated for the second target step. Compensation was defined such that the saccadic endpoint was within a distance
2◦ of visual angle from the second target location. Latency
was calculated as the elapsed duration between the onset of
the first target step and the onset of first response saccade.
A cumulative distribution function (CDF) was fit to compare latencies between delays of different lengths. Latencies
from 200 ms TSD trials were excluded as too few compensated saccades were observed. Latencies for compensated
saccades are clearly longer than those of saccades elicited by
no-step stimuli indicating that in order to incorporate the second target step into the response, increased latencies are required. Furthermore, we observe that as the TSD increases a
corresponding increase in latency is also observed.

Summary of the estimated values of the fixedeffects parameters along with their means (M), standard errors (SE), t and p values, units of the parameters are reported in milliseconds. The parameters a
and b are respectively the lower and upper asymptote of the sigmoid while c scales the response about
the midpoint and d is the inflection point of the sigmoid.

Scene

8

6

0.8

no step
50
100
150

0.6

10

0.4

Proportion latency <= x

1.0

12

50

0.2

Saccade amplitude (Degrees)

14

150

200

300

0.0

no step
100

100

400

D (ms)

0

100

200

300

400

500

Latency

Figure 3. Amplitude transition function constructed from responses
in the Scene double-step condition. D represents the amount of time
elapsed between the onset of the second target stimulus and detection of the first response saccade. Horizontal lines represent the locations of target steps 1 and 2.

The results of the model fits estimated that the lower and
upper bounds of the saccadic endpoints were 6.47◦ (SE =
.160, t = 40.48) and 12.35◦ (SE= 0.35, t = 35.23) respectively.
While there was undershoot for saccades targeting both the
initial and final target steps, the undershoot to the final step
was larger (0.53◦ vs 1.65◦ ).

Cumulative distribution function of saccade
latencies
Saccade programming latencies were compared on trials in
which there was no target step (no-step) with trials in which
there was a target step (50, 100, 150, 200 ms). This analysis
aims to investigate whether trials in which a saccade was reprogrammed from the first target to the second target require
longer latencies when compared to no-step trials in which no
such reprogramming occurs.
In no-step trials saccade latency was calculated as the

Figure 4. Cumulative distribution function of latencies at target step
delays of 50, 100, 150 ms compared to the no-step latencies. The
no-step latencies are constructed from latencies on trials in which
there was only a step to the first target response.

Comparison of Static vs Scene conditions
While the primary aim was to provide evidence that results
from static double-step conditions generalize to a more dynamic scene based context, our dataset also offers an opportunity to directly compare performance differences between
the Static and Scene conditions. A description of the model
used to fit the Static vs Scene data can be found in the Model
fitting section of the Scene only analysis.
Comparing the scatter in the Static vs Scene condition (Fig.
5) it is apparent that there is considerably more variability
in the data that comprise the ATF in the Scene as compared
to Static condition. Due to the more dynamic nature of the
Scene task this is to be expected. For instance, in the Static
condition participants stay fixated on a central cross while
they wait for the target stimuli to appear. It is therefore
likely that any anticipatory processes preparing future eyemovements are suppressed. In contrast, during the Scene con-

1572

Table 2. Mixed effects model parameters

Effect

M

SE

t

p

a (Intercept)
a (Scene)
b (Intercept)
b (Scene)
c (Intercept)
c (Scene)
d (Intercept)
d (Scene)

6.63
-0.17
13.0
-0.74
0.14
-0.05
76.14
33.86

0.14
0.16
0.11
0.20
0.02
0.02
2.30
2.51

48.62
-1.1
119.9
-3.82
7.57
-2.18
32.91
13.44

(< 0.01)
(= 0.27)
(< 0.01)
(< 0.01)
(< 0.01)
(= 0.03)
(< 0.01)
(< 0.01)

amplitude of responses targeting the final location (t = −3.82,
p < 0.01), indicating greater undershoot in the Scene condition.
A final observation can be made regarding the markedly
slower compensation response in the Scene condition. The
ATF in the Scene condition appears to be shifted to the right,
and this reflects that increasing values of D are required to
make a response of corresponding amplitude to that of the
Static condition. Furthermore, we observe a significant effect of condition on d (inflection point) (t = 13.44, p < 0.01)
supporting the observation that responses of comparable amplitude require longer values of D in the Scene condition as
compared to the Static condition.
Ludwig et al. (2007) have referred to saccadic dead time
(SDT) as the last moment at which a new stimulus can modify a saccade program currently under preparation. They describe that the SDT may be extracted from the ATF by estimating the point at which the compensation function begins
to incorporate the location of the second target step. The SDT
was extracted from our ATF by deriving the point on the curve
which represents a cumulative increase of 5% from the lower
asymptote. We estimated this point in the Static condition as
55 ms and in the Scene condition as 77 ms.

Summary of the estimated values of the fixed-effects parameters along with their means (M), standard errors (SE)
and t and p values, units of the parameters are reported in
milliseconds. The parameters a and b are respectively the
lower and upper asymptote of the sigmoid while c scales
the response about the midpoint and d is the inflection
point. The intercept indicates the estimated parameter in
the Static condition, while (Scene) indicates the influence
of condition Scene.

dition participants are actively engaged in search, the display
and measurement of their double-step response is likely to incorporate processes involved in preparing an eye-movement
prior to the presentation of the double-step stimuli.
100

Static

200

300

Discussion

400

Scene

Saccade amplitude (Degrees)

14

12

10

8

6

100

200

300

400

D (ms)

Figure 5. Comparison of the amplitude transition functions in Static
vs Scene conditions. D represents the amount of time elapsed between the onset of the second target stimulus and detection of the
first response saccade. Horizontal lines represent the locations of
target steps 1 and 2.

Effect of experimental condition (Scene vs Static) on
model parameters Model parameters are summarized in
Table 2. The lower and upper bounds of the fitted functions
measure the saccadic endpoints of responses to either the first
(lower bound) or second (upper bound) targets. No effect
of condition was observed on the lower bound (t = −1.1,
p = 0.27) however, there was an effect of condition on the

The research question that this paper addresses is whether established results utilizing double-step stimuli to explore saccade programming can be extended to scene viewing. It has
been argued that the ATF constructed from double-step responses provides evidence for a distinction between a labile
and nonlabile stage of saccadic programming. A target stimulus is only able to modify the current goals of a saccade while
it is in the labile stage of programming and can no longer have
an influence once the program becomes nonlabile. The sigmoidal shape of the ATF (Fig. 3) reveals that when the target
stimulus is presented shortly before the saccade (low values
of D) that processing had reached the nonlabile threshold and
therefore had no influence on the resulting saccade. When the
second target is presented in earlier stages of saccade preparation (higher values of D) we see saccades that compensate
for the second target location due to programming still being
within the labile stage. These results have been previously
established in double-step studies utilizing static conditions
(Becker & Jürgens, 1979; Ludwig et al., 2007), and our study
provides evidence for an analogous process occurring within
a condition more akin to naturalistic scene viewing.
Cancellation has also been suggested as a causal mechanism for the systematic increase in observed fixation durations. For instance, in the CRISP model, saccade cancellation accounts for the increase in fixation durations that is observed directly following a delay of stimulus onset (see Figure 7, Nuthmann et al., 2010 for details). The CDF (Fig.
4) illustrates that latencies are increased in trials in which a
reprogramming of a saccade is likely to have occurred. However, caution must be taken when assigning a causal interpre-

1573

tation to the role of saccade cancellation in observed latency
increases. The TSD trials analysed are specifically those for
which a saccade was not executed prior to the appearance
of the second saccade target. Therefore, we expect to see
a complementary increase in latency alongside increases in
TSD. One possibility is that increased latencies are observed
specifically because compensated saccades are those in which
the programming to the first target progressed slowly enough
to wait out and incorporate the appearance of the second target. While this analysis does provide confirmatory evidence
that saccade cancellation is consistent with increased fixation
durations, it does not necessarily shed light on the causal connection between cancellation and increased latencies.
The comparison between the Static and Scene condition
also indicate the presence of several notable differences.
Ludwig et al. (2007) analyse a concept termed saccadic dead
time (SDT) which corresponds closely to the concept of a
nonlabile stage of programming. The SDT corresponds to
the last point in time at which a saccadic eye-movement may
be modified. We estimated SDT as 55 ms in the Static condition and 77 ms in the Scene condition. Differences in the
SDT across experimental conditions have been observed in
prior work (Ludwig et al., 2007). An important implication
of this result with regard to models of gaze control in naturalistic scene viewing is that it provides an empirical bound
for the duration of the nonlabile stage. In CRISP for instance,
a mean duration of 40 ms was assigned to the duration of
the nonlabile stage. This value was determined from classic
double-step results conducted under static conditions. This
value is also roughly consistent with the duration of the nonlabile stage estimated in our own Static condition (55 ms) but
represents an underestimate when compared to the nonlabile
duration in the Scene condition. As CRISP is a model of fixation durations in scene viewing it is likely that the estimated
mean duration of the nonlabile stage in our Scene condition
represents an improvement over the corresponding Static estimate.
It should be noted that the comparison reported here may
still reflect important differences not solely attributable to the
influence of scene processing. For instance, the Scene but
not Static condition double-step targets were presented on any
axis. Future work may consider including a task in which
performance in our Scene condition is compared directly to a
similar task but one in which the scene is replaced by a noise
filtered image.
Further comment is warranted on the applicability of the
data reported here to models such as CRISP that claim a
causal interpretation for saccade cancellation in observed fixation duration delays. In CRISP, when a saccade program
is within the labile stage of programming a cancellation signal may interrupt the current program. The time required to
reinitiate a new saccade program results in a delay to the current fixation duration. In an alternative formulation aimed at
explaining saccade latencies within a Static double-step context, Camalier et al. (2007) suggest that cancellation occurs

due to a race between a process initiated to execute a saccade
(GO) and process initiated to cancel that saccade (STOP).
While there is some similarity in the assumptions between
these two models the race model does not insist on a nonlabile/labile dichotomy. Rather, the race model accounts for
double-step performance with reference to the timing of the
GO and STOP accumulation processes. In order to further
explore the role of saccade cancellation it may be of interest
to directly compare the predictions of the saccade programming mechanisms in the CRISP model with those of the race
model described in Camalier et al. (2007).

References
Becker, W., & Jürgens, R. (1979). An analysis of the saccadic
system by means of double step stimuli. Vision Research,
19(9), 967-983.
Camalier, C., Gotler, A., Murthy, A., Thompson, K., Logan,
G., Palmeri, T., et al. (2007). Dynamics of saccade target
selection: Race model analysis of double step and search
step saccade production in human and macaque. Vision
Research, 47(16), 2187-2211.
Engbert, R., Nuthmann, A., Richter, E., & Kliegl, R. (2005).
SWIFT: A dynamical model of saccade generation during
reading. Psychological Review, 112(4), 777-813.
Ludwig, C. J. H., Mildinhall, J. W., & Gilchrist, I. D. (2007).
A population coding account for systematic variation in
saccadic dead time. Journal of Neurophysiology, 97(1),
795-805.
Nuthmann, A., & Henderson, J. M. (2010). Object-based
attentional selection in scene viewing. Journal of Vision,
10(8), 1-19.
Nuthmann, A., Smith, T., Engbert, R., & Henderson, J.
(2010). CRISP: A computational model of fixation durations in scene viewing. Psychological Review, 117(2),
382-405.
Pinheiro, J., & Bates, D. (2000). Mixed-effects models in S
and S-PLUS. New York: Springer.
Pinheiro, J., Bates, D., DebRoy, S., Sarkar, D., & R Core
Team. (2013). nlme: Linear and nonlinear mixed effects
models [Computer software manual]. (R package version
3.1-108)
R Development Core Team. (2008). R: A language
and environment for statistical computing [Computer
software manual]. Vienna, Austria. Available from
http://www.R-project.org (ISBN 3-900051-07-0)
Reichle, E., Pollatsek, A., Fisher, D., & Rayner, K. (1998).
Toward a model of eye movement control in reading. Psychological Review, 105(1), 125-157.
Tatler, B. W., & Vincent, B. T. (2008). Systematic tendencies
in scene viewing. Journal of Eye Movement Research, 2(2),
1–18.
Westheimer, G. (1954). Eye movement responses to a horizontally moving visual stimulus. Archives of Ophthalmology, 52(6), 932-941.

1574

