UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Progress in Joint Action Research

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84t980q4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Brennan, Susan E.
Richardson, Daniel
Richardson, Michael J.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Progress in Joint Action Research
Participants
Susan E. Brennan (susan.brennan@stoneybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA

Daniel Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)
Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London
26 Bedford Way, London, UK, WC1H 0AP

Michael J. Richardson (michael.richardson@uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action, and Perception, University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA

Andreas Roepstorff (andreas@pet.au.dk)
Interacting Minds Centre, Aarhus University
8000 Aarhus C, Denmark

Natalie Sebanz (sebanzn@ceu.hu)
Cognitive Science Department, Central European University
Leo Frankel utca 30, 1021 Budapest

Organiser
Günther Knoblich (knoblichg@ceu.hu)
Cognitive Science Department, Central European University
Leo Frankel utca 30, 1021 Budapest

Keywords: Joint action; dialogue; perception and action;
coordination; cooperation; shared intentions.

which linguistic forms are coded. But a transcript is only an
artifact of the processes that generated it. What are the
effects of joint action on language processing, moment-bymoment, in dialogue? I will discuss several studies that
illustrate how both global and local information have the
potential to affect processing, and at what grains they do so.
Global information may involve some degree of mentalizing
about a partner and the partner’s needs or intentions; this
information is available at the start of the interaction
(whether in detailed or quite rudimentary form) and may or
may not be updated as the dialog unfolds. Local information
includes verbal and nonverbal cues that emerge during the
course of the interaction and that can be construed as
evidence about the state of the task or the partner; such cues
may be provided intentionally or instrumentally (as a byproduct of doing the task). Such cues can shape language
processing in dialogue, whether implicitly (outside of
awareness) or explicitly.

A Current Trend in Cognitive Science
Joint action is an increasingly popular topic in Cognitive
Science. This popularity reflects a recent theoretical trend of
postulating, in one way or another, that human perception,
action, and cognition are geared to enable successful
coordination and communication with others. The speakers
in the symposium will provide an overview of current
progress in joint action research. Their contributions will
address a wide range of phenomena ranging from tight
temporal coordination to shared planning and discourse
processes. Together, the contributions will illustrate that
social constraints affect cognitive processing in a deeper
sense than the more traditional notion of specific modules
for social perception and social reasoning would suggest.

Joint Action Shapes Processing in Dialogue
Susan E. Brennan

The Reciprocity of Attention and Joint Action
Daniel Richardson

Language processing is typically studied as comprehension
or production, in solitary contexts. Studies of language use,
on the other hand, often have pairs of people performing
tasks together that require them to communicate, in which
they fill the roles of speaker and addressee in rapid
alternation or even simultaneously. Data from such studies
have tended to take the form of transcribed dialogues from

Attention is shaped by joint action, and joint action is
shaped by attention. When two participants have a
discussion over an intercom, their gaze coordination is
modulated by what they each believe the other can see and
what they believe the other knows. But conversation is not
required for coordination. We found that individuals looked

55

at photographs differently if they simply believed that
another person sat elsewhere was looking at the same
images. Joint activity does not always produces joint
looking, however. Incorporating results from other labs, we
can see that joint action can cause attention to converge or
diverge depending on subtle aspects of the task, the rewards
and the relationships between co-actors. So far, I have used
visual attention as marker of perceptual and cognitive
processing. But gaze, perhaps uniquely, has another
function. The eyes take in information, but also interact with
the social world. I will conclude with new experiments
showing that gaze patterns are changed by looker’s belief
that they are being looked at. Gaze is not just a window onto
the cognitive processes of joint action, but a tool used in its
construction.

predictive framework, the unfolding of more basic forms of
coupling may support bootstraping into higher order
coordination as shared perceptions, joint action and division
of labor.

Planning joint actions
Natalie Sebanz
It has commonly been thought that to perform joint actions,
individuals need to plan their actions around others’.
However, recent evidence suggests that individuals not only
plan actions around each other, but instead plan each others’
actions. I will review studies showing that co-actors 1) form
representations of and keep track of each other’s tasks, 2)
engage in motor simulation to predict the timing of each
others’ actions, and 3) form action plans that specify
relations between their actions, thus enabling group-level
action planning. These findings not only tell us about the
cognitive mechanisms of joint action, but also challenge us
to rethink the role of shared intentions in joint action.

Joint Action Coordination
Michael Richardson
A fundamental feature of social behavior is face-to-face or
co-present physical interaction. The success of such jointaction, whether measured in terms of social connection, goal
achievement, or the ability of individuals to understand and
predict the meaningful intentions and behaviors of others, is
not only dependent on numerous neural-cognitive processes,
but also on the physical and informational processes of
perceptual-motor coordination. Understanding and modeling
the dynamics of these coordination processes, including
how they emerge and are maintained over time, as well as
how differing stable states of coordination are activated,
dissolved, and transformed is therefore imperative. Here I
review research aimed at uncovering the dynamics of the
perceptual-motor coordination that can emerge across a
range of joint-action tasks and describe a dynamical
modeling strategy for capturing such coordination. I further
argue that as the enactment of a shared intention or task
goal, the behavioral dynamics of perceptual-motor
coordination not only lawfully express the physical,
informational, and neural-cognitive relations that underlie
successful joint-action, but also operate to control the
behavioral intentions and action strategies adopted by social
situated co-acting individuals.

Acknowledgments
This symposium was supported by the ESF Eurocores
program EuroUnderstanding (Roepstorff/Knoblich) and an
ESF European Young Investigator award (Sebanz).

Coordination as Predictive and as Productive:
Bootstraping from Low-Level Automaticity to
Top-Top Interaction
Andreas Roepstorff
An emerging body of research demonstrates how people, in
direct interaction, become coupled along a number of
dimensions: e.g., physiology, behavior, and semantics.
However, once these methods are applied to more complex,
goal-oriented settings, it seems that the patterns of
coordination are not only synchrony and mimicry, but also
more complex forms of complementarity such as in division
of labor. This raises the issue of whether the same
mechanisms may explain the simple and the more complex
forms of coordination? I will explore the hypothesis that in a

56

