UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reducing The Impact of Math Anxiety on Mental Arithmetic: The Importance of Distributed
Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gm694qt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Valle-Tourangeau, Frederic
Sirota, Miroslav
Villejoubert, Gaelle

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reducing the Impact of Math Anxiety on Mental Arithmetic:
The Importance of Distributed Cognition
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau (f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE

Miroslav Sirota (miroslav.sirota@kcl.ac.uk)
Medical Decision Making and Informatics Research Group, King`s College London
London, UNITED KINGDOM SE1 3QD

Gaëlle Villejoubert (g.villejoubert @kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
Abstract
that interfere with the manipulation of numbers and the
solving of mathematical problems in a wide variety of
ordinary life and academic situations” (p. 551). From a
processing efficiency perspective (Eysenck & Calvo,
1992), math anxiety impairs performance by using up
working memory resources to maintain and retrieve
negative performance-related thoughts and memories
(Ashcraft & Krause, 2007). As a result, math anxious
people deploy limited cognitive resources when working
on a math problem, leading to poorer performance,
reinforcing a cycle of anxiety and avoidance that
perpetuates poor numeracy.

Mathematics anxiety negatively affects performance in
simple arithmetic tasks. The experiment reported here
explored the role of interactivity in defusing the impact
of math anxiety on mental arithmetic. Participants were
invited to complete additions presented on paper without
using their hands or any artefact; in a second,
interactive, condition, the same problems were presented
in the form of a set of manipulable tokens. Math anxiety
was significantly correlated with mental arithmetic
performance only in the static condition. The results of a
mediation analysis indicated that the effect of math
anxiety on mental arithmetic was mediated by working
memory capacity in the static condition; in the
interactive condition, math anxiety and working memory
did not significantly correlate with performance.
Interactivity encouraged the coupling of internal and
external resources to create a cognitive system that
augmented and transformed working memory capacity,
diffusing the resource drain caused by math anxiety.

Mental Arithmetic

Keywords: Mental arithmetic, interactivity, math
anxiety, individual differences, distributed cognition

Introduction
A person’s proficiency in mathematics and an
appreciation that effort is a key determinant of math
performance will likely have important consequences for
his or her educational and occupational opportunities. In
addition, a mathematically competent workforce is
identified as a strategic driver of economic growth
(National Mathematics Advisory Panel, 2008). There are
indications in the US and in the UK (National Numeracy
Facts and Figures, 2012) that numeracy levels are in
decline.
An important factor that impedes math performance
and reduces exposure to math—with the inevitably
negative impact on the acquisition of math knowledge
and skills—is math anxiety. Richardson and Suinn (1972)
define math anxiety as “feelings of tension and anxiety

3615

In the absence of pen and paper, mental arithmetic is a
quintessential working memory task. Admittedly, for
simple problems where the solution draws on long-term
memory knowledge of well-rehearsed answers (e.g., 3 +
3), working memory plays a more limited role (DeStefano
& LeFevre, 2004). However, for more complex problems,
such as multiple number additions, working memory
resources must be deployed to arrive at a correct answer
(Ashcraft, 1995). These resources involve storage of
interim totals and place markers as well as executive
function skills that direct attention (e.g., which number to
add next) or the retrieval of strategies to support more
efficient and reliable performance.
The exact nature of the resources recruited depends on
the context of reasoning, defined by the features of the
external environment in which the problem is presented.
For one, the manner of presentation (visual, auditory)
would recruit different subsystems of working memory.
In addition, if the numbers are visually presented,
working memory would be taxed differently depending
on whether the presentation is sequential or simultaneous.
Even with a simultaneous presentation, the numbers’
arrangement in space—columnar, linear, or random—

would also determine the extent of working memory load.
More important is the opportunity to manipulate the
problem presentation to facilitate thinking: Enabling
participants to re-order and group numbers would likely
help them remember the numbers already added, identify
felicitous sub-totals and interim totals, guide attention,
and encourage the development of more efficient
arithmetic strategies.
Imagine a participant invited to complete an addition
problem involving seven numbers, some single digit,
some double digit. In one condition, the problem is
presented on a piece of paper as a randomly configured
array of numbers; the participant is asked to put her hands
palm down on the flat surface on which the problem is
presented. The mental effort required cannot be guided
and supplemented with complementary actions (Kirsh,
1995) such as pointing and re-arranging. In this context,
mental arithmetic performance should reflect the
participant’s working memory capacity, arithmetic
knowledge and skill. Imagine, in turn, the same problem
but, this time, presented as a set of number tokens, which
the participant is invited to manipulate. The importance of
arithmetic knowledge and skills remain; however, now,
working memory is augmented by a modifiable problem
presentation. Such a dynamic presentation unveils a
shifting array of opportunities and possibilities, whether
strategically engineered or fortuitously encountered.
Thus, working memory is augmented not simply in terms
of storage capacity, but also in terms of executive
functions. That is, a shifting problem presentation cues
certain strategies—for example by grouping certain
numbers together—and guides attention. Hence, in a
modifiable environment, the strategic control of
attentional resources originates, partly, in the world.

The Present Experiment
Participants’ performance in a mental arithmetic task is
likely to be impaired by math anxiety, and this may be
particularly apparent when the mental arithmetic task
requires a larger commitment of working memory
resources, such as in a static context of reasoning where
participants cannot interact with numbers that compose a
problem. In turn, if reasoners are given the opportunity to
couple their working memory resources and arithmetic
skills to a dynamic and modifiable problem presentation,
the impact of math anxiety might be considerably
attenuated. This is because the coupling of internal and
external resources creates a more robust and resilient
cognitive system that augments the participants’ working
memory resources, which then can more easily soak up
the resource-depleting rehearsal of performance-related
thoughts. Arithmetic performance might be positively
correlated with math anxiety in a static reasoning
environment; however when participants can extend their
cognitive resources and let the environment shoulder
some of the computational efforts, then accuracy may be

3616

influenced by math anxiety to a lesser extent.
Math anxious individuals cope with math anxiety by
limiting their exposure to math, which further limits their
levels of numeracy (Ashcraft, 2002). Hence, to get a
better window on the influence of anxiety on
mathematical cognition, a relatively simple task was
developed for this experiment engaging basic arithmetic
skills
acquired
and
mastered
by
university
undergraduates. Participants completed the additions in
both a static, non-interactive, context and in one where
tokens corresponding to the elements of the addition
problems could be touched, arrayed, grouped, in whatever
manner to support problem solving; hence interactivity
was manipulated within-subjects.
Performance was measured in terms of accuracy
(absolute error) and efficiency. Thinking efficiency was
calculated as the ratio of the proportion of correct
solutions for a set of problems over the proportion of time
invested by that participant to complete the set out of the
maximum time invested by the slowest participants. In the
static condition, participants’ working memory resources
would likely be stretched, particularly by the long
additions; in turn the coupling of internal to external
resources in the interactive condition could augment the
participants’ working memory capacity and executive
processes.
Participants’ working memory capacity was assessed
using a computation span task. Math anxiety was
predicted to correlate negatively with working memory
capacity. More important, the magnitude of error in the
mental arithmetic task was predicted to correlate
positively with anxiety level and negatively with working
memory capacity, but only in the static condition. Thus, a
key prediction was that interactivity would defuse the
impact of anxiety on calculation error. In a similar
manner, math anxiety and working capacity should
predict thinking efficiency in the static, but not in the
interactive condition. Mediation analyses were conducted
to determine the direct and indirect effect of math anxiety
on thinking efficiency in both conditions.

Method
Participants
Forty psychology university undergraduates (35 females,
overall mean age 20.8, SD = 3.2) received course credits
for their participation.

Material and Measures
Mathematics Anxiety. Mathematics anxiety was
measured using an abridged version of the original 98-item
scale (Suinn, 1972) developed by Alexander and Martray
(1989). The abridged version is based on 25-items for each
of which participants used a 5-point scale (1 = “not at all”,
5 = “very much”) to describe how anxious the event

described made them feel. The 25 items assessed math
anxiety in terms of test anxiety (e.g., “studying for a math
test”), numerical task anxiety (e.g., “reading a cash register
receipt after your purchase”) and math course anxiety (e.g.,
“watching a teacher work on an algebraic equation on the
blackboard”). Math anxiety scores could range from 25 to
125 – the higher the score, the higher the math anxiety; the
mean score in the present sample was 66.0 (SD = 18.1).
Working memory capacity. Working memory was
assessed using a computation-span test (Ashcraft & Kirk,
2001, p. 226). Participants solved simple arithmetic
problems in blocks increasing from 2 to 6 problems (e.g.,
“50 + 7 = ?”, “60 ÷ 2 = ?”, “19 - 8 = ?” was a block of
three problems). At the end of each block, participants
were prompted to recall in correct order the last number of
each problem in that block (for the example above, correct
recall would be “7, 2, 8”). There were two blocks for each
sequence length (e.g., two blocks with sequences of 3
different problems) for a total of 10 blocks. Working
memory capacity was measured as the sum of all correct
answers across the 10 blocks, for a maximum score of 40.
The mean number of digits recalled by the participants in
the present study was 24.1 (SD = 7.6).
Arithmetic Task. Participants carried out short and long
additions, involving either 7 or 11 numbers (see Fig. 1), as
fast and as accurately as possible. They completed the
problems in blocks, five from the short set first, and five
from the long set second. Performance was measured in
terms of the mean absolute error and in terms of efficiency.
Efficiency was measured as the ratio of accuracy
(proportion correct sums) over time invested in doing the
sums. The latter was measured as the proportion of actual
time to complete the sums divided by the maximum time
needed to complete them in that condition; this maximum
was determined by taking the average of the top quartile
latencies. Inefficient performance is reflected with a ratio
smaller than 1 indicating that proportion accuracy was
smaller than proportion time invested.

Procedure
The mental arithmetic task, working memory span task,
and the completion of the 25-item mathematics anxiety
scale were embedded in an experimental session that lasted
approximately 40 minutes, and which included other tests
of motivation and cognitive skill unrelated to the present
experiment. The session always started with participants
completing the math anxiety scale. During the mental
arithmetic task, participants were presented with the five
additions from the short set first. After a 2-min distractor
task (a word search puzzle), participants were presented
with the five additions from the long set; the problem order
within each set was randomized for each participant. These
two sets of sums were presented twice. For one

3617

presentation participants performed the additions with their
hands on the table facing them (the static condition) and
announced their answer out loud; for the second
presentation, square numbered tokens (3cm by 3cm) were
used, and participants were encouraged to touch, move or
group the tokens in whatever manner to help them add the
numbers (the interactive condition); as in the static
condition, participants announced the solution for each
problem out loud. While the long set always followed the
short set, the order of condition (non-interactive,
interactive) was counterbalanced across participants. With
10 different problems, involving 10 unique configurations
of numbers, and 90 numbers across the two sets, it was
unlikely that participants remembered the solution to each
problem when presented a second time. Still, to prevent
direct retrieval of solutions during the second presentation,
the participants completed the computation span test
between the two presentations of the arithmetic task.
Problem set size (with two levels) and interactivity (with
two levels) were independent variables that were
manipulated in a 2×2 repeated measures design.

14

19
17

18

6

7

8
9

3

18

15

11

19

12

14

17

13
5

!
Figure
1: Examples of additions from the short set (7number additions) and the long set (11-number additions).

Results
The correlation matrix involving the anxiety and working
memory span measures along with the mental arithmetic
performance measures is reported in Table 1. We note, for
now, that math anxiety scores were negatively correlated
with working memory span, r (38) = -.318, p = .045. The
correlations with the different measures of mental
arithmetic performance in the static and interactive
conditions are described below.

Absolute Error
The mean absolute deviation from the correct answer or
absolute error for the short and long sums in the static and
interactive conditions are reported in the top half of Table
2. Mean absolute error was similar for the short sums
across conditions; however, errors increased for the long
sums, in a relatively more pronounced manner in the static
condition. In a 2x2 repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA), the main effect of condition was not
significant, F < 1, the main effect of problem size was
marginally significant, F(1, 39) = 4.02, p = .052, but the
interaction was not significant, F(1, 39) = 2.26, p = .141.

Table 1: Correlation matrix involving mathematics
anxiety, working memory capacity, and mental arithmetic
performance averaged across all 10 additions in the static
and interactive condition (df = 38).
1
MARS
1
2

-

2
SPAN
-.318 *
-

3
4
5
6

3
ERR-S

4
ERR-I

5
EFF-S

6
EFF-I

.427 **

.002

-.306

-.230

-.283

.030

.494 **

.341 *

.238

*
-.758 **

-.443 **

-.387 *

-.605 **

-

-

-

5.24, p = .028, as was the condition by problem size
interaction, F(1, 39) = 5.37, p = .026.
Table 2: Mean absolute error and efficiency ratio, along
with the standard deviation, for short and long sums in the
static and interactive conditions.
Set Size
Short
Condition

M

Long
SD

M

SD

Abolute Error

.725 **

Static

3.3

4.4

5.6

6.1

Interactive

3.6

4.7

4.2

3.9

Efficiency Ratio

-

Note: * p < .05 ** p < .01. MARS = Mathematics Anxiety Rating Scale scores; SPAN =
Computation span scores; ERR-S = Average absolute error in the static condition; ERR-I
= Average absolute error in the interactive condition; EFF-S = Average efficiency ratio in
the static condition; EFF-I = Average efficiency ratio in the interactive condition.
.

Math anxiety was strongly correlated with absolute
error in the static condition averaged across all 10
problems, r = .427, p = .006 (see Table 1), but not in the
interactive condition, r = .002, p = .989. To determine the
interaction between math anxiety and condition
(interactive, static), the difference in the average absolute
errors between the interactive and static condition were
regressed on the anxiety scores mean deviation form (an
alternative to dichotomising anxiety scores with a median
split—which reduces power—as recommended by Brauer,
2002). In the absence of an interaction, one would expect
that as math anxiety level increased, participants would not
benefit from manipulating the tokens—in other words, the
difference between the interactive and static condition
would be constant across levels of math anxiety. However,
the slope of the regression line, β = -.372, was significantly
negative, t(38) = -2.471, p = .018. This confirms that
participants who were more math anxious made errors of a
smaller magnitude in the interactive than in the static
condition.
Finally, working memory span was marginally
correlated with error in the static condition, r = -.283, p =
.077, but not in the interactive condition, r = .030, p =
.852.

Efficiency Ratio
The mean efficiency ratios are reported in the bottom half
of Table 2. Participants’ efficiency exceeded 1 in the static
condition for the short problems, but declined for the long
sums. In turn, efficiency remained well calibrated and
constant across problem size in the interactive condition.
The 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA revealed that the
main effect of condition was not significant, F < 1, the
main effect of problem size was significant, F(1, 39) =

3618

Static

1.2

0.9

0.9

0.8

Interactive

1.0

0.7

1.0

0.7

Math anxiety was negatively correlated with the
efficiency ratio averaged across all 10 problems in the
static, r = -.306, p = .055, but not in the interactive
condition, r = -.230, p = .153. The average efficiency ratios
were not characterised by a significant math anxiety by
condition interaction, however. In the regression of the
difference in the average efficiency ratios between the
interactive and static condition on the mean deviation form
of the math anxiety scores, the slope of the regression line,
β = .161, was not significantly different from zero, t(38) =
1.008, p = .320.
Working memory span was positively correlated with
efficiency in the static, r = .494, p = .001 and to a lesser
extent in the interactive condition, r = .341, p = .031. In
light of the strong correlation between working memory
capacity and efficiency, the mediation of the effect of math
anxiety on efficiency via working memory capacity in both
the static and the interactive condition was analysed using
the procedure and SPSS macro developed by Preacher and
Hayes (2008). A simple mediation model analysis was run
with math anxiety as the independent variable (X),
working memory capacity as the mediator (M) and average
efficiency as the dependent variable (Y); Figure 2 depicts
the results of both mediation model analyses for the static
(left panel) and interactive condition (right panel). In the
case of the static condition, the total effect of math anxiety
on mental arithmetic performance (path c) was negative
and significantly different from zero. Math anxiety
significantly influenced working memory in a negative
direction (path a) and working memory significantly
influenced efficiency (path b). Finally, the effect of anxiety
on efficiency after controlling for working memory (path
c´) was no longer significant. A bootstrap analysis revealed
that the 95% bias corrected interval with 5000 resamples

Interactive Condition

Static Condition

Working
Memory (M)
a = -0.13
p = .045

Math
Anxiety (X)

Working
Memory (M)
b = 4.35
p = .005

c = -1.26
p = .055
c' = -0.68
p = .272

a = -0.13
p = .045

Efficiency
Ratio (Y)

Math
Anxiety (X)

b = 2.46
p = .073
c = -0.80
p = .153
c' = -0.47
p = .407

Efficiency
Ratio (Y)

Figure 2: Results of the mediation analysis in the static (left panel) and interactive condition (right panel).
for the size of the indirect effect (-0.58; CI [-1.47; -0.03])
did not include a zero value and thus can be consider to be
statistically significant. A traditional Sobel´s test
approached significance, z = -1.73, p = .084. Thus, the
effect of math anxiety on mental arithmetic efficiency in
the static condition was completely mediated by working
memory (see Fig. 2, left panel). In the interactive
condition, the total effect of math anxiety on efficiency
(path c, see Fig. 2, right panel) was negative but not
significantly different from zero. Thus, strictly speaking,
the condition for mediation analysis was not fulfilled
(Baron & Kenny, 1986). However, it has sometimes been
argued that the indirect effect can still be significant, and
omitting this analysis could lead to the failure of detecting
interesting mechanisms (Hayes, 2009). With this in mind,
the mediation analysis was conducted and showed that
math anxiety influenced significantly working memory in a
negative direction (path a), while working memory
marginally influenced mental arithmetic performance (path
b). Finally, the effect of anxiety on mental arithmetic
performance after controlling for working memory (path
c´) was not significant. A bootstrap analysis revealed that
the 95% bias corrected interval with 5000 resamples for
the size of the indirect effect (-0.33; CI [-0.99; 0.02])
included zero and thus cannot be consider to be statistically
significant. Finally, the Sobel´s test was not significant, z =
-1.41, p = .160. Thus, there was no significant total or
indirect path between math anxiety and mental arithmetic
efficiency in the interactive condition (see Fig. 2, right
panel).

Discussion
In this experiment participants completed short and long
additions in two different contexts, one which permitted
the reconfiguration of the problem through the spatial
rearrangement of the number tokens, and one which did
not. Participants were generally accurate—although less so
for longer additions—and interactivity did not significantly
enhance accuracy. However, the significant interaction
between problem size and condition for the efficiency ratio
measure confirmed that thinking efficiency dropped for the

3619

longer sums in the static condition, but remained stable in
the interactive condition. The interaction between problem
difficulty and context of reasoning (static, interactive)
indicates that determining the benefits of physically reshaping a problem presentation is an exercise done relative
to the degree of task difficulty. Thus, with a relatively easy
task, interactivity might not benefit the reasoning agent,
but interactivity can enhance efficiency when the task is
challenging and undertaken on the basis of internal
resources alone.
Math anxiety was significantly correlated with working
memory capacity. This has been reported previously
(Ashcraft, 2002) especially when capacity is gauged with a
span test that involves numbers and operations. The more
important findings was the significant interaction between
math anxiety level and the degree of interactivity: as math
anxiety increased, participants made fewer errors in the
interactive than in the static condition.
It is important to stress that this experiment employed a
repeated measures design: Participants and their levels of
maths anxiety were identical in the static and interactive
condition. Having said this a post-task measure in each
condition might have offered a better measure of how
much anxiety was experienced in completing the sums.
Manipulating tokens might have altered participants’
experience in terms of intrinsic motivation, attentional
commitment, and self-efficacy.
In turn, reasoning efficiency, as determined by the
ratio of accuracy over time invested in completing the
sums, was marginally correlated with math anxiety in the
static condition, but not in the interactive condition. The
mediation analysis confirmed that the effect of math
anxiety on efficiency in the static condition was mediated
by working memory capacity. In turn, in the interactive
condition, math anxiety had no effect on reasoning
efficiency, but working memory capacity marginally
influenced performance. According to processing
efficiency theory (Ashcraft, 2002) math anxiety exacts
working memory resources to maintain performancerelated beliefs and fears. As the static condition put a
higher demand on working memory, efficiency was more

directly determined by working memory capacity. In the
interactive condition, however, participants have the
opportunity to recruit external resources to help them
complete the sums. They can group the number tokens to
guide and direct attentional resources and identify
congenial interim totals that facilitate more efficient
addition strategies. The coupling of internal and external
resources creates a cognitive system (Wilson & Clark,
2009) that augments memory storage and distributes the
control of executive function in a manner that copes better
with the resource drain caused by math anxiety. These
findings lend support to the conjecture that for simple
mental arithmetic problems, performance improvements
are better supported in a learning environment that fosters
interactivity.
Future research may explore the role of interactivity in
helping reasoners enhance their mental arithmetic
performance in contexts that can elicit higher levels of
anxiety, such as under time pressured or in situations of
greater accountability. One of the recommendations of the
National Mathematics Advisory Panel (2008, p. 31) is to
determine the etiology of math anxiety and important
advances in charting its neurodevelopmental origins have
recently been reported (Young, Wu, & Menon, 2012). In
addition, it might be of particular interest to determine
whether intervention programmes that are based on
interactive training exercises enhance participants’ level of
instrumentality, efficacy and confidence, reducing math
anxiety in more traditional situations, and encouraging
greater exposure to mathematics.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Ellie McCourty, Angie Makri, and
Joakim Westh Wiencken for their assistance with the
recruitment and running of the participants. Financial
support from the Kingston University Faculty of Arts and
Social Sciences Research Capability Fund is gratefully
acknowledged.

References
Ashcraft, M. H., & Kirk, E. P. (2001). The relationships
among working memory, math anxiety, and
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 224-237.
Alexander, L., & Martray, C. (1989). The development of
an abbreviated version of the Mathematics Anxiety
Rating Scale. Measurement and Evaluation in
Counselling and Development, 22, 143-150.
Ashcraft, M. H. (1995). Cognitive psychology and simple
arithmetic: A review and summary of new directions.
Mathematical Cognition, 1, 3-34.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Kirk, E. P. (2001). The relationships
among working memory, math anxiety, and

3620

performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 224-237.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Krause, J. A. (2007). Working
memory, math performance, and math anxiety.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 243-248.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderatormediator variable distinction in social psychological
research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical
considerations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Brauer, M. (2002). L’analyse des variables indépendantes
continues et catégorielles: Alternatives à la
dichotomisation. L’Année Psychologique, 102, 449484.
DeStefano, D., & LeFevre, J.-A. (2004). The role of
working memory in mental arithmetic. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 16, 353-386.
Eysenck, M. W., & Calvo, M. G. (1992). Anxiety and
performance: The processing efficiency theory.
Cognition and Emotion, 6, 409-434.
Hayes, A. F. (2009). Beyond Baron and Kenny: Statistical
mediation analysis in the new millennium.
Communication Monographs, 76, 408-420.
Kirsh, D. (1995). Complementary strategies: Why we use
our hands when we think. In J. M. Moore & J. L.
Lehman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 212217). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Publishers.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel (2008). Foundations
for success: The final report of the National
Mathematics Advisory Panel. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education.
National Numeracy Facts and Figures (2012). Retrieved 1
August, 2012, http://www.nationalnumeracy.org.uk/
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and
resampling strategies for assessing and comparing
indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior
Research Methods, 40, 879-891.
Richardson, R., & Suinn, R. N. (1972). The mathematics
anxiety rating scale: Psychometric data. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 19, 551-554.
Suinn, R. M. (1972). Mathematics Anxiety Rating Scale
(MARS). Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain Behavioral
Science Institute.
Wilson, R. A., & Clark, A. (2009). How to situate
cognition: Letting nature take its course. In P. Robbins
& M. Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of
situated cognition (pp. 55-77). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Young, C. B., Wu, S. S., & Menon, V. (2012). The
neurodevelopmental
basis
of
math
anxiety.
Psychological Science, 23, 492-501.

