UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reduced neural sensitivity to online social interactions in autism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/62s8m66z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Redcay, Elizabeth
Saxe, Rebecca

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reduced neural sensitivity to online social interactions in autism
Elizabeth Redcay (redcay@umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20782 USA

Rebecca Saxe (saxe@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Abstract
Difficulty with social interactions is a hallmark characteristic
of autism spectrum disorders. While many studies have
investigated the neural mechanisms underlying atypical social
cognition, the methods used have rarely involved social
interaction, relying instead on offline reasoning about a
character. In the current study, we examined whether and
which brain systems are sensitive to online social interactions
in individuals with autism. We compared functional MRI data
collected from 15 neurotypical (NT) and 15 autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) participants during live real-time interactions
(Live) and during a video replay of the same interaction
(Recorded-Same) and a novel interaction (Recorded-Novel).
Whole brain analyses demonstrated a significantly greater
response to Live than Recorded conditions, in NT vs ASD,
within left posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) and
regions of the cerebellum bilaterally. Region of interest
analyses revealed that right posterior temporal regions were
differentially recruited during online social interactions in the
ASD and NT groups. Also, regions commonly associated
with personal salience (i.e., dorsal anterior cingulate and
bilateral insula) were sensitive to online social interactions in
NT, but to novelty in the ASD group. These data suggest
reduced and atypical neural sensitivity to online social
interactions in individuals with autism.
Keywords: social interaction; autism; fMRI.

Introduction
Social interactions provide a rich opportunity to learn
from others beginning early in infancy and continuing
throughout one’s life. Individuals with autism engage in
fewer interactions than their typically developing peers and
reduced social engagement predicts later delays in language
and social abilities (e.g., Mundy, Sigman, & Kasari, 1990).
A central question in the study of autism is what underlies
this reduced engagement in social interactions. Some have
proposed that social interactions are inherently rewarding,
and thus motivating, for neurotypical (NT) individuals but
not for those with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) (e.g.,
Chevallier, Kohls, Troiani, Brodkin, & Schultz, 2012;
Dawson et al., 2002). Similarly, others suggest that, unlike
NT individuals, social stimuli fail to capture the attention of
those with autism (e.g., Klin, Jones, Schultz, & Volkmar,
2003). Others still suggest difficulties with social
interactions arise from impairments in theory of mind, or
reasoning about another person’s thoughts (Baron-Cohen,
Leslie, & Frith, 1985).

While evidence exists to support each of these claims,
most of the empirical data come from studies using proxies
for social interactions, such as a picture, video, or vignette
of a person or characters. While important, these offline
methods may be missing the processes at the root of ASD,
namely social interactions or engagement with others. For
example, difficulties interpreting or predicting a social
partner’s behavior are thought to underlie real-world
difficulties in communication; however, offline tasks in
which individuals must predict a fictional character’s action
based on false beliefs often fail to find differences between
autism and neurotypical groups in behavioral reports (e.g.,
Senju, Southgate, White, & Frith, 2009) and brain activation
patterns (Dufour et al., 2012). Interestingly, while offline
reasoning processes appear to be relatively intact,
individuals with autism fail to spontaneously anticipate the
location of an actor’s reach based on a false belief (Senju et
al., 2009) – a process more akin to real-world use of belief
inferences to predict behavior. Furthermore, even for
neurotypical individuals, social or communicative behavior
in the context of an interaction, as compared to mere
observation, may be quantitatively and/or qualitatively
different from offline social communication (e.g., Clark &
Brennan, 1999; Pönkänen, Alhoniemi, Leppänen, &
Hietanen, 2011; Redcay et al., 2010; Risko et al., 2012;
Schilbach et al., 2012; Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich,
2006; Shimada & Hiraki, 2006) Thus, like others (e.g.,
Schilbach et al., 2012), we argue for a second-person
neuroscience approach to understand core difficulties with
social interaction in individuals with autism.
Using a novel method for collecting fMRI data during an
online social interaction, we previously demonstrated that
brain systems supporting reward processing, social
cognition, and attention were engaged more when
interacting with another person in a real-time face-to-face
interaction (i.e. the Live condition) than during a video
replay of the experimenter from the same interaction
(Recorded-Same condition) or video replay of the
experimenter taken from a different scan session (RecordedNovel condition) (Redcay et al., 2010). Thus, this paradigm
provides a method to examine the extent to which reward,
attention, and social-cognitive systems are engaged during
simple social interactions in individuals with autism, and as
such can provide insight into the proposed mechanisms
underlying atypical social interactions.

3263

The goals of the current study were to 1) replicate
findings from Redcay et al., (2010) in a new neurotypical
sample, 2) determine what is driving the difference between
live and recorded conditions (i.e., novelty or social
contingency), and 3) examine whether reward, attention, or
social-cognitive systems (or some combination) show an
atypical response profile in individuals with autism. To
investigate these questions, we examined the response
profiles for each condition of interest (Live, RecordedSame, Recorded-Novel) within the regions of interest
identified in the previous study for the contrast of Live vs.
Recorded conditions (Redcay et al., 2010). A greater
response to Live interactions as compared to the same video
replay (Recorded-Same) may simply be due to the novelty
of the interaction. Thus, the critical comparison to isolate
brain regions sensitive to contingent social interaction,
independent of novelty, is Live vs. Recorded-Novel. In both
of these conditions, the participant sees the experimenter
moving and talking in novel ways with novel objects; the
only difference is that in the Live condition, the
experimenter’s actions are contingent on real-time
communication with the participant. Based on our previous
study, we predicted that regions within social, attention, and
reward networks would be differentially recruited during the
Live condition in the NT group. Given the hypotheses
discussed above, we predicted reduced differentiation
between Live and Recorded conditions in the ASD group
within regions associated with reward and social cognition.

Verbal, nonverbal, and full-scale IQ scores did not differ
significantly between ASD and NT participants (IQ data
from 1 ASD and 4 NT are missing).

Study Design
Prior to each scanning session the experimenter
administered consents, screening forms, and IQ assessments
in order for all participants to have some familiarity with the
same experimenter in the face-to-face fMRI task.
Live face-to-face set-up During fMRI data acquisition
participants were able to see and hear an experimenter in the
control room. For extensive details on the audio-visual setup see Redcay et al., 2010. Briefly, during the Live
conditions, a real-time video and audio feed of the
experimenter was provided to the participant. For all
conditions, the experimenter viewed a real-time video feed
of the participant’s eye through use of a camera from an
eye-tracker at the back of the scanner bore. With this dual
video set-up both experimenter and participant could
interact in real-time. The timing of dual video capture and
presentation was implemented using Psychtoolbox
extensions in Matlab 7.8 (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997). This
dual video capture capability allowed for post-scan coding
of the participants eye-movements as well as with the
experimenter’s actions throughout the experiment.

Methods
Participants
All participants provided written, informed consent as
approved by the Committee on the Use of Humans as
Experimental Subjects (COUHES) at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and were compensated monetarily
for their participation. Participants were excluded if they
had a history of neurological or psychiatric disorders or any
contraindication for MRI scanning. IQ data were collected
using the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (K-BIT).
Figure 1. Example of a social interaction block for Live,
Recorded-Same, and Recorded-Novel conditions. Video
frames are presented to illustrate the sequence of events.

Table 1: Participant Information.
Group
ASD
NT

n
15
15

Age (yrs)
28.4±7.1
27.4±6.2

Sex
11M
11M

FIQ
119.5±14.8
117.5±12.3

Participants with Autism Eighteen adults with highfunctioning ASD participated in the current experiment. All
participants met criteria for ASD (autism or spectrum) on
the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS),
Module 4. Three participants were excluded because of an
inability to perform the task (2) or excessive movement
during the scan (criteria described below).
Neurotypical Participants Fifteen NT participants were
recruited to match the ASD participants on age and sex.

Social Interaction Task During fMRI data collection,
participants engaged in a social interaction task, in which
the experimenter prompted them to choose one of two
buckets (via eye movements) in the context of a highlyscripted interaction (Figure 1). During ‘Live’ conditions
these interactions occurred in real-time while ‘Recorded’
conditions involved video replays. Participants were told
whether they were in the Live or Recorded conditions both
via a green or red square around the screen, respectively,
and a text prompt before the start of the block and above the
video of the experimenter throughout the block.
Importantly, they were told to play along with the
experimenter’s requests during the Recorded conditions
even though she could not see them. During the Recorded-

3264

Same condition, the same video of the experimenter from
the previous Live condition was replayed to the participant,
serving as a perfect control for perceptual complexity.
During the Recorded-Novel condition a novel video from a
previous interaction with a different participant was
presented, controlling for the novelty of the live interaction.
fMRI design Conditions were presented in a blocked design
with each block lasting 40 seconds. Each run contained two
repetitions of each condition (i.e., Live, Recorded-Same,
Recorded-Novel) alternating in a pseudo-counterbalanced
order (with the caveat that Live had to precede RecordedSame). To allow for the opening and closing of video
capture devices, the first and last 2.5 seconds of each block
were modeled but not analyzed. Runs contained 3 blocks of
a 20-second resting baseline at the beginning, middle, and
end of each run. All participants completed four
experimental runs except for one participant in the ASD
group who completed 3.

Data acquisition and analyses
Data acquisition Data were collected on a 3T Siemens Tim
Trio scanner at the Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging center at
the McGovern Institute for Brain Research at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Functional imaging
data were collected using a T2*-weighted gradient echoplanar image sequence with a voxel resolution of
3.1x3.1x4.0 mm (TR=2s, TE=30ms, 32 slices). Siemens
PACE online motion correction was used to adjust for head
movement (<8mm). T1-weighted structural images were
collected with 128 slices axially (TE=3.39 ms, TR=2530
ms, 1.3 mm isotropic voxels).
fMRI analyses fMRI data were analyzed using SPM8
(http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) and in-house Matlab
scripts. Preprocessing steps included 1) realignment of all
data to the first volume of the first run using a 6-degree rigid
spatial transformation, 2) spatial smoothing with a 5 mm
full width half maximum Gaussian filter, 3) spatial
normalization to a standard EPI template in Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) space using a 12-parameter
affine transformation. A high pass filter of 260 s (1/260 Hz)
was applied to the functional data to model low-frequency
signals unrelated to the task. 260 seconds was chosen
because it is the length from the beginning of the first block
to the end of the last in each run. Motion artifacts were
estimated using the artifact detection toolbox (ART). A
volume exceeding 1 mm (across rotational and translational
directions) of movement between timepoints or intensity
greater than 3 SD was marked as an outlier. Participants
with more than 15% outlier timepoints across any
experimental run were removed (1 ASD participant).
Whole-brain first-level analyses were performed within
each subject using the general linear model. The model
included conditions of interest (Live, Rec-Same, RecNovel) as well as conditions not of interest (the 2.5 seconds
at the beginning and end of each block and the text prompt

preceding each block). Nuisance regressors included the
degree of deviation at each time point for the 6-motion
directions (roll, pitch, yaw, x,y,z) and any outlier timepoints
identified. Contrasts of interest included each condition of
interest vs. fixation as well as the Live condition compared
to Rec-Same and Rec-Novel separately and compared to
both recorded conditions combined (Recorded). Contrasts of
Rec-Novel to Rec-Same were also included and all reverse
contrasts were modeled (e.g., Recorded vs. Live).
Second level random effects analyses were conducted via
voxel-wise whole-brain t-tests (within and between sample)
for each contrast of interest and region of interest analyses.
All within-sample whole-brain tests were corrected at p<.05
using nonparametric permutation analyses (snpm5b). All
between-group whole-brain tests are thresholded at p<.001
(uncorrected) with a cluster correction corresponding to
p<.05 (k=192 mm3). Cluster size was determined using
AFNI’s 3dClustSim program (Cox, 1996).
Region of interests were created from previously
published data using this same social interaction task
(Redcay et al., 2010). These data included a sample of 16
typically developing adults (7 male; 18-29 years) who were
not part of the sample in the current study. Region of
interests included voxels that were significantly more
engaged during the Live than Recorded conditions (p<.05,
corrected) and intersected with a sphere (6 mm radius)
surrounding the peak coordinate for each region identified
in the group contrast of Live-Recorded (Redcay et al.,
2010). Parameter estimates from the first-level analyses for
each condition of interest from each subject were extracted
from each of these 21 regions of interest. Repeatedmeasures ANOVAs were run for each ROI with condition
(Live, Rec-Same, Rec-Novel) as the repeated measure and
group (ASD, NT) as the between-subjects measure. The
Greenhouse-Geisser correction was used when the
assumption of sphericity was violated. For all regions
showing a significant effect of condition or significant
group x condition interaction, follow-up paired t-tests were
conducted within each group for the contrasts Live vs. RecSame, Live vs. Rec-Novel, and Rec-Novel vs. Rec-Same.
Post-scan video coding Following data collection, videos
from 9 ASD and 10 NT participants were coded for several
behavioral variables, including the onset and duration of eye
movements during the event periods in which the
experimenter requested a response from the participant.
Videos from the remainder of the participants were lost or
not collected at the time of the fMRI session due to
technical difficulties in video recording. The number and
duration of eye movements were compared between groups
and between conditions using separate two-way repeated
measures ANOVAs.

Results
Eye movements do not differ by condition or group No
significant main effects or interactions were found for either
the total number or duration of eye movements during the

3265

Live, Rec-Same, and Rec-Novel conditions. These data
suggest differences between conditions were not due to lowlevel differences in eye movement behavior.
Replication of previous study in new TD sample Wholebrain and ROI analyses comparing the Live and Recorded
conditions revealed many similarities but also some
differences from the sample published in a previous paper
(Redcay et al., 2010). In general a smaller number of areas
were recruited during the Live vs. Recorded contrast than
reported in the previous study. Specifically, subcortical
regions associated with reward and anterior temporal
regions did not show differential recruitment during the
Live condition. However, regions within dorsal medial
prefrontal cortex (dMPFC), which did not meet threshold
for significance in the 2010 paper, were significant in the
current NT sample. Regions showing a greater response to
Live than Recorded conditions (in both samples) included
bilateral posterior STS, dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC),
dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dMPFC), thalamus, and left
cerebellum (Figure 2, top).
Next, we compared parameter estimates for Live and
Recorded conditions within the ROIs from the previous
study using one-way paired samples t-tests (p<.05,
Bonferroni corrected). Nine of the 21 regions revealed a
pattern of significantly greater activation in Live as
compared to Recorded conditions: dorsal anterior cingulate
(dACC) t(14)= 2.95, p<.011, anterior cingulate
cortex/medial prefrontal cortex (ACC) t(14)=3.26, p<.006,
left cerebellum (L CBLM) t(14)=3.68, p<.002, left lingual
gyrus t(14)=3.01, p<.009, left insula t(14)=4.96, p<.0001,
left middle temporal gyrus (L MT) t(14)=2.7, p<.017, right
insula t(14)=3.61, p<.003, right posterior superior temporal
sulcus (RpSTS) t(14)=5.65, p<.000, right temporoparietal
junction (RTPJ) t(14)=3.30, p<.005, and supplementary
motor area (SMA) t(14)=3.58, p<.003.

Figure 2. Whole-brain random effects analyses for the
contrast Live>Recorded within NT (top) and ASD (bottom)
groups are displayed on a template brain in MNI space. A
direct statistical comparison between groups for the
Live>Recorded contrast is shown in the right panel.
Whole brain comparisons between ASD and NT Only the
right pSTS showed a significantly greater response during
the Live as compared to Recorded conditions in the ASD
group (Figure 2, bottom). Direct statistical comparison of
the Live vs. Recorded contrast between groups revealed
significantly greater activation in the NT group in the left

posterior STS and bilateral cerebellum. Significantly greater
activation was seen in the ASD than NT group for the LiveRecorded contrast within the left angular gyrus (AG) and
right putamen; however, this effect was driven by greater
deactivation in the NT group during Live conditions rather
than differential engagement of these regions in ASD.

Figure 3. Region of interest analyses. The statistical
parametric map for the contrast Live>Recorded from a
separate group of healthy typically-developing participants
(Redcay et al., 2010) is displayed on a template brain
registered in MNI space. Each region showing a significant
main effect of condition in the new sample (ASD and NT) is
marked with a yellow circle. Response profiles for each
condition (Live=blue, Recorded-Same=orange, RecordedNovel=red) for the NT (solid bar) and ASD (open bar)
groups are displayed for these ROIs. Brain images and bar
plots are grouped by patterns for the NT and ASD groups.
Region of interest analyses Two-way repeated measures
ANOVA for each of the 21 ROIs revealed significant main
effects of condition (Live, Rec-Same, Rec-Novel) in nine of
the ten regions as reported above (dACC, ACC, LCBLM,
LIns, RIns, RpSTS, RTPJ, SMA, LMT) and a significant
group by condition interaction in one region, the anterior
cingulate cortex (F(1.6,30)=6.1, p<.008) (Figure 3).
Within-group condition comparisons allowed for
investigation of whether regions were sensitive to the social
contingency of a live interaction (i.e. Live>Recorded-Novel
and Live>Recorded-Same) or to the novelty of the
interaction (i.e. Live>Recorded-Same or RecordedNovel>Recorded-Same).
Salience network sensitive to online interactions in NT
but novelty in ASD Within the NT group, 6 regions
showed a pattern of sensitivity to Live as compared to
Recorded-Novel and Recorded-Same conditions, suggesting

3266

these regions are sensitive to online social interaction. These
regions included those associated with the salience network
(e.g., Seeley et al., 2007), namely the dorsal anterior
cingulate (dACC), bilateral insula, and supplementary motor
area (SMA), as well as regions associated with social
cognition including the RpSTS extending into the RTPJ. Of
these six regions, the ASD group demonstrated no
difference between conditions within left insula and dACC
(Figure 3, top left) and a pattern of sensitivity to novelty but
not social interaction in the right insula, SMA, and ACC
(Figure 3, top right). Like the NT group, the ASD group
showed a significant effect of social interaction (i.e.
Live>Recorded-Novel and Live>Recorded-Same) in the
right pSTS/RTPJ (Figure 3, bottom left).
Three regions were sensitive to novelty but not live
interaction specifically in both ASD and NT groups.
Within the NT group, the left cerebellum, left middle
temporal gyrus (MT), and left anterior STS (aSTS)
demonstrated a pattern of sensitivity to novelty (i.e.
Live>Recorded-Same and Recorded-Novel>RecordedSame) that was not specific to online interactions (i.e. Live
is not different from Recorded-Novel). Left MT and left
aSTS demonstrated a pattern consistent with novelty in the
ASD group in that Recorded-Novel was greater than
Recorded-Same. Further, the region within the left
cerebellum showed a greater response to Live than
Recorded-Same in ASD (Figure 3, bottom right).

Discussion
The goals of the current study were to replicate previous
findings using a novel interactive method and to determine
whether reward, attention, and/or social-cognitive networks
in autism showed a lack of sensitivity to online social
interactions. We replicated the finding of a greater response
to Live than Recorded conditions in many regions
associated with social cognition and attention, as previously
seen. Surprisingly, however, reward-related regions were
not differentially sensitive to live interactions in the current
sample of NT or ASD participants.
Social-cognitive areas show typical response in ASD Our
hypothesis was that regions associated with social cognition,
such as bilateral TPJ, posterior STS, and amygdala would
not be modulated by condition in the ASD group. Some
support for this hypothesis was found in the whole-brain
between-group comparisons (Figure 2). The left pSTS was
recruited significantly more for Live than Recorded
conditions in NT than ASD groups. However, whole-brain
and region of interest analyses revealed no differences
between groups within right posterior superior temporal
cortex (RpSTS cluster extending into RTPJ). For both NT
and ASD groups this region was recruited across all three
conditions but the greatest response was seen in the Live
condition and no differences were found between the
Recorded conditions. It is possible (and indeed likely) that
group differences might have emerged if the social

interaction had required mental state inferences and/or been
less predictable. Nonetheless, these findings suggest that in
a simple social interaction, posterior superior temporal
regions are sensitive to social contingency in both NT and
ASD samples.
Salience network sensitive to live interactions in NT, but
not ASD Regions within attention networks, specifically the
salience network, revealed the greatest differences between
groups in the region of interest analyses. We found a
significantly greater response in the Live condition as
compared to both Recorded conditions within regions
thought to be part of a personal salience network, including
bilateral insula and dorsal anterior cingulate (e.g., Seeley et
al., 2007) in NT individuals but not individuals with ASD.
In fact, within the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex a
significant group x condition interaction revealed sensitivity
to novelty, but not live interaction, in the ASD group. This
salience network is engaged during tasks of empathy
(Bernhardt & Singer, 2012), affective pain (Singer et al.,
2004), error processing and task-onset (Dosenbach et al.,
2006) and can be identified through task-free intrinsic
connectivity analyses (Seeley et al., 2007). Seeley et al.,
(2007) propose that these regions are important for
associating incoming sensory stimuli with “markers” to aid
in the decision of what to do next through interaction with
other control, attention, and emotion networks. One
possibility is that in NT individuals, interaction with another
person in real-time provides a salient cue to enhance
attention to the stimuli or task at hand via the salience
network. This is analogous to theories suggesting social
interactions “gate” learning (e.g., Kuhl, 2007; Meltzoff,
Kuhl, Movellan, & Sejnowski, 2009). For individuals with
ASD, however, the novelty of the visual stimulus engages
the salience network rather than the social contingency.
These data are consistent with the proposal by Mundy and
colleagues (e.g., Mundy, 2003) that atypical socialexecutive networks, of which the dorsal anterior cingulate
plays a primary role, may characterize autism. Thus, these
data may provide a neurobiological correlate for how social
interactions are less “special” in individuals with autism.
These findings also underscore the importance of examining
the interaction of social and attention processes, instead of
treating them as separate processes and systems.
Future Directions
While the results are intriguing, the current study has
several limitations that need to be addressed in future work.
First, the interaction was highly scripted and simplified.
Future studies should examine whether increasing the
unpredictability or required mental state inferences within
the interaction would lead to greater differences between
groups within social-cognitive brain regions. Similarly,
future studies should explicitly engage reward systems
during real-time social interaction to help explain the
discrepancy in activation of reward systems between these
studies. Finally, it will be critical to examine the

3267

developmental trajectory of atypical responses to social
interactions within the salience network to determine
whether reduced neural sensitivity underlies the emergence
of the autistic phenotype.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dr. John Gabrieli, Lee Mavros, David
Dodell-Feder, Mark J. Pearrow, Mario Kleiner, Steven
Shannon, and Dr. Christina Triantafyllou for their help in
the development of the face-to-face fMRI set-up, as well as
the Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging center at the McGovern
Institute for Brain Research. We also thank Brieana
Viscomi, Ruth Ludlum, Nick Dufour, Daniel O’Young,
Shannon Coveney, Neelima Wagley, Arella Mayer, and
Nina Lichtenberg for their assistance with analyses and
coding of the behavioral data. This project was supported by
a grant from the Simons Foundation Autism Research
Initiative (SFARI) awarded to R.S. and an NRSA (F32 HD
59302) awarded to E.R.

References
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, a M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the
autistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition,
21(1), 37–46.
Bernhardt, B. C., & Singer, T. (2012). The neural basis of
empathy. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 35, 1–23.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
vision, 10(4), 433–6.
Chevallier, C., Kohls, G., Troiani, V., Brodkin, E. S., &
Schultz, R. T. (2012). The social motivation theory of
autism. Trends in cognitive sciences, 16(4), 231–9.
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: software for analysis and
visualization of functional magnetic resonance
neuroimages. Computers and biomedical research, an
international journal, 29(3), 162–73.
Clark, H.H. & Brennan, S.E. (1991) Grounding in
Communication. In L.B. Resnick, J.M. Levine, and
S.D.Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared
cognition, pp. 127-149. Washington DC: APA books.
Dawson, G., Carver, L., Meltzoff, A. N., Panagiotides, H.,
McPartland, J., & Webb, S. J. (2002). Neural
correlates of face and object recognition in young
children with autism spectrum disorder,
developmental delay, and typical development. Child
development, 73(3), 700–17.
Dosenbach, N. U. F., Visscher, K. M., Palmer, E. D.,
Miezin, F. M., Wenger, K. K., Kang, H. C., …
Petersen, S. E. (2006). A core system for the
implementation of task sets. Neuron, 50(5), 799–812.
Dufour, N., Redcay, E., Young, L., Mavros, P., Moran, J.,
Triantafyllou, C., Gabrieli, J.D., Saxe, R. (2012).
What explains variability in brain regions associated
with Theory of Mind in a large sample of neurotypical
adults and adults with ASD? In N. Miyake, D.
Peebles, & R.P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the

34th Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
312–317).
Klin, A., Jones, W., Schultz, R., & Volkmar, F. (2003). The
enactive mind, or from actions to cognition: lessons
from autism. Philosophical transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences,
358(1430), 345–60. doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1202
Kuhl, P. K. (2007). Is speech learning “gated” by the social
brain? Developmental science, 10(1), 110–20.
Meltzoff, A. N., Kuhl, P. K., Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T.
J. (2009). Foundations for a new science of learning.
Science (New York, N.Y.), 325(5938), 284–8.
Mundy, P, Sigman, M., & Kasari, C. (1990). A longitudinal
study of joint attention and language development in
autistic children. Journal of autism and developmental
disorders, 20(1), 115–28.
Mundy, Peter. (2003). Annotation: the neural basis of social
impairments in autism: the role of the dorsal medialfrontal cortex and anterior cingulate system. Journal
of child psychology and psychiatry, and allied
disciplines, 44(6), 793–809.
Pelli, D. (1997). The video toolbox software for visual
psychophysics: transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial vision.
Pönkänen, L. M., Alhoniemi, A., Leppänen, J. M., &
Hietanen, J. K. (2011). Does it make a difference if I
have an eye contact with you or with your picture? An
ERP study. Social cognitive and affective
neuroscience, 6(4), 486–94.
Redcay, E., Dodell-Feder, D., Pearrow, M. J., Mavros, P. L.,
Kleiner, M., Gabrieli, J. D. E., & Saxe, R. (2010).
Live face-to-face interaction during fMRI: a new tool
for social cognitive neuroscience. NeuroImage, 50(4),
1639–47.
Schilbach, L., Timmermans, Reddy, V., Costall, A., Bente,
G., Schlicht, T., & Vogeley, K. (2012). Toward a
second-person neuroscience. Behav. Brain Sciences
1–77.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 10(2), 70–6.
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J.,
Glover, G. H., Kenna, H., … Greicius, M. D. (2007).
Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for
salience processing and executive control. The
Journal of neuroscience, 27(9), 2349–56.
Senju, A., Southgate, V., White, S., & Frith, U. (2009).
Mindblind eyes: an absence of spontaneous theory of
mind in Asperger syndrome. Science (New York,
N.Y.), 325(5942), 883–5.
Shimada, S., & Hiraki, K. (2006). Infant’s brain response to
live and televised action. NeuroImage, 32(2), 930–9.
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan,
R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2004). Empathy for pain
involves the affective but not sensory components of
pain. Science, 303(5661), 1157–62.

3268

