UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relational labels can improve relational retrieval

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3nc5d41x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Jamrozik, Anja
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relational labels can improve relational retrieval
Anja Jamrozik (a.jamrozik@u.northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract

Even though relational retrieval is typically rare, it is
more likely for experts in a domain. For example, when
solving challenging science problems, experts often retrieve
problems that share common relational structure (e.g.,
Clement, 1988). Likewise, the likelihood of relational
retrieval is better for students with greater mathematical
expertise than for novices (Novick, 1988), and mathematical
expertise can predict the likelihood of transferring a solution
strategy to analogous math problems (Novick & Holyoak,
1991).
What contributes to experts’ improvement in relational
retrieval? Two factors that might be involved are having
experienced many opportunities to compare examples and
acquiring a technical vocabulary. There is abundant
evidence that comparison of examples can improve the
likelihood of relational retrieval. When learners compare
two instances of the same relational structure, the process of
alignment renders their common structure more salient. This
process of schema abstraction increases the likelihood of
retaining this common relational structure and transferring it
to other instances (e.g., Gentner Loewenstein, Thompson, &
Forbus, 2009; Gentner & Markman, 1997; Gick & Holyoak,
1983; Markman & Gentner, 1993; Reeves & Weisberg,
1994; Ross & Kennedy, 1990).
In the current research, we focus on the second factor and
ask how acquiring a vocabulary may impact relational
retrieval1. As someone develops expertise in a domain, they
may acquire terms that name common relations or relational
patterns in that domain. We ask whether the use of such
relational language can improve relational retrieval.

Retrieval that is based on common relational structure, such
as an underlying principle or pattern, is useful but typically
rare. Based on evidence that comparison-derived schema
abstraction can improve relational retrieval, we asked whether
the use of relational labels can also promote abstraction and
improve relational retrieval. Using a cued-recall paradigm, we
varied the presence of relational labels at encoding and test.
As compared to a no-label baseline condition, relational
retrieval improved when relational labels were given at
encoding and at test and also when relational labels were
given only at encoding. The findings demonstrate that one
way to improve relational retrieval is through the use of labels
that name relational structure.
Keywords: relational retrieval; relational language; inert
knowledge

Introduction
When encountering a new example or problem, we
sometimes retrieve examples from memory that share
relational structure with the current example. This can be
very useful as it allows us to transfer existing knowledge to
the new example. For instance, if a social psychology
student learns about the classic findings that a person’s
attitude can become resistant against very persuasive
arguments after the person has argued against weak versions
of such arguments (e.g., McGuire, 1961; McGuire &
Papageorgis, 1961), then this might remind the student of
how someone can become immune to a disease after being
exposed to a weakened form of that disease. Based on this
connection, they may be able to draw some conclusions
about the new situation, such as why the attitude becomes
resistant to change, or why the initial arguments against the
attitude have to be weak.
As useful as it can be, relational retrieval—retrieval based
only on common relational structure—is typically rare (e.g.,
Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993; Gick & Holyoak,
1980, 1983; Holyoak & Koh, 1987; Ross, 1987, 1989).
Instead, memory retrieval is likely to be based either on
overall similarity or on surface commonalities, such as
matching entities (e.g., Brooks, Norman, & Allen, 1991;
Gentner et al., 1993; Holyoak & Koh, 1987; Ross, 1987,
1989). This is an instance of the inert knowledge problem
(Whitehead, 1929) – that people are often unable to retrieve
knowledge and apply it to new situations even when that
information has been stored in memory (e.g., Barnett &
Ceci, 2002; Bransford, 1979).

Relational Language
In the current research, we ask whether an abstraction
process like the one that operates during comparison also
applies when relational language is used. Specifically, we
ask whether using known relational terms like reciprocity or
inoculation to label examples promotes the abstraction of
their relational structure and leads to improved relational
retrieval. The idea is that using a relational term to label a
situation can promote the abstraction of relational structure
1
The value of relational language and comparison might in
some cases be related because using the same term for different
examples can invite comparison of these examples (e.g., Gentner,
2003, 2010; Gentner & Medina, 1998; Gentner & Namy, 1999).
However, our focus here will be on the individual effects of
relational language and comparison.

651

and change the construal of the situation by shifting the
focus to its relational structure (e.g., Gentner, 2003, 2010;
Genter, Angorro, & Klibanoff, 2011; Gentner &
Loewenstein, 2002). This may result in improved relational
retrieval in response to another example that shares the same
relational structure.
Applying relational labels shares some similarities with
comparison of examples, in that both involve the extraction
and retention of relational structure. The difference is that in
the case of relational labels, the alignment is between a
labeled example and the relational structure conveyed by the
label (which has already been abstracted). For instance, if
the label inoculation is applied to a situation in which
someone becomes immune to the stronger form of smallpox
after being exposed to a milder form of smallpox, this
invites a construal of the situation with a heightened focus
on the common relational structure, such as ‘exposure to a
weakened form of something protects against the stronger
form’. If so, then this might increase transfer to a further,
more distant example of the relational structure. For
instance, if someone encodes the example from medicine
labeled inoculation and later receives an example about
attitude change labeled inoculation, then both of the
examples should be construed with a focus on the relational
structure that each shares with inoculation. These similar
relational construals should then improve the likelihood of
relational retrieval of one example given the other.
The logic of the current experiment is to vary the presence
of relational labels and to test the likelihood of subsequent
relational retrieval. In the experiment, participants read a
series of stories at encoding either with or without relational
labels. Later, they were given test stories that shared
relational structure with the encoding stories and asked to
write out of the encoding stories they were reminded of. In
one condition, the same relational labels were used at
encoding and at test. The prediction is that this will lead to
heightened relational retrieval, because the labels will invite
the same construal across examples. Of course, if the same
label is used at encoding and at test, then this leaves open
the possibility that the label may also be acting as a common
surface feature between examples that share relational
structure.
We will also test a more interesting possibility: that labels
may improve relational retrieval even if they are only
present at encoding. If a relational label is applied to the
initial example, then this can result in a construal in which
there is a greater focus on the invited relational structure.
Later, if the relational structure of the test example is
apparent (or even partially apparent), then it should be more
likely to match the initial (stored) example than it would
have been had the initial example not been labeled. For
instance, if the initial medical example is labeled
inoculation, then this may increase its likelihood of being
retrieved given a new passage involving the analogous
phenomenon in attitude change.

Finally, it is possible that relational labels present at test
only may likewise improve relational retrieval. There is
some evidence that deriving a relational abstraction from
comparison can improve relational retrieval of past
examples that share the same relational structure (Gentner et
al., 2009). If, as we have suggested, labels also promote
abstraction of relational structure in much the same way as
comparison, then they may also improve relational retrieval
when they are given at test.
In the current experiment, we tested whether relational
labels can improve relational retrieval in one of the ways
described above. We varied the presence of labels at
encoding and at test. As outlined above, the pattern of
results can inform us about the underlying processes
through which relational labels might be having their effect.

Logic of the Experiment
We used a cued recall paradigm similar to that used in
previous studies of relational retrieval (e.g., Gentner et al,
1993). Participants studied one set of stories during an
encoding phase. After a delay, in the test phase they
received a new set of stories. For each story, their task was
to write down any stories that they were reminded of from
the encoding phase.
Each story in the test phase described the same relational
pattern (e.g., positive feedback, reciprocity) as one story in
the encoding phase and came from the same domain (e.g.,
medicine, political science) as another story in the encoding
phase. Thus for each test story there were two likely
retrieval candidates, one sharing the same relational pattern
as the test story (the relational match), and one coming from
the same domain as the test story (the domain match).
We expected that domain matches would be quite likely
to be retrieved because stories from the same domain often
involve both surface commonalities and associative
connections. As reviewed earlier, retrieval is likely to be
based on surface commonalities (e.g., Gentner et al., 1993;
Holyoak & Koh, 1987; Ross, 1987) and there is also
evidence that the degree of association between examples
affects retrieval (e.g., Howard & Kahana, 2002; Pollio,
Richards, & Lucan, 1969; Wolfe, 2005). Assuming that
domain retrieval would be dominant and relational retrieval
relatively rare at baseline, we could assess improvement in
relational retrieval when relational labels were added.
We varied whether participants received relational labels
during the encoding and test phases in a 2 x 2 betweensubjects design (no relational labels at encoding or at test;
relational labels at encoding only, relational labels at test
only, or relational labels at both encoding and at test). The
condition in which no relational labels were given during
either the encoding or test phases provides a baseline of
performance against which we could measure gains in
relational retrieval. We tested whether (a) the use of
relational labels can improve the likelihood of relational
retrieval, and (b) whether this benefit occurs only when the

652

same relational labels are used both at encoding and at test,
or whether there is also a benefit for the use of relational
labels only during encoding or only during test.
The relational labels we used were schema noun labels
that named the relational patterns described by the stories
(e.g., positive feedback, reciprocity, inoculation). Schema
nouns are a subtype of relational nouns, which name
categories whose members share relational structure (e.g.,
Gentner & Kurtz, 2005; Goldwater, Markman, & Stilwell,
2011; Markman & Stilwell, 2001). Since schema nouns
name entire relational structures, they seemed particularly
well-suited for promoting abstraction and a relational
construal of the stories.
The most obvious prediction is that giving relational
labels at encoding and at test should improve relational
retrieval. This effect would be consistent with the
interpretation that the label invited a similar relational
construal for the two examples. Unfortunately, this result by
itself is subject to another interpretation. Perhaps relational
labels also act as a common surface feature between
examples that share relational structure. If labels invite
relational construal and/or act as a common feature, there
should only be a benefit of relational labels on retrieval if
labels are present at both encoding and test.
The two conditions of most interest are whether
participants’ relational retrieval improves when relational
labels are given only during the encoding phase or during
the test phase. If relational labels promote a construal in
which there is a greater focus on the invited relational
structure, then this may enable it to be retrieved more easily
if the same relational structure (or a part of this relational
structure) is encountered in future situations. If this is the
case, then providing relational labels at encoding should
also improve retrieval. It is possible that providing relational
labels at test might also improve relational retrieval. If
relational labels help people abstract the named relational
structure and retrieve prior examples that share the same
structure, then receiving labels during the test phase may
also lead to improvement in relational retrieval. In sum, the
two single labeling conditions allow us to examine the
effects of selective abstraction on relational retrieval. The
pattern of results will inform us about how relational labels
might be having their effect.

encoding, 16 participants received labels only at test, and 14
participants received labels at encoding and at test. An
additional four participants were tested but excluded from
further analyses, either for failing to follow the test
instructions (one participant), or for failing to respond to at
least half of the test items (three participants).

Materials and Design
The materials consisted of two sets (A and B) of fourteen
stories each that served as the encoding and test story sets
(with A/B assignment counterbalanced). Each of these two
story sets was made up of ten key stories and four filler
stories. The ten key stories described relational patterns. The
relational patterns were chosen to be applicable in different
domains. For example, as described earlier, the relational
pattern inoculation can appear in domain of medicine and
also in the domain of psychology. Half of the key stories
described causal systems (e.g., a positive feedback system),
and the other half described other relational schemas (e.g.,
reciprocity). Some of the causal systems stories were
adapted from an earlier study by Rottman, Gentner, and
Goldwater (2012).
Within each of the two story sets (i.e., the encoding and
test sets), each of the test stories was set in a different
domain (e.g., mechanical engineering, political science,
psychology). Across the two story sets, each test story
matched one encoding story in terms of its relational
structure, and matched a different encoding story in terms of
its domain. For example, in one set, the story describing
reciprocity was set in the domain of political science. In the
other set, the story describing reciprocity was set in the
domain of psychology, and the story set in the domain of
political science described a different relational pattern.
As a check on our manipulation of domain-relatedness,
we used Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to measure the
degree of relatedness between the stories (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997). For each of the ten test stories in story set
A, we calculated the LSA relatedness scores (Landauer &
Kintsch, 1998) to the story in set B that came from the same
domain and to the story from set B that described the same
relational pattern. Stories that came from the same domain
had higher relatedness scores (M = 0.35, SD = 0.20) than did
stories that shared relational structure (M = 0.14, SD =
0.07), t(9) = 3.38, p = .008, d =1.40. This confirmed that, as
intended, stories that came from the same domain were
more semantically related than stories that described the
same relational pattern.
Each of the two story sets also contained four filler
stories. Across the two story sets, the filler stories were
matched both in their relational pattern and in their domain
setting.
The presence or absence of relational labels during the
encoding and test phases was varied in a 2 (label present vs.
absent at encoding) x 2 (label present vs. absent at test)
between-subjects design.

Method
Participants
Participants (N = 60, 39 female, mean age = 22.48) were
recruited from the Northwestern University community and
were paid or received course credit for their participation in
the experiment. All participants were native English
speakers.
Participants were assigned to one of the four conditions as
follows: 15 participants received no relational labels at
encoding or at test, 15 participants received labels only at

653

Procedure

2.52, participants who received labels at encoding (M =
4.13, SD = 2.23), p = .005, d = 1.21, and participants who
received labels at test (M = 2.81, SD = 2.04), p < .001, d
=1.87 (see Figure 1). More interestingly, participants who
received labels only at encoding also retrieved more
relational matches than participants who received no labels,
p = .023, d = 1.21.
Domain matches showed a somewhat complementary
pattern. Participants who received no labels retrieved more
domain matches (M = 3.60, SD = 1.96) than participants
who received labels in both the encoding and test phases (M
= 1.43, SD = 1.55), p = .015, d = 1.27. There were no other
differences between conditions in the number of domain
matches retrieved. There were no differences between
conditions in the total number of items (domain, relational,
and other) retrieved, F(3, 56) = 1.76, p = .166, η2 = 0.086.

There were two phases: an encoding phase and a test phase.
Before the encoding phase, participants were informed that
the experiment was composed of two parts. They were told
that they would read a number of stories and that they would
use the information they read about during the second part
of experiment.
In the encoding phase, participants read one set of stories,
either story set A or B. The order of the stories was
randomized. If participants were in either of two labeling
conditions (labels at encoding, labels at encoding and test),
an additional sentence was added to the end of each story
that described the relational pattern (e.g., “This is an
example of reciprocity”). Participants were allowed as much
time as they needed to read the stories.
After the encoding phase, participants completed a 15
minute filler task and then began the test phase of the
experiment. In the test phase, participants received the set of
stories that they did not receive during the encoding phase.
For each story, they were asked to write down any of the
original stories of which they were reminded. They were
told that they could write down multiple original stories if
they were reminded of them by one test story. Likewise,
they could write down an original story multiple times if
they were reminded of it by multiple test stories.
The test stories were presented one at a time on the
screen, with a large text box below each story for
participants to write down their responses. Participants were
allowed as much time as needed to make their responses. As
in the encoding phase, in the two labeling conditions (labels
at test, labels at encoding and test), each of the stories ended
with a sentence describing the relational pattern.
For each participant, we calculated two measures: the
number of relational matches retrieved and the number of
domain matches retrieved. A trained research assistant, who
was blind to condition, coded the responses as relational
matches, domain matches, or other responses. Other
responses included extraneous retrievals that were neither
domain matches or relational matches, and responses that
were ambiguous or that did not provide enough information
to be classified.

Figure 1: The average number of relational matches
retrieved by condition.

Discussion
As predicted, we found that relational labels are able to
improve relational retrieval. Relational retrieval improved
over the baseline level when participants received relational
labels at encoding and at test. More interestingly, relational
retrieval also improved significantly when participants
received relational labels only at encoding. There was
evidence that relational labels can also promote a relational
focus: participants who received relational labels at
encoding and at test retrieved fewer domain matches than
did participants who did not receive labels.
Earlier, we suggested that the use of known relational
labels might improve relational retrieval by promoting a
consistent relational construal of examples that share the
same label. Further, we proposed that if an example is
construed with a focus on the relational structure invited by
the label, then this construal might be more likely to be

Results
As predicted, relational labels led to more relational
retrievals and fewer domain retrievals overall. Label
condition had an effect on the number of relational matches,
F(3, 56) = 15.51 p < .001, η2 = 0.454, and domain matches,
F(3, 56) = 3.51, p = .021, η2 = 0.158, retrieved. As expected,
Tukey HSD tests2 revealed that participants who received
labels at encoding and at test retrieved more relational
matches (M = 6.86, SD = 2.45) than participants who
received no labels (M = 1.87, SD = 1.60), p < .001, d =
2

All of the post-hoc tests were Tukey HSD tests.

654

retrieved in response to another example that shares the
same relational structure. Finally, we suggested that if a
label promotes abstraction of relational structure, that this
might improve the likelihood of retrieving prior examples
that share this relational structure. We found evidence for
the first and the second predictions, but not for the third.
The likelihood of relational retrieval was greatest when
relational labels were present at both encoding and test,
consistent with our hypothesis that labels promote a
consistent relational construal (though, as noted earlier, it
could also have resulted simply through labels acting as a
common feature). Turning to the second prediction, we
found that relational labels at encoding improved relational
retrieval. This suggests that the labels promoted abstraction
and storage of the named relational structure so that it could
be retrieved more easily when a test example shared the
same relational structure.
We did not find an effect of labels at test. One reason for
this asymmetry between encoding and test may be that
relational labels at encoding could have primed people to
adopt a relational focus that carried over into the test.
At the start of the paper, we raised the question of why
relational retrieval becomes more likely with domain
expertise. Our findings suggest that one factor may be
learning a technical vocabulary to name relational patterns
in the domain.
The present findings have implications for learning and
education. In order to promote relational retrieval and
transfer, it could be useful to provide learners with labels for
important relational structures. Our findings suggest that
relational labels may highlight relational structure and make
it more likely that it will be accessed again in the future.
Additionally, the finding that relational retrieval is best
when the same labels are used at encoding and retrieval
suggests that labels for relational structures should be
consistent. This fits with Forbus et al.’s (1995) claim that
uniform relational encoding promotes relational retrieval.
Our findings are compatible with prior work
demonstrating that other kinds of relational language can
improve relational retrieval and transfer. For example,
Clement, Mawby, and Giles (1994) found that using the
same or synonymous verbs to describe relational structure in
analogous situations improved the likelihood of relational
retrieval. This suggests that using relational terms that invite
a similar construal of situations, even if the labels are not
identical, can increase the likelihood of noticing their
similarity. Another finding related to this work is that
receiving relational terms when learning about a new
domain can improve the likelihood of relational transfer
(Son, Doumas, & Goldstone, 2010). In Son et al.’s (2010)
studies, participants completed a tutorial about a domain
they did not know about (Signal Detection Theory) and later
solved transfer problems that involved the same principles.
Half of the participants received relational terms (e.g.,
target, distracter, false alarm) in the tutorial. Since the

domain was new to participants, these particular uses of the
terms were novel to them. The studies manipulated whether
the semantics of the relational terms matched the tutorial
scenario and whether the tutorial and transfer scenarios were
easily alignable. The use of relational terms improved
transfer performance the most dramatically when the
semantics of the relational terms matched the tutorial and
when the tutorial and transfer situations were easily
alignable. These findings are consistent with the framework
we presented earlier. If a relational term already had some
initial stored meaning, then if it were applied in a new
context (the tutorial scenario), this should lead to an
alignment that resulted in the abstraction of their common
relational structure. If participants then received the easily
alignable transfer scenario and attended to its identical
relational structure, then they should be able to retrieve the
past case that shared this relational structure and transfer
solution strategies from it to the transfer scenario.
In sum, the current research suggests that one way to
improve relational retrieval is through the use of relational
labels. This raises a number of interesting questions about
how relational labels bring about this improvement. In this
research, we investigated the effects of known relational
labels. What effects would unknown or partially understood
labels have? What would be the most effective way to
introduce new vocabulary to improve relational retrieval and
transfer? Would the benefits of relational labels on retrieval
remain with greater delays? This line of research promises
to shed light on the way in which symbolic learning and
analogical processes combine in the acquisition of expertise.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ONR Grant N00014-08-10040. We thank Laura Willig for her help in coding the data
and members of the Cognition and Language Lab for their
helpful suggestions.

References
Barnett, S. M., & Ceci, S. J. (2002). When and where do we
apply what we learn? A taxonomy for far transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 128, 612–637.
Bransford, J. D. (1979). The role of prior knowledge. In J.
D. Bransford (Ed.), Human cognition: Learning,
understanding, and remembering. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Brooks, L. R., Norman, G. R., & Allen, S. W. (1991). Role
of specific similarity in a medical diagnostic task. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 278–287.
Clement,
J.
(1988).
Observed
methods
for
generating analogies
in
scientific
problem
solving. Cognitive Science, 12, 563-586.
Clement, C.A., Mawby, R., & Giles, D.E. (1994). The
effects of manifest relational similarity on analog
retrieval. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 396-420.

655

Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC:
A model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science,
19, 141-205.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5).
752-775.
Gentner, D., Anggoro, F. K., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2011).
Structure-mapping and relational language support
children’s learning of relational categories. Child
Development, 82(4). 1173-1188.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Learning and using
relational categories. In W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B.
C. Love, A. B. Markman, & P. W. Wolff (Eds.),
Categorization inside and outside the laboratory.
Washington, DC: APA.
Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2002). Relational language
and relational thought. In J. Byrnes & E. Amsel (Eds.),
Language, Literacy, and Cognitive Development.
Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Forbus, K.
(2009) Reviving inert knowledge: Analogical abstraction
supports relational retrieval of past events. Cognitive
Science, 3, 1343-1382.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability and inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524–575.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306–355.
Gick, M . L., & Holyoak, K J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Goldwater, M. B., Markman, A. B, Stilwell, C. H. (2011).
The
empirical
case
for
role-governed
categories. Cognition, 118, 359-376.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition, 15,
332–340.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). When does
semantic similarity help episodic retrieval? Journal of
Memory & Language, 46, 85-98.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.

Psychological Review, 104, 211–420.
Landauer, T., & Kintsch, W. (1998). Latent Semantic
Analysis. [Online computer software]. Available from
http://lsa.colorado.edu/.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Intelligence, 13, 329-358.
McGuire, W. J. (1961). The effectiveness of supportive and
refutational defenses in immunizing and restoring beliefs
against persuasion. Sociometry, 24, 184-197.
McGuire, W. J., & Papageorgis, D. (1961). The relative
efficacy of various types of prior belief defense in
producing immunity against persuasion. Journal of
Abnormal Social Psychology, 62, 327-337.
Novick, L. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem similarity,
and expertise. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 510–520.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 398–
415.
Pollio, H. R., Richards, S., & Lucas, R. (1969). Temporal
properties of category recall. Journal of Verbal Learning
& Verbal Behavior, 8, 529-536.
Reeves, L. M., & Weisberg, R. W. (1994). The role of
content and abstract information in analogical transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 115, 381–400.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13, 629–639.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 456–468.
Ross, B. H., & Kennedy, P. T. (1990). Generalizing from
the use of earlier examples in problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 42–55.
Rottman, B. M., Gentner, D. & Goldwater, M. B. (2012).
Causal systems categories: Differences in novice and
expert categorization of causal phenomena. Cognitive
Science, 36(5), 919-932.
Son, J.Y., Doumas, L.A.A., & Goldstone, R.L. (2010).
When do words promote analogical transfer? Journal of
Problem Solving, 3, 52-92.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929). The Aims of Education and Other
Essays. New York: Macmillan Company.
Wolfe, M. B. (2005). Memory for narrative and expository
text: Independent influences of semantic associations and
text organization. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(2), 359-364.

656

