UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relations between Body Motion and Emotion: Analysis based on Laban Movement Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8sk5s61w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Morita, Junya
Nagai, Yukari
Moritsu, Tomoyuki

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relations between Body Motion and Emotion:
Analysis based on Laban Movement Analysis
Junya Morita, Yukari Nagai, Tomoyuki Moritsu
j-morita@jaist.ac.jp, ynagai@jaist.ac.jp, moritsu.tom@gmail.com
School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
The movement stimuli used in emotion perception studies
are usually created from performances of expert dancers or
actors. On the basis of this method, several body movement
theories have been proposed in the ﬁeld of drama and dance.
Laban Movement Analysis (LMA) is one of the most famous theories of body expressions in dance (Laban, 1980).
This theory assumes two basic opposing forms of body movement: ﬁghting form and indulging form. Fighting form involves active, prominent, brisk body movements, while indulging form is unsteady weak body movements.
LMA assumes that such forms of body movement reﬂect
subjective inner attitudes, refered to as efforts. The theory
classiﬁes effort into the following three axes:

Abstract
This study examined the relationship between human body
movements and emotion based on Laban Movement Analysis (LMA). Ten participants participated in the experiment in
which they stayed at a small resting room while hearing pleasant or unpleasant sounds. After the stay at the room, the participants rated their subjective emotional states. Participants’
body movement were also recorded with four video cameras.
The movement analysis based on LMA reveled signiﬁcant differences in movement features between experimental conditions. In addition, signiﬁcant correlations between movement
features and subjective mood ratings were observed. These results suggest a strong relationship between human body movements and emotion.
Keywords: Emotion; Body motion; LMA

Introduction
The English word “emotion” comes from the Latin word
“emovere,” meaning to “move out.” This derivation suggests a close relationship between emotion and body movements. In fact, this relationship, which we will refer to as
the motion-emotion relationship in this paper, has been repeatedly discussed (Damasio, 1994; Darwin, 1890; James,
1892). Researchers have attempted to reveal causal relationships between emotion and body movements or the evolutionary advantages of emotion. This work has also described how
emotion is expressed in body movements. However quantitative relationships between body movements and emotion
categories have yet to be fully clariﬁed.
Experimental studies on the motion-emotion relationship
have so far, been conducted in the ﬁeld of emotion perception (Atkinson, Dittrich, Germmell, & Young, 2004; Dittrich, Troscianko, Lea, & Morgan, 1996; Field, Hampson,
& Rose, 2005; Kaiser & Keller, 2011; Pollick, Paterson,
Bruderlin, & Sanford, 2001). For example, in Dittrich et
al. (1996) presented participants with stimuli that expressed
human body movements, and participants rated their impressions of those movements on basic emotional category scales.
The results showed that participants could judge the emotional states even from biological motion produced by pointlight displays.
Pollick et al. (2001) also conducted experiments that followed the paradigm proposed by Dittrich et al. (1996). Unlike
the other previous studies, Pollick and colleagues quantiﬁed
features of body movements as a way to reveal the motionemotion relationship. The results showed that motions with
strong velocity tended to be perceived as anger or happiness,
while motions with weak velocity tended to be perceived as
sadness or tired.

• Weight effort that stands for the vigorousness of body
movement.
• Space effort that stands for the degree of directional deﬂection.
• Time effort stands for the hurriedness in the changes of
movement.
The terms ﬁghting and indulging refer to opposing or enhancing the characteristics of a type of effort deﬁned in the
above three axes. Fighting form has strong weight, space,
and time efforts. Indulging form has weak weight, space and
time efforts.
LMA does not directly explain the motion-emotion relationship. Instead, this theory was proposed to describe body
movements in dance. Laban (1980) did not mention any
correspondence between the efforts and emotion categories.
However, several researchers have applied LMA to emotion
expressions programmed in robots (Hachimura, Takashina, &
Yoshimura, 2005; Masuda & Kato, 2009; Nakata & Mori,
2002). For example, Nakata and Mori (2002) deﬁned the
three effort axes based on Euclidean vector operations. Here,
participants rated impressions of robot motions that manipulated the three efforts based on LMA. The results indicated
correlations between emotion ratings and the efforts based on
LMA.
Studies using robots are useful in being able to produce
precise manipulations of body movement. Researchers can
freely create robot’s movements, and these movements are
easily quantiﬁed. However, studies using robots have the
same limitations as studies assessing emotion perception.
Both ﬁelds have only examined intentionally expressed emotion. Ekman and Friesen (1975) pointed out that there are uncontrolled, involuntary, true emotion expressions, as well as

1026

qualiﬁed, modulated, or false expressions. Past studies have
examined Ekman’s second type of emotion expressions. Few
studies have challenged the ﬁrst type of emotion expressions.
For a deeper understanding of the motion-emotion relationship, the ﬁrst type of emotion expressions needed to be examined.
The present study aimed to apply past ﬁndings of the
motion-emotion relationship from uncontrolled experimental situations (Ekman’s ﬁrst type). To achieve this goal,
we quantiﬁed involuntarily body movements using LMA.
The motion-emotion relationship was explored by calculating correlations between quantitative features of body movements and subjective ratings of emotional states. In addition,
this study explored how the environment inﬂuences on the
motion-emotion relationship. It can be reasonably assumed
that the motion-emotion relation will be affected by environment. We prepared two experimental conditions that were
expected to arouse different emotional states.

• Environmental sound
The environmental sounds were prepared using free
sound libraries on the web. The pleasant sound was
selected from “pdsounds” (http://www.pdsounds.org/).
The unpleasant sound was created at “sound 101”
(http://www.sound101.org/). Ten sound ﬁles were arbitrarily downloaded from these two web sites. Three raters,
who were naive to the purpose of the study, assessed the
pleasantness of these sounds. The sound that had the highest rating was chosen as the pleasant sound, and the sound
that had the lowest rating was selected as the unpleasant sound. The selected pleasant sound was the sound
of a brook (17 seconds), while the unpleasant sound was
composed of several noises, such as sirens, microphone
feedback, and scratching noises (20 seconds). Each environmental sound was looped during the experiment. The
participants heard the sound through wireless headphones
(Sony DRBT50). The maximum output sound level was
kept below 70 db for both groups.

Methods
Design

Procedure

This study utilized audio stimuli that were assumed to arouse
participants’ emotion. A series of studies have previously
examined environmental sounds related to pleasant or unpleasant emotion (Shimai, Tanaka, & Terasaki, 1990). From
this work, we set up an experiment to examine the motionemotion relationship using different environmental sound settings.
A between subjects design was used in the experiment.
One group heard a pleasant environmental sound (pleasant
sound group), and the other group heard an unpleasant environmental sound (unpleasant sound group).

The procedure for the experiment was composed of the following three steps:
1. Instructions
The participants were told that this experiment was conducted to evaluate the resting room with environmental
sound. They were asked to rest while hearing the environmental sound. They were not told that their movements
would be recorded while in the room.
2. Resting room

Participants

The participants entered the resting room alone, and took
off their shoes. They put on a set of wireless headphones
and an orange jump suit. The jump suit was used to analyze body movements with more ease. The participants
could not bring any personal items into the room, including their mobile phone. After 30 minutes, the experimenter
announced the end of the experiment.

Twenty graduate students from Japan Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology participated in the experiment; they
were divided into two groups of 10 participants each; all participants were in their 20s and naive to the purpose of the
study.

Apparatus
We did not prepare any speciﬁc tasks for the participants because we wanted to examine emotion elicitation and body
movement in uncontrolled situations. The participants were
just asked to relax in a resting room while hearing the environmental sounds. We prepared the following resting room
and environmental sounds:

3. Subjective emotional state ratings
Immediately after being in the resting room, the participants rated their emotional states using the POMS (Proﬁle of Mood States) brief test (Pollock, Cho, Reker, &
Volavka, 1979). This test is usually used to assess transient
and distinct mood states, which includes 30 questions classiﬁed into six factors: tension (anxiety), depression (dejection), anger (hostility), vigor (activity), fatigue (inertia),
and confusion (bewilderment). This test outputs standardized scores with an average of 50 points.

• Resting room
The resting room was designed like a Japanese teahouse
(2m × 2m × 2m). The room had two tatami on the ﬂoor,
and one small window on the wall. The participants’ body
movements were recorded with four video cameras afﬁxed
to the ceiling (Panasonic BB-HCM515).

The Ethics Committee of Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology approved the study.

1027

Analysis
We analyzed the video data by applying LMA. Although the
LMA effort axes were quantiﬁed by Nakata and Mori (2002),
their method targeted pre-programed movements with parameters such as joint torque or angles of movement. Since our
study obtained data in uncontrolled situations, the method
from this previous study could not be directly applied. To
quantify the efforts of Weight, Space and Time, we used optical ﬂows estimated by image processing.
Weight effort is deﬁned as the following equation.
t

Weight =

x

y

||vni j ||

∑ ∑ ∑ t ×x×y

(1)

Figure 1: Subjective rating of emotional states after staying
in the resting room.

n=1 i=1 j=1

where t, x, and y indicates the number of frames (25 fps),
the width of the frame (240px), and the height of the frame
(320px), respectively. ||vn jk || indicates the strength of the optical ﬂow at pixel i j of frame n. Weight indicates the time
space average of the vector strength. If the participants moved
actively, this index would increase.
The following equation deﬁnes Space effort.
t

Space =

y

x

µn · vni j

∑ ∑ ∑ t ×x×y

(2)

n=1 i=1 j=1

where µn is a mean vector (by-center) of optical ﬂows in
frame n, which indicates overall direction of body movements
in the frame. Space is calculated as the time space average of
dot products between a mean vector and individual optical
ﬂows. This value would increase when optical ﬂows in the
frame had consistent direction. Conversely, the value would
decrease if direction of optical ﬂows diverged.
Based on the above two feature quantities, Time (W) and
Time (S) are deﬁned as hurriedness in the changes of movement.

Figure 2: Changes in the features of body movements while
in the resting room.

Results

|Weight( n) −Weight( n − 1)|
t
n=2

(3)

µn · µn−1
t
n=2

(4)

t

Time(W ) =

∑

Subjective ratings on emotional states

t

Time(S) =

∑

Time (W) and Time (S) represent the difference of Weight
and Space between two continuous frames respectively. Time
(W) represents the degree of changes of movement strength.
Time (S) indicates the degree of changes of movement direction.
These feature quantities were averaged over the four video
cameras. Optical ﬂows were determined by Lucas and
Kanade (1981)’s gradient method. The frames were preprocessed by gray-scale processing and background differencing technique. For all steps of the above analysis, we used
OpenCV that is an open-source library for image processing.

Figure 1 shows the average rating scores on the POMS after
staying in the resting room. A 2 (group: pleasant sound vs.
unpleasant sound) by 6 (emotion categories: tension, depression, anger, vigor, fatigue, confusion) mixed design Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA) revealed a signiﬁcant interaction between the environmental sounds and the emotion categories
(F(5, 90) = 3.80, p < .01). Simple main effects of the environmental sounds were signiﬁcant for tension, depression,
fatigue, and confusion (tension: F(1, 18) = 8.97, p < .01,
depression: F(1, 18) = 7.89, p < .05, anger: F(1, 18) =
2.64, n.s., vigor: F(1, 18) = 0.01, n.s., fatigue: F(1, 18) =
11.12, p < .01, confusion: F(1, 18) = 5.74, p < .05). These
results indicate changes in emotional states inﬂuenced by the
environmental sounds.

1028

Table 1: Correlations between the subjective ratings of emotional states and features of body movements (Overall).
Weight
tension
0.632*
depression
0.436
anger
0.589*
vigor
-0.072
fatigue
0.601*
confusion
0.473*
Note. * p < .05.

Space
0.543*
0.275
0.372
0.056
0.473*
0.327

Time(W)
0.655*
0.405
0.560*
-0.036
0.601*
0.435

Table 2: Correlations between the subjective ratings of emotional states and features of body movements (pleasant sound
condition).

Time(S)
0.691*
0.560*
0.610*
-0.023
0.520*
0.468*

Weight
tension
-0.136
depression -0.028
anger
-0.531
vigor
0.338
fatigue
-0.610
confusion
0.324
Note. * p < .05.

Space
0.113
0.129
-0.405
0.182
-0.493
0.413

Time(W)
-0.014
0.267
-0.355
0.187
-0.436
0.577

Time(S)
-0.181
-0.101
-0.657*
-0.005
-0.591
-0.259

Feature quantities of body movement
Figure 2 shows the feature quantities of body while the
participants were in the resting room.
Four separete
10 (time: 3-30) by 2 (environmental sounds: pleasant vs. unpleasant) mixed design ANOVAs were conducted for the feature quantities. The analysis did not
reveal signiﬁcant interactions between time and the environmental sounds (Weight: F(9, 162) = 0.38, n.s., Space:
F(9, 162) = 0.59, n.s., Time(W): F(9, 162) = 0.49, n.s.,
Time(S): F(9, 162) = 0.85, n.s.).
We obtained signiﬁcant main effects of the environmental sounds (Weight:
F(1, 18) = 12.77, p < .01. Space: F(1, 18) = 11.64, p < .01.
Time(W): F(1, 18) = 8.54, p < .01. Time(S): F(1, 18) =
23.92, p < .01), and signiﬁcant main effects of time for the
four feature quantities (Weight: F(9, 162) = 12.17, p < .01.
Space: F(9, 162) = 6.22, p < .01, Time(W): F(9, 162) =
12.89, p < .01. Time(S): F(9, 162) = 15.30, p < .01).
The main effects of the environmental sounds indicate that
the body movements in the unpleasant sound condition were
active, directed, and rapid. This suggests that the unpleasant
sound changed body movements toward ﬁghting form. On
the other hand, the pleasant sound changed the body movement toward indulging form.
The main effects of time indicate that the participants made
more movements immediately after entering the resting room.
We conﬁrmed qualitative differences in behaviors between
the early and latter stages of the experiment. During the
ﬁrst few minutes, several participants observed interiors of
the resting room. Next, they tended to lie down on the tatami
mats until the end of the experiment.

Correlations between emotional states and body
movement
Table 1 shows correlation coefﬁcients between the rated emotional states and the feature quantities of body movements. In
this analysis, we used the feature quantities in the latter 12
minutes to examine body movements that strongly connected
to the emotional states.
From the table, we can observe some signiﬁcant correlations between body motion and the emotion ratings. The
emotion categories other than vigor appear to be related to
some of the body movements.
However, we cannot exclude the possibility that these correlations were caused by features of the environmental sound

Table 3: Correlations between the subjective ratings of emotional states and features of body movements (unpleasant
sound condition).
Weight
tension
-0.616
depression
0.291
anger
0.731*
vigor
-0.232
fatigue
0.725*
confusion
0.343
Note. * p < .05.

Space
0.389
-0.050
0.422
0.039
0.451
-0.001

Time(W)
0.580
0.140
0.661*
-0.123
0.621
0.158

Time(S)
0.798*
0.540
0.892*
-0.020
0.719*
0.510

because the participants in the two groups heard different
sounds. The body movements might have been inﬂuenced
by acoustic features such as rhythm or tempo. To exclude
this possibility and obtain stronger evidence of the motionemotion relationship, we calculated correlations disaggregated by the environmental sound.
Table 2 and 3 show correlation coefﬁcients between the
emotional states and the feature quantities of body movements in the pleasant and the unpleasant sound conditions,
respectively. In the pleasant sound condition, anger was negatively correlated with time (S). In the unpleasant sound condition, anger was positively correlated with Weight, Time (W),
and Time (S). There was a positive correlation between tension and Time (S) in the unpleasant sound condition. Fatigue
in the unpleasant sound condition was also correlated with
Weight and Time (S).
From these results, we conﬁrmed a motion-emotion relationship in a situation where the same environmental sound
was presented. However, there were large differences in the
pattern of the motion-emotion relationship between the two
groups. In the following section, we will try to explain each
of the observed correlations.

Discussion
This study explored the motion-emotion relationship in uncontrolled experimental situations. We prepared two conditions that differed in the environmental sounds presented.
The results conﬁrmed that (1) changes in emotional states as
a function of environmental sound occured, (2) differences
in body movements between different environmental sound

1029

conditions emerged, and (3) correlations between emotional
states and body movements in each environmental sound condition were observed. This following section provides an interpretation of these results and discusses implications and
limitations of the current ﬁndings.

Changes in emotional states by environmental sound
This study conﬁrmed that environmental sounds changed
emotional states as assessed by the POMS test. Although
this study does not focus on the relationship between environmental sounds and emotion, we consider this result useful
for future experimental studies on emotional arousal. Presentation of environmental sounds is non-invasive and an easy
way to manipulate emotional states.
However, Figure 1 also shows limitations of our emotional
manipulation. The inﬂuence of the environmental sound was
limited to speciﬁc emotion categories. There were no differences in anger and vigor between the two groups. It is difﬁcult to interpret why these differences occured. To provide
a more accurate emotion manipulation, we need to conduct
further experiments that explore the mechanisms underlying
the relationships between emotion categories in this context.

Changes in body movements by environmental
sound
In addition to the emotional states, the environmental sound
inﬂuenced body movements. The feature quantities of body
movements in the unpleasant sound condition were higher
than those in the pleasant sound condition. The participants
in the unpleasant sound condition exhibited active, directed,
and rapid movement. Such body movements are consistent
with ﬁghting form of LMA. In contrast, body movements observed in the pleasant condition are consistent with indulging
form. Considering the results of the POMS test, we can assume emotion categories like tension, depression, fatigue and
confusion were related to ﬁghting form.
However, this conclusion is not sufﬁcient given that the environmental sounds in the two groups had different physical
features. The difference between the two groups might be
explained by certain mechanisms, such as sensory-motor coordination (Repp, 2005). This limitation can be addressed by
examining correlations disaggregated by the environmental
sounds.

Relationships between emotional states and body
movement
Our study observed signiﬁcant correlations between emotional states and body movements. This was especially the
case when we consider that the correlations disaggregated by
the environmental sounds are important. We provide an interpretation for the observed correlations in the following section.
Expressions of anger in response to the unpleasant sound
In the unpleasant sound condition, anger was correlated with
all of the features except Space. From this result, we can con-

sider that anger is expressed as ﬁghting form in LMA. This
interpretation is consistent with past studies of emotion perception. As noted in the Introduction, Pollick et al. (2001)
observed a correlation between anger perception and velocity
of body movements. Masuda and Kato (2009), who analyzed
robot motion based on LMA, also observed a strong correlation between anger perception and Time effort. The present
study succeeded in extending these ﬁndings of emotion perception to an uncontrolled situation.
Expressions of tension in response to the unpleasant
sound In the unpleasant sound condition, tension was correlated with Time (S), which quantiﬁes the degree of hurriedness in movement changes. This result is consistent with
the classic ﬁnding indicating that tension is often accompanied by muscle overactivity (Sainsbury & Gibson, 1954).
Darwin (1890) also classiﬁed this action as an involuntary
reﬂex movement. The present study described these relationships using the LMA framework.
Expressions of fatigue in response to the unpleasant sound
Weight and Time (S) were correlated with fatigue in the unpleasant sound condition. POMS deﬁnes fatigue as decrease
in motivation or energy. This result is inconsistent with our
intuition that fatigue decreases body movements.
However, this result does not necessarily indicate a direct
causal relationship between fatigue and these movement features. One possible explanation for this result might be that
other emotion categories that covaried with fatigue caused an
increase in the movement features.
In the unpleasant sound condition, fatigue was positively
correlated with tension (r = 0.738, p < .05) and anger (r =
0.698, p < .05), which were also correlated with the movement features (Table 3). From these correlations, we can
speculate that fatigue in the unpleasant sound condition was
caused by strong and rapid movements accompanying these
emotional states. However, our results cannot directly conﬁrm this hypothesis. This possibility needs further study using more sophisticated methods such as path analysis.
Expressions of anger in response to the pleasant sound
Compared to the unpleasant sound condition, the pleasant
sound condition did not show many correlations between
body movements and emotional states. In the pleasant sound
condition, anger was negatively correlated with Time (S).
This result is incontrast to the positive correlation observed
in the unpleasant sound condition.
As in the above case, this contrasting ﬁnding might be explained by examining emotion categories that were negatively
correlated with anger. In Pollick et al. (2001)’s experiment,
both anger and happiness were expressed as active motion.
Considering their ﬁnding, our negative correlation between
anger and Time (S) is not too suprising. The increase in
happiness might accompany a decrease in anger. However,
we cannot conﬁrm with the present results. Future studies
that employ emotional ratings including happiness, should be
conducted.

1030

Summary
This study attempted to reveal motion-emotion relationships
in uncontrolled situations. As a result, we observed that both
motion and emotion were changed by environmental sounds.
More importantly, we obtained correlations between emotion
and body movements in each environmental sound condition.
From these results, we conﬁrmed the motion-emotion relationship from uncontrolled, involuntary emotional expressions.
Our study is characterized by a method of quantifying body
movement features based on LMA. This quantitative method
is useful for connecting motion and emotion in uncontrolled
experimental situations. We consider that our approach can
contribute not only to scientiﬁc studies of emotion but also to
engineering applications. Automatic emotion assessment is
applicable to various pragmatic situations, including dance,
education and marketing. LMA is a useful tool for systematically describing body movements. Past studies using
LMA have not included involuntary motion/emotion in uncontrolled situations. Our study extends the application ﬁelds
of these past studies.
However, our results also revealed complexities in the
motion-emotion relationship. As shown in Table 2 and 3,
emotion is expressed differently in different situations. Additionally, there is no one-to-one correspondence between body
movements and emotional states. A single emotion category
can be connected to several body movements and vice versa.
Furthermore, as speculated earlier, emotion categories are intricately intertwined. To reveal the deeper mechanisms of the
motion-emotion relationship, studies with larger sample sizes
will be needed.

References
Atkinson, A., Dittrich, W., Germmell, A., & Young, A.
(2004). Emotion perception from dynamic and static body
expressions in point-light and full-light displays. Perception, 33, 717–746.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, rationality
and the human brain. New York: Putnam.
Darwin, C. (1890). The Expression of the Emotions in Man
and Animals (London ed.). HarperCollins.
Dittrich, W. H., Troscianko, T., Lea, S. E. G., & Morgan, D.
(1996). Perception of emotion from dynamic point-light
displays represented in dance. Perception, 25(6), 727–738.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1975). Unmasking the face:
A guide to emotions from facial cues. Prentice-Hall. New
Jersey.
Field, D., Hampson, S., & Rose, D. (2005). The perception
of emotion from body movement in point-light displays of
interpersonal dialogue. Perception, 34, 1171–1180.
Hachimura, K., Takashina, K., & Yoshimura, M. (2005).
Analysis and Evaluation of Dancing Movement Based on
LMA. In Ieee international workshop on robot and human
interactive communication, 2005. (pp. 294–299). IEEE.

James, W. (1892). Psyhology (Brief Course). University of
Notre Dame Press.
Kaiser, R., & Keller, P. E. (2011, July). Music’s impact
on the visual perception of emotional dyadic interactions.
Musicae Scientiae, 15(2), 270–287.
Laban, R. (1980). The Mastery of Movement (4th ed.; L. Ullmann, Ed.). Hampshire, UK: Dance Books.
Lucas, B. D., & Kanade, T. (1981). An iterative image registration technique with an application to stereo vision. In
Proceedings of imaging understanding workshop (pp. 121–
130).
Masuda, M., & Kato, S. (2009). Emotion detection from
body motion of human form robot based on laban movement analysis. In Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on principles of practice in multi-agent systems
(pp. 322–334). Nagoya.
Nakata, T., & Mori, T. (2002). Analysis of impression of
robot bodily expression. Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, 14(1), 27–36.
Pollick, F., Paterson, H., Bruderlin, A., & Sanford, A. J.
(2001). Perceiving affect from arm movement. Cognition,
82, 51–61.
Pollock, V., Cho, D. W., Reker, D., & Volavka, J. (1979).
Proﬁle of Mood States: The factors and their physiological
correlates. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 167,
612-614.
Repp, B. (2005). Sensorimotor synchronization: A review of
the tapping literature. Psychonomic Bulletin Review, 12(6),
969–992.
Sainsbury, P., & Gibson, J. G. (1954). Symptoms of anxiety
and tension and the accompanying physiological changes
in the muscular system. Journal of Neurology, 17, 216–
224.
Shimai, S., Tanaka, M., & Terasaki, M. (1990). Plesantness and unplesantness of environmental sounds. Perception and Motor Skills, 71, 960-962.

1031

