UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representational Shifts Towards the Prototype in Memory for Hue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9683h6zc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kelly, Laura
Heit, Evan

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representational Shifts Towards the Prototype in Memory for Hue
Laura Jane Kelly (lkelly@ucmerced.edu)
Evan Heit (eheit@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
5200 N. Lake Road, Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract
Representational shifts in memory have been a recent topic of
interest and debate (Blanco & Gureckis 2012; Lupyan, 2008;
Richler, Gauthier & Palmeri, 2011; Richler, Palmeri &
Gauthier, 2012). Whether there are true systematic biases in
memory due to a stimulus being labeled has been proposed
and contested. The fundamental proposal that representations
shift toward the prototype has not previously been
demonstrated. In the present experiment, participants judged
colored silhouettes by color category or by preference, then
were asked to remember the hue of the original silhouette
among five narrowly distinct options. By using the single
dimension of hue, we are able to show prototypical
representational shifts in memory for colored silhouettes after
a few minutes. We did not observe a difference between color
labeled and preference judged silhouettes, refuting the claim
that labeling is the source of prototypical representational
shifts.
Keywords: Concepts and Categories;
Perception; Memory; Labels; Color

Representation;

Introduction
A representational shift is a spatial metaphor for a
systematic difference between the representation as
measured and the original stimulus that inspired the
representation. The representation is said to have shifted
from the original sensory input somewhere along its
cognitive path before being measured. The representational
shift hypothesis (Lupyan, 2008) suggests that when explicit
labels are used while perceiving an object, the encoded
representation shifts from what it would be without explicit
labeling to a more prototypical representation.
The original experiments (Lupyan, 2008), described in
more detail below, did not directly address the main
predictions of the representational shift hypothesis: the
existence of a systematic shift or the direction of that shift.
The analysis relied on inferring a representational shift from
a pattern of non-directional forgetting. The data only
directly indicated worse memory for labeled objects. The
existence of a systematic shift and the direction of the
potential shift is simply not shown by the data collected.
In the experiment presented here, we use color to test
memory for recently presented silhouettes of animals and
objects. In a paradigm similar to Lupyan (2008), the objects
are labeled or not labeled followed by a surprise memory
task. Instead of a yes-no recognition task, we present an
array of 5 hue variations for the participants to choose
among. By switching from multidimensional objects to
unidimensional hue, and testing fine variations of hue

memory rather than course-grained recognition memory, we
can see whether there are systematic shifts of hue memory
and their direction within the dimension of hue. The pattern
of false alarms is used to look for representational shifts.
Why do these representational shifts matter? We already
know there are top-down influences on memory (e.g., Heit,
1997). Two particularly dramatic examples of the
imperfection of memory are eyewitness testimony (Wells &
Olson, 2003) and flashbulb memories (Schmolck, Buffalo,
& Squire, 2000). Small differences between the experience
of an object or color and its representation in memory may
seem minor in comparison to changing the race of a shooter
based on stereotypes or radically rewriting how you heard
about a defining national moment over the course of a few
years. However, taking into account how pervasive these
small differences would be, representational shifts could
have extensive effects on how meaning is build and
supported. Prototypes can be conceived of as resulting from
the build up of exemplars over time (Nosofsky, 1986;
Palmeri & Nosofsky, 2001). As a ramification of the
representational shift hypothesis, exemplars in memory
would not accurately reflect experience alone but would
also have a bias related to when the example of the category
was experienced. The stronger the category, the stronger the
pull of the prototype, and as a result, the more new
exemplars are biased towards categories as they already
stand.

The Representational Shift Hypothesis
Lupyan (2008) proposed that there would be a difference in
encoding and retrieving memories of objects if the
categorization was explicit rather than only implicit at the
time of encoding. Previous work had shown better category
learning with labels than without labels (Lupyan, Rakison &
McClelland, 2007), suggesting that there are differences in
how categories with labels are activated. The difference in
activation of the category could influence the encoding of
exemplars of the category. Specifically, the representational
shift hypothesis asserts that concurrent labels activate a
more prototypical representation of the category than would
the perceived exemplars activate alone. The stored encoding
is hypothesized to be a mixture of the exemplar activation
and the label activation; the final representation has shifted
toward the prototype as a result of the interaction of
perception and semantic memory.
The original work (Lupyan, 2008) used an experimental
paradigm consisting of a presentation of chairs and lamps
followed by a surprise recognition test including both the
old objects and matched new object lures that were very

2674

similar to the old objects. There were two conditions,
category judgments and preference judgments. During the
initial presentation of the objects, each object was either
judged to be a chair or lamp, or was judged to be liked or
disliked. The results were then analyzed in terms of both
hits and false alarms. Lower hit rates for the categorically
judged objects than for the preference judged objects were
taken to indicate a distorted or shifted memory. High false
alarm rates, on the other hand, would have been taken to
indicate overall poor memory. The results showed the
predicted lower hit rate without a higher false alarm rate in
the category judgment condition but not in the preference
judgment condition. This pattern of forgetting was taken to
be evidence for the representational shift account.

Challenges to a Representational Shift Account
Not all researchers accept the representational shift
hypothesis. An alternative hypothesis to explain the low hit
rates (Lupyan, 2008) is depth of processing. A depth of
processing account predicts both high false alarm rates and
low hit rates for the category judgment condition because
only minimal exemplar specific information would be
encoded for categorical judgments but more detailed
information about each exemplar would be processed and
encoded for preference judgments. Follow-up experiments
explored this idea using additional judgment conditions of
location (Richler, Gauthier & Palmeri, 2011) and of
orientation (Blanco & Gureckis, 2012). They tested whether
a preference judgment simply forces more fine-grained
processing of an object than a category judgment does,
leading to more detailed encodings. The location and
orientation judgments were not expected to require as much
processing of the actual item as preference judgments.
According to the representational shift hypothesis, if
labeling forces a more typical encoding than non-labeling,
then a category judgment should result in the lower hit rates
without a change in false alarms while preference, location
and orientation judgments should all have higher false alarm
rates. The labeling conditions did not uniformly create lower
hit rates than non-labeling conditions. The hit rates were
only lower in comparison to the preference condition
supporting depth of processing.
Richler, Palmeri, and Gauthier (2012) tested the
representational shift hypothesis, or labeling effect, against a
paradoxical production effect (MacLeod, Gopie, Hourihan,
Neary & Ozubko, 2010) which is characterized by more
distinct and accurate memory for vocally named words and
objects. Explicit category responses by button push, by
silent labeling, and by verbal labeling were contrasted with
preference judgments using the same surprise recognition
memory test paradigm as Lupyan (2008). Richler et al.
found varying levels of memory strength. Verbal labeling
was remembered most accurately, then preference, followed
by silent naming, with button press categorization being the
least strong. The pattern of forgetting along with the pattern
of accurate memory was used to support the distinctiveness

of processing account which emphasizes the uniqueness of
features over depth of processing
In each of these follow-up experiments, the pattern of
forgetting was used to support a depth of processing
account.

But What About the Shifts?
There is now one set of experiments in favor of the
representational shift hypothesis and three sets opposed.
However, none of these experiments truly get at the main
prediction of the representational shift hypothesis: a
stimulus processed with overt categorization will undergo a
shift where the encoded representation in memory will be
more prototypical than the original stimulus. The literature
accepts an effect that is only implied, arguing about its
cognitive mechanism rather than its existence. Rather than
looking at the absence of recognition and trying to infer
what processes could result in poor recognition memory, we
can instead look at patterns of recognition to see if the
encoding has shifted and by how much which should lead
more straightforwardly to possible underlying processes.
One way to go about looking at the shifts is to move the
categorization and subsequent shifts onto a single
dimension, in this case the hue dimension, rather than trying
to infer shifts in chair-versus-lamp space, with multiple
unknown dimensions.

Hue Perception and Memory
In psychological color research, it has been found that there
is a near universal progression of basic color names (e.g.,
Berlin & Kay, 1969) and optimized focal or prototypical
shades of color within a named category (e.g., Regier &
Kay, 2009). This has led to further research looking at
categorical perception where colors are labeled differently
based on their relation to the focal colors and the color
boundaries of their language’s color categories (e.g., Kay &
Kempton, 1984). An implication of this literature is that
colors are not always experienced the same even if they are
objectively the same wavelength of light. A speaker of
Russian will see two shades as more different from each
other when they cross the boundary between the Russian
light blue and dark blue basic categories than an English
speaker who would categorize them both as blue (Winawer
et al., 2007). Color space has a distorted topography of
similarity and difference based on the categories applied to
it.
As implied by the term categorical perception, it is
tempting to conclude that there is always an issue of
categorization at play with color perception. We routinely
perceive colors to be different than they actually are as in
these color perception tasks. However, in the psychophysics
literature, hue is highly memorable. Hue is one of three
dimensions along with lightness and saturation that are used
to describe color. Under some circumstances, participants
can quite accurately reproduce the hue that they have just
seen (Pérez-Carpinell, Baldoví, de Fez, and Castro, 1998).
These results contrast with the psychological literature

2675

Figure 1: Example colored silhouettes. The silhouettes are
representative of the two color categories: red and green, as
well as the two animacy categories: living and non-living.
Focused on distortion, instead suggesting that we do not
always influence the colors we see with top-down
knowledge but truly record hues as they objectively are in
the world.
Color is a domain where memory has proven accurate to
experience and is a domain where categories affect
perception. The representational shift hypothesis can be
tested in a domain where memory has shown to be accurate
to experience without labels. By adding labels alongside hue
perception we can see if representations of the colors do
indeed shift.

Experiment
The present experiment was designed to test the predictions
of the representational shift hypothesis: There is a
systematic prototypical shift of memory for overtly labeled
objects, and preference-judged objects are not subject to the
same shift. Preference-judged objects could lack a
representational shift or at the least demonstrate a less
strongly prototypical shift.

Method
Participants 39 participants were recruited through UC
Merced’s participant pool. All participants were
monolingual or early (by age 10) bilingual English speakers.
Participants had normal or corrected to normal vision. They
also had normal color vision, tested using the CITY color
vision test (City University, 2002) at the conclusion of the
experimental session.
Stimuli 40 colored silhouettes were created in Adobe
Photoshop for the study phase of the experiment. All colors

Figure 2: A representation of CIE L*C*h color space. The
variations in hue are calculated in degrees on the plane of
lightness
and
the
radius
of
saturation.
(http://nyman.netsolution.ch/IT8FujiProvia.htm)
were calculated in device independent CIE L*a*b* color
space and converted to RGB device dependent color space
via unique monitor profiles created by a X-rite i1 Display
Pro color calibrator to ensure color constancy across testing
stations. 20 silhouettes were living things such as a giraffe
and a butterfly, and 20 silhouettes were non-living objects
such as a pan and an airplane (see Figure 1). 8 main hues, 4
reds and 4 greens were selected. The colors had the
lightness and saturation values of their category’s focal
color (Sturges & Whitfield, 1995). Each object was
randomly assigned a hue of red and a hue of green. The
silhouettes were randomly assigned to 4 groups of 10
objects, 5 living and 5 non-living. The groups were then
assigned a color category between subjects (i.e. Participant
1 saw groups 1 & 2 in their red hues and groups 3& 4 in
their green hues while Participant 2 saw groups 1 & 3 in red
and groups 2 & 4 in green, etc.) The semi-random creation
of colored silhouettes preserves color and animacy balances
while counterbalancing the color/shape pairings across
participants.
For the testing phase of the experiment, four variations of
each of the 8 main hues were calculated in CIE L*C*h color
space (Figure 2) with a distance of 4° along the hue
dimension from its adjacent hue. A test scale for each
silhouette of two steps more typical, one step more typical,
the original, one step less typical, and two steps less typical
was created.

Procedure
The experiment consisted of two main parts: a judgment
phase and a memory test. Each participant encountered 80
judgment trials followed by 40 memory trials. For the
judgment phase, the participants had been instructed to

2676

Figure 3: The memory test display of 5 hue
variants.

Figure 4: Average percent of each hue typicality chosen by
participants. 20% chosen would be expected if participants were
choosing at random.

remember the silhouettes as they would show up more than
once but were not explicitly told of a memory test.
Initially, participants were instructed in the two types of
judgments: color (“1” for red or “2” for green) and
preference (“3” for like or “4” for dislike). Tags were placed
above the keys on the keyboard to remind participants of the
mappings mid-task. The trials were presented in alternating
judgment blocks with 10 trials per block. Each silhouette
was judged twice by each participant, both within the same
judgment type (e.g., if the giraffe was judged for color the
first time it appeared, the giraffe would be again judged for
color the second time it appeared). The silhouettes were
judged in each judgment condition between participants.
Each trial consisted of a fixation cross (1500ms), the
silhouette to be judged (300ms), a question mark eliciting
the judgment for that block (700ms), followed by a blank
screen (1000ms).
After the judgment phase, participants were then tested
for hue memory. The memory trials consisted of a circular
array of the 5 hue variants of a particular silhouette (Figure
3). The array had the hues in graded clockwise order with
the most typical hue rotated to a random position by trial
resulting in a consistent appearance of selecting from a
gradient of hues but avoiding position effects that would be
present in a line. Each of the 5 positions had a location label
1 through 5 that participants entered on the keyboard to
make their selection. There was no time limit imposed on
the memory test responses with an intertrial interval of
1500ms.

Results
Not all participants proved equally skilled or motivated to
complete this task. The following criteria needed to be met
in order to include a participant’s data in the analysis: at
least 80% accuracy for color judgments (4 participants did

not meet this criteria), and responded using at least 3 of the
5 memory test positions (6 participants did not meet this
criteria). As a result, 29 participants were included in the
analyses.
As can be seen in Figure 4, there was a systematic shift of
responses in the hue memory test. As described above, the
position of the hues was randomized, disambiguating
position responses from typicality. The judged stimuli
selected were both clockwise and counterclockwise to the
focal color in color space disambiguated hue space direction
and the direction of typicality. Only when taking into
account the relative direction in hue space of the focal color
does the systematic bias emerge from the data.
There are three main questions to be addressed in the data
analysis to test the representational shift hypothesis: Is there
a shift of memory for color judged silhouettes? Is there a
shift for preference judged silhouettes? Is there a difference
between the two shifts should they both be observed?
To test whether there is a shift for items in the color
judgment condition, a one sample t-test with a comparison
value of 3 was performed on the average typicality value of
the hue chosen at memory test. Responses lower than 3 are
more typical of the color category, a response of 3 is true to
the original color viewed, and response values higher than 3
are atypical of the color category. The mean response
typicality for color judged silhouettes is 2.70. The mean is
significantly lower than 3, indicating that the shift is in the
prototypical direction, t(28)=-3.93, p<.001. In the color
judgment condition, there is an observed representational
shift is the prototypical direction as predicted by the
representational shift hypothesis.
To test whether there is a representational shift for items
in the preference condition, another one sample t-test with a
comparison value of 3 was preformed. Again the mean
response typicality is less than 3 at 2.56 indicating a
prototypical representational shift, t(28)=-5.82, p<.001. The

2677

representational shift hypothesis does not explicitly reject
such a shift, but it does predict that the shift due to labeling
should be stronger.
Finally, the mean is significantly greater for the color
condition (2.70) than the preference condition (2.59), paired
t(28)=2.05, p<.05. The direction of the difference is actually
the opposite of the prediction made by the representational
shift hypothesis. There is more of a prototypical shift for
preference-judged stimuli than color judged stimuli. Even if
the two conditions being statistically different were a matter
of chance, it is quite unlikely that they are truly different in
the opposite direction.

Discussion
As designed, this paradigm allows us to directly view
representational shifts within hue color space. Participants
were exposed to colored silhouettes then tested on 5
variations of the original silhouette. Participants on average
chose hues that were slightly more prototypical of the basic
color category than the hue that they had originally seen.
This is the prototypical representational shift predicted by
the representational shift hypothesis. However, the type of
judgment made on the silhouette did not make a difference
in whether a prototypical representational shift occurred. In
contrast to the predictions of the representational shift
account, participants chose a more prototypical hue in even
larger proportions when they had made preference
judgments about a silhouette rather than labeling the color
category.

Depth of Processing
In previous experiments there have been measurable
differences between conditions (Blanco & Gureckis, 2012;
Lupyan, 2008; Richler et al. 2011, 2012) that were
interpreted as superior memory for preference-judged items.
The restriction to a single dimension for variation limited
the ways in which preference-judged items could be
uniquely encoded into memory to benefit recognition. For
the dimension tested, the depth of processing predictions
could have been turned around with color being more
deeply processed with category judgments than with
preference judgments. While making preference judgments,
participants were not limited to opining on the color. It is
plausible that they paid more attention to whether they liked
giraffes and pans than the particular hue. Thus, a depth of
processing account of the present results appears most
plausible.

Implications of Representational Shifts
Earlier we discussed a potential implication of
representational shifts: a pervasive influence of past
experience and existing categories on new representations.
These representations then become part of the categories
that proceed to influence representational shifts in future
experiences. Rather than categories being an accumulation
of raw experience, these distortions in how new exemplars

are encoded support existing category structures and
discourage new categorization schemes from developing in
well-categorized domains. As categorization schemes
mature, the representational shifts would cascade,
potentially reaching the extreme of the characteristically
discrete looking categorical perception effect (Harnad,
1987; but see Huette & McMurray, 2010). These
implications hold for the representational shift effect
regardless of the mechanism behind the shifts.

Online Influence of Categories
Categories, regardless of overt labeling, affect memory. In
the context of this experiment, hue memory was not as
accurate as it has been reported in other research (e.g.,
Pérez-Carpinell et al., 1998). Given that categorization of
objects is fairly automatic (Grill-Spector & Kanwisher,
2005), having category judgments in the course of the
experiment could have created a ‘category-relevant’ context
where regardless of explicit categorization responses,
categories were activated for all stimuli. The implication is
that categories alter memory formation online rather than
being a permanent perceptual bias consistent with recent
research (e.g. Landau, Dessalegn, & Goldberg, 2010). A
non-category relevant context with added overt labels is a
possible scenario where labeling may have an effect on
representational shifts.

Time Course
Our previous research (Kelly & Heit, 2012) has shown that
atypical representational shifts—shifts away from the
prototype—are found with immediate (half second and five
second delay) recognition tests. At some point between five
seconds and a few minutes representations go from being
distorted atypically to being distorted typically.
Representations are not veridical to the stimulus initially or
subsequently.
It’s possible that these shifts are symptomatic of
competing needs of working memory and long term
memory. Working memory could privilege differentiating
information in case details are important in the moment.
Detailed information that will go unused would deplete
resources unnecessarily when being encoded into long term
memory, making relying on the category general
information to supply a complete representation upon recall
more advantageous. Variables that change depth of
processing could be indicative of how likely specific
differentiating information is to be needed in the future.
These explanations for the mobility of representational
shifts are purely speculative and need to be researched
further.

Push or Pull?
Lupyan (2008) hypothesized the mechanism of blended
representations between exemplar and category prototype as
the cause of prototypical representational shifts. Another
proposed mechanism to account for this bias is boundary
truncation (Huttenlocher, Hedges, Lourenco, Crawford, &

2678

Corrigan, 2007). Rather than having a pull toward the
prototype via prototype activation, there is a push toward
the prototype by disregarding extreme information. The
shift into the category would be consistent with both
theories and needs to be explored further.

Conclusion
Representational shifts exist in memory for hue. There are
prototypical shifts in memory for colored silhouettes
encountered minutes before test. These shifts can be seen
and measured on a unidimensional testing ground.
Conceptual space has long been known to be contorted in
color (Kay & Kempton, 1984) and beyond (Goldstone,
1992). Our results support the idea that the creation and
maintenance of these contortions could be due to
representational movement.

References
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic Color Terms: Their
Universality and Evolution. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Blanco, N. and Gureckis, T.M. (2012). Does category
labeling lead to forgetting? Cognitive Processing.
City University (2002). A web-based colour vision test.
http://www.city.ac.uk/avrc/colourtest.html.
Goldstone, R. L. (1998). Perceptual learning. Annual review
of psychology, 49(1), 585-612.
Grill-Spector, K., & Kanwisher, N. (2005). Visual
recognition: As soon as you know it is there, you know
what it is. Psychological Science, 16, 151-160.
Harnad, S. R. (Ed.). (1990). Categorical perception: The
groundwork of cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Heit, E. (1997). Knowledge and concept learning. In K.
Lamberts & D. Shanks (Eds.), Knowledge, Concepts, and
Categories, 7-41. London: Psychology Press.
Huette, S. & McMurray, B. (2010). Continuous dynamics of
color categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
17(3), 348-354.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., Lourenco, S. F., Crawford,
L. E., & Corrigan, B. (2007). Estimating stimuli from
contrasting categories: Truncation due to boundaries.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 502519.
Kay, P., & Kempton, W. (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis?. American Anthropologist, 86(1), 65-79.
Kelly, L.J. & Heit, E. (2012, November). Representational
Shifts in Memory for Hue. Poster presented at the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Landau, B., Dessalegn, B., & Goldberg, A.M.
(2010). Language and space: Momentary interactions. In
P. Chilton and V. Evans (Eds.), Language, cognition and
space: The state of the art and new directions. Advances
in Cognitive Linguistics Series (Ed, V. Evans, B. Bergen,
J. Zinken). London: Equinox Publishing.

Lupyan, G. (2008). From chair to “chair:” A
representational shift account of object labeling effects on
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
137(2), 348-369.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D.H., & McClelland, J.L. (2007).
Language is not just for talking: Labels facilitate learning
of novel categories. Psychological Science, 18(12), 10771083.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification–categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115(1), 39.
Palmeri, T. J., & Nosofsky, R. M., (2001). Central
tendencies, extreme points, and prototype enhancement
effects in ill-defined perceptual categorization. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 197235.
Pérez-Carpinell, J., Baldoví, R., de Fez, M. D. and Castro, J.
(1998). Color memory matching: Time effect and other
factors. Color Research and Application, 23, 234–247.
Regier, T. & Kay, P. (2009). Language, thought, and color:
Whorf was half right. Trends in Cognitive Science, 13,
439-446.
Richler, J.J., Gauthier, I., & Palmeri, T.J. (2011).
Automaticity of basic-level categorization accounts for
labeling effects in visual recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 1579-1587.
Schmolck, H., Buffalo, E. A., & Squire, L. R. (2000).
Memory distortions develop over time: Recollections of
the OJ Simpson trial verdict after 15 and 32
months. Psychological Science, 11(1), 39-45.
Sturges, J. & Whitfield, T.W.A. (1995). Locating basic
colours in the munsell space. Color Research and
Application, 20, 364-376.
Wells, G. L., & Olson, E. A. (2003). Eyewitness
testimony. Annual Review of Psychology, 54(1), 277-295.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M.C., Wu, L., Wade,
A.R., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal
effects of language on color discrimination. Proceedings
of the National Academy Sciences 104, 7780 –7785.

2679

