UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representation and Criterion Differences between Men and Women in Semantic
Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45b2z57c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Stukken, Loes
Verheyen, Steven
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representation and Criterion Differences between Men and Women
in Semantic Categorization
Loes Stukken (loes.stukken@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Steven Verheyen (steven.verheyen@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (gert.storms@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences. University of Leuven
Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Gender differences are not widely studied in the
categorization literature and the studies that did focus on
gender differences generally investigated processing
differences or differences in the use of particular
categorization answers (absolute versus continuous). In the
following study we looked at differences in the likelihood that
men or women consider an item to be part of a category. The
objective of the study was twofold: we wanted to introduce a
model that is able to determine whether there are meaningful
differences in categorization between groups and that is able
to identify the sources of these differences. Secondly with this
model we wanted to show that there were meaningful
categorization differences between men and women: these
differences are located at the level of the representation
and/or the criterion.
Keywords: semantic categorization, threshold theory,
gender differences, typicality, similarity, differential item
functioning

Introduction
Are men more likely than women to consider fishing a
sport? And are women more likely than men to consider a
dollhouse a member of the category toys? Or in other words
are there, for some items, differences between men and
women in the likelihood that they would consider an item to
belong to a particular category? And if so what is/are the
source(s) of this gender difference? In the following study
we addressed this question by gathering categorization
judgments for 23 exemplars from eight categories, and by
analyzing these data with a model that is able to detect
differences between men and women in the strictness of the
criterion they use to judge an item to be part of the category
and differences in the representation that men and women
use. The model is a random item mixture model proposed
by Frederickx, Tuerlinckx, De Boeck, and Magis (2010),
henceforth referred to as the RIM model.

RIM model
The RIM model is an item response theory model, Such
models assume that the probability that a person endorses an
item can be derived from the relative position of the item
and the person towards each other on a common latent scale.
The more an item’s position exceeds the position of the
person on the scale the more likely that the person will give
a positive answer to the item. Verheyen, Hampton, and
Storms (2010) claimed that these models therefore provide

an excellent formalization of the threshold theory proposed
by Hampton (1995, 2007) in which it is assumed that an
item is judged to be part of a category if the similarity of the
item to the category exceeds a certain threshold criterion. In
this case the item’s position on the latent scale represents
the item’s similarity to the category and the person’s
position is the threshold criterion the person uses to judge
whether the item-category similarity is sufficient for the
item to belong to the category.
The RIM model extends this approach in that it is able to
account for group differences in two different ways. First of
all, the RIM model estimates an average threshold criterion
for each group. If the average threshold criterion estimated
for women differs from the average threshold criterion for
men, women have, depending on the sign of the difference,
either a more liberal threshold criterion (they require a
smaller item-category similarity than men to judge items as
belonging to the category) or a more strict threshold
criterion (they require a larger item-category similarity than
men to judge an item to be part of the category). Thus the
model allows us to detect whether the categorization
differences between men and women are due to differences
in the threshold criterion that they use to determine whether
an item belongs to the category.
Secondly, the model is able to detect differential item
functioning (DIF). An item demonstrates DIF when men
and women who employ the same threshold criterion,
nevertheless are found to have a different probability of
endorsing an item. The RIM model allows the positions of
these items on the latent scale to differ for different groups
of people. The model is thus able to detect whether the
position of an item on the latent scale should be different for
men and women. The different position of the item indicates
that the similarity of the item to the category differs between
men and women and thus that men and women, given that
they use the same threshold criterion, will have a different
probability in judging this item to be part of the category.
Different item positions for men and women thus imply
representation differences between men and women. The
RIM model is thus able to detect whether categorization
differences between men and women are due to a difference
in the representation and/or in the criterion between men
and women.
The model is formally implemented by assuming that a
categorization decision for item i by categorizer j from
group g is the outcome of a Bernoulli trial with the

3474

probability that the item is judged to belong to the category
equal to:
logit(Pr(Yijg == 1)) = βi – θjg
In which βi represents the item i’s position on the latent
scale and θjg represents the threshold criterion of categorizer
j from group g. In a categorization context βi can be taken
to represent the similarity of item i to the category; θjg can
be taken to represent the required level of item-category
similarity to consider an item a category member
(Verheyen, Hampton, & Storms, 2010). The model makes
furthermore use of an indicator variable that indicates for
each item, whether the item should be considered a DIF
item. If so the model estimates a different β for that item for
the two groups. If not the model estimates the same β for
both groups.

Gender differences
Several studies showed that men and women differ in the
processing of natural and artificial categories. Women tend
to name and recognize members of natural categories faster,
while men have an advantage over women in naming and
recognizing artificial categories (Barbarotto, Laiacona,
Macchi, & & Capitani, 2002; Capitani, Laiacona, &
Barbarotto, 1999; Laws, 1999). Based on these studies
Pasterski, Zwierzynska, and Estes (2011) argued that
women and men might differ in the vagueness of their
category judgments since natural and artificial categories
tend to differ in vagueness. While membership in many
natural categories is considered all-or-none, membership in
most artifact categories is found to be graded (Diesendruck
& Gelman, 1999; Estes, 2003, 2004; Verheyen, Heussen, &
Storms, 2011).
Contrary to their initial hypotheses Paterski et al. showed
that women provided more vague judgments than men
(regardless of category type). They also showed that men,
relative to women, gave more inclusive judgments for the
artifact categories and tended to give more exclusive
judgments for the natural categories.
Our study differs from these studies in that we are not
focusing on differences between men and women in the
processing of different types of categories or in the type of
judgments that men or women give. We are interested in the
question of whether or not there are differences in the
likelihood/probability that men and woman judge an item to
be part of the category. We argue that since men and women
are known to be raised differently, to dress differently, to
play with different toys, and to engage in different hobbies
and professions, we expect that for some items men and
women might differ in the likelihood that they consider the
item as part of a particular category. To our knowledge this
is the first study that looks at gender differences in the
likelihood/probability that individual items are part of a
category and allows to determine whether these differences
reside at the level of the criterion or at the level of the
representation.

Method
Materials
Eight natural language categories were studied (Addictions,
Clothing, Diseases, Furniture, Professions, Sports, Toys,
Weapons). The categories were selected based on the
intuition of the researchers that they might contain items
that have a different likelihood of membership in men and
women. For each category we included 23 exemplars in the
study. The items were selected based on previously
collected typicality ratings to make sure that each category
contained candidate exemplars that were generally
considered typical of the category, atypical of the category,
and borderline (items for which people in general are not
always sure of whether they belong to the category or not).
The typicality ratings were gathered as part of a larger
norming project comprising 1276 items from 24 categories.
Twenty-nine students (23 women, 6 men) provided
typicality ratings for half of the categories using a seven
point Likert scale ranging from very atypical to very typical.
The reliability of these ratings for the 23 x 8 items in our
study varied between 0.86 for addictions and 0.96 for
clothing with a mean of 0.93.
Categorization task
In total 287 men and 568 women participated in the study.
They filled in a questionnaire in which they were, for each
item, asked to indicate (yes or no) whether it belonged to the
corresponding target category. Participants were, for
example, asked whether or not a cold was part of the
category diseases. To prevent order effects, we administered
4 different versions of the task with a different order for
items and categories. The participants were randomly
assigned to one of the 4 versions of the task. The age of the
participants ranged between 17 and 64 with an average of
20.
Model analyses
Each category’s categorization data were analyzed
separately using the RIM model. This was done using
WinBUGS (Lunn, Thomas, Best, & Spiegelhalter, 2000)
according to the details and code provided by Frederickx et
al. (2010). For every analysis 5 chains were run of 10,000
iterations each, with a burn-in sample of 800.

Results
Typicality
For every category we calculated the correlation between
the items’ positions on the scale (the posterior means for the
βi’s) and the items’ average typicality to verify whether
people were categorizing items by the use of similarity. We
calculated the correlation between the items’ positions and
typicality because it was previously suggested that typicality
and item-category similarity are strongly linearly related

3475

(Hampton, 2007; Verheyen, Hampton, & Storms, 2010). A
high correlation between typicality and the items’ positions
thus also implies a high correlation between the items’
positions and the similarities of the items towards the
category. We calculated the correlations between typicality
and the items’ positions for men and women separately. The
correlations can be found in Table 1. The correlations were
invariably high, suggesting that our participants were indeed
using item-category similarity when they judged whether
the items belonged to the category.
Table 1
For each category the correlation between item positions
and typicality for men and women separately
Category
Addictions
Clothing
Diseases
Furniture
Professions
Sports
Toys
Weapons

Men
0.92
0.98
0.92
0.95
0.91
0.87
0.93
0.94

Women
0.92
0.98
0.95
0.95
0.93
0.96
0.93
0.94

Also note that the correlations of typicality with the items’
positions of men and women can hardly be distinguished.
Looking at categorization tendencies across the entire
typicality range might not be the most fruitful manner to
identify differences between groups of categorizers. For
natural language categories, whose meaning is to a
considerable extent determined by the environment the
language community shares, one does not expect
pronounced reorganizations of the representation from one
group to the other. This would seriously hamper the
communication between the group members. Rather, the
differences might be more subtle, residing in individual
items or in the severity of the employed categorization
criterion.
Criterion differences
To check whether there were any gender differences in the
threshold criterion that participants used to make category
judgments, we plotted the posterior distribution of the
difference in the average threshold criterion between men
and women. If there is a reliable difference in the average
threshold criteria, the credibility intervals of this distribution
(the region around the mean that contains 95% of the mass
of the distribution) may not include 0. As can be seen from
Figure 1, this is the case for two categories: professions and
toys. In these categories the average differences were 0.34
and 0.74 respectively, indicating that women had a more
liberal threshold criterion and require less item-category
similarity to judge items to be part of the category than men.
For the other categories there is no credible difference in

average threshold criterion indicating that women and men
on average require equal levels of item-category similarity
for category membership.
Representation differences
The RIM model gives an indication of the DIF-status of
items by means of latent indicator values that can take one
of two values (either DIF or no DIF) on every iteration,
resulting in a difference in the estimated item position when
required. Following Frederickx et al. (2010) we term an
item a DIF item if in more than half of the iterations it was
classified as DIF. Table 2 gives an overview of the number
of items that were identified as DIF items and the number of
items for which men seemed to be more inclined/likely to
consider the item to be part of the category and the number
of items for which women seemed to be more likely to
judge the item to be part of the category. There was one
category for which no DIF items were found, the category
furniture. For one category, the category clothing, we found
only one DIF item: belt was categorized differently by men
and women with the same threshold criterion (men were
more likely than women to indicate that belt was part of the
category). For the other categories the number of DIF items
ranged between 2 and 16 and for most of these categories
there were both DIF items for which men were more likely
to indicate that they were part of the category and DIF items
for which women were more likely to indicate that they
were part of the category. The categories professions and
weapons were the only categories that contained only DIF
items for which women were more likely to indicate that
they were part of the category. For professions these items
were diver, magician, explorer, parachutist, pirate, and
inventor. For weapons these were catapult and harpoon.
DIF items were found across the entire range of typicality.
Within the DIF items there were items for which people
generally agree that it belongs to the category (for example:
dollhouse for the category toys), items for which it is not
sure whether or not they belong to the category (snooker for
the category sports) and items for which it is generally
agreed that they do not belong to the category (pirate for
the category professions). Thus women and men do not only
disagree on items for which there is uncertainty about
whether or not they belong to the category, but also on items
for which there is general agreement about whether or not
they belong to the category.
First of all remember that for the category clothing the RIM
model indicated that there is no reliable difference in mean
threshold criterion between men and women. So any gender
differences in categorization proportions are representation
differences according to the model. The model considers
only one of these differences meaningful. The model
detected only one DIF item (belt, with an average typicality
of 4.53).

3476

Figure 1: The posterior distributions of the difference in mean threshold between men and women for the eight categories.
The 95% credibility interval is represented by the red bars.

3477

These examples should make it clear that it does not suffice
to look at categorization proportions alone to determine
whether there are group/gender differences in
categorization, and that the main contribution of the model
is that it is able to disentangle two main causes of
differences in categorization proportions: criterion
differences
and
representation
differences.

Table 2
Overview of the number of DIF items in the categories
Category

# DIF items

Men1

Women1

Addictions

4

1

3

Diseases

10

8

2

Clothing

1

1

0

Furniture

0

0

0

Professions

6

0

6

Sports

16

5

11

Toys

6

4

2

Weapons

2

0

2

1

columns ‘Men’ and ‘Women’ represent the number of DIF items for
which respectively men and women are more inclined to consider it as part
of the category

For the category toys there were several items for which the
difference in proportion was determined meaningful after
controlling for the threshold criterion. The RIM model
indicated that the items pin-ball machine, gocart, coloured
pencil, and chalk (manly items); and dollhouse and
skipping rope (womanly items) are DIF items. That is,
according to the model, the categorization differences one
observes for these items are representational in nature.
Interesting here are the items comic book and music box,
that at first glance have a large and meaningful difference in
the categorization proportion between men and women
(0.60 versus 0.73 and 0.46 versus 0.62 at average
typicalities of 4.23 and 5.08, respectively). The RIM model
nevertheless indicates that these are not DIF items. After
controlling for the threshold criterion there no longer is a
meaningful difference between men and women for these
items, indicating that the difference in proportion for these
items is entirely caused by the difference in threshold
criterion for this category. Indeed, the category of toys was
one of the categories for which the RIM model indicated
there was a credible criterion difference between men and
women.
It is therefore also able to identify items for which at first
glance there are no differences when one looks only at the
differences in proportions between the groups/sexes. The
item, go-cart (average typicality: 5.15), for example, has a
very small difference in categorization proportion between
men and women (0.78 versus 0.76), but after controlling for
the threshold criterion the item is identified by the model as
a DIF item.

Figure 2: Categorization proportion for men and women as
a function of typicality for the categories clothing and toys

Discussion
This is, to our knowledge, the first study that looks at
differences in the likelihood/probability with which men
and women would judge items to be part of the category.
We have shown that for some items categorization
differences were due to representational differences between
men and women and for other items these differences were
due to the differences in threshold criterion that men and
women use.
The study described above fits in a recent group of studies
in which it is shown that item response theory models can
be used to analyze data from categorization tasks
(Verheyen, Hampton, & Storms, 2010; Verheyen, De

3478

Deyne, Dry, & Storms, 2011). It has previously been shown
that variations of these models can reveal differences in the
threshold criterion between different groups (Verheyen,
Ameel, & Storms, 2011) and reveal latent groups of
categorizers who employ a different representation
(Verheyen & Storms, 2013). The RIM model is another
valuable approach in that it can not only reveal criterion
differences between existing groups, but also representation
differences between these groups. It therefore opens up new
ways of investigating group differences in semantic
categorization.
For instance, a study by Hampton, Dubois, & Yeh (2006)
that investigated categorization differences between groups
of categorizers who were categorizing items in different
contexts, compared the correlation between categorization
proportions and typicality, and the percentage positive
responses between the different groups. In our study there
were only minor differences in the correlation between the
categorization proportions and typicality between men and
women, but the model did indicate that there were
differences between the two sexes. Furthermore, looking at
the percentage positive responses to see whether some
groups are using a stricter threshold criterion, might give an
imprecise picture of what is going on, since we showed that
not all differences in categorization proportions are due to
the use of a more or less strict categorization criterion. It
should be clear from our results that the RIM model allows
for the detection of more subtle but important differences
between groups. The implementation of the model is also
not limited to two groups. It can easily be extended to
investigate data from multiple groups, such as the
pragmatic, technical, and neutral context groups in
Hampton, Dubois, & Yeh (2006), cultures (Medin & Atran,
2004), or age groups (Ameel, Malt, & Storms, 2008). The
RIM model can also be easily adjusted to account for
continuous categorization data.

Acknowledgments
Steven Verheyen is a postdoctoral fellow at the Research
Foundation-Flanders. The authors wish to thank Sofie
Frederickx for generously providing details about the RIM
model.

References
Ameel, E., Malt, B. & Storms, G. (2008). Object naming
and later lexical development: From baby bottle to
beerbottle. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 262-285.
Barbarotto, R., Laiacona, M., Macchi, V., & Capitani, E.
(2002). Picture reality decision, semantic categories and
gender: A new set of pictures, with norms and an
experimental study. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1637-1653.
Capitani, E., Laiacona, M., & Barbarotto, R. (1999).
Gender affects word retrieval of certain categories in
semantic fluency tasks. Cortex, 35, 273-278.
Diesendruck, G., & Gelman, S. A. (1999). Domain
differences in absolute judgments of category membership:

Evidence for an essentialist account of categorization.
Pschonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 338-346.
Estes, Z. (2003). Domain differences in the structure of
artifacual and natural categories. Memory & Cognition, 31,
199-214.
Estes, Z. (2004). Confidence and gradedness in semantic
categorization: Definitely somewhat artifactual, maybe
absolutely natural. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11,
1041-1047.
Frederickx, S., Tuerlinckx, F., De Boeck, P., & Magis, D.
(2010). RIM: A random item mixture model to detect
differential item functioning. Journal of Educational
Measurement, 47, 432-457.
Hampton, J. A. (1995). Testing the prototype theory of
concepts. Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 686-708.
Hampton, J. A. (2007). Typicality, graded membership,
and vagueness. Cognitive Science, 31, 355-384.
Hampton, J. A., Dubois, D., & Yeh, W. (2006). Effects of
classification context on categorization in natural categories.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 1431-1443.
Laws, K. R. (1999). Gender affects naming latencies for
living and nonliving things: Implications for familiarity.
Cortex, 35, 729-733.
Lunn, D. J., Thomas, A., Best, N., & Spiegelhalter, D.
(2000). WinBUGS: A Bayesian modeling framework:
Concepts, structure, and extensibility. Statistics and
Computing, 10, 325-337.
Medin, D.L & Atran, S. (2004). The Native Mind:
Biological Categorization, Reasoning and Decision Making
in Development Across Cultures. Psychological Review,
111( 4), 960-983 .
Pasterski, V., Zwierzynska, K., & Estes, Z. (2011). Sex
differences in semantic categorization. Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 40, 1183-1187.
Verheyen, S., Ameel, E., & Storms, G. (2011).
Overextensions that extend into adolescence: Insights from
a threshold model of categorization. In L. Carlson, C.
Hölscher, & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2000-2005) Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Verheyen, S., De Deyne, S., Dry, M. J., & Storms, G.
(2011). Uncovering contrast categories in categorization
with a probabilistic threshold model. Journal of
Experimental Psycholoy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 1515-1531.
Verheyen, S., Hampton, J. A., & Storms, G. (2010). A
probabilistic threshold model: Analyzing semantic
categorization data with the threshold model. Acta
Psychologica, 135, 216-225.
Verheyen, S., Heussen, D., & Storms, G. (2011). On
domain differences in categorization and context variety.
Memory & Cognition, 39, 1290-1300.
Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (2013). A mixture item
response theory approach to vagueness and ambiguity.
Manuscript submitted for publication.

3479

