UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Roles of Diagrams in Computational Modeling of Mechanisms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wn4s4jm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bechtel, William
Abrahamsen, Adele

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Roles of Diagrams in Computational Modeling of Mechanisms
William Bechtel (bechtel@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy and Center for Chronobiology, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0119 USA

Adele Abrahamsen (aabrahamsen@ucsd.edu)
Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0119 USA
Abstract
As tools in science, diagrams not only serve as vehicles for
communication but also facilitate and constrain scientific reasoning. We identify roles that diagrams play when computational models and synthesized organisms are used to recompose mechanisms proposed to explain biological phenomena.
Diagrams not only serve as locality aids for constructing
computational models but also help in identifying ways to
manipulate these models and interpret the results. Moreover,
they serve as blueprints for constructing synthetic organisms
and then guide the interpretation of discrepancies between
these organisms and computational models.
Keywords: diagrams; computational models; mechanistic
explanation; circadian rhythms

Introduction
Cognitive scientists have contributed analyses and experiments on the roles diagrams play in reasoning and problem
solving (e.g., Hegarty, 2004, 2011; Tversky, 2011) and have
even designed new diagram formats that facilitate learning
in math and science (Cheng, 2002, 2011). However, there
have been only a few studies of the roles diagrams play in
the natural sciences (Nersessian, 2008; Gooding, 2010). The
most obvious role, evidenced by the ubiquity of diagrams in
talks and publications, is communication of methods, results, and proposed mechanistic explanations (Perini, 2005).
Less visibly, but crucially, diagramming is a tool that scientists use to reason about phenomena (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2012) and the mechanisms that might explain them
(Sheredos, Burnston, Abrahamsen, & Bechtel, in press).
In many fields of biology, such as cell and molecular biology, the primary goal of research in the 19th and 20th centuries was to identify and decompose mechanisms to determine their parts (e.g., proteins) and operations (e.g., catalyzing particular chemical reactions). As recognized in the new
mechanistic philosophy of science, the organization of these
parts and operations must also be determined to arrive at a
basic mechanistic explanation of a phenomenon of interest
(Bechtel & Richardson, 1993/2010; Bechtel & Abrahamsen,
2005; Machamer, Darden, & Craver, 2000; Thagard, 2003).
That is, to understand how the parts and operations contribute to producing the phenomenon, researchers must recompose the responsible mechanism either conceptually or
physically. Through most of the 20th century this involved
proposing a simple sequence in which the operations might
occur, perhaps using mental simulation to verify its plausi-

bility (Bechtel, 2006). By the last decades of the century,
however, the operations of numerous biological mechanisms were understood to display nonlinear, continuous
dynamics and complex interactions. As sequential organization broke down, so too did biologists’ ability to mentally
track the functioning of the proposed mechanisms. Hence,
they turned first to computational models and later to synthetic organisms as tools for recomposing mechanisms, with
an emphasis on investigating the complex dynamics and
interactions of operations by which a mechanism generates
a phenomenon. In this paper we identify some of the roles
diagrams play in the design of computational and synthetic
models of mechanisms in actual scientific practice.
Computational modeling in biology, in contrast to that in
much of cognitive science, has been grounded in considerable knowledge of the physical parts and operations of the
mechanisms being targeted (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2010).
Diagrams showing how different parts are thought to operate on each other serve as locality aids that “group together
information that is used together” in the mechanism itself
and hence often in computational models of its dynamics
(Jones & Wolkenhauer, 2012, p. 705). But such diagrams
also figure centrally in conceiving how manipulations made
to the computational model correspond to possible perturbations of the mechanism, thereby relating experiments on
models to experiments on actual mechanisms or to pathologies known to result from damage to actual mechanisms.
Moreover, as the efforts to recompose mechanisms increasingly take a step beyond computational modeling to synthesizing organisms, a diagram can serve both as a blueprint
for synthesizing an organism and as a medium for adjudicating mismatches in behavior between organism and model.
We focus on one domain of biology, circadian rhythms:
the daily oscillations in a variety of physiological and behavioral processes in species ranging from bacteria and fungi to plants and animals. The phenomena of greatest interest
involve three characteristics of these rhythms: they are endogenously generated, entrained to the day-night cycle on
our planet, and sustained over time (not dampened). Their
complex dynamics have made circadian rhythm research a
model case for developing computational models and synthesized organisms to determine how a proposed mechanism might account for relevant phenomena. By examining
specific exemplars of this research, we show how diagrams
can play an important role in the reasoning that goes into
computational modeling and synthetic biology.

1839

Diagrams for Modeling “How-Possibly”
Mechanisms
Computational modeling of circadian rhythms began shortly
after behavioral researchers determined that the daily oscillations in organisms are endogenously generated, with a
period varying slightly from 24 hours (Bünning, 1960).
Since engineers had shown that negative feedback systems
generate oscillations, biologists were attracted to the idea
that feedback loops are involved in circadian oscillations.
But most feedback systems dampen, settling into a steady
state. The challenge was to determine how a biological
mechanism might generate sustained oscillations, which
entailed computational modeling of its dynamics.
Goodwin (1963) accepted this challenge, and took as his
starting point one of the first molecular feedback mechanisms identified in biology: the lac operon. Jacob and
Monod (1961) had specified how synthesis of the enzymes
needed to metabolize lactose could be restricted via negative
feedback to occur only when glucose levels are low. Although the molecular parts and operations involved in the
circadian mechanism had not yet been identified, Goodwin
borrowed the architecture of the better-understood lac operon to construct a diagram depicting a possible circadian
mechanism (Figure 1). In it he included not only generic
labels for the putative parts and operations but also associated variables and parameters relevant to their dynamics. The
mechanism has five types of molecular parts, three of which
undergo changes in their concentration. These concentrations are represented by the variables X, Y, and Z. Arrows
depict six operations that affect the concentrations: three
(labeled) involve aspects of gene expression and three indicate decay of a particular type of molecule, at rates associated with the parameters k1, . . . k6. Thus, X is the concentration of mRNA transcribed from the gene, Y the concentration of the enzyme resulting from translating the mRNA, Z
the concentration of the repressor molecule whose synthesis
is catalyzed by the enzyme, k4 to k6 the rates of decay, and
k1, to k3 associated with rates of gene expression operations.
There are three equations in the computational model.
Each specifies the change in concentration of one molecular
component by subtracting a term for its decay from a term

for the impact of one of the operations in the feedback loop.
Consulting the diagram, it is easy to see which variables and
parameters should be in the same equation. Each variable
has one arrow from it (its decay) and one arrow to it from
another variable; its equation includes that variable and the
parameters on those arrows. By providing these groupings,
the diagram does service as a locality aid.

dX
k
= n 1 ! k4 X
dt Z +1
dY
= k2 X ! k5Y
dt
dZ
= k3Y ! k6 Z
dt

Five of the terms simply multiply a concentration by a rate
parameter. The first term is more complex: since the repressor reduces synthesis of mRNA, its concentration (Z) is
in the denominator and raised to the power n; known as the
Hill coefficient, n represents the number of molecules that
must interact. As the only nonlinear term, this first term is
crucial for generating sustained oscillations.
It is difficult to determine exactly how a mechanism will
behave when even one component exhibits nonlinearity and
also when appropriate parameter values are not yet known.
For both of these reasons, it is important to run simulations
by solving the equations with different initial values and
parameter settings. Doing so on an analog computer, Goodwin concluded that such a mechanism could generate sustained oscillations when n equaled 2 or 3. These are biologically plausible values, but when Griffith (1968) ran simulations on a digital computer he determined that sustained
oscillations resulted only when n>9, generally recognized as
biologically unrealistic. Accordingly, he concluded that
negative feedback with a single gene product operating on a
gene could never “give rise in practice to undamped oscillations in the concentrations of cellular constituents” (p. 207).
This reasoning highlights an advantage of grounding a computational model in a representation of the associated mechanism. A biologist, having noticed that the term in question
relates to molecules interacting to inhibit a biochemical reaction, can draw on knowledge of such reactions to judge
the plausibility of different parameter values. Lacking such
grounding, the modeler has no independent check on the
values obtained from parameter fitting.

Diagrams for Modeling Known Parts
and Operations

Figure 1. Diagram of the generic mechanism for feedback
control of gene expression that Goodwin used as a locality
aid in constructing his computational model of circadian
rhythms (adapted from Goodwin 1963).

Diagrams continued to serve as locality aids after researchers discovered some of the actual parts and operations of the
circadian mechanism, and modelers turned to modeling their
specific dynamics. As we will see, the diagrams also supported additional reasoning about the mechanism.
The first component part of a circadian clock was discovered by Konopka and Benzer (1971) through a process of
generating mutant fruit flies with short, long, or absent circadian rhythms. They named the gene in which mutations

1840

produced altered rhythms period (per). When cloning techniques became available, Hardin, Hall, and Rosbash (1990)
were able to measure the mRNA into which per was transcribed and the protein into which it was translated. They
determined that these concentrations oscillated over 24
hours, with the peak concentration of the protein lagging
several hours behind that of the mRNA transcript. They thus
hypothesized a feedback mechanism whereby the protein
PER fed back to inhibit the transcription of the gene per.
This research physically identified some of the parts and
operations of the proposed mechanism, but the “feedback
hypothesis” left open the question of whether and under
what specific conditions it could generate sustained oscillations. Goldbeter (1995) took up this question by developing
a computational model, drawing upon Hardin et al.’s empirical discoveries and inspired in part by Goodwin’s abstract
model. Like Goodwin, he portrayed the mechanism in a
diagram (Figure 2) in which each part and operation was
accompanied by its corresponding variable or parameter.
Shown within the dashed box is the operation occurring in
the nucleus in which the PER protein inhibits per transcription. The rest of the diagram shows the operations of transcription and translation and an additional post-translational
operation through which the protein PER is phosphorylated

Figure 2. Goldbeter’s (1995) diagram that guided his
computational model based on the mechanism proposed by
Hardin, Hall, and Rosbash (1990).

(a step that had been determined to be necessary before PER
could be transported back into the nucleus).
Like Goodwin, Goldbeter then constructed differential
equations, each characterizing the change in concentration
of one of the molecular components. Again, the grouping of
arrows around each variable served as a locality aid in determining the equations. As a result of including additional
nonlinearities in the terms representing decay, Goldbeter’s
model exhibited sustained oscillations using parameter values deemed biologically realistic.
In the same window of time during which Goldbeter was
constructing his model, molecular researchers were searching for additional parts to fill known gaps in the mechanism.
They recognized, for example, that PER could not directly
inhibit its own transcription since it lacked the needed binding region. Mammalian researchers identified a gene, Clock,
in which a mutation could eliminate circadian function and
whose protein contained a DNA-binding region (Vitaterna,
King, Chang, Kornhauser, Lowrey, McDonald, Dove, Pinto,
Turek, & Takahashi, 1994). In short order, it was found that
CLOCK forms a dimer with BMAL1 that binds to the promoter region of Per (as well as a second gene, Cry) and that
by interacting with this dimer, PER and CRY inhibit their
own transcription. Realizing that concentrations of BMAL1
oscillate, researchers hypothesized a second negative feedback loop in which it inhibited the transcription of its gene.
The introduction of this additional feedback loop raised the
question of whether the results of Goldbeter’s (1995) simulation were still applicable: would the two loops generate
sustained oscillations? To address this question, Leloup and
Goldbeter (2003) constructed a diagram (Figure 3) that included a variable for the concentration of each molecular
part and a rate parameter for each operation. Again, the
grouping of arrows around each variable served as a locality
aid. With 16 variables being tracked this time, the computational model consisted of 16 differential equations.

Figure 3. Leloup and Goldbeter’s (2004) diagram of the mammalian circadian oscillator in which proteins are represented as
ovals (labeled within) and operations as arrows (some identified in adjacent boxes, and all with rate parameters shown).

1841

Leloup and Goldbeter employed their computational
model not only to establish that the mechanism could generate sustained oscillations, but to determine as well whether
it could account for other circadian phenomena. Of prime
importance is the ability of circadian clocks to be entrained
by light. Light had been shown experimentally to affect
PER expression, and hence Leloup and Goldbeter incorporated light in their diagrams as a black box with an arrow
feeding into the box for Per transcription. This in turn guided their strategy for simulating light exposure in the computational model: instead of a setting a single value for the
parameter vsP, which set the maximum rate of Per expression, they used a square wave function to alternate between
a high value (simulating light) and a low value (simulating
darkness). Leloup and Goldbeter were then able to use their
model to show that the mechanism’s responses to light exposure varied with time of day in ways similar to the responses of mammals.
Leloup and Goldbeter were also interested in whether the
proposed mechanism could be perturbed in ways that correspond to known circadian pathologies. Advanced sleep
phase syndrome is a condition in which people naturally go
to sleep around 7 PM and rise around 3 AM. Genetic studies
of families with this pathology had revealed a mutation affecting the interaction of PER with a kinase that phosphorylates it. The diagram includes the parameter v1P at this location, and Leloup and Goldbeter showed that they could replicate the characteristics of the pathology by altering it.
In a subsequent paper Leloup and Goldbeter (2004) explored the sensitivity of the model to variations in all of the
parameters. Here the diagram facilitated identifying which
operations in the actual mechanism correspond to those perturbed by varying parameters in the computational model.
A question researchers often ask when they encounter a
mechanistic account is whether all of the parts are required
for the phenomenon to occur. Leloup and Goldbeter questioned which of the two feedback loops in their diagram
were essential for circadian rhythmicity, and explored this
by setting the parameter governing PER synthesis to 0. The
model ceased to exhibit oscillation. They then explored
whether oscillation could be rescued by increasing parameters regulating the synthesis of BMAL1. This restored oscillation, but with a shorter period of approximately 19 hours.
This question of what different components contribute to
the generation of circadian rhythms remains one of great
interest to modelers. Some have pursued the question using
highly reduced models, but adopting Goldbeter’s approach
instead, Relógio, Westermark, Wallach, Schellenberg, Kramer, & Herzel (2011) included in their model all of the currently identified operations in the mammalian circadian
mechanism. They developed the diagram in Figure 4 as a
locality aid. Like the other diagrams, it includes variables
and parameters adjacent to the relevant parts and operations.
An innovation is use of a dashed line to differentiate two
sub-mechanisms. By running the model with targeted variables set to constant values—first those for concentrations of
parts above the line and then those below—they concluded

that it was the feedback loops involving BMAL1 that were
crucial to the generation of circadian rhythms.

Figure 4. Relógio et al’s (2011) diagram of the mammalian
circadian oscillator. They use a dotted line to differentiate
two sub-mechanisms investigated in their model.
The diagrams discussed in this section all serve as locality
aids in constructing computational models, but then serve
additional roles in determining which variables to manipulate in various simulations and in relating simulations back
to the hypothesized mechanism.

Diagrams of Mechanisms to be Synthesized
Traditionally, biologists have been limited to analyzing extant mechanisms to determine what parts, operations, and
organization are responsible for a phenomenon of interest.
But the development of techniques for inserting genes into
host organisms (typically, E. coli) has generated a new field
of synthetic biology, in which researchers use computational
models to help design regulatory networks, insert them into
organisms, and assess the effects on behavior. As Cookson,
Tsimring, and Hasty (2009) make explicit, diagrams play a
central role in this research. In the first step “genetic wiring
diagrams are translated into equations that can be analyzed.”
After such analysis, “modern recombinant DNA techniques
are used to construct gene-regulatory networks in living
cells according to the design specification.” In this endeavor, diagrams are not only locality aids for developing mathematical models, but also blueprints for constructing an organism. Once the behavior of the synthesized organism can

1842

be assessed, diagrams play a further role in analyzing that
behavior and revising the network design in light of the effects discovered in the synthesized organism.
This practice is illustrated in the efforts of Stricker, Cookson, Bennett, Mather, Tsimring, & Hasty (2008). They explicitly drew upon the mechanism understood to be operative in the fruit fly circadian clock to construct a synthetic
clock in E. coli. Specifically, they added a lacZYA promoter
to the naturally occurring araBAD promoter and then situated the hybrid promoter on the araC, lacI, and yemGFP
genes (the last generates a green fluorescent protein used as
a reporter of oscillations). Before inserting this mechanism
into the bacterium, Stricker et al. constructed a diagram
(Figure 5) from which they developed a computational
model. Satisfied that the proposed mechanism would generate sustained oscillations under a limited set of parameter
values (especially, of IPTG levels), they then employed the
diagram as a blueprint for synthesizing the mechanism and
as a guide to what components would have to be fine-tuned
to generate sustained oscillations.

Figure 5. Stricker et al.’s (2008) diagram, which they used
both to develop a computational model and to synthesize a
bacterium that could generate oscillations.
The organism Stricker et al. synthesized did not behave as
the model had led them to expect. Most surprising, it generated sustained oscillations under almost all parameter values
tested. This led Stricker et al. to return to the mechanism as
represented in the diagram and question whether processes
that they had not represented in the diagram or in the equations of the model, such as protein folding, multimerization, and DNA-binding, were important to the process. They constructed a new diagram (Figure 6) and computational model that incorporated additional operations.
The behavior of this model now corresponded closely to
that of the synthesized bacterium. Stricker et al. concluded
that the delays introduced into the feedback by these
additonal steps were responsible for the oscillations.
In this example from synthetic biology, the diagram
serves not only as blueprint for building the mechanism but
also as a guide to determining why the mechanism did not
behave as expected and then for proposing an alternative
account of the mechanism.

Figure 6. Stricker et al. (2008) revised diagram motivated by
the discrepencies between the behavior of the synthesized
organism and their computational model.

Conclusion
We have focused on one of the contexts in which diagrams
provide the basis for reasoning in the development of mechanistic explanations—recomposing mechanisms through
computational models and synthesized organisms. Through
examples we have identified a widespread practice of constructing a diagram of the hypothesized mechanism that
includes variables and parameters and using it as a locality
aid in constructing equations to model the dynamics of the
mechanism. But this is only the start. One of the interests in
constructing a computational model is to experiment on it to
determine whether the mechanism could explain various
identified phenomena. A diagram can help with this, by
guiding the selection of parameters to be reset or of variables to be given fixed values. When researchers set out to
synthesize organisms, diagrams function both as locality
aids in developing the computational models and as blueprints guiding the determination of components to include.
When a synthesized organism fails to behave as the computational model suggested, researchers returned to the diagram to explore alternatives.
Our examination of published diagrams is only a first step
in understanding researchers’ cognitive engagement with
diagrams as they seek to recompose mechanisms. Although
unlikely, we cannot rule out the possibility that the diagrams
we have discussed are epiphenomenal—constructed after
developing the computational model as a means of communicating it to others. Given the utility of the diagram for
grounding the modeling and the experiments on the model,
it seems most likely the scientists would have so used it.
Having identified ways diagrams appear to function in recomposing mechanisms, our hope is that other cognitive
scientists will contribute to further understanding this aspect
of scientific reasoning. One strategy would be ethnographic
studies of modelers in which one can observe interactions
with the diagrams in the process of developing and experimenting with computational models. Another strategy
would involve experiments in which some modelers were
allowed to create or consult diagrams while constructing a
computational model and others were restricted from doing
so. Such studies may help elucidate the cognitive operations
that go into the construction of computational models. Further, such studies can also go beyond what we have been

1843

able to do and address the specific features of diagrams that
serve the aims of developing computational models and
whether different representations, including different diagram formats, might serve these ends better. What we hope
to have done is demonstrate a widespread practice of using
diagrams in constructing and experimenting with computational models of biological mechanisms.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 1127640. We thank the
other members of the WORking Group on Diagrams in Science (WORGODS), Daniel Burnston and Ben Sheredos, for
constructive comments on earlier drafts.

References
Bechtel, W. (2006). Discovering cell mechanisms: The
creation of modern cell biology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A
mechanist alternative. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 36, 421-441.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2010). Dynamic
mechanistic explanation: Computational modeling of
circadian rhythms as an exemplar for cognitive science.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 41,
321-333.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2012). Diagramming
phenomena for mechanistic explanation. Proceedings of
the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 102-107). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. C. (1993/2010). Discovering
complexity: Decomposition and localization as strategies
in scientific research. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1993
edition published by Princeton University Press.
Bünning, E. (1960). Opening address: Biological clocks.
Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology,
25, 1-9.
Cheng, P. C.-H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
principles for complex representational systems.
Cognitive Science, 26, 685-736.
Cheng, P. C.-H. (2011). Probably good diagrams for
learning: Representational epistemic recodification of
probability theory. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3, 475498.
Cookson, N. A., Tsimring, L. S., & Hasty, J. (2009). The
pedestrian watchmaker: Genetic clocks from engineered
oscillators. FEBS Letters, 583, 3931-3937.
Goldbeter, A. (1995). A model for circadian oscillations in
the Drosophila Period protein (PER). Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. B: Biological Sciences, 261,
319-324.
Gooding, D. C. (2010). Visualizing Scientific Inference.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 2, 15-35.

Goodwin, B. C. (1963). Temporal organization in cells; a
dynamic theory of cellular control processes. London:
Academic.
Griffith, J. S. (1968). Mathematics of cellular control
processes I. Negative feedback to one gene. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 20, 202-208.
Hardin, P. E., Hall, J. C., & Rosbash, M. (1990). Feedback
of the Drosophila period gene product on circadian
cycling of its messenger RNA levels. Nature, 343, 536540.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental
simulation. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8, 280-285.
Hegarty, M. (2011). The cognitive science of visual-spatial
displays: Implications for design. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 446-474.
Jacob, F., & Monod, J. (1961). Genetic regulatory systems
in the synthesis of proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology,
3, 318-356.
Jones, N., & Wolkenhauer, O. (2012). Diagrams as locality
aids for explanation and model construction in cell
biology. Biology and Philosophy, 27, 705-721.
Konopka, R. J., & Benzer, S. (1971). Clock mutants of
Drosophila melanogaster. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences (USA), 89, 2112-2116.
Leloup, J.-C., & Goldbeter, A. (2003). Toward a detailed
computational model for the mammalian circadian clock.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100,
7051-7056.
Leloup, J.-C., & Goldbeter, A. (2004). Modeling the
mammalian circadian clock: Sensitivity analysis and
multiplicity of oscillatory mechanisms. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 230, 541-562.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
Nersessian, N. (2008). Creating scientific concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Perini, L. (2005). Explanation in two dimensions: Diagrams
and biological explanation. Biology and Philosophy, 20,
257-269.
Relógio, A., Westermark, P. O., Wallach, T., Schellenberg,
K., Kramer, A., & Herzel, H. (2011). Tuning the
mammalian circadian clock: Robust synergy of two loops.
PLoS Computational Biology, 7, e1002309.
Sheredos, B., Burnston, D., Abrahamsen, A., & Bechtel, W.
(in press). Why do biologists use so many diagrams.
Philosophy of Science.
Stricker, J., Cookson, S., Bennett, M. R., Mather, W. H.,
Tsimring, L. S., & Hasty, J. (2008). A fast, robust and
tunable synthetic gene oscillator. Nature, 456, 516-519.
Thagard, P. (2003). Pathways to biomedical discovery.
Philosophy of Science, 70, 235-254.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizing thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 499-535.
Vitaterna, M. H., King, D. P., Chang, A.-M., Kornhauser, J.
M., Lowrey, P. L., McDonald, J. D., et al. (1994).
Mutagenesis and mapping of a mouse gene, Clock,
essential for circadian behavior. Science, 264, 719-725.

1844

