UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Seeing the forest for the trees predicts accumulation decisions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0d5907sj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Fischer, Helen
Gonzalez, Cleotilde

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Seeing the forest for the trees predicts accumulation decisions
Helen Fischer (helen.fischer@uni-hd.de)1
Cleotilde Gonzalez (coty@cmu.edu)2
1
2

Department of Psychology, Heidelberg University, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany

Dynamic Decision Making Laboratory, Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

Stock-flow (SF) systems involving the accumulation of a
stock over time are pervasive in many areas of human life.
However, people make consistent mistakes when regulating
such systems, a phenomenon termed SF failure. We introduce
holistic (global) versus analytic (local) processing as a
cognitive mechanism underlying the hardly understood SF
failure. Using a classic SF problem (department store task),
we found that (a) solutions to SF problems were up to four
times higher when a global task format highlighting global
structure compared to a local task format highlighting local
elements was used; (b) a more global processing style is
connected to higher solution rates to the SF problem; and (c)
procedurally priming participants with more global
processing results in higher solution rates to the SF problem.
In sum, our results point towards global-local processing as a
basic explanation for SF failure.
Keywords: Stock-flow failure; global-local processing;
dynamic systems.

Many decisions we make in our daily lives are aimed at
keeping a system under control, or in equilibrium. For
example, we aim at keeping our weight at a healthy stage,
don't each too much, don't eat too little; we aim at keeping
our bank accounts under control: buy the things that we
need but don't spend too much. These types of systems are
called dynamic stock management problems, where a stock
(i.e., accumulation) is influenced by decisions to increase
the stock (i.e., inflow) or to decrease the stock (i.e., outflow)
(Sterman, 2000). Keeping a stock in balance implies that the
outflow equals the inflow, that is, the stock does not change
when the rate of increase equals the rate of decrease in the
stock.
Dynamic stock management is extremely difficult to master
even after extended amounts of practice (Diehl & Sterman,
1995; Paich & Sterman, 1993). The dominant explanation of
these difficulties has been dynamic complexity (Sterman,
2000): the idea that systems that involve multiple decisions
and delays between actions and observable outcomes create
complex interdependencies that go beyond our cognitive
capacity.
In light of these difficulties, more recent studies have pared
back dynamic stock management tasks to their fundamental
elements – one stock, one inflow and one outflow – and
asked for simple ‘one-shot’ decisions about the system
(Booth Sweeney & Sterman, 2000; Cronin & Gonzalez,
2007; Gonzalez & Wong, 2012; Sterman, 2002).

Interestingly, even in these extremely simplified problems, a
majority of people performs poorly (Cronin et al., 2009).
This general difficulty in understanding the dynamics of
accumulation was termed “Stock-Flow Failure” (SF failure).
There is very little research, however, aimed at
understanding how people make decisions in these types of
systems (Cronin, Gonzalez, & Sterman, 2009). For example,
it was repeatedly found that people have the erroneous
tendency to perceive a stock’s behavior as directly related to
that of its flows (Booth Sweeney & Sterman, 2000; Cronin
et al., 2009; Cronin & Gonzalez, 2007), a tendency termed
correlation heuristic (Cronin et al., 2009). Although the
correlation heuristic seems to be robust in SF failures, it
remains a re-description of the typically observed behavior
rather than an explanation of why the behavior occurs. A
goal of the current research is to elucidate some cognitive
mechanisms underlying SF failure. Specifically, we
introduce Global-Local processing1 as a fundamental
explanation.
We propose that, to make accurate accumulation decisions,
one needs to process information globally and not locally.
That is, one needs to see the forest and not the trees. For
example, to make a prediction about the amount of money
in our bank account at a point of time, we need to see
broadly the predicted deposits and withdrawals over the
preceding time periods.
Processing styles are content-free ways of perceiving the
environment (Tulving & Schacter, 1990). In global
processing, one attends to objects holistically and focuses
on the entire Gestalt by “zooming out”; in local processing,
one attends to objects elementally and focuses on its details
by “zooming in” (Navon, 1977; Schooler, 2002). Just as a
global view on a Navon letter (global letter made up of
smaller letters, Navon, 1977) means perceiving the whole
form and not its component parts, a global view on dynamic
systems should mean perceiving the systems’ behavioral
patterns and not its constituent parts. This should hold not
only for complex systems containing a range of interacting
variables, but even for “simple” SF systems, because in
either case the behavior of the stock depends on the relation
between in- and outflow, aggregated over time periods.
That is, to regulate dynamic complexity in general, an
abstraction process is needed from lower-level
1

We use the term processing in a generic sense to include both
perception and cognition. To distinguish both, we use the terms
perceptual and conceptual processing, respectively.

2303

representations (e.g. about a specific inflow at a specific
point in time) to higher-order representations (e.g., about the
overall relation between in-and outflow). We expect such a
super-ordinate framework to enable the problem-solver not
to view each component in isolation, but to view all
components as structurally related parts of the system, thus
allowing for inferences on the behavior of system as a
whole.
To see how a human's tendency to process information
globally or locally influences SF-reasoning, we measure
individual differences in global-local processing and test
participants with two task formats of a commonly used SF
problem, the "Department Store" (DS) task (Sterman, 2000;
Cronin et al., 2009). We argue that the SF task format that
was used previously induced local instead of global
processing of the problem and that a representation that
induces global processing would lead participants to higher
accuracy in their judgments of a stock.
In summary, we investigate the effects of three different
aspects of global-local processing on SF reasoning: (a)
global vs. local task format of SF problems, (b) individual
differences in global vs. local processing and (c) global vs.
local perceptual priming.
Procedural Priming of global-local processing
The tendency to perceive the environment locally versus
globally does not only exists as a prior bias in participants,
but it can also be triggered, e.g. by instructing participants to
focus on the global versus the local letters in the classic
Navon-letter task (Navon, 1977; Macrae & Lewis, 2002).
Moreover, global-local processing styles can carry over to
subsequent tasks (procedural priming). Such procedural
priming must be distinguished from semantic priming in
that “the how rather than the what is primed” (Förster &
Dannenberg, 2010, p. 176). As predicted by Schooler’s
theory of processing shifts (Schooler, Fiore & Brandimonte,
1997), procedural priming effects can be transferappropriate or transfer-inappropriate. For example, after
global procedural priming, participants generated more
creative answers such as original uses for a brick than after
local procedural priming (Friedman, Fishbach, Förster &
Werth, 2003), thus showing a transfer-appropriate shift.
Procedural priming affects both perceptual and conceptual
processing by means of a common attentional mechanism
that is used both on the perceptual (e.g. to perceive the
global and not the local figure) and the conceptual level
(e.g., to select the distant and not the proximal node within
the semantic network; Friedman, Fishbach, Förster, Werth,
2003; Förster, 2009). A, say, broadened perceptual scope
thus carries over to a broadened conceptual scope, resulting,
for example, in more remote associates and higher creativity
or the use of broader mental categories (Förster, 2012).
The department store task
In the DS task, participant are presented with a graph
showing the rate of people entering and leaving a
department store each minute and over a 30-min. interval

(Fig.1). The stock is the accumulation of people in the store
over the 30-min interval, the inflow is people entering and
outflow people leaving the store. Participants are then
asked four questions as shown in the figure. The first two
questions test whether participants can read the graph
correctly, essentially measuring if they are able to identify
the inflow and the outflow. The last two questions test
whether participants can infer the stock's behavior based on
the behavior of the flows over time.
The main measure of SF failure is the typically low solution
rates to questions 3 and 4 (see detailed analyses of different
kinds of errors in several publications such as Cronin et al.,
2009 and Gonzalez & Wong, 2012).
The SF failure was also demonstrated using bar charts,
tables or texts listing the specific in- and outflows per
minute (Cronin & Gonzalez, 2007; Cronin et al., 2009), for
different contents (Brunstein, Gonzalez, & Kanter, 2010),
and also when motivation and learning were induced
(Cronin et al., 2009). Thus, so far, SF failure has not only
proven to be a highly stable construct, but also the involved
cognitive mechanisms remain unclear.
We expect global, as opposed to local, processing to be a
beneficial cognitive strategy, however, for two reasons.
First, SF problems (or any problem, for that matter) consist
of a set of surface details and an underlying relational
structure. SF systems all adhere to the same structure: If the
inflow exceeds the outflow, the stock increases and vice
versa. Even though the SF structure is simple, “seeing” it is
not, but is nevertheless crucial for problem-solving. Because
local processing means searching for details, whereas global
processing means searching for structural relations (Förster,
2009; Love et al., 1999), we expect global processing to be
beneficial for detecting the SF structure and thus for
problem solving.
Second, global processing was found to be connected to
more superordinate category-use (Förster & Dannenberg,
2010). Because processing in concrete and narrow
categories (e.g., “In minute five, eight people enter, and in
minute six, two people enter”) represents an erroneous
strategy, whereas processing in abstract and broad
categories (e.g., “Overall, more people enter than leave”)
represents a helpful strategy for making inferences about the
overall system behavior such as the stock, we expect global
processing to be beneficial for problem solving.
The typical SF paradigm may arguably have primed local
perceptual processing, however, because local features such
as specific numbers of people were highly salient (Fig. 1).
Participants might therefore get the impression that exact
numbers need to be retrieved and worked with, thus using
local processing. In our reasoning, however, it should be
beneficial to induce the impression that specific numbers are
merely constituent elements, and that the overall figure, the
gist of the display needs to be perceived. Since in the
Navon-letter-task, it was found that manipulating the
relative salience of the local versus the global form triggered
local versus global perceptual processing (see Kimchi, 1992,
for a review), we expect a task format highlighting surface

2304

elements (local format) to induce local processing and
therefore to be detrimental, and a task format highlighting
structure (global format) to induce global processing and
therefore to be beneficial for SF performance.

maps task (Förster, 2005; 2009), and test their effect on
solution rates in the department store task.
Experiment
Participants. A total of 148 participants (80 female, 67
male, 1 unknown) with a mean age of 34.9 years (SD = 12,
range = 18–64) took part in the experiment via Internet. All
participants were residents of the US and had completed at
least High School, 33% had a 4-year college degree in a
range of different fields, the largest groups being Business
(10%), Psychology (7%) and English (3%).

Figure 1. Original department store task format as used in
Cronin, Gonzalez and Sterman (2009).
In sum, we expect a connection between global-local
processing and stock-flow reasoning. Our test of this
assumption is threefold:
1. Task format hypothesis: A global task format should
enhance solution rates compared to a local task format.
We use the same SF problem (department store task)
and vary the relative salience of local versus global
features.
2. Individual differences hypothesis: Individual more
global perceptual processing should be connected to
higher solution rates to SF problems. We measure
global-local perceptual processing style using a variant
of the Navon-letter task, the Kimchi-Palmer figures task
(Förster & Dannenberg, 2010) and correlate
participants’ mean score with SF problem-solving
performance.
3. Priming hypothesis: Priming global perceptual
processing should induce a transfer-appropriate,
whereas local perceptual processing should induce a
transfer-inappropriate shift on subsequent problemsolving. That is, we except induced global perceptual
processing to shift to global conceptual processing,
resulting in high solution rates in SF problems, and vice
versa. We will experimentally induce different
perceptual processing styles in participants using the

Materials. A 3(priming: global vs. local vs. control) x
2(task format: global vs. local) mixed design was used, with
priming as the between-, and task format as the withinsubjects factor. To procedurally prime participants with a
processing style (global vs. local vs. control), the maps task
was used (see Förster, 2005; Förster et al., 2009). For each
of seven trials, participants were presented with a state map
displayed on the screen. In the global condition, participants
were instructed to attend to the map in its entity in order to
be able to describe its overall shape in one sentence. In the
local condition, participants were instructed to attend to only
the respective capital marked on the screen in order to be
able to describe its location in one sentence. In the control
group, participants were instructed to think about an item
that characterizes the respective state in order to name it in
one sentence. For all three conditions, participants
subsequently typed one sentence into an input field while
the respective map was still presented on the screen.
To test effects of task formats, the department store task was
used in a global and a local format. The local format was
very similar to the original format used, thus arguably
highlighting local surface features, whereas the global
format was designed to highlight global structure of the
problem. For both task formats, the original introductory
sentence and task display depicting in- and outflows was
used (see Fig.1), but the answer options cannot be
determined were replaced with 7-point Likert scales
assessing subjective confidence: How confident are you in
your answer? 0 = Not confident at all and 7 = very
confident. This was done to assess whether participants have
a reliable feeling for correctness as a function of the task
format. In the local format, participants answered the
following questions:
1. During which minute did the most people enter the store?
2. During which minute did the most people leave the store?
3. During which minute were the most people in the store?
4. During which minute were the fewest people in the store?
In the global format, participants answered the following
questions:
1. How are the people entering related to the people leaving
the store between time periods 1 to 14? (a) More people
entering than leaving (b) More people leaving than
entering (c) Same amount of people entering and leaving.
2. How are the people entering related to the people leaving
the store between time periods 14 to 30? (a) More people

2305

entering than leaving (b) More people leaving than
entering (c) Same amount of people entering and leaving.
3. How would you best describe the accumulation of the
number of people in the store between time periods 1 to 14?
(a) Increasing (b) Decreasing (c) Stable.
4. How would you best describe the accumulation of the
number of people in the store between time periods 14 to
30? (a) Increasing (b) Decreasing (c) Stable.
To measure individual global-local processing styles, we
used the Kimchi-Palmer-figures task (Förster &
Dannenberg, 2010). Participants were presented with
triangles and squares that are made up of smaller triangles
and squares. Participants indicated for each of 16 trials
whether a target figure (e.g., a global square made up of
local squares) was more similar to a sample figure that
matched its global form or its local form. Display of the
figures was counterbalanced with respect to the global
(local) match appearing on the left (right). Mean ratings
were then conducted for each participant, ranging from 0
(completely local processing style) to 1 (completely global
processing style).
Since a bi-directional link exists between good versus bad
mood and a global versus local processing style (Gasper &
Clore, 2002), and, in turn, mood is connected to problemsolving (Spering, Wagener & Funke, 2005), we controlled
for mood effects using two 7-point Likert-scales: How do
you feel right now? 0 = Very good and 7 = very bad; 0 =
Very sad and 7 = Very happy.
Procedure. Participants were told that they were going to
take part in two tasks, one about visual perception, and one
about problem solving. Participants first completed one of
three randomly assigned between-subjects procedural
priming treatments (maps task): global vs. local vs. neutral.
Second, participants answered both the local and the global
version of the department store task, in random order. Please
note that being able to answer the first version correctly
(say, the global) was no prerequisite for being able to
answer the second version correctly (say, the local). Third,
participants completed the Kimchi-Palmer-Figures-task and,
as a final set of answers, they answered the mood questions.
Results
Task format hypothesis. To test whether a global task
format improves SF performance relative to a local task
format, we compared solutions rates to SF tasks in both
formats. For both SF questions 3 and 4, solution rates in the
global format were higher than in the local task format (see
Table 1). Moreover, mean confidence ratings in the local
tasks were not connected to performance in the local tasks, r
= .004, p = .48, but confidence ratings in the global tasks
were connected to performance in the global tasks, r = .37, p
< .001.
In sum, the task format hypothesis was confirmed: As
expected, mean solution to the SF tasks were higher when a
global relative to a local task format was used. Confidence
ratings in both format might indicate, moreover, that
participants are merely guessing in the local tasks, whereas

they have insight into the problem structure, and therefore a
reliable feeling for correctness, in the global tasks.
Table 1. Percentage of participants who answered each of
the two SF questions (questions 3 and question 4) correctly
as a function of task format (global vs. local).
Task format
Local
(n=148)

Question 3
20%

χ2

Question 4
16%

42.3***

Global
57%
77%
109.3***
(n=147)
Note. Local question 3 (4): “During which minute were the
most (fewest) people in the store?“. Global question 3 (4):
“How would you best describe the accumulation of the
number of people in the store between time periods 1 to 14
(14 to 30)?”. ***p < .001
Individual differences hypothesis. To test whether globallocal processing styles affect SF-reasoning, processing style
was correlated with mean correct solutions to all four SF
tasks as a function of priming. After global priming, globallocal processing styles were not connected to mean SF
solution, r(50) = -.05, p = .37; processing styles were
connected to mean SF solutions, however, after local and no
priming, r(99) = .21, p = .02. A median split was performed
to directly compare SF solutions from participants with
more global vs. more local processing styles. After no
priming (control), and even more so after local priming,
participants with a more global processing style performed
better than participants with a more local processing style
(Table 2).
In sum, the individual differences hypothesis was supported:
As long as global priming did not induce a global
processing style anyway, participants profited from a preexisting more global processing style when solving SF
problems and achieved higher mean solutions than
participants with a more local processing style.
Table 2. Mean solution (SD) rates to all four SF tasks as a
function of processing style (local vs. global) and priming
(local vs. global vs. control).
Priming

Local
processing

Global
processing

t

Global
Priming
(n=51)

.44 (.29)

.43 (.28)

-.10

Control
(n=43)

.37 (.51)

.52 (.27)

-1.85*

Local Priming .31 (.26)
.46 (.18)
-2.44**
(n= 53)
Note. Local question 3 (4): “During which minute were the
most (fewest) people in the store?“. Global question 3 (4):

2306

“How would you best describe the accumulation of the
number of people in the store between time periods 1 to 14
(14 to 30)?”. *p < .05, **p < .01
Priming hypothesis. To test the effect of priming on
solution rates to SF tasks, local and no priming conditions
were collapsed, since they did not produce any significant
differences in either of the four SF tasks (p > .05). To test
differences in the number of correct solutions in SF tasks
after global priming, two-sample z-tests were conducted. If
participants answered the global SF tasks first, global
priming had no effect on solution rates, z =1.04, p = 0.15; z
=0.89, p = 0.19; z =0.46, p = 0.36 and z =0.33, p = 0.37 (for
the local question 3 and 4, and the global question 3 and 4,
respectively). However, if participants answered the local
questions first, global priming enhanced solution rates in the
local SF question compared to local or no priming for
question 3 (M = 24% vs. M = 12%) and 4 (M = 18% vs. M =
7%), yielding marginal significance of z =1.44, p = 0.07 and
z =0.33, p = 0.06, respectively. Global priming did not
enhance solutions rates to the global tasks 3 (M = 77% vs.
M = 68%) and 4 (M = 88% vs. M = 87%), yielding z =0.8, p
= 0.21 and z =0.33, p = 0.23, respectively.
To control for mood-effects, we compared participants’
mean mood in the three priming conditions. Results showed
that participants' mood in the global priming condition (M =
5.8, SD = 1.8) was not different from the local or no priming
condition (M = 6.3, SD = 1.8), t(149) = -1.58, p = .12,
indicating that the effect of global priming on problemsolving performance was not simply due to mood effects.
In sum, the priming hypothesis was marginally supported:
Inducing a global processing style enhanced solutions to the
local, but not the global SF questions. An additional priming
effect on the local SF tasks did not occur, however, if global
SF tasks were answered first, indicating that answering the
global SF questions first served as a prime in itself.
Discussion and Conclusion
The present experiment investigated the cognitive
mechanisms underlying SF failure. We proposed globallocal processing as a fundamental, cognitive explanation
and tested this notion using three different approaches:
Global versus local task formats, individual differences in
global-local processing and procedurally priming local
versus global processing. Results generally supported our
notion of global-local processing to affect SF performance.
In the department store task, participants profited
immensely from a global task format highlighting structural
relations between the system parts compared to the original
local format highlighting features of the constituent parts.
Specifically, solution rates in the global format were twice
(question 3) or even more than four times as high (question
4) compared to the local format. One might argue, however,
that the higher solution rates in the global task format were
merely due to the greater amount of information since only
the global task format referred to “time periods 1 to 14” and
“time periods 14 to 30”, respectively. However, the global

task format was specifically designed to unveil the structure
of the problem, so that a greater amount of information was
inherent in the design of the task format. We would even
suspect, moreover, that if questions 3 and 4 left out
information about time periods, the global task format
would still achieve higher solution rates, simply because
questions 1 and 2 already allow participants to detect the
problem structure. This, however, is for further research to
decide.
As a further result, there was a connection between globallocal processing style and mean solutions to all SF tasks in
the control group and the local priming group. Specifically,
in line with our expectation, participants using overall
global processing were better able to infer the overall
behavior of the SF system, as measured by tasks testing an
understanding of how the stock reacts to given in- and
outflow progressions. Moreover, global processing could be
procedurally primed in participants with the map task,
resulting in (marginally significant) higher solution rates
compared to local processing and the control group. This
connection was only present for the local tasks, however,
suggesting that participants do not profit from global
processing and thus a search for structure, when the task
format highlights structure in the first place. In sum, these
results point towards global-local processing as a first
explanation of the cognitive mechanisms involved in SFreasoning and SF failure.
The present results contribute to an understanding of how
people deal with dynamic complexity. Our results merge to
the conclusion that less successful participants seem to
approach the problem in a piecemeal and concrete manner,
whereas successful participants seem to approach the
problem in a holistic and abstract manner. Interestingly,
locally processing participants tend to stick more closely to
the literal information given, whereas globally processing
participants tend to go beyond the given information
(Friedman & Förster, 2001). With respect to SF systems,
such literal use of information might result in lowest level,
categorical representations (e.g., “the inflow is five”),
whereas going beyond the information given might result in
ordinal (e.g., “in minute 5, the inflow is smaller than the
outflow”) and increasingly higher-order representations
(e.g., “overall, the inflow is bigger than the outflow”).
Similarly, fuzzy-trace theory holds that people store two
fundamentally different kinds of representations in memory:
superficial verbatim representations such as exact numbers
and meaning-based gist representations such as the
“substance” of information (Reyna, 2012). Based on the
present results, it seems plausible to speculate that, after
local versus global processing of the task, participants hold
fundamentally different representations of the task in
memory. This, however, is for future research to decide.
In order to enhance people’s ability to deal with SF systems,
a range of strategies can be deduced from the present
results. For example, it might be helpful to apply the
principles of Gestalt psychology for pattern recognition to
SF problem displays. With help of the law of good Gestalt,

2307

for example, the constituent elements of SF problems could
be grouped to imply global structure and regularity. In a
different vein, one could try to enable people to process
dynamic problems globally, for example by teaching
strategies of abstraction, pattern recognition and induction
of higher-order representations. Making use of the finding
that a Gestalt view is helpful for dealing with SF problems,
one could even try to make computers “see” the patterns in
simple SF systems in order to regulate them.
It seems interesting to speculate in how far the benefit of a
global, Gestalt view applies to complex systems in general.
Systems containing a range of interacting variables can
hardly be regulated using analytical strategies, because of
limited cognitive capacities of the problem-solver, and
because information in real-life is mostly fuzzy in nature.
For both reasons, form-generating Gestalt principles could
be helpful: They enable the problem-solver both to conceive
of the system in its most economic form and to recognize
basic similarities and therefore to re-use previously
successful regulation strategies. Thus, recognizing patterns
in systems might enable one to recognize and use
similarities in a noisy world.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Defense Threat Reduction
Agency (DTRA) grant to Cleotilde Gonzalez (HDTRA1-091-0053). The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce
and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation here on.
References
Booth Sweeney, L. B. & Sterman, J. D. 2000. Bathtub
dynamics: initial results of a systems thinking inventory.
System Dynamics Review 16, 249–286.
Brunstein, A., Gonzalez, C. and Kanter, S. (2010), Effects of
domain experience in the stock–flow failure. System
Dynamics Review, 26(4), 347-354.
Cronin, M., & Gonzalez, C. (2007). Understanding the
building blocks of system dynamics. System Dynamics
Review, 23(1), 1–17.
Cronin, A.M., Gonzalez, C., & Sterman, D. 2009. Why
don’t well-educated adults understand accumulation? A
challenge to researchers, educators, and citizens.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Process. 108,
116-130.
Diehl, E., & Sterman, J. D. (1995). Effects of feedback
complexity on dynamic decision making. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 62(2), 198–215.
Förster, J. (2009). Relations between perceptual and
conceptual scope: How global versus local processing fits a
focus on similarity versus dissimilarity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138,88–111.
Förster, J. & Dannenberg, L. (2010). GLOMOsys: A systems
account of global versus local processing. Psychological
Inquiry, 21, 175–197.
Förster, J., Liberman, N.,&Friedman, R. S. (2007). Seven
principles of goal activation: A systematic approach to

distinguishing goal priming from priming of non–goal
constructs. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11,
211–233.
Friedman, R. S., & Förster, J. (2001). The effects of
promotion and prevention cues on creativity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1001–1013.
Friedman, R., Fishbach, A., Förster, J., & Werth, L. (2003).
Attentional priming effects on creativity. Creativity
Research Journal, 15, 277–286.
Gasper, K., & Clore, G. L. (2002). Attending to the big
picture: Mood and global versus local processing of visual
information. Psychological Science, 13, 33-39.
Gonzalez, C. & Wong, H. 2012. Understanding stocks and
flows through analogy. System Dynamics Review, 28(1), 327.
Kimchi, R. (1992). Primacy of wholistic processing and
global/local paradigm: A critical review. Psychological
Bulletin, 112, 24–38.
Love, B. C., Rouder, J. N., & Wisniewski, E. J. (1999). A
structural account of global and local processing. Cognitive
Psychology, 38, 291–316.
Macrae, N. & Lewis, H. 2002. Do I know you? Processing
orientation and face recognition. Psychological Science,
13(2), 194-196.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive Psychology,
9, 353–383.
Paich, Mark, & John D. Sterman. 1993. Boom, bust, and
failures to learn in experimental markets. Management
Science, 39(12), 1439-1458.
Reyna. 2012. A new intuitionism: Meaning, memory and
development in Fuzzy-trace Theory. Judgment and Decision
Making, 7(3), 332-359.
Schooler, J.W., Fiore, S., & Brandimonte, M. (1997). At a
loss from words: Verbal overshadowing of perceptual
memories. In D.L. Medin (Ed.), The psychology of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory, (Vol. 37,
pp. 291–340). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Schooler, J. W. (2002). Verbalization produces a transfer
inappropriate processing shift. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 989–997.
Spering, M., Wagener, D., & Funke, J. (2005). The role of
emotions in complex problem-solving. Cognition and
Emotion, 19, 1252-1261.
Sterman, J. D. (2000). Business dynamics: Systems thinking
and modeling for a complex world. New York: McGrawHill.
Sterman, J. D. (2002). All models are wrong: Reflections on
becoming a systems scientist. System Dynamics Review, 18,
501–531.
Sterman, J.D. & Booth Sweeney, L. 2002. Cloudy Skies:
Assessing public understanding of global warming. System
Dynamics Review 18, 207-240.
Tulving, E., & Schacter, D. L. (1990). Priming and human
memory systems. Science, 247, 301–306.

2308

