UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Selection of Linker Type in Emphatic Reduplication: Speaker’s Intuition meets Corpus
Statistics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/24r2b2cd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
K?l?ç,, Özkan
Boz?ahin, Cem

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Selection of Linker Type in Emphatic Reduplication:
Speaker’s Intuition meets Corpus Statistics
Özkan Kılıç (ozkan.kilic@gmail.com)
Cem Bozşahin (bozsahin@metu.edu.tr)
Department of Cognitive Science, Graduate School of Informatics
Middle East Technical University (METU), Ankara, Turkey
Abstract

(1) ka-s-katı
çı-r-ıl-çıplak
RED solid
RED naked
‘hard as a rock’ ‘totally naked’
pa-r-am-parça
dü-p-e-düz
RED torn
RED plain
‘completely torn apart’ ‘utterly’

Turkish Emphatic Reduplication (TER) occurs in adjectives
and adverbs to accentuate their meanings. The current experimental study to investigate the selection of the linker type in
TER indicated that responses from the participants correlate
with some lexical statistics. The result relies on the statistics
from a corpus with approximately 2 million Turkish words,
which we use in lieu of lexical statistics. The frequency order of linker choice reported by the participants was exactly
the opposite of the order of frequency of words in which the
linker and the first consonant co-occur consecutively in the corpus. Such a direct link to lexicon was unexpected. We suggest
that TER, an apparently phonological operation, depends on
lexical access for selecting the appropriate linker whose cooccurrence with the initial consonant of the reduplicated word
is infrequent. Our results relate morphology and lexicon in
more ways than the blocking phenomena, and suggest that
TER may be morpholexical.
Keywords: Morphology; emphatic reduplication; lexicon;
lexical frequency.

Related Work

Introduction
Turkish is generally considered to be a language with subjectobject-verb word order, and it is morphologically agglutinating, with considerably involved morphology. The Turkish
word structure depends heavily on suffixes, which are transparently stacked on the leftmost stem like “beads on a string”
(see Kornfilt, 1997; Lewis, 2000; Göksel & Kerslake, 2005
for a detailed review of Turkish). However, not all Turkish
morphology is suffixal, and it is not always the case that we
can enumerate the allomorphies clearly in non-suffixal morphology and phonology, with some good variation among
speakers, which is not the case for suffixal morphology. Perhaps not surprisingly, these cases involve items which might
appear to look like prefixes. We suggest a way to relate these
differences in the processing of bound items to lexical statistics, as evidence for another case of interaction between morphology and lexicon.
Turkish Emphatic Reduplication, henceforth TER, is one
such resource showing greater speaker variation. It is a
derivational process which intensifies the meaning of adjectives and some adverbs. Phonologically it involves the duplication of the initial (C)V of the base, and addition of a
prefix-like item as a linker to the root, which is a consonant
from the set {p, s, m, r}. (Demircan, 1987; Oztaner 1996;
Wedel, 1999; Yu, 1999; Kelepir, 2000; Kim, 2007; Dhillon,
2009). All words beginning with a vowel are infixed with -pas the linker. In some cases the (C)V+linker “prefix” is also
followed by an additional “infix” from the set {-A, -Il, -Am}
as in some of the examples below.

Inkelas & Zoll (2005) use cophonology to explain emphatic
reduplication. A cophonology is a morphological function associated with particular morphological constructions to
model morphologically conditioned phonology. Cophonologies receive words or morphemes as input, and perform some
operations such as constraint ranking, truncation, and velar
deletion on the input to be sent to the phonological interface
(Inkelas & Orgun, 1995; Inkelas, 2000). Truncation and addition act on the word beyaz ‘white’ to produce bem−. Then,
the mother node links the subconstituent daughters to the input and shifts stress to the truncated one to form bémbeyaz
‘snow white’. Demircan (1987), and later Wedel (1999,
2000), examined TER as a phonological operation and summarized the linker selection constraints as follows:
(2) (i) The linker from the set {p, s, m, r} cannot be identical with the initial consonant (C1 ) of the base: pembe
‘pink’ → *peppembe, although p ∈ {p, s, m, r}. Perpembe is possible but not likely (see below).
(ii) The linker cannot be identical to the second consonant
(C2 ) of the base: pembe → *pempembe/pespembe, although m ∈ {p, s, m, r}.
(iii) The phonetic features {coronal, sonorant, labial, continuant} of the linker cannot be identical with those
of the second segment of the base. The linker with
the most contrasting features is selected for perceptual
salience.
(iv) The linker is selected in a way that it can establish an
optimization or balance among the features contributing to the featural contrast with respect to base.
Some examples in Turkish seem to be orthogonal to these
constraints. For example, in addition to çı-r-ıl-çıplak, which
is the commonly assumed reduplicated form of çıplak as in
(1), çı-s-çıplak, çı-r-çıplak, çı-m-çıplak and çı-p-çıplak do occur in the Web.

2722

The constraints in (2i–iv) can be violated when phonological productivity is put to the test in relation to morphology and the lexicon. We asked 50 participants to reduplicate pırasa ‘leek’, and along with the expected pımpırasa and
pıspırasa, we also received pırpırasa and pıppırasa, in more
or less equal distribution.
In this paper we report our experimental study which investigates the selection of the linker type, and its relation to
morphology and the lexicon. The results indicate that responses from participants show disagreements with the literature about familiar words which are known to be non-TER
targets. It also suggests that TER may be morpholexical,
which is quite contrary to current literature.
The database for our statistics is a corpus of approximately
2 million Turkish words. We consider the database to be
a rough approximate of a native speaker’s lexical statistics.
We asked the participants to emphatically reduplicate some
words from this corpus. We asked them to play a “what-if”
game to reduplicate the words that they would normally resist
to reduplicate, such as masa ‘table’. Among 50 participants
and 31 target words, only one target, the only one that begins
with a vowel, showed unanimous agreement, all others showing varying degrees of agreement. We present our method
and the experiments toward understanding these results.

(4) a. Çocuklar mocuklar akıcı konuşmazlar.
childPLU M - DUP fluently speak- NEG - AOR -3 PL
‘Children (and the like) do not speak fluently’
b. Mocuklar hiç konuşmazlar.
M - DUP
never speak- NEG - AOR -3 PL
lit. ‘The likes do not speak at all.’

Doubling
Doubling occurs in two ways: simple doubling, and doubling
in lexical formations. In simple doubling, the word is repeated, as in (5). Depending on the syntactic category of
the targeted lexeme, it can produce adverbials, adjectivals and
measure terms (Göksel & Kerslake 2005).
(5) tek tek
zaman zaman
one DUP
time DUP
‘one by one’ ‘time to time’
Some additional morphemes, such as the plural suffix and
the question particle (QP), are attached to the sister constituents as in (6a) and (6b), or one of the constituents undergoes phonetic changes, as in (6c), for doubling in lexical
formations.
(6) a. güzel-ler
güzel-i
bir kız
beautiful- PLU beautiful- POSS a girl
‘a very beautiful girl’

TER vs. Reduplication
Kim (2007) points out that the most productive “prefixation” in Turkish is observed in reduplication. According to
Göksel & Kerslake (2005), Turkish duplication can be observed in three ways: M-reduplication, doubling, and TER,
as explained above. We show below that, unlike TER, the
first two kind are phonological-syntactic operations, therefore
not operating on morphological properties but phonologicalsyntactic ones. In this regard they are expected to be less
susceptible to lexical statistics.

b. güzel mi
güzel
bir kız
beautiful QP beautiful a girl
‘a very beautiful girl’
c. ufak tefek
bir kutu
little φi (little) a box
‘a tiny box’

M-reduplication
If a word or compound to be m-reduplicated starts with a
vowel, the original word is prefixed with m-, and then duplicated as shown in (3a). If it starts with a consonant other
than m-, the consonant is replaced with m-, and the new form
is duplicated as shown in (3b). In case the word or the compound starts with m-, it is followed by the word falan ‘like, so
and so’. M-reduplications can occur in all syntactic positions.

Among these alternatives, the last one seems closest to
a morphological-lexical operation. φi in (6c) stands for
cophonology (Orgun, 1996; Orgun, 1999; Inkelas & Zoll,
2005), which is the morphological function associated with
particular morphological constructions to model morphologically conditioned phonology. The basic idea is shown in Figure 1.

(3) a. [ Çocuklar ]NP [ [ akıcı makıcı ]ADV [ konuşmazlar ]V ]V P
child- PLU
fluent M - DUP
speak- NEG - AOR -3 PL
lit. ‘Children do not speak fluently (and the like)’
b. [ Çocuklar mocuklar ]NP [ [ akıcı ]ADV [ konuşmazlar ]V ]V P
child- PLU M - DUP
fluent
speak- NEG - AOR -3 PL
lit. ‘Children (and the like) do not speak fluently’
We note that the results of this process are two independent
words, both phonologically and syntactically. We can, for
example, choose the duplicated form in (3b) as the target of a
construction:

Figure 1: Template for cophonologies.

2723

Inkelas & Zoll (2005) employ cophonologies in their Morphological Doubling Theory (MDT), and stress that the theory is morphologically motivated because it makes use of
roots, morphs and affixes, rather than mora, coda or foot. The
model works in a binary manner, in which there are two inputs called daughter nodes, and the output in the tree’s root
is called the mother node. In MDT, the reduplicant and base
are both generated by morphology as part of a construction
that also embodies semantic and phonological generalizations
concerning the output of reduplication (Inkelas, 2005).
However, Göksel & Kerslake (2005:101) classify lexical
formations as idiomatic expressions, and our intuitions are
consistent with this observation. Take for example the following from the same page in their book:
(7) a. konu
komşu
LEX - FORM neighbor
‘neighbors’, lit. ‘neighbor-neighbor’
b. süklüm püklüm
crestfallen LEX - FORM
‘in a crestfallen manner’
Firstly, they are not always right-headed or left-headed,
which seems a bit unusual for a purportedly morphological
operation. Secondly, as Göksel & Kerslake (2005) point out,
the copy may or may not exist independently. We add to this
an additional observation that the doubled word is indeed a
phonological word, not a suffix, prefix, and not necessarily a
lexeme.
It is not clear to us whether examples such as (6c) should be
made part of an experiment on lexical statistics versus speaker
production of bound elements, because it is not clear whether
something other than multi-word word formation is involved
here, although we are quite certain that independent words
should be left out, i.e. examples such as (6a–b). We chose
to take idiomatic lexical formations (6c) outside the scope of
our experiments too, and concentrate only on TER.
In Morphological Doubling Theory, MDT, the features
given above can be ranked by the cophonologies to determine
the linker in the emphatically reduplicated form of TER. Yu
(1999) argued that the allomorphy in Turkish reduplication
could be accounted for by positing morphotactic constraints,
which spell out the form of each of the allomorphs that dominate certain phonotactic constraints. The ultimate selection of
the appropriate morph depends on the harmonic satisfaction
of the lower-ranked phonotactic constraints on the linker.
Demircan (1987) analyzed 121 emphatically reduplicated
adjectives, and concluded that the frequency of reduplicated
adjectives showed the ranking -p > -m > -s > -r, in which
-p is the most selected linker, and -r the least. Of all the
adjectives, 46% are reduplicated with -p, 29% with -m, 18%
with -s, and 7% with -r. In another study, Wedel (1999, 2000)
concluded that TER with the linker -r might be lexicalized.
In contrast with these findings, and with the constraints
summarized in (2), we noted some frequently occurring “exceptions” in §1, for example, among others, çı-r-ıl-çıplak,

which is the expected reduplicated form of çıplak, but also
çı-s-çıplak, çı-m-çıplak, çı-r-çıplak and çı-p-çıplak.
There seems to be no easy generalization across the speakers about how they emphatically reduplicate a novel word.
Auspiciously, there are tendencies depending on the linker
type, with respect to lexical co-occurrence frequencies, which
we explain below.

Method and Findings
In order to thoroughly understand the linker selection choices
available to native speakers of Turkish, a questionnaire consisting of 31 nonadjectival words composed of Turkish nouns
and verbs was prepared. The word list was given to 25 male
and 25 female participants, all university graduates, average
age 34.20, and all native speakers of Turkish. Nonadjectives
were deliberately selected to guarantee that the participants
would be very unlikely to have applied TER to the words
in the list before. The participants were asked the following questions: if the words were to be treated as adjectives,
how would they emphatically reduplicate them? They were
allowed to give single word answers. We also asked whether
they had ever reduplicated the words, how they knew how to
reduplicate the words, and the average time in seconds it took
them to reduplicate each word. Because our plans did not involve reaction time experiments, we considered the last piece
of information as the perceived difficulty and/or effort on behalf of the speaker. About two-thirds of the subjects took the
experiment in our presence, and our timing seems to concur
what they reported.
We have been told that they had never reduplicated any of
the words before. For their own explanation of self performance, the participants responded that they reduplicated the
words ‘intuitively’, and that each word required about 5 seconds or less for reduplication. All the participants used -p,
-m, -s, and -r for the linker position, but none used -A, -Il or
-Am as an additional infix. This result is shown in more detail
in Table 1.
Looking closer at the results, most productions seem to
satisfy the constraints previously reported (Demircan, 1987;
Wedel, 1999; Wedel, 2000), but, certainly, some formations
such as böpböcek, fırfırın, mammasal and kemkemir, violate
these constraints. Unlike the study by Demircan (1987), the
order of the linker type frequencies in this study is -p > -s > m > -r. Moreover, the reduplicated forms with r-linkers seem
to disconfirm Wedel’s (1999; 2000) conclusion that r-forms
might be lexicalized. They seem to be just less frequently
used.
Explanations for these findings might lie in lexical statistics, in particular n-grams of graphemes, which we use in lieu
of phonemes because of lack of speech data. For this end we
used corpora to approximate a lexical statistic. When we examined the METU-Sabancı Turkish Treebank (Atalay et al.,
2003), we found that there are 43,571 roots, of which 5,533
are distinct. The linker order found in the current study is exactly opposite of the frequency of words with roots that end

2724

Table 1: TER results for the nonadjectives.
Word
bıçak
böcek
cevap
cami
çorba
dilek
davet
duvar
eğlen
fırın
felek
getir
götür
hüzün
jilet
kıble
kemir
leğen
laf
masal
nizam
pırasa
resim
surat
seçim
şerit
tutkal
tekerlek
vazo
yutkun
zarf
(%)

p-linker
11
(bıpbıçak)
13
30
28
29
32
26
27
50
17
12
32
37
43
36
18
23
36
26
14
32
14
38
43
32
26
37
24
29
38
40
57%

m-linker
10
(bımbıçak)
8
0
8
0
11
3
7
0
2
3
0
0
2
6
2
8
3
7
5
8
9
4
6
9
19
5
7
2
3
10
11%

s-linker
28
(bısbıçak)
25
16
14
16
7
21
16
0
23
30
18
13
5
8
30
14
11
17
29
10
17
8
0
0
0
8
18
19
9
0
28%

r-linker
1
(bırbıçak)
4
4
0
5
0
0
0
0
8
5
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
2
0
10
0
1
9
5
0
1
0
0
0
4%

with the grapheme found in the linker; see Table 2, the second
column. The third column repeats the same count in a much
larger corpus, the BOUN corpus of 490 million words (Sak,
Güngör, & Saraçlar, 2011). The database has 45,035 distinct
stems, whose frequency of ending with p/m/s/r is reported in
the third column. They have the same rank as the other corpus. We take the rank as an adequate relative measure of the
lexical choice of endings in Turkish.
Next we consider the co-occurrence of the linker type
with other consonants that are likely to be at the initial segment. For a word without TER beginning with the sequence
C1V1C2 ..., the consonant co-occurrence on the boundary of
the “prefix” and the base will be one taken from the set {pC1 ,
mC1 , sC1 , rC1 }. Prefixation is a morphological operation, and
we wanted to see if early lexical access can be contrasted with
early morphological processing by frequency.
One hypothesis is that the linker may be selected so that the

Table 2: Number of distinct stems/roots terminating with the
same grapheme as a linker type, in two large corpora.
Root ending METU-Sabancı BOUN
p
100
639
s
128
780
m
281
1,620
r
470
3,523

first segment of the reduplicated word has less resemblance
to an existing root. One way to check this effect is to see
if the consonant co-occurrence is minimized for the linker
type-C1 pairs. In order to test this hypothesis, the statistics
from the METU Turkish Corpus (Say et al., 2002) is studied. Table 3 shows the number of distinct words containing
the consonant co-occurrences composed of one linker and the
initial grapheme of the nonadjectival word from the corpus.
For example, 46 words in the corpus have pb as substring.
Similarly, 482, 101 and 633 words have pm, ps and pr as substrings, respectively.
Table 3: Linker-consonant co-occurrences in the corpus.
Consonant
Linkers
pmsrb
46
482
101
633
(pb)
(pm)
(ps)
(pr)
c
44
435
136
705
ç
112
13
48
602
d
106
1599
148 9958
f
25
28
66
191
g
11
92
54
1519
h
189
114
168
200
j
7
1
7
90
k
275
134
845 2575
l
1799
3171
1655 8005
m
340
257
519 5156
n
90
82
140
559
p
100
447
404
499
r
952
201
139
277
s
529
926
612 3119
ş
10
90
10
624
t
820
109
4338 3321
v
25
25
61
61
y
132
122
719
346
z
36
161
16
195
(%)
6%
16%
17% 61%
The order of the linker type selection frequencies reported
by the participants is exactly the opposite of the order of
the frequency of the words in which the linker and the first
consonant (C1 ) co-occurred in the corpus. To exemplify: if
the participants’ choices occurred in the order pC1 > mC1 >
sC1 > rC1 (where xC1 indicates frequency of co-occurrence
of x and C1 , in this sequence), then the linker type and conso-

2725

nant co-occurrences in the corpus independent of reduplication are in the order pC1 <mC1 <sC1 <rC1 . This seems to be
true for all cases that we have tried. For example, the following are produced by the participants in varying frequencies
for the word masa ‘table’: mammasa, masmasa, mapmasa,
marmasa. When we look at the co-occurrence of mm, sm,
pm, rm in the corpus, their frequency rank is the opposite of
the ranking of the four alternatives by the participants. Such
a direct relation to lexical frequency would be surprising if
phonological and morphological contrasts were the sole bases
of ranking as suggested by the constraints listed in (2). The
same considerations apply to cophonology.
The Mann-Whitney non-parametric test was employed to
compare the distributions of the two sets given in Table 1 and
Table 3. It shows that the two sets are significantly different
(U = 693, p < .05, r = .79). For the participants’ responses,
the frequency of answers significantly and negatively correlated with linker types, ranging from -p to -r (Pearson’s
r(124) = −.64, p < .01). On the other hand, the frequency
of consonant collocations in the corpus significantly and positively correlate with linker types, ranging from -p to -r (Pearson’s r(124) = .34, p < .01).

Discussion and Conclusion
The study of Turkish Emphatic Reduplication (TER) on unexpected targets, e.g. on nonadjectival words, and the ‘intuitive’ responses on part of the participants which violate the
phonological feature constraints, show that although TER is a
morphologically conditioned phonological process, it seems
to depend on the knowledge of distributions such as consonant co-occurrence statistics and root ending statistics. The
participants tended to dissimilate the linker type they chose
from the known consonant co-occurrences and root endings
of their language.
Besides the phonological constraints, selecting an appropriate linker so that the first segment of the reduplicated word
has less resemblance to an existing root-word is additionally
effective in the process of reduplication. This dissimilation
tendency can be observed in Table 1. For example, dar-davet,
dur-duvar, göm-götür, gör-götür, ger-getir, gem-getir, hürhüzün, var-vazo and zar-zarf were not produced because dar
‘tight’, dur ‘stop’, göm ‘bury’, gör ‘see’, ger ‘stretch’, gem
‘curb’, hür ‘free’, var ‘exist’ and zar ‘die’ are already existing stems in Turkish. Thus, selecting a linker which has a frequent (admittedly orthographic) representation in the corpus
would seem to steer the speaker to considering as if there was
a root instead of a prefix. This we think might point out more
ways to look at morphology-lexicon relation, rather than just
the “blocking” kind such as went/*goed and git/*gittir/götür
(leave/cause to leave/take away). Also, considering the fact
that participants were able to respond within 5 seconds, it
seems to us that the speakers are putting the co-occurrence
frequencies in their language to online use.
The findings underline that cophonologies, i.e. morphological functions (Inkelas & Zoll, 2005), might require prior

knowledge of known words’ frequencies to select the appropriate linker after the truncation of the base in light of the
phonological constraints. To be able to employ these statistics, TER as a process needs access to a speaker’s lexicon.
We therefore suggest that Turkish emphatic reduplication,
an apparently phonological operation, depends on global lexical knowledge for selecting an appropriate linker whose cooccurrence with the initial consonant of the reduplicated word
is infrequent. (Yavas, 1980 was first to point out the lexical
source of the linker type.)
We argue further that there are sufficient reasons to take
emphatic reduplication as morpholexical, rather than phonological or cophonological. First, the ranking of TER elicitations from non-TER targets conforming to TER’s base form
paradigm is not consistent. This suggests that something
other than phonological ranking is also at work.
The lexical constraints on TER seems to be more than the
stem’s part of speech and lexical statistics. The process is
very productive when we can entertain a ((e,t), (e,t)) reading
for TER, from a ((e,t), (e,t)) base, be it adjective or adverb,
to ((e,t), (e,t)) result. This is a semantic constraint. Yemek
‘food’ is not the right type (currently it seems to be (e,t)),
and we have *yepyemek/*yemyemek/*yesyemek/*yeryemek,
although the first syllable of the base would be a phonologically legitimate input to TER if the semantic type could be
satisfied: yeşil ‘green’ → yemyeşil ‘all green’. Place names
cannot be of the right semantic type either, and similarly fail
to undergo TER if not forced: Mordoğan → *mosmordoğan.
The semantics of reduplication works on aspectual properties or intensive aspects, depending on the morphological
and lexical property of the ((e,t), (e,t)) base: çabuk ‘quick’
→ çarçabuk ‘in haste’, which is aspectual and derivational
(cf. syntactic/phonological reduplication çabuk çabuk ‘hurriedly’), and mor ‘purple’ → mosmor ‘deep purple’, which
is intensive. Note also the case of yeşil → yemyeşil above,
which seems to be intensive in some other way.
Connectives and postpositions are the hardest targets for
TER, presumably because of their semantic type in addition
to morphology: ama ‘but’ → *apama, göre ‘according to’
→ *göpgöre. Other semantically potential targets for TER,
e.g. VPs, are in fact (e,t), and as such they behave as expected: uyu ‘sleep’ → *upuyu, düşün ‘think’ → *düpdüşün.
Additional linkers {-A, -Il, -Am} are never used by our participants, which suggests that such forms in (1) are probably
lexicalized.
It is clear that the reduplicated “prefix”, the linker types {p,
s, m, r}, or the “infix” from {-A, -Il, -Am} are not morphological objects. They are not affixes or morphemes. It seems also
clear that the process is not purely lexical or phonological. Its
“allomorphy” is open-ended; there seems to be no discernible
TER morpheme, or a purely morphophonological process.
We point out that (i) the process is codetermined by morphology and the lexicon, (ii) its semantics depend on lexical
properties, and (iii) it cannot be repeated: masmavi → *masmasmavi and apaçık → *apapaçık. Therefore it is most likely

2726

a morpholexical rule, with subsequent phonological effects,
rather than causes, as exponence.

References
Atalay, N., Oflazer, K., & Say, B. (2003). The annotation
process in the Turkish Treebank. In Proceedings of the
EACL workshop on linguistically interpreted corpora (pp.
13–14). Budapest, Hungary.
Demircan, O. (1987). Emphatic reduplication in Turkish.
In H. E. Boeschoten & L. T. Verhoeven (Eds.), Studies
on modern Turkish: Proceedings of the 3rd conference on
Turkish linguistics (pp. 24–41). Tilburg: Tilburg University
Press.
Dhillon, R. (2009). Turkish emphatic reduplication: Balancing productive and lexicalized forms. GLS, 71, 3–20.
Göksel, A., & Kerslake, C. (2005). Turkish: A comprehensive
grammar. London: Routledge.
Güngör, T. (2003). Lexical and morphological statistics for
Turkish. In Proceedings of TAINN (pp. 409–412).
Inkelas, S. (2000). Phonotactic blocking through structural
immunity. In B. Stiebels & D. Wunderlich (Eds.), Lexicon
in focus (pp. 7–40). Berlin: Akademia Verlag.
Inkelas, S. (2005). Morphological doubling theory: Evidence
for morphological doubling in reduplication. In B. Hurch
(Ed.), Studies on reduplication (pp. 63–86). Berling: Mouton de Gruyter.
Inkelas, S., & Orgun, C. O. (1995). Level ordering and economy in the lexical phonology of Turkish. Language, 71,
763–793.
Inkelas, S., & Zoll, C. (2005). Reduplication: Doubling in
morphology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kelepir, M. (2000). To be or not to be faithful. In A. Göksel
& C. Kerslake (Eds.), Studies on Turkish and Turkic languages. Harrassowitz Verlag.
Kılıç, O., & Bozşahin, C.
(2012).
Semi-supervised
morpheme segmentation without morphological analysis.
In Proceedings of the workshop on language resources
and technologies for Turkic languages, LREC. İstanbul,
Turkey: ELRA.
Kim, H. (2007). The full-to-partial reduction in Korean and
Turkish reduplication. Linguistic Research, 26, 121–148.
Kornfiltl, J. (1997). Turkish. London and New York: Routledge.
Lewis, G. (2000). Turkish grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (2nd ed)
Orgun, C. O. (1999). Morphological doubling theory: Evidence for morphological doubling in reduplication. In
B. Hermans & M. von Oostendorp (Eds.), The derivational
residue in phonological optimality theory (pp. 247–267).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Oztaner, S. M. (1996). A word grammar of Turkish with morphophonemic rules. Master thesis, Department of Computer Engineering, Middle East Technical University.
Sak, H., Güngör, T., & Saraçlar, M. (2011). Resources for
Turkish morphological processing. Language Resources

and Evaluation, 45(2), 249–261.
Say, B., Zeyrek, D., Oflazer, K., & Ozge, U. (2002). Development of a corpus and a treebank for present-day written Turkish. In K. Imer & G. Dogan (Eds.), Proceedings
of the eleventh international conference of Turkish linguistics (pp. 183–192). Famagusta, Northern Cyprus: Eastern
Mediterranean University Press.
Wedel, A. (1999). Turkish emphatic reduplication. Master
thesis, Department of Linguistics, University of California,
Santa Cruz.
Wedel, A. (2000). Perceptual distinctiveness in Turkish emphatic reduplication. In Proceedingsof the 19th west coast
conference on formal linguistics (pp. 546–559).
Yavas, M. (1980). Borrowing and its implications for Turkish phonology. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Univ. of
Kansas.
Yu, A. (1999). Dissimilation and allomorphy: The case of
Turkish emphatic reduplication. Master thesis, Department
of Linguistics, University of California, Berkeley.

2727

