UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Self-Regulated Learning with Graphical Overviews: When Spatial Information Detracts from
Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5kp8b0n9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Davies, Sarah
Butcher, Kirsten
Stevens, Corey

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Self-Regulated Learning with Graphical Overviews: When Spatial Information
Detracts from Learning
Sarah Davies (sarah.davies@utah.edu)
Kirsten R. Butcher (kirsten.butcher@utah.edu)
Corey Stevens (coreybstevens@gmail.com)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1705 Campus Center Drive, MBH 327
Salt Lake City, UT 84112 USA

work with a hypertext document (Salmerón et al., 2009).
However, it is unclear if graphical overviews will have
similar facilitative effects in online environments with
limited coherence between independent online resources
(rather than within a single hypertext document).
There is some evidence that a graphical interface can
facilitate learning with varied, independent online resources.
Research studying the use of a graphically-organized
interface for online browsing showed that it facilitated
processing of domain information in a digital library
environment when compared to a keyword search interface
(Butcher, Bhushan, & Sumner, 2006). However, it remains
unclear if results were driven by the spatial formatting of the
graphical interface or its conceptual (textual) content.
This research investigates the effects of a graphical
overview (presented as either a text-based outline view or a
spatially-organized network view) on students’ selfregulated learning with online digital resources drawn from
an educational digital library.

Abstract
Graphical overviews have been studied as a method to
improve hypertext learning and digital search. Although
previous studies have found learning benefits to graphical
overviews of single hypertext, it is unclear if these benefits
extend to online learning across multiple (independent)
documents. Previous research also has found that graphical
overviews facilitate domain focus during online search, but it
has not been established whether these benefits are derived
from the spatial organization of the graphic or its textual
content. This research examined the impact of using graphical
overviews organized either spatially (i.e., network view) or
textually (i.e., outline view) during self-regulated online
learning. Assessments focused on deep understanding of
science concepts and the relationships between them. Results
indicated that the outline view promoted deeper
understanding of science concepts and fewer errors about the
relationships between them. Implications are discussed for the
design and implementation of instructional materials to
support self-regulated learning.
Keywords: self-regulated learning; graphical representations;
online learning; conceptual browsing; comprehension

Self-Regulated Learning with Hypermedia

Introduction
As individual learning tasks increasingly are performed in
online environments (Graham & Metaxas, 2003), there is a
strong need to understand how the format of different
materials impacts successful self-regulated learning
(Pintrich, 2000; Winne, 2001). Self-regulated learning refers
to learning situations in which students themselves must
organize and manage the learning task (Azevedo &
Cromley, 2004); it can be contrasted with learning in
structured environments such as intelligent tutoring systems,
where the computer system typically chooses the problems
and decides when the student has reached mastery and is
ready to move on to new materials (Anderson et al., 1995).
When students work with online learning materials – for
example, hypertext documents – the learning task is
inherently self-regulated by virtue of non-linear links that
allow the learner to choose a unique path through the digital
content. Research has found that students have great
difficulty in self-regulating their learning with hypermedia,
often utilizing ineffective strategies during self-regulated
learning tasks (Azevedo et al., 2008). Other research has
demonstrated the potential of organizational materials to
facilitate more effective self-directed learning in online
environments. For example, graphical overviews have been
found to facilitate learning when presented before students

When students are asked to self-regulate their learning from
hypermedia, they often struggle to organize and process
information in ways that support deep understanding
(Azevedo et al., 2008). Although successful self-regulated
learners engage in strategies such as planning and prior
knowledge activation (Azevedo, Guthrie, & Seibert, 2004),
students engaged in self-regulated learning with hypermedia
frequently choose to prioritize their reading based upon
personal interest or text location (Salmerón, Kintsch, &
Cañas, 2006). Not surprisingly, this failure to attend to
conceptual relationships and coherence in the domain can
lead students to miss important semantic connections
between ideas and to form a more shallow understanding of
hypermedia content (Salmerón et al., 2006).
Students may need significant help – especially in
activating prior knowledge, organizing knowledge, and
processing conceptual relationships – in order to learn
effectively with online content. One way to offer this
support is to provide the student with useful organizational
materials that can be used to guide study and learning.
Graphical overviews, which illustrate high-level ideas and
the relations between them for a given text or topic, provide
one form of organizational materials that has been shown to
support learning among students with low prior knowledge
(Salmerón et al., 2009).

2136

Graphical Overviews and Hypertext Learning
Salmerón and colleagues have examined the impact of
graphical overviews as the method of navigation through a
hypertext (Salmerón et al., 2009; Salmerón & Garcia, 2012).
These graphical organizations provided students with
freedom to choose navigational paths through the hypertext
but organized the content that could be viewed across the
hypertext using a conceptual overview of the content.
Salmerón and Garcia (2012) found that providing young
(sixth grade) learners with a graphical overview of a
hypertext document improved their knowledge integration
during a comprehension task. These results complement
earlier findings which showed that providing students with a
graphical overview before hypertext study led to increases
in comprehension for undergraduate learners (Salmerón, et
al., 2009). Salmerón and colleagues have proposed two
potential explanations for the observed benefits of graphical
overviews: first, graphical overviews may facilitate learning
by providing an organizational framework to support online
study; second, graphical overviews may facilitate active
processing of difficult texts by providing a text
macrostructure that frees up additional resources for
comprehension processes.
If graphical overviews facilitate learning by providing
learners with an organizational framework for domain
knowledge, studying their effects within a single hypertext
may underestimate their potential benefits. Whereas a single
hypertext likely has an overall coherence and topical focus,
self-regulated learning in more authentic online
environments requires working across independent digital
resources that may not be easily integrated. Thus, it is
important to consider whether graphical overviews may
facilitate learning when students work with multiple online
resources (i.e., independent web pages and sites).

Graphical Overviews and Digital Search
There is some evidence that graphical overviews change
learners’ processing when engaged in learning tasks that
require work with multiple online resources. Butcher,
Bhushan, and Sumner (2006) studied the impact of
graphical overviews on students’ search and evaluation
processes as they attempted to locate useful online resources
in an educational digital library. Students used either a
graphical representation (a domain overview in the form of
a node-link diagram) or a keyword interface to search for
relevant digital content. Results showed that using the
graphical representation as a search interface increased the
depth of domain-relevant processing. Whereas students who
navigated digital resources using a keyword interface tended
to focus on superficial features of the resources, students
navigating the resources with the graphical interface focused
on analyzing domain concepts. Changes in the depth of
students’ processing of digital resources does not provide
direct evidence of deeper learning with these resources;
however, novice learners engaged in educational search
tasks likely are engaged in “search to learn” processes
which include iterative rounds of cognitive processing and

interpretation (Marchionini, 2006). Recent research
(Butcher et al., 2011) has confirmed the impact of graphical
overviews on digital search and evaluation: when graphical
representations were used as the basis for preservice
teachers’ navigation of resources in an educational digital
library, students were more likely to identify educationallyuseful online content and to focus on domain-level content
when evaluating a web page or site.

Format and Content of Graphical Overviews
Although Butcher and colleagues (Butcher et al., 2006;
Butcher et al., 2011) have found clear evidence that
graphical representations can impact the processes that
students use during online search and the overall success of
online searches during educational tasks, it remains unclear
whether these observed benefits were derived from the
spatial format of the graphic (i.e., the spatial organization of
the graphical overviews) or its (textual) domain content.
Because keyword interfaces may require significant
cognitive effort to generate relevant search terms
(Marchionini & White, 2007), it is possible that the benefits
of graphical overviews for self-regulated, online learning
tasks may be derived from reallocation of cognitive effort
from keyword generation to concept analysis. If this were
the case, we would expect that removing spatial
organization could facilitate even greater benefits by
removing processing difficulty associated with examining
and understanding spatial information.
If it is largely the textual content of graphical overviews
that facilitates learning, more complex spatial formats
actually may hurt novice learners. Graphical overviews in
the form of a network map (see Figure 1) may depict
interrelationships that are too complex for novice learners to
understand. Novice learners may be better served by formats
that emphasize organizational information in a hierarchical
(i.e., linear) manner (see Figure 2). In a comparison of
learning from linear and non-linear conceptual overviews,
Amadieu and colleagues (2009) found that domain novices
reported increased disorientation when learning from a
network conceptual overview that depicted important
relationships. In contrast, learners reported less
disorientation and achieved better recall when learning with
a hierarchical conceptual overview. Still, if it is true that
graphical overviews promote learning by providing a
conceptual framework for domain content, we would expect
that a hierarchical graphical overview that removes spatial
information would cease to be effective.
The current research extends prior research by examining
two forms of graphical overviews during an online learning
task: a spatially-organized network view vs. a textuallyorganized (linear) outline view. The use of these two
conditions facilitates a direct comparison of whether the
spatial format or the domain content of the graphical
overviews has the greatest impact on learning outcomes. In
addition, this research examines impact within a more
authentic online environment, using the graphical overview
to facilitate learning across a variety of independent online

2137

resources. Because the network view is designed to
demonstrate key conceptual relationships between multiple
learning goals, we hypothesized that this graphical overview
would facilitate greatest understanding of domain
relationships.

Factual Knowledge vs. Deeper Understanding
When considering learning outcomes, it is important to
recognize that comprehension research has established that
different levels of knowledge can be formed during learning
(Kintsch, 1998). In this work, we draw upon a well-known,
established model of comprehension – ConstructionIntegration (CI) – that distinguishes between three levels of
knowledge representation: the surface level, the textbase,
and the situation model (Kintsch, 1994). A surface level
representation is formed by encoding the specific details of
a text (e.g., exact words and sentences). A textbase
representation consists of the semantic meaning of a text;
thus, a textbase representation drives recall of basic ideas
derived from learning materials. The most flexible and
durable knowledge representation is the situation model,
which is formed when the learner integrates to-be-learned
content with prior knowledge. A well-developed situation
model drives inference, application, and transfer; as such,
students who develop the situation model can be considered
to understand materials rather than simply remember them.
The outcome assessments in this research target
knowledge at the textbase and situation model levels. As
described below, textbase assessments focus on factual
knowledge learned during study and recalled during testing.
Situation model assessments focus on students’ application
of learned knowledge, through explanation of concepts and
relationships. Errors in student explanations, which may
result from superficial reasoning about perceived
relationships, also are examined.

Method
Participants
Twenty-six undergraduate students (8 males, 18 females, M
age = 23) at a large public university in the western United
States participated in this study in partial fulfillment of a
class research requirement. One participant was excluded
because his major was geology.

Design
This study utilized a two-condition, between-subjects
experimental design. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of the two experimental conditions upon arrival to the
study.

Materials
Graphical Overviews The graphical overviews in this
study were drawn from the Science Literacy Maps
published on the National Science Digital Library (NSDL)
website. NSDL is a digital library which seeks to provide

access to up-to-date, high-quality, online resources in varied
formats that will support education and learning in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (Zia, 2000). The
NSDL Science Literacy Maps are derived from strand maps
developed by the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS, 2001); these maps take
the form of node-link diagrams. Nodes contain text that
describe key learning goals in a topic area. The spatial
organization of the nodes and the links between them
demonstrate how student knowledge (as evidenced by the
learning goals) should progress over time in a given domain.
In the NSDL, the Science Literacy Maps serve as a
conceptual browsing interface (Zia, 2000); that is, the maps
serve as a graphical search interface. To retrieve relevant
digital resources using a conceptual search interface, users
select a specific learning goal from the graphical overview
(i.e., the Science Literacy Map). Clicking a learning goal
brings up a small window that lists the NSDL-catalogued
resources relevant to the conceptual information contained
in the learning goal; much like a commercial search
interface, each listed result provides users a title, a linked
URL, and a short description of the resource.
Network Graphical Overview. The network view of the
search interface utilizes the standard form of the Science
Literacy Maps as found on NSDL.org. Learning goals are
represented as nodes and are connected to one another with
arrow links (see Figure 1); links between nodes indicate
conceptual relationships between the learning goals. The
overall spatial organization of the network indicates a more
global knowledge organization, showing how learning goals
develop over time, across grade levels and subtopics in the
domain (see Figure 1).
Outline Graphical Overview. The outline view of the
search interface contains the same node content as the
network view. That is, all nodes contain the same text
describing the same learning goals. However, in this view,
the learning goal nodes are listed vertically rather than
spatially. Learning goals in the outline view still are
grouped by grade level (see Figure 2), but there are no links
indicating conceptual relationships and spatial organization
has been removed. As in the network view, clicking a
learning goal in the outline view will bring up a window
showing relevant resources catalogued in the digital library
(see Figure 2). The learning goals in the outline view
retrieved the same digital resources as in the network view
(i.e., both interfaces searched over the same collection of
digital resources and used the same algorithms to retrieve
content relevant to each learning goal).
Reference Versions of Network and Outline Views
Before students used the graphical overview as a search
interface to find online digital resources, they were given
ten minutes to familiarize themselves with a non-interactive
version of the graphic. The non-interactive forms of the
graphical overviews utilized the same formatting and
content as the interactive (search interface) versions of the
graphical overviews as described above (see Figures 1 & 2).

2138

Table 1: Conceptual Explanation Examples
Shallow
Moderate

Figure 1: The network conceptual search interface is
on the left. On the right is its associated noninteractive reference.

Deep

Figure 2: The outline conceptual search interface is on
the left. On the right is its associated non-interactive
reference.
Learning Assessments Learning assessments were
administered at the beginning and end of each session.
Questions tested participants’ factual knowledge of plate
tectonics, as well as their understanding of important plate
tectonics concepts and relationships between them
Factual Knowledge. Factual knowledge items were
designed to capture participants’ textbase-level knowledge
of plate tectonics. Factual items consisted of generative as
well as non-generative (multiple choice and true/false)
questions. Generative questions provided participants with
images, such as a cross-section of the Earth, and asked them
to generate labels for specific components or processes.
Participants were asked to generate 13 diagram labels;
correct labels received one point and partially-correct labels
received half a point, for a total of 13 points. Nongenerative questions tested students on their general
knowledge (e.g., the number of Earth’s tectonic plates). The
non-generative factual assessment consisted of 33 items;
participants received one point per correct item, for a total
of 33 points.
Conceptual Understanding. Conceptual understanding
items were designed to elicit participant explanations about
key plate tectonics processes, thereby reflecting
participants’ situation models. These items asked students
to interpret a diagram and explain the plate tectonics
processes pictured. Conceptual understanding items were
scored using a rubric that categorized explanations from
most shallow to most deep, with a maximum of 5 points
available per item. See Table 1 for examples of shallow,
moderate, and deep answers. There were four conceptual
understanding items, for a total of 20 points possible.

It is showing the movement and direction
in which Earth is moving caused by heat.
The arrows are drawn in a circular pattern
because that is how the convection heat
current travels beneath the surface.
The rock in the mantle is heated up and
due to its then lighter density rises to the
surface where it is cooled because it is
further away from the core and starts to
become more dense and sinks. This
process is repeated over and over again
and is called convection.

Relationship Explanations. These items were designed to
assess the depth with which students understood conceptual
relationships between the learning goals. Relationship
explanation items provided students with two distinct
learning goals from the graphical overview and asked them
to explain the relationship between the learning goals. This
assessment presented students with 3 pairs of learning goals
at pretest and 6 pairs at posttest. Relationship explanation
items were scored as shallow or deep (see Table 2 for
examples). Because novice learners often fail to identify and
understand important relationships during learning, and
because the conditions differed in the explicit portrayal of
these relationships, the accuracy of relationship explanations
was also examined. Explanations containing incorrect
reasoning or mechanisms were marked as containing errors.
Table 2: Relationship Explanation Examples
Shallow

Deep

They both talk about the movement of the
earth and what is causing the earth to move.
Because of heat flow and gravity, we see a
pattern of movement within the earth's
mantle (convection). The plates ride on the
mantle, so this movement translates into the
plates interacting with each other.

Procedure
To begin the study session, participants completed a brief
survey which gathered demographic information. Next, the
pretests were administered to assess participants’ prior
knowledge of plate tectonics. The learning task included 10minute study of the reference version of the graphical
overview (as appropriate to randomly assigned conditions),
followed by forty minutes of learning with online digital
resources as facilitated by the (condition-appropriate)
graphical overview acting as the search interface. During
online study, the reference version of the graphical overview
was displayed on a second monitor so that participants
could refer to it when reading/examining a digital resource.
Following the learning task, posttest assessments were
administered.

2139

Analysis
As a check of random assignment, factual knowledge at
pretest was analyzed using a MANOVA. Posttest learning
assessment components also were analyzed using a repeated
measures analysis of variance (RMANOVA) and a
MANCOVA (see below). Alpha level was set at p = .05 for
all analyses.

Results
Prior Knowledge of Plate Tectonics
A MANOVA for performance on both types of factual
knowledge items at pretest did not show an overall
condition difference (F(2, 22) = 2.50, p = .11); however,
univariate tests indicated that the two conditions did differ
significantly on pretest diagram labels (F(1, 23) = 5.19, p =
.03). At pretest, the network overview condition correctly
labeled a higher percentage of diagrams (M = .29, SD = .19)
than the outline overview condition (M = .15, SD = .10). To
control for the variance in learning due to prior knowledge,
pretest performance in diagram labels was used as a
covariate in a MANCOVA for posttest performance.

Posttest Performance on Learning Assessments
Factual Knowledge A RMANOVA was used to examine
pre- and posttest performance on the non-generative factual
knowledge items. Overall, participants showed a slight but
significant learning gain from pre- to posttest (Mdiff = .05;
F(1,23) = 5.30, p = .03) but there was no significant effect of
condition (F < 1).
Conceptual Understanding & Relationship Explanations
A MANCOVA was used to examine posttest performance
on measures of deep comprehension. There was a
significant main effect of condition (F(3, 20) = 4.32, p = .02).
Univariate tests showed a main effect of graphical overview
condition on conceptual understanding (see Table 3).
Students in the outline graphical overview condition
produced conceptual explanations that evidenced deeper
understanding of plate tectonics concepts (M =.38, SD=.19)
than the network graphical overview condition (M =.34, SD
= .24; F(1, 22) = 9.42, p < .01). There also was a significant
Table 3: M and (SD) for Assessments of Learning
Assessment Scores (%)
Factual Knowledge
Non-generative (pretest)
Non-generative (posttest)

.56(.09)
.62(.13)

.53(.11)
.57(.06)

Conceptual Understanding*

.34(.24)

.38(.19)

.17(.25)
.27(.17)

.24(.25)
.14(.16)

Relationship Explanations
% Deep Relationships
% Conceptual Errors*
* p < .05

Network

Outline

condition difference in the percentage of errors when
explaining relationships between plate tectonics concepts
(F(1, 22) = 8.12, p < .01). Students in the outline condition
generated a smaller percentage of errors (M = .14, SD = .16)
than students in the network condition (M = .27, SD = .17).
A non-significant but note-worthy trend was found in the
percentage of deep explanations of relationships between
concepts (F(1, 22) = 3.34, p = .08). The outline condition
produced a higher percentage of deep relationship
explanations (M = .24, SD = .25) than the network condition
(M = .17, SD = .25).

Discussion
After learning from multiple resources online, students in
both conditions evidenced a similar increase in factual (textbase level) understanding of plate tectonics concepts.
Overall, this is consistent with previous research finding
that providing a graphical overview before hypertext study
supports textbase comprehension (Salmerón et al., 2009).
However, the current results also demonstrate that a
spatially-organized graphical representation does not
facilitate textbase learning more than a linearly-organized
representation. Thus, it may be the textual content of the
graphical organizer that facilitates macrostructure
processing and leads to learning gains.
Although spatial format does not vary learning outcomes
when considering factual (textbase-level) knowledge, it does
impact the depth of understanding for important concepts
and relationships between them. However, the pattern of
results was opposite of hypothesized findings. Current
results show that an outline graphical overview provided a
learning advantage over a network (spatially-organized)
overview: students learning with the outline view produced
more deep explanations of science concepts and evidenced
fewer erroneous ideas about inter-conceptual relationships.
This is a surprising result, since only the network view
visually depicted the conceptual relationships among the
learning goals. Indeed, previous studies have hypothesized
that a schematic representation of relationships between
concepts may provide novice learners with a framework for
assimilating knowledge (Salmerón et al., 2009; Butcher et
al., 2011). In this study, the spatial depiction of domain
relationships compromised deep understanding. Concepts
depicted in a network organization resulted in more errors
when students explained conceptual relationships; students
working with the network view also demonstrated less
evidence of deep thinking about concepts. It may be that the
graphic illustration of relationships actually precluded
students from thinking deeply about the nature of those
relationships. By explicitly depicting the conceptual
relationships between learning goals, the network view may
have caused students to generate fewer of their own
inferences or predictions during learning. Alternatively, the
network representation of content may have been too
complex for novice learners. Previous research has found
that students report feeling more disoriented with a network
organization than with a more linear representation of

2140

information (Amadieu et al., 2009). Because the network
view did not specify the nature of potentially-complex
relationships, students may have resorted to more shallow
strategies of reasoning, integrating concepts based on
superficial, easily-perceivable common features such as
shared keywords.
When searching for information online, students typically
learn from varied sources (Marchionini, 2006). Creating a
deep, flexible understanding of the situation under
investigation requires that self-regulated learners be able to
synthesize multiple sources of information and integrate
their learning with prior knowledge (Butcher & Kintsch,
2012; Perfetti, Rouet, & Britt, 1999). By demonstrating
potential drawbacks to network-based graphical organizers
during online learning, this study contributes an important
initial finding to the literature on how to externally support
self-regulated learning with multiple online resources.
However, more research is needed to understand the specific
relationship between the format of graphical overviews and
their impact on learning outcomes.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported, in part, by the
National Science Foundation under Grant DUE-0938041.
Any opinions, findings, and recommendations or
conclusions are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

References
AAAS (2001). Atlas of Science Literacy, Volume 1.
Washington, DC, Project 2061, Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the National
Science Teachers Association.
Amadieu, F., Van Gog, T., Paas, F., Tricot, A., & Mariné,
C. (2009). Effects of prior knowledge and concept-map
structure on disorientation, cognitive load, and learning.
Learning and Instruction, 19, 376-386.
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., &
Pelletier, R. (1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(2), 167-207.
Azevedo, R., & Cromley, J. G. (2004). Does training on
self-regulated learning facilitate students’ learning with
hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96,
523–535.
Azevedo, R., Guthrie, J. T., & Seibert, D. (2004). The role
of self-regulated learning in fostering students’ conceptual
understanding of complex systems with hypermedia.
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 30, 87–111.
Azevedo, R., Moos, D. C., Greene, J. A., Winters, F. I., &
Cromley, J. G. (2008). Why is externally-facilitated
regulated learning more effective than self-regulated
learning with hypermedia? Educational Technology
Research & Development, 56, 45–72.
Butcher, K.R., Bhushan, S., & Sumner, T. (2006).
Multimedia displays for conceptual search processes:
Information seeking with strand maps. ACM Multimedia
Systems Journal, 11, 236-248.

Butcher, K.R., Davies, S., Crockett, A., Dewald, A., &
Zheng, R. (2011). Do graphical search interfaces support
effective search for and evaluation of digital library
resources? Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual
International ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital
Libraries (pp. 315-324). New York, Association for
Computing Machinery.
Butcher, K. R., & Kintsch, W. (2012). Text comprehension
and discourse processing. In A.F. Healy & R.W. Proctor
(Eds.), Handbook of Psychology, Volume Four:
Experimental Psychology (2nd Ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Graham, L., & Metaxas, P. T. (2003). Of course it's true; I
saw it on the internet! Communications of the ACM,
46(5), 71-75.
Kintsch, W. (1994). Text comprehension, memory, and
learning. American Psychologist, 49(4), 294-303.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marchionini, G. (2006). Exploratory search: From finding to
understanding. Communications of the ACM, 49(4), 4146.
Marchionini, G., & White, R. (2007). Find what you need,
understand what you find. International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction, 23(3), 205-237.
Perfetti, C. A., Rouet, J.-F., & Britt, M. A. (1999). Towards
a theory of documents representation. In H. van
Oostendorp & S. R. Goldman (Eds.), The construction of
mental representations during reading. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Pintrich, P. R. (2000). The role of goal orientation in selfregulated learning. In M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M.
Zeidner (Eds). Handbook of Self-Regulation. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Salmerón, L., Baccino, T., Cañas, J. J., Madrid, R. I., &
Fajardo, I. (2009). Do graphical overviews facilitate or
hinder comprehension in hypertext? Computers &
Education, 53, 1308-1319.
Salmerón, L., & Garcia, V. (2012). Children’s reading of
printed text and hypertext with navigation overviews: The
role of comprehension, sustained attention, and visuospatial abilities. Journal of Educational Computing
Research, 47(1), 33-50.
Salmerón, L., Kintsch, W., & Cañas, J. J. (2006). Reading
strategies and prior knowledge in learning with hypertext.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 1157-1171.
Winne, P. H. (2001). Self-regulated learning viewed from
models of information processing. In B. Zimmerman &
D. Schunk (Eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic
achievement: Theoretical perspectives (2nd Ed).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zia, L. L. (2000). The NSF National Science, Mathematics,
Engineering, and Technology Education Digital Library
(NSDL) Program: A progress report. D-Lib Magazine, 6:
Available
<http://www.dlib.org/dlib/october00/zia/10zia.html#ref08
>.

2141

