UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantics: Intuition, Experiment or Illusion?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xw1n5hg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Slezak, Peter

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantics: Intuition, Experiment or Illusion?
Peter Slezak (p.slezak@unsw.edu.au)
Department of Philosophy, School of Humanities
University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052 Australia

Abstract
Externalist theories in natural language semantics have
become the orthodoxy since Kripke is widely thought to have
refuted descriptive theories involving internal cognitive
representation of meaning. This shift may be seen in
developments in philosophy of language of the 1970s – the
direct reference “revolution against Frege” (Wettstein 2004,
66). Almog (2005, 493) writes of the “uprising against
Frege’s doctrines” that “spread like fire” based on the work of
Kripke, Donnellan, Putnam and Kaplan. However, I consider
Fodor’s (2004) heretical thought that something has gone
“awfully wrong” in this philosophical consensus, perhaps
confirming Chomsky’s (1992) view that the whole field of
philosophical semantics is “utterly wrongheaded” and “crazy”
by virtue of its non-naturalist assumptions and
“methodological dualism.” I suggest that the externalist
orthodoxy is a kind of cognitive illusion seen elsewhere in
philosophy and cognitive science.
Keywords: semantics; externalism; meaning; intuition.

Externalist Orthodoxy
Externalism is widely acknowledged to be the orthodoxy in
the theory of mental content and psychological states.
However, despite its subjective force, externalism may be
undermined by attending to its aetiology and showing how
the intuitions evoked arise from deceptive mechanisms.
Instead of defending internalism directly, we may ask: Why
does externalism seem so convincing? This is a cognitive
science of biases and illusions among philosophers.
Kripke (1972) is regarded as having “ushered in a new
era in philosophy” (Soames 2005, 1) by refuting a widely
held descriptive conception of proper names. In the
philosophy of language, this was part of the 1970s direct
reference “revolution against Frege” (Wettstein 2004, 66).
Frege held that something about the speaker’s cognitive
state must explain the difference between sentences such as
“Hesperus is Phosphorus” and “Hesperus is Hesperus.” The
first is cognitively significant but the second is knowable a
priori as necessarily true, even though the substituted terms
are co-referential. However, Kripke’s externalist doctrine of
“rigid designators” has become the orthodoxy – essentially
the view of J.S. Mill that proper names have no meaning
other than the name’s denotation, and a name refers to the
same individual in any possible situation.
In Putnam’s slogan, the externalist orthodoxy holds that
“meanings ain’t in the head” since mental content is
individuated by referents in the world. This view rests on
intuitions elicited by thought-experiments such as Putnam’s
(1975) famous Twin Earth story, characterized as “a sort of
paradigm in the philosophies of language and mind” (Segal

2000, 24). On another planet, Twin Earth, the only
difference is that the clear, potable liquid in rivers and lakes
has chemical structure XYZ rather than H2O. An atom-foratom replica of an Earth person might have identical internal
psychological/brain states and yet not have the same waterthoughts since Twin Earth thoughts are about XYZ. Also
influential has been Kripke’s (1979) puzzle about Pierre
who believes both that Londres est jolie and also that
London is ugly, not realizing that London is the same city as
Londres. Kripke says “I know of no answer” to the question
“Does Pierre, or does he not, believe that London is pretty?”
Kripke regards the puzzle as comparable to the Liar Paradox
(1979, 904). On this point, Salmon (2011, 236) endorses
Kripke’s “sound methodology” quoting Tarski’s classic
discussion of the Liar antinomy and its intellectual
challenge.
Kripke’s “primary moral” is that “the puzzle is a puzzle”
(1979) and he insists that it can not be resolved by redescribing the problem, but this conception is open to
challenge. A re-description need not avoid the problem but
rather it may show how a pseudo-problem arises. After all,
the indeterminacy of Pierre’s belief about London is not like
the contradictory state of Shrödinger’s cat or the quantum
wave/particle duality. To be sure, in another case, restating
Zeno’s paradox of Achilles and the Tortoise (e.g. with a
distance/time graph) is to sidestep the puzzle rather than
solving it since the re-description doesn’t expose the flaw in
Zeno’s reasoning. Kripke is right to say that talk of ‘what is
really going on’ doesn’t answer his original question, but it
does show clearly what’s wrong with the original question
and why the puzzle isn’t a puzzle, after all. With Kripke, we
can point out that “No answer has yet been given” to the
question of whether Lois Lane loves Clark Kent, but we
understand why.
Or, seeing the Necker Cube on two different occasions,
Pierre might not recognize it as the same geometrical figure.
Adapting Kripke’s (1979) words, we may ask “Does Pierre,
or does he not, believe that the Figure (not the shape
satisfying such-and-such descriptions, but the Figure) is
facing upwards to the left? No answer has yet been given.”
Fodor (2008, 76) pointedly asks “But why on earth should
we suppose that the question [concerning Pierre] has a
definite right answer when it’s phrased that way? And, once
one sees why it doesn’t, why does it matter that it doesn’t?”
However, while sharing Fodor’s dismissive attitude, we
may go further to ask why the puzzle should have such a
firm grip on philosophical imagination.
Thus, Devitt (1984, 385) has made a salutary distinction:
“Thoughts are one thing, their ascription another.” Devitt

1336

warns “it is a common practice … to use ‘belief’, for
example, where what one means to refer to is belief
ascription” (1984, 389). The failure to respect Devitt’s
distinction is to blame for Kripke’s puzzle in which we
seem forced to describe the hapless Frenchman as holding
contradictory beliefs about London. The relevance of
Devitt’s distinction should be clear: “a difference in sorts of
thought ascription does not entail a difference in the sorts of
thought object ascribed” (1984, 389). In this case, the
question concerning Pierre’s belief about London involves
thought ascription about the thing itself or de re, using our
own reference, like Putnam’s thought ascriptions about H2O
and XYZ. The intuition that we can be induced to share is
simply the idea that we can ascribe de re beliefs from our
own perspective independently of the beliefs of the subject
in question. Brandom (1994, 503) explains, “expressions
that occur within the scope of the ‘that’ [in de dicto
contexts] serve to specify how things are represented by the
one to whom the belief is ascribed.”

Little Choice?
Significantly, Kripke (1972, 42) acknowledges that he was
led by his “natural intuition” to his view of proper names
and that there could not be “more conclusive evidence one
can have about anything, ultimately speaking.” However,
Farkas (2003) characterizes the “deeply rooted” intuitions as
“baffling” and a “vexatious problem” that “poses a serious
challenge for any attempts to give an internalist analysis.”
Accordingly, we may ask why philosophers feel that the
“intuitive responses to a certain kind of thought-experiment
appear to leave them little choice,” as Boghossian (1998,
273) puts it. Fodor (1987a) has noted that the Twin-Earth
Problem is not a problem but “just a handful of intuitions
together with a commentary on some immediate
implications of accepting them” (1987a, 208). Significantly,
he says: “it is very plausible that all these intuitions hang
together. The question is: What on earth do they hang on?”
(Fodor 1987, 202). I offer an answer that gains a distinctive,
if not decisive, strength from the fact that the intuitions in
this domain “hang on” the same biases and illusions to be
seen operating elsewhere throughout cognitive science.

Giving Intuitions a Bad Name
In different guises, under such headings as ‘conceptual
analysis’ (Jackson 1998) or ‘conceivability’ (Chalmers
2002), intuitions have played a central role in philosophy
(DePaul & Ramsey eds. 1998). Hintikka (1999, 127)
suggested intuitions “came into fashion in philosophy” as
philosophers’ attempted to “get on the bandwagon of
transformational grammar” that they took to provide a
methodological model for research into cognition. Hintikka
(1999, 127,8) specifically cites Kripke’s (1972) Naming and
Necessity as an influential case in point, suggesting
“Unfortunately” his doctrines are “apt to give intuitions a
bad name.” Even a sympathetic account by Hughes (2004)
makes a damaging admission: He confesses “blindness” to
Dummett’s (1973) alternative reading of key sentences but

takes “comfort” from the fact that the same defect is very
widespread among philosophers. However, the Müller-Lyer
illusion is very widespread too. As Sosa (2001, 26) notes,
the phenomenon of ambiguity is widespread in the English
language and the “shiftiness” of linguistic constructions
containing modal expressions is akin to lexical ambiguity of
words such as “bank.” Closer are the structural ambiguities
familiar to linguists and the basis for jokes such as Groucho
Marx’s remark: “One morning I shot an elephant in my
pajamas.” Failure to appreciate the humour through
blindness to the ambiguity is a psychological defect rather
than theoretical criticism.
Contrary to Hintikka (1999, 132), Chomsky’s use of
intuitions in linguistics has nothing to do with being a “selfacknowledged Cartesian” or innate ideas. Nevertheless,
Hintikka (1999, 133) correctly notes, in contrast to linguists’
use of intuition, “philosophers’ intuitions do not pertain to
the supposed faculty of intuition itself but to the truths about
which this faculty is supposed to provide knowledge.” For
an egregious example, Bealer (1998, 202) argues that
intuitions have a “strong modal tie to the truth” which he
suggests “is a philosophical (conceptual) thesis not open to
empirical confirmation or refutation.” In the same vein,
Chalmers (2002) challenges the systematic scientific picture
asking “Does Conceivability Entail Possibility?” However,
we need not agree that “Philosophical intuition is
epistemologically useless” (Cummins 1998, 125). If
philosophers’ intuitions are taken properly on the model of
generative grammar, they may be seen as psychological
evidence rather than intimations of truth. The PutnamKripke intuitions might be explained like the Müller-Lyer
illusion as deceptive in spite of its subjective force.

Omniscient Philosopher-Narrator
The model for this kind of inquiry into intuitive judgements
is the ‘heuristics and biases’ program of Tversky and
Kahneman (1974). This work has demonstrated the
systematic unreliability of compelling intuitions resulting in
a wide range of cognitive illusions to which we are prone.
Seen from this perspective, I suggest externalist theories of
reference involve a generic pseudo-explanatory mistake that
is not confined to any one domain. For example, Chomsky
has explained the need for a fully explicit grammar that
avoids the unwitting dependence on the linguistic
knowledge of the theorist. Of course, the potential for this
error is not unique to linguistic explanation and its very
seductiveness means we should expect to find it elsewhere.
Generally, it seems difficult to avoid invoking internal
representations which have their meaning because we, as
theorists, can understand them. This has been the charge
against pictorial theories of imagery by Pylyshyn (2003) and
was precisely anticipated by Descartes. In this case external
representations are taken as a model for internal
representations and, therefore, relying on the theorist’s
intelligence and invoking the notorious homunculus.
Chomsky (1962) notes that a grammar may produce the
illusion of explanatory completeness, but in fact have

1337

“serious limitations so far as linguistic science is concerned”
because the success of the grammar depends on being
“paired with an intelligent and comprehending reader.”
Chomsky explains: “Reliance on the reader’s intelligence is
so commonplace that is significance may be easily
overlooked” (Chomsky 1962, 528). In a different guise of
interest here, the theorist posits mental representations based
on his own knowledge of the truth rather than the subject’s
beliefs. In this case, philosophical intuitions arise from
tacitly adopting the perspective of an invisible narrator – the
illusion of the omniscient story-teller, the literary device that
Mario Vargas Llosa (1975) aptly refers to as the
“philosopher-narrator.”

Residue of Commonsense
Pietroski (2003) suggests that despite a considerable
literature on reference, “no one has shown that names do
bear any interesting and theoretically tractable relation to
their bearers.” If he is correct, we are owed an explanation
of how so many philosophers could have been so
misguided. Chomsky characterizes the commonsense
conception of semantics as a kind of illusion and points to
the kind of diagnostic, aetiological concern I wish to pursue:
“Here, I think, philosophers and linguists and others who
are in the modern intellectual tradition are caught in a kind
of trap, namely, the trap that assumes that there is a
reference relation” (2012, 28). That is, “there is no wordthing relations.” This is undoubtedly a shocking remark that
flies in the face of the most obvious, taken-for-granted facts
about language. Of course, that’s just the point. Chomsky
suggests that we may suffer from a “residue of
commonsense,” some deeply persuasive, but illegitimate,
“distorting” picture of the world (see also Egan 1999, 188).
Word-thing relations are “mythical” by contrast with the
question of “how the person’s mental representations enter
into articulation and perception” (1996, 23), but this is
syntax. Chomsky (2000, 148) suggests that we can have no
intuitions about such questions as whether an identical
replica of ourselves uses the word “water” to refer to
something, XYZ, which is not H2O because the key terms
such as “extension” and “reference” are technical
inventions. In the same way, it would be pointless to explore
our intuitions about “tensors” or “undecidability.” However,
there can be no doubt that certain intuitions may be
consistently induced in philosophers and others by the
notorious thought experiments. These are not random in the
way that intuitions about tensors might be among the
uninitiated. The vast philosophical literature attests to the
existence of systematic, robust and widely shared intuitions
that are at the heart of externalism.

Who Cares What the Mayans Think?
Recently, the question has been illuminated from a new
angle by empirical inquiries into the cross-cultural variation
in intuitions on which philosophers have relied (Machery et
al., 2004). These studies have challenged the universality of
the evidence on which philosophical puzzles have relied.

For example, Segal (2004, 339) says “we should not trust
those intuitions” because Putnam and Kripke “mistakenly
think that their intuitions are ‘ours’, that they are
representative of those of all sensible, reflective humans”
(2004, 340). Segal reports studies “designed to tap relevant
twin-Earth intuitions among tribespeople” such as the
Mayans of the Yucatan in Mexico. The data are mixed, but
Segal says “surely these data … should be given
considerably more weight than Putnam’s intuitions about
Oscar’s “water” concept and Kripke’s intuitions about
medieval “unicorn” concepts (Segal 2004, 343). In the same
vein, Machery et al. (2004, B7) found that “Chinese subjects
tended to have descriptivist intuitions, while Westerners
tended to have Kripkean ones” and these data suggest
“significant philosophical conclusions.” The authors
conclude:
We find it wildly implausible that the semantic intuitions of
the narrow cross-section of humanity who are Western
academic philosophers are a more reliable indicator of the
correct theory of reference … than the differing semantic
intuitions of other cultural or linguistic groups. (2004, B9)

Competence or Incompetence?
Devitt (2011) rejects the challenge of cross-cultural
evidence to semantic theory because they tested the wrong
subjects. The intuitions of ordinary folk are unreliable by
comparison with intuitions of “experts,” namely,
“metaphysicians and other philosophers.” However, we
need not accept philosophers’ intuitions as authoritative
divinations to treat them, instead, as diagnostic evidence of
illusion among those who suffer from it – data for the
development of a theory of ‘tacit knowledge’ or
“competence” (i.e. incompetence).
The point has been missed in the ongoing controversy
about empirical inquiries into intuitions. Recently, Nagel
(2012) has argued that epistemic intuitions do not, after all,
vary in ways that pose a challenge, but Stich (2012) has
defended such research and its threat to philosophical
reliance on intuition. He cites evidence that even the MüllerLyer visual illusion is not universally shared among all
human cultures. Kalahari San foragers apparently do not
judge the familiar lines as differing in length. So what?
Devitt, Stich and Nagel miss the point that it remains a
matter of psychological interest to explain why we do suffer
from the illusion. The only difference with the case of
philosophical intuitions is that we don’t take our visual
perceptions as veridical.
That is, it is no help to be told that someone else doesn’t
share your puzzlement. Who cares what the Mayans or
Chinese think? Their failure to be puzzled doesn’t help
resolve our problems. If I am the only one who is guilty of
confirmation bias or base rate neglect, I need diagnosis and
a cure, not anthropology. Even if it is parochial to Western
departments of analytic philosophy, the central problem
remains for Kripke and those who do, as a matter of fact,
share the intuitions in question. Moreover, the
anthropological evidence of cross-cultural variation does not

1338

illuminate the fundamental question because, even if the
Kripke-Putnam intuitions were universally shared, their
credentials are not thereby established as guides to scientific
or metaphysical claims.

of mental representations applies to Gettier too: “we need it
[broad or externally individuated content] to make sense of
the fact that thoughts have the truth conditions that they do”
(1994, 50). As if describing the Gettier Problem, in an
entirely different context, Fodor gives a diagnosis that is apt
for this puzzle:

Who is in the Know?
Putnam (1975, 11) explains that internally identical “water”
thoughts are said to have different meaning on Earth and
Twin-Earth, although the chemistry of H2O or XYZ may
never be discovered by people on either planet. That is,
externalism depends on intuitions arising from the theorist’s
knowing the truth. Indeed, defending externalism, Burge
(1988) confirms this diagnosis saying “We take up a
perspective on ourselves from the outside.” The conception
of an “Omniscient Observer” is explicitly embraced as
unproblematic by Donnellan (1974), a perspective Kaplan
(2012, 156), too, has endorsed as “description from above.”
This is an understanding “in which one surveys another’s
thought” from a point of view “independent of whether the
subject’s thought corresponds to reality.” These are
remarkable confirmations of my diagnosis of the illusion of
the “philosopher-narrators” omniscience.
In Crane’s (1996) useful phrase, the question of who is
“in the know” is central to untangling the intuitions at the
heart of puzzles concerning externalism. Crane’s question
recalls Putnam’s (1981, 50) question “From whose point of
view is the story being told?” The invisibility of our own
role and our own knowledge creates the illusion that it is the
relational fact about how the world really is that determines
the thought or belief in question. As Crane (1996, 293)
notes, “the Twin Earth cases are meant to demonstrate that
the world itself can, as it were, fix the meanings of some of
our words.” Crane’s apt characterization captures the
paranormal or clairvoyant conception of meanings which
somehow link the mind directly with its objects in the
world.

Philosophers, autistics & three year olds
Burge (2012, 119) recently explains the nature of de re
belief in terms that are suggestive of other philosophical
problems: “One can have a de re belief that is successfully
referential and meets all other conditions on being de re,
which nevertheless fails to count as knowledge.” Consider
the case in which someone is looking at a chair which he
can see in a certain position apparently in the next room.
However, he doesn’t notice that he is looking at a large
mirror and, therefore, sees the reflection of a chair that is
actually nearer to him in the same room. As it happens,
there is an identical chair in the next room behind the
mirror, exactly where the reflection appears to be. It is
evident that this circumstance is precisely Burge’s scenario
of de re belief and it is also exactly the Gettier (1963) case
of justified, true belief that doesn’t count as knowledge.
Burge doesn’t mention Gettier, but these parallels suggest
the Problem has a wider interest beyond the epistemological
issues it has been directly concerned with. Accordingly, it is
interesting to notice Fodor’s comment about the semantics

It is, to put the point starkly, the heart of externalism that
semantics isn’t part of psychology. The content of your
thoughts (/utterances), unlike for example, the syntax of your
thoughts (/utterances), does not supervene on your mental
processes. (Fodor 1994, 38)

In the Gettier case, too, the wide contents of your thoughts
construed transparently as knowledge do not supervene on
your mental processes, being merely justified beliefs. Fodor
had made the same point where he said “truth, reference and
the rest of the semantic notions aren’t psychological
categories” (1980, 253).
In response to the semantic orthodoxy, Farkas’ (2003)
argues that “external features are important only if they are
incorporated into the internal cognitive or experiential
perspective of cognizers.” Schantz, too, explains, “As far as
psychological explanation is concerned, what counts is how
the world is internally represented as being, not how the
world really is (2004, 23; emphasis added).” This is
essentially the formula with which Fodor (1998, 20)
characterized externalism, the view that “what you are
thinking depends on what world you’re in.” This diagnosis
of externalist semantic intuitions is precisely appropriate to
the notorious Gettier (1963) Problem. In Chisholm’s (1966)
classical version, the subject sees a sheep-like bush and
acquires a perceptual belief “There is a sheep in the field.”
Although this belief is justified by the evidence, it is true
only by accident because, unbeknownst to him, there is a
sheep elsewhere in the field. The classical criteria for
knowledge – justified, true belief – appear to be met, but the
belief does not count as knowledge. Hetherington (2012)
has recently given an analysis of “Gettiered beliefs”, being
cases in which “truth remains essential.” His diagnosis is
that philosophers’ intuitions are evidence of their “being
infallibilists, without realizing this about themselves.” This
seems to be another way of making my point about puzzles
that arise from the “narrator’s” omniscience. Putnam’s Twin
Earth example, too, is a case in which mental content is
ascribed to someone on the basis of truths that are not
represented internally by the subject just as in the Gettier
Problem.
Schantz’ prescription for psychological explanation –
what counts is how the world is internally represented as
being, not how the world really is – is apt also for capturing
the mistaken “theory of mind” in a different domain. We see
a striking analogue known to clinical psychologists in the
Wimmer and Perner (1983) “false belief” task: Autistics and
three year-olds ascribe beliefs to others based on their own
knowledge of the truth rather than on the other’s justified
beliefs. Switching the candy when the character isn’t
looking in the experiments of Wimmer and Perner is

1339

analogous to Gettier’s substitution of bushes for sheep, or
Fodor’s substitution of shrews for mice in cases of
misrepresentation. Putnam’s substitution of XYZ for H2O,
like Dretske’s (1986) disoriented microbes, are various
ways that have been devised to make ‘the world go wrong.’
The truth-making facts are unconnected with the grounds
for belief which are known only to the philosopher-narrator.
By ascribing beliefs in this way, it appears that philosophers
make the same mistake that autistics commit and children
grow out of by the age of four. Ralph’s belief about Ortcutt
(Quine 1960) just like Twin Oscar’s thoughts about water
(Putnam 1975) and Pierre’s thoughts of London (Kripke
1979) are essentially ascriptions of belief based on the
philosophers’ knowledge of the truth (see Slezak 2011).

Obscurantist Intentional Magic
“Object-dependent” referential thoughts called de re are
taken to be “singular thoughts” about a particular object or
person that the speaker has in mind. This is the strong
intuition expressed by Brian C. Smith that symbols
somehow “reach out and touch someone” (1987, 215).
Kripke has placed these issues in his framework of ‘rigid
designators’ that denote the same individual in all ‘possible
worlds.’ However, Stalnaker (2003) emphasizes that
Kripke’s claims rest on intuitive grounds, and poses a
revealing question: “Doesn’t this presuppose that the same
individuals can be found in different possible worlds? Searle
(1969, 93), too, argues that if an expression has no
descriptive content as Kripke and ‘direct reference’ theorists
claim, “then there could be no way of establishing a
connection between the expression and the object.” He asks
“What makes this expression refer to that object?” Kripke’s
preferred answer is that a chain of historical, causal,
connections back to a baptismal event fixes the reference.
However, this account utterly fails to explain how a
particular individual acquires the competent use of a name.
The point is precisely analogous to Putnam’s (1967, 18)
attempt to rebut Chomsky’s “innateness” claims by citing
the common historical origin of all human languages. But
this response fails to address the problem of language
acquisition – the question of how each individual child must
accomplish the task of becoming a competent speaker. The
common origin of all human languages is irrelevant to this
question, just as the supposed historical-causal chain is
irrelevant to an individual’s understanding and use of proper
names. Stalnaker (2003, 178) captures the problem aptly,
speaking of the only alternative to descriptive accounts
which seems to be “some kind of obscurantist intentional
magic.” In Searle’s (1969, 87) suggestive words, the idea
that we can mean or intend a particular object and not
another inclines us to think “that it is a movement of the
soul.” In the same vein, Putnam (1981) suggests that
externalist intuitions are a “magical theory of reference” that
assumes occult “noetic rays” connecting words with their
referents. Indeed, these referential intuitions are suggestive
of widely held, compelling misconceptions concerning
visual perception that are thought to involve emanations

from the eyes – the so-called “extramission theory of
perception” maintained by early Greek philosophers.
Remarkably, following Piaget, Winer et al. (2002) report
evidence that belief in extramission remains widespread,
deeply ingrained and resistant to educational efforts. I don’t
mean to suggest that such theories are literally believed by
philosophers, but the compelling conceptions are very
suggestive of intuitions underlying the most widely held
externalist semantic theories.

References
Almog, J. 2005. Replies. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 70, 3, 717-730.
Bealer, G. 1998. Intuition and the Autonomy of Philosophy,
in M.R. DePaul and W.M. Ramsey eds., Rethinking
Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition and Its Role in
Philosophical Inquiry. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.
Boghossian, P. 1998. What the Externalist Can Know A
Priori, in C. Wright, B.C. Smith & C. Macdonald eds.,
Knowing Our Own Minds, Oxford: Oxford Univ Press.
Brandom, R. 1994. Making It Explicit, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Burge, T. 1988. Individualism and Self-Knowledge, The
Journal of Philosophy, 85, 649-63.
Burge, T. 2012. Referring De Re, in J. Almog & P.
Leonardi eds., Having in Mind: The Philosophy of Keith
Donnellan, Oxford: Oxford Univ Press.
Chalmers, D. 2002. Does Conceivability Entail Possibility?
In T. Gendler and J. Hawthorne eds., Conceivability and
Possibility, Oxford: Oxford Univ Press, 145-200.
Chisholm, R.M. 1966. Theory of Knowledge. Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Chomsky, N. 1962. Explanatory Models in Linguistics, in E.
Nagel. P. Suppes & A. Tarski, eds., Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science, Stanford Univ Press, 528-550.
Chomsky, N. 1992. Language and Interpretation:
Philosophical Reflections and Empirical Inquiry, in J.
Earman, ed., Inference, Explanation, and Other
Frustrations, Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 99-128.
Chomsky, N. 1996. Power and Prospects, Sydney: Allen &
Unwin.
Chomsky, N. 2000. New Horizons in the Study of Language
and Mind, Cambridge, Cambridge Univ Press.
Chomsky, N. 2012. The Science of Language, J. McGilvray
ed. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ Press.
Crane, T. 1996. All the Difference in the World, in A.
Pessin & S. Goldberg eds., The Twin Earth Chronicles,
New York: M.E Sharpe, 1996.
Cummins, R. 1998. Reflection on Reflective Equilibrium, in
M.R. DePaul and W.M. Ramsey eds., Rethinking
Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition and Its Role in
Philosophical Inquiry. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.
DePaul, M.R. & Ramsey W. eds., 1998. Rethinking
Intuition, New York: Rowman and Littlefield.
Devitt, M. 1984. Thoughts and their Ascription, Peter A.
French, Theodore E. Uehling and Howard K. Wettstein

1340

eds., Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Vol. IX, 385-420:
Minneapolis: Univ of Minnesota Press.
Devitt, M. 2011. Experimental Semantics, Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 82, 2, 418-435.
Donnellan, K.S. 1974. Speaking of Nothing, The
Philosophical Review, 83, 1, 3-31.
Dretske, F. 1986. Misrepresentation. In R.J. Bogdan ed.,
Belief: Form, Content and Function. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dummett, M. 1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language, New
York: Harper & Row.
Egan, F. 1999. In Defence of Narrow Mindedness, Mind &
Language, 14, 2, 177-194.
Farkas, K. 2003. Does Twin Earth Rest on a Mistake?
Croatian Journal of Philosophy, III/8, 155-69.
Fodor, J.A. 1987a. Individualism and Supervenience, in in
A. Pessin & S. Goldberg eds., The Twin Earth Chronicles,
New York: M.E Sharpe, 1996.
Fodor, J.A. 1987b. Psychosemantics: The Problem of
Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind, Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Fodor, J.A. 1998. Concepts: Where Cognitive Science Went
Wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fodor, J.A. 2004. Water’s Water Everywhere, London
Review of Books, 21, October.
Fodor, J.A. 2008. LOT2: The Language of Thought
Revisited, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gettier, E.L. 1963. Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?
Analysis, 23, 121-3.
Hetherington, S. 2012. The Gettier Illusion, Synthese, 188,
2, 217-230.
Hinitkka, J. 1999. The Emperor’s New Intuitions, The
Journal of Philosophy, 96, 3, March, 127-147.
Hughes, C. 2004. Kripke: Names, Necessity and Identity,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Jackson, F. 1998. From Metaphysics to Ethics, Oxford:
Clarendon Press
Jackson, F. 2010. Language, Names and Information,
Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Kaplan, D. 2012. An Idea of Donnellan, in J. Almog & P.
Leonardi eds., Having in Mind: The Philosophy of Keith
Donnellan, Oxford: Oxford Univ Press.
Kripke, S. 1972. Naming and Necessity, reprinted 1980,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Kripke, S. 1979. A Puzzle About Belief, in A. Margalit ed.,
Meaning and Use, Dordrecht: Reidel, 239-283.
Machery, E., Mallon, R, Nichols, S, Stich, S.P. 2004.
Semantics, cross-cultural style, Cognition, 92, B1-B12.
Nagel, J. 2012. Intuitions and Experiments: A Defense of
the Case Method in Epistemology, Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, xx, xx, pp-pp.
Pietroski, P.M. 2003. The Character of Natural Language
Semantics in A. Barber ed., Epistemology of Language,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Putnam, H. 1967. The ‘Innateness Hypothesis’ and
Explanatory Models in Linguistics, Synthese 17, 12-22.

Putnam, H. 1975. The Meaning of ‘Meaning’. In K.
Gunderson ed. Language, Mind and Knowledge:
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume 7,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Putnam, H. 1981. Reason, Truth and History, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. 2003. Seeing and Visualizing: It’s Not What
You Think, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Quine, W.V. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Salmon, N. 2011. A Note on Kripke’s Puzzle about Belief,
in A. Berger ed., Saul Kripke, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schantz, R. ed. 2004. The Externalist Challenge, New York:
Walter de Gruyter.
Searle, J. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of
Language, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Segal, G.M.A. 2000. A Slim Book About Narrow Content,
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Segal, G.M.A. 2004. Reference, Causal Powers, Externalist
Intuitions and Unicorns, in R. Schantz eds., The
Externalist Challenge, New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Slezak, P. 2011. Philosophers, Three Year Olds and
Autistics, in L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher & T. F. Shipley.
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Boston, Massachusetts. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Smith, Brian C. 1987. The Correspondence Continuum.
CSLI Report 87-71.
Soames, S. 2005. Reference and Description: The Case
Against Two-Dimensionalism, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Sosa, D. 2001. Rigidity in the Scope of Russell’s Theory,
Nous, 35,1, 1-38.
Stalnaker, R. 2003. Ways A World Might Be, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Stich, S. 2012. Do Different Groups Have Different
Epistemic Intuitions? A Reply to Jennifer Nagel,
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, xx xx 1-28.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, Science, 185, 11241130.
Vargas Llosa, M. 1975. La Orgia Perpetua, Translator
Helen Lane, New York: Farrar Straus Giroux.
Wettstein, H. 2004. The Magic Prism: An Essay in the
Philosophy of Language, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wimmer, H. and Perner, J. 1983. Beliefs About Beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13, 103-28.
Winer, G.A., Cottrell, J.E., Gregg, V., Fournier, J.S. & Bica,
L.A., 2002. Fundamentally Misunderstanding Visual
Perception: Adults’ Belief in Visual Emissions, American
Psychologist, 57, 6/7, 417-424.

1341

