UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sharing in the Dark? Target Memory and Risk Awareness in Online Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1287h28g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Moll, Ricarda
Pieschl, Stephanie
Bromme, Rainer

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sharing in the Dark? Target Memory and Risk Awareness
in Online Communication
Ricarda Moll (r.moll@uni-muenster.de)
Stephanie Pieschl (pieschl@uni-muenster.de)
Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Department of Psychology, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster
Fliednerstr. 21, 48149 Muenster, Germany

Abstract
A high degree of self-disclosure in Online Social
Networks (OSNs) is associated with several risks. This
raises an important question: Why don´t many users
protect their personal data more eagerly? We propose
that a lack of memory for what information has been
disclosed to which audience contributes to this privacyneglecting behavior in OSNs. We transferred the
paradigm of target monitoring to a fictitious OSN and
varied the degree of risk associated with selfdisclosure. In a 2x2 experiment we varied both
audience size (large vs. small) and information
intimacy (personal vs. non-personal). We used
recognition tests for the association of audience and
disclosed information to assess memory performance.
Results show that item memory (the memory for what
information has been disclosed) exceeded target
memory and that target memory improved in
vulnerable situations (for large audiences and personal
information). Our findings widen the realm of offline
memory research and expand our knowledge about
which cognitive factors impact privacy-related behavior
in online environments.
Keywords: Target Memory, Online Self-Disclosure, Risk
Awareness

Introduction
Self-Disclosure in OSNs
Self-disclosure is an important mechanism in relationship
formation and trust development (Jourard & Lasakow,
1958). Lately much research has investigated the benefits of
sharing personal information on OSNs-platforms i.e. in
terms of self-esteem and identity formation (Valkenburg &
Peter, 2011). At the same time this behavior is associated
with several risks. For example, it is not uncommon that
employers retrieve information of their job applicants
through an online search that includes profile information
on OSNs. This information often decides to whom the
announced job position is offered (Zeidner, 2007).
Interestingly, many users actually are concerned about
potential data misuse but nevertheless choose to reveal
personal information in OSNs, a pattern that is known as

privacy paradox (Norberg, Horne, & Horne, 2007). Some
scholars argue that privacy related decisions result from a
logical calculation in which risks and benefits of selfdisclosure are rationally weighed against each other (Xu,
Teo, Tan, & Agarwal, 2010). If users self-disclose despite
their concerns, the benefits must be larger and/or more
probable than the associated risks. However, we argue that
privacy-related calculations might be biased, because users
could lack important information to assess the actual
amount of vulnerability: Online revelation of personal
information is usually done over and over again and while
the single event is indeed not that risky, its repetition
produces a cumulative amount of online information about
the user (indicating a corresponding amount of cumulative
risk). One important detail that is crucial for the assessment
of this cumulative risk is the memory for which information
has been disclosed, and to whom it is available.

Target Memory in Offline Interactions
Recently it has been shown that people struggle to
remember the targets of their messages in offline contexts.
For example, in one of their experiments Gopie and
MacLeod (2009) investigated how well people remember
having disclosed fifty personal facts to pictures of famous
people in comparison to impersonal facts. Results show that
people successfully identified the facts they had disclosed
(item memory) but had problems associating facts and
targets (target memory); they did not remember to whom
they disclosed what. In another study Marsh and Hicks
(2002) let participants repeatedly choose to whom they
wanted to give different kinds of objects. The authors
conclude that this decisional aspect leads to a deeper
elaboration of the situational context which then facilitates
subsequent retrieval. Finally, Brown, Hornstein, and
Memon (2006) let participants tell various pieces of
information to five different celebrity pictures on five
subsequent days. On-line and retrospective target memory
declined with the number of previous “interactions”,
indicating a confusion of which information was given to
whom.
In the light of these findings it seems plausible to assume
that target memory problems also exist online. Therefore,
we transferred the paradigm of target monitoring to the
environment of OSNs. As a prerequisite for further analysis
we assumed that participants remember what information
they disclosed but struggle remembering to whom. We thus

3092

hypothesized that item memory exceeds target memory
(hypothesis 1).

Risk Cues in Online Communication
There has been much discussion on how online
environments change the nature of communication and
information processing (Kiesler, Siegel, & McGuire, 1984).
However, while OSNs environments are somewhat deprived
of conventional context cues that could support the
encoding and decoding of information, other situational
factors could be more relevant for target memory in OSNs.
For example, the elaboration likelihood model (Petty,
Cacioppo, & Kasmer, 1988) argues that when people are
motivated they process information in a more elaborate
way. It seems plausible that people are more motivated if
they feel at risk. People could therefore process risky
situations more thoroughly than neutral ones. This could be
especially true for online interactions since the accessibility
and distribution of information is inherently more difficult
to control. Furthermore, studies in associative memory
research have demonstrated that the emotional intensity of
an event has a major impact on memory performance
(LaBar & Cabeza, 2006). As we can assume that perceived
risk does cause some sort of arousal or emotion (Slovic &
Peters, 2006) it seems plausible that risk cues could have a
positive impact on target memory performance in OSNs. In
this study we focused on two major aspects that could
influence perceived vulnerability: a) the kind of information
that is disclosed and b) the kind of audience that gains
access to the information.
Information Gopie and MacLeod (2009) found that target
memory performance was worse when people disclosed
personal facts in comparison to impersonal facts. In line
with Koriat, Ben-Zur, and Druch (1991) the authors argue
that revealing personal details increases self-focus which
prevents people from integrating the outer environment as a
reference point of that event. Impersonal information on the
other hand would not trigger the same amount of self-focus
resulting in better target memory performance. However, we
believe that in OSNs the degree of intimacy of information
serves as a distinct risk cue, because disclosing personal
information gives the audience´s members more
opportunities for personal judgment and information
misuse. We therefore predicted that target memory would
improve when the disclosed information is personal rather
than impersonal (hypothesis 2).
Audience Perceived vulnerability does not only vary with
the nature of the information but also with the nature of the
target. Thus, perceived vulnerability seems to increase with
the number of people who have access to this information
(Bateman, Pike, & Butler, 2011). Slonje and Smith (2008)
similarly showed that cyberbullying victims experience the
unwanted disclosure by others as especially harmful when a
large group gains access. Naturally, a larger group is not
only more difficult to control but necessarily contains more

members that are less trusted. Publicity thus seems to be an
important factor for risk awareness during online selfdisclosure. Therefore, we assumed better target memory for
larger than for smaller audiences (hypothesis 3).

Hypotheses
To summarize, this study addresses two different aspects of
risk awareness and memory performance in online selfdisclosure. On the one hand we assumed that overall target
memory problems also exist online. We predicted that
people easily remember what information they disclosed
(item memory), but not to which audience (target memory;
hypothesis 1). On the other hand we presumed that people
cognitively react to specific risk cues like the intimacy of
the disclosed information (personal vs. impersonal
information) and the size of the audience that receives the
message (small vs. large audience). We therefore
hypothesized that target memory would improve when
information is personal rather than impersonal (hypothesis
2) and when the receiving audience is large rather than
small (hypothesis 3).

Method
Participants
Participants were senior students from high schools in the
area of Münster, Germany. We excluded two participants
from data analysis, because they did not follow the
instructions as requested. Thus, our sample consists of 99
participants (34 males, 65 females) with a mean age of
17.59 years (SD = 2.08).

Materials
Scenario Students entered a fictitious social networking site
of the local university. Within this site participants entered a
sham discussion group where they would be posting
information concerning the topic of the group. Students
were aware that they were part of an experimental study.
Information In the personal condition students entered the
fictitious discussion group “to get to know each other”.
Items in the personal condition were partly taken from
former studies about relationship formation (Joinson, 2001;
Jourard & Lasakow, 1958), partly taken from what is
typically disclosed in online profiles (e.g. “your favorite
music”) and partly self-created (e.g. “what is the meaning of
life in your opinion”). In the non-personal condition
students entered the sham group “information about the city
of Münster”. Items in this condition were taken from an
online tourist brochure about the city of Münster (e.g.
“famous band from Muenster - H-Blockx” or “founding
year of the city of Muenster - 793”).
Audiences The disclosed information would be sent to
either everyone in the students´ semester (large audience;

3093

180 people) or only to their future study group (small
audience; five people). We defined the size of the audiences
to approximate how online social networks are arranged. In
2011 the average network of a Facebook user consisted of
around 190 Facebook-friends (Ugander, Karrer, Backstrom,
& Marlow, 2011). Usually, a core group of these people are
active contacts the user communicates with on a frequent
basis (strong ties). The rest of the network constitutes weak
ties – users passively keep in touch with these contacts, but
not necessarily interact with them on a regular basis
(Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007). Please note that the
audiences in this experiment did not constitute strong and
weak ties per se since participants had no actual relation to
the displayed people whatsoever.
Communication Task The communication task consisted
of 20 randomized slides. On each slide students saw two
facts at the top of the page (personal or non-personal). They
decided which one they wanted to disclose and marked that
one. In the personal condition we paired facts with a similar
degree of intimacy. In the impersonal condition we paired
facts that both contained either numerical or textual
information. The audience (small or large) was saliently
displayed underneath these two facts via a collection of
small-scaled photos that matched the number of the
announced audience size. Participants were instructed to
choose one of the two facts and disclose it at the bottom of
the page where they wrote the information into an empty
text field. Ten facts were disclosed to a small target
audience, ten facts to a large target audience and thus
twenty facts were not disclosed because they were not
chosen. While the students could choose which one out of
the two facts they wanted to disclose, the audience was
predetermined and could not be selected. We incorporated
this decisional aspect to enhance the external validity of our
experiment: People presumably choose more or less
carefully what information they disclose (Marsh & Hicks,
2002) - not only for privacy reasons but also because this
information becomes an inherent part of their selfpresentational strategy. Interestingly, many Facebook users
would rather decide what to disclose, instead of to whom,
since many report that they make all their information and
actions visible to all of their Facebook-friends. Therefore,
participants in our experiment could decide what
information they wished to disclose but not to which
audience.
Memory Task The memory task consisted of 50 randomly
presented test slides that contained the forty facts of the
communication task plus ten completely new facts. For each
displayed fact the students indicated if they had disclosed
this fact to a small target audience, a large target audience,
if it was a fact they hadn´t seen before (new) or if they had
encountered this fact but not disclosed it (each of the first
three options was correct in 10 times of the cases, the last
option in 20 times of the cases). Items that were new or had

not been chosen to be disclosed in the learning phase were
treated as distractors.1
Internet Literacy Questionnaire The internet literacy
questionnaire (Stodt, Moll, Polzer, Pieschl, & Brand, 2013)
consists of twenty items measuring online literacy in terms
of technical skills, online empathy, online interactions, and
privacy-related attitudes and behaviors.2 This questionnaire
was incorporated to create latency between the
communication task and the memory task and to thus
weaken short term memory effects.

Procedure
Students were recruited during an open day of the
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster. Groups of
students sat down in front of a computer screen to
participate in the experiment. We conducted a 2x2
experiment with information (personal versus impersonal)
as a between-subject factor and audience size (small versus
large) as a within-subject factor. After being welcomed the
students were randomly assigned to the information
conditions. They received a short description of the scenario
and entered the communication task. Afterwards students
answered the internet literacy questionnaire as a short filler
task, being followed by an explanation on how to work on
the subsequent memory task. After this memory task
students shortly answered questions about their OSNs-usage
and socio-demographic details. After completing the
experiment students were offered the chance of winning one
out of six gift cards for the online shop Amazon. Students
were encouraged to leave an email-address so we could
explain the purpose of the experiment after data analysis had
been completed. They were then thanked for their
participation and dismissed.

Results
The random assignment to between-subject conditions was
successful. Demographic details in the personal condition
(n = 49; 31 females, 18 males; M = 17.55 years, SD = 1.02)
did not differ significantly from the impersonal condition,
(n = 50; 34 females, 16 males; M = 17.62 years, SD = 2.76).

Target Memory
As a prerequisite for further analysis we assessed if there
actually is a target memory problem in comparison to item
memory. In order to do so, we compared the mean number
of correct audience identifications (small and large
1
Additionally, students indicated on 5-point Likert-scales how
confident they were about the correctness of each of their answers.
These results are not reported here as they addressed a different
research question that due to space constraints cannot be reported
in this paper.
2
The results of this questionnaire are not part of this report as no
meaningful factor structure could be found in this sample.

3094

audiences) as indicator of target memory with the mean
number of correct distractor identifications (not disclosed
and new facts) as indicator of item memory in a repeatedmeasure ANOVA. Information was the between-subject
factor. Item memory significantly exceeded target memory
across both information conditions, F(1,98) = 262.08,
p < .001 ηp2= .73 (see Figure 1), indicating better memory
for which information had (not) been disclosed than to
which audience it was disclosed.

answering bias; students in both information conditions
overall answered “large audience” more frequently than
“small audience” (see row “Total chosen” in Table 1).

Figure 2: Percentage of correctly identified targets for the
experimental factors audience (X-axis) and information
(error bars indicate standard deviations).

Figure 1: Percentage of correctly identified audiences and
distractors per information condition (error bars indicate
standard deviations).
We also found a significant main effect for information,
F(1,97) = 46.25, p < .001, ηp2= .32 as well as a significant
interaction between the two factors, F(1,97) = 19.89,
p < .001, ηp2= .17. The difference of correct audience and
distractor identification was larger in the personal condition
than in the impersonal condition.

Risk Cues
To test hypotheses two (target memory improves for
personal in comparison to impersonal information) and
three (target memory improves for large audiences in
comparison to small audiences) we computed a 2x2
repeated-measure ANOVA with audience size (small vs.
large) as repeated-measure factor and information
(personal vs. impersonal) as between-subject factor. Our
dependent variable was the mean number of correct target
identifications in each condition. We found a significant
main effect of information, F(1,97) = 6.15, p < .015,
ηp2= .06. Memory performance in the personal condition
exceeded performance in the impersonal condition
regardless of audience size (see Figure 2). Furthermore, we
found a significant main effect for audience size,
F(1,97) = 51.044, p < .001, ηp2 = .35. Memory performance
was better when the target audience was large opposed to
small - regardless of information (see Figure 2). The
interaction of the two factors was not significant,
F(1,97) = .43, p = .51, ηp2 = .00. The descriptive results of
the memory test also indicate that students had a general

Discussion
Overall Target Memory
Participants correctly identified significantly more
distractors (new and not disclosed facts) than they identified
the associated audiences of disclosed information (small and
large audience). We thus confirmed our first hypothesis that
item memory would be superior to target memory: Students
struggled to remember what information they had disclosed
to which audience. Thus our study shows that target
memory problems exist online and might contribute to
repeated privacy-neglecting behavior in OSNs: Without the
memory of what audience has access to which information
the cumulative risk of online self-disclosure must be
constructed on an abstract level that is weighed out by the
immediate benefits of the same behavior. Our study thus
not only expands the realm of target memory research but
also contributes to further explanations of the circumstances
under which privacy-related decisions are made in online
environments. Interestingly, error rate analysis shows that
participants mainly confused the audiences or the
distractors, but rarely identified a disclosed piece of
information as a distractor or a distractor as having been
disclosed (see Table 1). Thus participants were well aware
of what they disclosed, but had trouble remembering to
whom. This finding holds the encouraging notion that OSNs
users are not blindly “sharing in the dark” – they are not
disclosing information without any memory of past
revelations whatsoever.

3095

Table 1: Percentages of chosen options per information condition in the memory task.

Responses given by participants
Correct Response

Personal
Information

Impersonal
Information

Small

Large

Not Discl.

New

Small
Large
Not Discl.
New

49%
27%
3%
1%

43%
71%
3%
0%

7%
1%
84%
1%

1%
1%
10%
98%

Total chosen

17%

24%

35%

24%

Small
Large
Not Discl.
New

44%
29%
4%
1%

46%
62%
5%
1%

5%
6%
51%
9%

5%
3%
40%
89%

Total chosen

16%

24%

25%

35%

Note: All percentages pertain to rows; for ‘Small’, ‘Large’, and ‘New’ 10 answers were given per participant, for
‘Not Discl.’ 20 answers were given; ‘Not Discl.‘ is the abbreviation of ‘Not Disclosed’; bold marked numbers
indicate percentages of correct identifications.

The Impact of Risk Cues on Target Memory
Participants identified more target audiences correctly when
they informed the audiences about something personal in
comparison to impersonal information. We hereby
confirmed our second hypothesis. In line with this finding
we also found that distractor identification in the personal
condition was superior to the impersonal condition (see
Figure 1). In line with hypothesis 3, target memory
performance also varied with the target audience of the
disclosed message. Participants remembered more targets
correctly when the audience was large. Furthermore,
response rates show that the risk of disclosing something to
a large audience seems to be especially salient, since
participants more often chose “large audience” in the
memory task than “small audience”. We can conclude from
our results that people are not oblivious to online risks but
show a direct cognitive reaction to situational vulnerabilities
like telling personal information or telling something to a
large audience. It might be that people process the
association of target and information in a more elaborate
way when they feel vulnerable or when they cannot trust
their interaction partners.

Limitations
Naturally, this experiment has limitations that we need to
consider when interpreting our results. For one, our sample
is a non-representative convenience sample. Thus, we do
not know if our results can be generalized to other age and

educational groups. Furthermore, in order to transfer the
paradigm of target memory to the environment of OSNs we
had to make several alterations from the conventional
offline paradigm. These alterations restrict a direct
comparison of our findings with results from former studies
but substantially enhance the ecological validity of our
experiment: First, as we could not find an up-to-date
validated collection of intimacy-rated items we created new
stimulus material for the information conditions. We
thereby focused on information that is typically disclosed in
online profiles as well as on details about participants´
biographical and attitudinal characteristics. The intimacy of
these items varies substantially and further research is
needed to assess the perceived intimacy of information in
different interaction contexts as well as the role of possible
self-reference effects in online environments. Second, we
changed the classic operationalization of the target in our
experiment. Usually a target consists of one single person
represented by a photo or name. However, in OSNs users
seldom communicate in one-to-one situations but rather
address different kinds of audiences. Therefore, it seemed
appropriate to adjust the receiving targets so that
information would be disclosed to two different kinds of
audiences (small vs. large). In this respect it also seems
important to note that our experimental design did not allow
manipulations of audience familiarity. Therefore, future
research is needed to assess the generalizability of our
results to real social network communication where people

3096

usually know their audience´s members from offline
contexts. Finally, our results do not fully explain the
underlying cognitive mechanisms that contribute to better
memory performance in risk situations. Future studies
should therefore attempt to clarify this issue, for example by
controlling for decision times in the communication task.

Implications
Our results show that users of OSNs actually do react to
specific risk circumstances, if these are salient enough to be
grasped. This indicates that users probably do not just claim
to be concerned about their data (which often contradicts
their behavior) but seem to automatically pay more attention
to vulnerable situations in online communication. This
possibility of a more thorough elaboration offers a direct
practical link: From a technical view, privacy-supporting
web applications should work on a less subtle and more
realistic representation of the potential audience of the tobe-disclosed information. Furthermore, it seems useful to
work on ways in which people get a quick overview about
what they have disclosed in the past and to whom it is
visible. From an educational standpoint, internet literacy
programs should sensitize participants to rather subtle
online risk cues, for example the degree of publicity.
However, these measures cannot and should not stop users
from self-disclosing in OSNs altogether since a considerable
amount of research also suggests that OSNs-users benefit
both emotionally and socially from their usage. The aim of
design alterations and educational measures should rather be
to achieve a natural consciousness so that privacy-related
decisions can be beneficial after all.

Acknowledgements
This study was funded by the Research Training Group
1712/1 “Trust and Communication in a Digitized World” of
the German Research Foundation (DFG). We would like to
thank Christina Wohlers and Franziska Thon for their
comments on this manuscript.

References
Bateman, P. J., Pike, J. C., & Butler, B. S. (2011). To
disclose or not: publicness in social networking sites.
Information Technology & People, 24(1), 78-100.
Brown, A., Hornstein, S., & Memon, A. (2006). Tracking
Conversational Repetition: An Evaluation of Target
Monitoring Ability. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20,
85-95.
Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The
benefits of Facebook 'friends:' Social capital and college
students' use of online social network sites. Journal Of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4), 1143-1168.
Gopie, N., & MacLeod, C. M. (2009). Destination Memory
- Stop me if I told you this before. Psychological Science,
20(12), 1492-1499.

Joinson, A. N. (2001). Knowing me, knowing you:
Reciprocal self-disclosure in Internet-based surveys.
Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 4(5), 587-591.
Jourard, S. M., & Lasakow, P. (1958). Some factors in selfdisclosure. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
56(1), 91.
Kiesler, S., Siegel, J., & McGuire, T. W. (1984). Social
Psychological Aspects of Computer-Mediated
Communication. American Psychologist, 39(10), 11231134.
Koriat, A., Ben-Zur, H., & Druch, A. (1991). The
contextualization of input and output events in memory.
Psychological Research, 53, 260-270.
LaBar, K. S., & Cabeza, R. (2006). Cognitive neuroscience
of emotional memory. Nat Rev Neurosci 7, 54–64.
Marsh, R. L., & Hicks, J. L. (2002). Comparisons of Target
Output Monitoring and Source Input Monitoring. Applied
Cognitive Psychology 16 845–862
Norberg, P. A., Horne, D. R., & Horne, D. A. (2007). The
Privacy Paradox: Personal Information Disclosure
Intentions versus Behaviors. The Journal of Consumer
Affairs, 41(1), 100-126.
Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Kasmer, J. A. (1988). The
role of affect in the elaboration likelihood model of
persuasion. In L. Donohew, H. E. Sypher & E. Higgins
(Eds.), Communication, social cognition, and affect.
Hillsdale, NJ England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Slonje, R., & Smith, P. K. (2008). Cyberbullying: Another
main type of bullying? Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology, 49, 147–154.
Slovic, P., & Peters, E. (2006). Risk Perception and Affect.
Current Directions In Psychological Science, 15(6), 322325.
Stodt, B., Moll, R., Polzer, C., Pieschl, S., & Brand, M.
(2013). First results of a new questionnaire to assess
Internet literacy: Correlations to pathological Internet
use and risk-taking behavior. Paper presented at the
TeaP, Vienna.
Ugander, J., Karrer, B., Backstrom, L., & Marlow, C.
(2011). The Anatomy of the Facebook Social Graph.
arXiv:1111.4503, 1-17.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2011). Online
Communication Among Adolescents: An Integrated
Model of Its Attraction, Opportunities, and Risks. Journal
of Adolescent Health 48, 121-127.
Xu, H., Teo, H.-H., Tan, B. C. Y., & Agarwal, R. (2010).
The Role of Push–Pull Technology in Privacy Calculus:
The Case of Location-Based Services. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 26(3), 135-173
Zeidner, R. (2007). How Deep Can You Probe. HR
Magazine, 52(10), 57–60.

3097

