UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity, causality and argumentation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d63z3d8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Jimenez-Leal, William
Gaviria, Christian

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity, causality and argumentation
William Jiménez-Leal (w.jimenezleal@uniandes.edu.co)
Christian Gaviria (cgaviria@uniandes.edu.co)
Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de los Andes.
Cra. 1 Nº 18A- 12, Edificio Franco, Bogotá, 111711. Colombia

Abstract
Similarity is a notion that is widely used both in cognitive
science and in argumentation theory. These research
programs have, however, developed in large part separately
and in consequence rely on disparate notions of similarity.
Only recently there has been a proposal for specifying how
similarity actually plays a role in judging slippery slope
arguments. We present here further theoretical discussion and
empirical evidence in order to show how similarity can play a
role in slippery slope arguments and in argumentation in
general. In the experiment presented here, we manipulated the
availability of causal information, and showed that people are
sensitive to it when judging arguments’ strength. We
conclude that similarity between causal properties of the
elements presented in arguments is crucial for arguments’
strength assessments.
Keywords: Argumentation, similarity, causality, analogical
reasoning.

Introduction
The degree of conviction that an argument generates
depends on many elements. The effectiveness of some
arguments seems to depend on the perceived similarity
between the elements presented in the premises and the
conclusions that might follow. For example, such is the case
of the argument based on precedent, where the similarity
between past events and the one under discussion is such as
to warrant following the same course of action as with the
precedent (Walton, 2010). Similarly, some arguments fail
because the relation of similarity between premises and
conclusion is weak. The fallacy of false analogy (Tindale,
2007) is one example, where there is a comparison between
situations based on superficial similarities that do not
support the conclusion. Walton, Reed & Macagno (2008)
recognize that judgements of similarity between a class and
an exemplar are key for the quality of arguments from
verbal classification (from definition, vagueness,
arbitrariness) (See also Macagno, 2009; Walton, 2009). The
notion of similarity is thus central to explaining why people
deem some arguments good or bad, and it is taken as a
primitive element for explaining how people evaluate
arguments.
Similarly, the typologies of arguments put forward by
perspectives like the dialectical (Walton, 2010) and the
pragma-dialectical (van Eemeren, Houtlosser, & Snoeck,
2007), rely on identification of similarity. In the pragmadialectical perspective, for example, one of the three main
types of arguments is the ‘argumentation based on
comparison” (van Eemeren, et al., 2007), where the
argument and the standpoint argued for refer to different
things but share a predicate. In the example “It is not at all

necessary to give James a 10 dollar allowance, because his
brother always got 10 dollars a week”, the similarity
between James and his brother regarding the money needed,
is the justification that allows one to proceed from premise
to conclusion (Hitchcock & Wagenmans, 2011). In fact, the
questions proposed to identify this type of argumentation
scheme presuppose the notion of similarity (e.g. “Are there
enough relevant similarities in the things that are
compared?”)
Similarity thus plays a dual role in argumentation: not
only is it proposed that similarity judgments are performed
by people engaged in argumentation, but it is also suggested
that argumentation schemes are to be identified by questions
that imply similarity judgements. That is, similarity plays a
role both in explaining what people do, and also as a tool
that the argumentation scholar needs to identify arguments
and evaluate its correctness.
Even though there has been vigorous research on the role
of similarity in several psychological processes (Goldstone
& Son, 2005), and despite argumentation research
consistently using this construct as a tool to characterise
several argumentation schemes (Walton et al, 2008), little
work has been done to integrate the findings of cognitive
science into our understanding of how people reason with
arguments. In what follows, we will briefly examine the
most common notions of similarity currently in use in
cognitive science and consider the only work we are aware
of that explicitly makes use of this idea to explain argument
strength (Corner, Hahn & Oaksford, 2011). This will lead us
to consider causality as one of the key ideas that is missing
when using similarity as an explanatory principle. We will
then present some empirical evidence to support our claims.

Similarity and cognitive science
It is difficult to overstate the importance of similarity as an
explanatory tool in cognitive science. From categorisation to
analogy, similarity judgements are advanced to explain very
diverse phenomena. Links between rules and similarity as
well as the very need of appealing to similarity in explaining
cognition have been widely discussed (Sloman & Rips,
1998; Goldstone, Day & Son, 2010). It is more or less
accepted that alternative ways of conceiving similarity
capture different intuitions about our use of this notion, and
that all have different weaknesses and strengths.
The multiplicity of contexts in which it is possible to use
the notion of similarity is consistent with the diversity of
ways in which people judge that objects are alike. One can
distinguish three main models to conceive similarity:
geometric models, featural models and alignment based

2656

models.1 While none of these models can possibly capture
the flexibility of similarity, they offer important insights
into how similarity can be possibly used in the context of
argumentation.
Geometric models are based on multidimensional scaling
of similarity and dissimilarity judgments provided by
participants. People judge how alike two objects are, and
their ratings are used to generate a set of points organised in
a metric space. The similarity of two objects is an inverse
function of the distance between points that represent the
objects. The distances measured depend on the number of
dimensions inferred (Goldstone el at., 2010). Certainly, a
geometrical representation of similarity seems to be at play
in the case of induction of blank properties, as proposed by
the similarity-coverage model of induction (Osherson et al.
1990). Knowing that “bears require Biotin for haemoglobin
synthesis” makes one more likely to believe that wolves
require that substance when compared to whales. In this
case, the induction is possibly supported by a similarity
judgement along the dimensions of “animal with fur”, and
“lives in the woods”.
Notice that this conception of similarity relies on the idea
of objects represented by dimensions, which can be
adequately captured by classification tasks. The problem
with this idea is that it makes geometric models too heavily
committed to the assumptions of minimality, symmetry and
the triangle inequality, as pointed out by Tversky (1977).
These assumptions make the model psychologically
implausible for some similarity judgments (e.g. asymmetric
judgments like “Korea is more similar to China than China
is to Korea”). Featural models capitalise on some problems
of geometric models to advance a notion of similarity based
on weighted feature-matching. Here the objects are
characterised as a set of features, and resemblance is
established by some linear combination of shared and
distinctive features, with their respective weights. Featural
models have found success particularly in explaining
categorisation tasks (Verguts et al, 2004). Typically, these
tasks involve a learning phase where participants are
presented several exemplars that belong to an artificial
category (e.g. Flowers whose colour, number of petals and
size can vary). Participants are then tested with new
exemplars, whose characteristics may match the ones
presented in the study phase.
Both geometric and featural representations of similarity
have traditionally been used to analyse tasks with relatively
unstructured inputs. The link between the inferred
dimensions or features had traditionally been overlooked. In
response to this problem, and inspired by research in
analogy and metaphor, Gentner and Markman (1995)
proposed the idea of having situations as the input of the
comparison process, and thus starting with complex inputs.
Similarity between objects is in this case derived from the
1
These are not the only models that have been proposed to
characterize similarity, but they are the most widely used.
Alternatives such as simplicity and transformation models (see
Goldstone et al, 2010), are not discussed for the sake of brevity.

role the object fulfils in the scene. This principle guides the
selection of characteristics relevant for the comparison
process. Alignment-based models assume that similarity
comparisons involve a mechanism of structure-mapping,
called structural alignment, that seeks maximal structurally
consistent matches. When maximizing these matches, there
is a set of matched characteristics and two sets of
differences, alignable and non-alignable. The latter are key
to establishing similarity and explaining the effects of
asymmetry and minimality identified by Tversky.
While these approaches to similarity have met different
degrees of success in explaining phenomena like
categorisation and metaphor, little has been done to specify
the particular approach at play when turning to the idea of
similarity in the context of explaining argumentation. Thus
we now consider the extant literature about argumentation.

Similarity in argumentation
To our knowledge, there are only two explicit proposals for
using similarity as an explanatory tool in argumentation.
The first one is attributed to Walton (2010, 2012), who
presents an analysis showing how arguments from precedent
are based on arguments from analogy and classification. The
second one is attributed to Corner, Hahn and Oaksford
(2011), who, in the framework of the Bayesian approach to
argumentation (Hahn & Oaksford, 2007), claim that the
mechanism underlying the slippery slope arguments (SSAs)
consists of a category boundary re-appraisal process, which
in turn depends on the perceived similarity between an
exemplar and a category. We now consider each one in turn.
In law, arguments from precedents involve applying an
earlier decision to a later case deemed to be the same. Of
course, the issue at stake here is when two cases can be
considered the “same” in light of the precedent. By the same
token, in arguments from analogy a decision is suggested
because the case is similar to another one, where “how
similar” is the critical question. Walton (2010) is interested
in finding an objective way “to identify, analyse and
evaluate arguments from analogy” (p. 217), and proposes
that arguments from precedent are a special case of
arguments from analogy, which in turn are cases of
arguments by classification or definition. Given Walton’s
interest in legal reasoning, the inputs of the process are
“cases”, complex situations that afford comparisons at
multiple levels. Comparisons are only possible if there is a
“plausible story” that connects the cases being compared.
The mechanism proposed to establish similarity is an
abstract structure called a “story scheme” (Bex, 2009),
which is a template that contains a connected sequence of
events or actions represented by variables, so that different
stories can be represented as instances of it (Walton, 2012).
Once the right story scheme is selected, it is possible to
establish if the case argued for is an instance of the story
scheme. For example, the argument that selling unhealthy
food is analogous to selling a malfunctioning car, and thus
the same controls should be implemented for food, is only
possible in a story scheme that can encompass both food

2657

and cars. In other words, to judge the quality of the
argument, it is necessary to decide whether the coverage of
the story scheme is to be extended to include the new case.
The methodology proposed by Walton is, ultimately, a
combination of story schemes and the argumentation
scheme from analogy. As such, it is a tool used by the
argumentation analyst and it is not intended to have
psychological reality. However, its use does imply a
functioning cognitive system able to comprehend similarity.
As such, the judgements of similarity from story schemes
implicitly rely on an alignment-based approach.
The second case is the work of Corner et al. (2011),
whose goal is to provide the objective basis for judging
SSAs. SSAs are arguments where a proposal is put forward
but its consequences are thought to be undesirable, so that if
the proposal is allowed, the undesirable consequence will
unavoidably follow (e.g. “if freedom of speech is refused to
extremist groups, then there will be censorship to any kind
of political expression”) (Volokh, 2003). Corner et al.
present evidence on how the strength of slippery slope
arguments is related to the perceived similarity of the
elements present in the premises of the argument. They
propose that the mechanism underlying the judged strength
of slippery slope arguments is the assessment of similarity
between the exemplars presented in their premise and
conclusion.
More specifically, Corner et al. claim that when assessing
a SSA there is a process of category boundary re-appraisal
(Corner et al., 2011), and thus the exemplar under
discussion can be rightly considered within the scope of the
category discussed. Consequently, people are more willing
to accept arguments of this form when the similarity
between the elements presented in the premises is high, and
otherwise consider the argument fallacious. How good an
SSA is, depends on extending the category boundaries to
include the case under discussion. For example, the
acceptability of the argument “If voluntary euthanasia is
legalised, then in the future there will be more cases of
‘medical murder” (Corner et al, 2011, p. 133), depends on
being able to redraw the limits of the category ‘medical
murder’ to include ‘euthanasia’. Their claims are based on
extensive findings from work on exemplars’ effects on
categorisation (Nosofsky, 1986).
This idea is certainly a step forward in integrating
research in cognitive science and argumentation. However,
the generality of Corner et al’s proposal is lessened when
considering the materials used in their experiments.
In their experiments 2, 2a and 3, they use numerically
defined exemplars. They describe a situation where there is
a discussion about the inclusion of a new territory in the
category of places of outstanding beauty (PONB).
Participants were presented with cases of areas that were
either declared PONB or not, including the number of
animal species in each place, as the decisive criterion. For
example, they were told that location A (114 species) and
location B (149 species) were not considered eligible as
PONB, whereas location C (224 species) and D (259

species) were. In the testing phase, which corresponds with
the SSA, a new pair of exemplars was presented in terms of
two conditions: similar (194 and 179 species) and dissimilar
(218 vs. 179 species). If the mechanism of SSA is an
instance of category boundary re-appraisal, it would be
expected that (1) an argument involving a comparison of
items should be better evaluated when they are similar; and
(2) that the results of a categorisation task would support
this prediction. They did in fact find a good match between
categorisation decisions and the strength of SSAs.
The similarity of the cases considered in Corner et al
(2011) depends on numerical thresholds (e.g. number of
species in a natural park necessary to declare it a PONB
(exp. 2); number of years of imprisonment for knife/gun
crime (exp. 3)), given by the fact of dealing with
numerically defined categories with only one dimension. As
such, their proposal suggests at least one question; namely,
will the link between similarity and SSAs show up in cases
where the similarity metric depends on more than one
dimension (or no dimensions at all: features, stories, etc.)?
The next logical step is then to examine the functioning of
the hypothesized mechanism in the cases suggested.
The common theme in the work of Walton and Corner et
al. is the idea of a more basic mechanism at work when
dealing with arguments: Walton, at the level of the scholar
of identifying and analysing argumentation schemes; Corner
et al, at the cognitive level of individuals faced with
arguments. We believe the latter is a particularly promising
avenue of research since it relies on the accumulated
knowledge of cognitive science about similarity and
promotes the integration of cognitive science and
argumentation theory (Hornikx & Hahn, 2012). However, as
has been acknowledged, the evidence presented by Corner
et al. is limited to cases where similarity judgments operate
within a dimension, suffering, in consequence, from one of
the main criticisms put forward against geometric
approaches to similarity, that is, overlooking the connection
between the judged dimension and other aspects of the
objects under consideration.

Causality and similarity
We believe there is a complementary way of conceiving
similarity in the context of argumentation that comes from
the literature on causal categorisation. This literature offers
a way of dealing with the dichotomy between dimensions
and features, and also accounts for the fact that features are
usually correlated in exemplars.
There is ample evidence of causal effects on similarity
assessments in the categorisation literature (Rehder, 2003).
According to the causal model of categorisation, the
observed correlation between exemplars’ features are
understood as evidence of an underlying mechanism at
work, resulting in those features (Rehder & Burnett, 2005).
Whereas Rehder (2006) considers causality and similarity as
two independent sources of information, it is possible to
interpret categorisation as cases that depend on similarity
judgments inspired by causality. Similarity is not a fixed

2658

notion, as noted above, and proposing that causal
information determines our perception of similarity amounts
to saying that features and dimensions that enter
comparisons are governed by a more general principle. In
fact, causal-based models can actually provide a way to
solve the apparent opposition of models based in either
features or dimensions. Kemp, Shafto, Berke and
Tenenbaum (2008) propose a causal model that integrates
both kinds of knowledge, relations between objects and
relation between features. The evidence accumulated
recently in favour of the causal models of categorisation and
induction gives good grounds for suggesting that the
similarity assessment at work in the case of argumentation
depends on the perceived causal similarity, in at least some
relevant cases.
This would lead one to consider causal-based similarity
judgements as the mechanism underlying some
argumentation schemes, which can be characterised by the
inclusion of a new exemplar under the scope of the
category. Some of these argument types have been
suggested above: analogy, precedent, classification,
definition and slippery slope. Similarly, some forms of the
SSA could be considered special cases of causal similaritybased argumentation, where how slippery a slope is,
depends on the causal links shared by the exemplars
presented in the premises of the argument, as the evidence
of their features provide.2
Here we do not commit to a particular model of causal
reasoning, only to the idea underlying causal-based models
of categorisation. However, our proposal has the general
appeal of using the logic of weighted feature-matching,
where the weights are assigned following a psychological
principle, viz. causal representation. In consequence, the
strength of the arguments that depend on this mechanism
can be predicted by establishing what the particular causal
mechanism at work is.
The present experiment
As a first attempt to test this idea, we designed an
experiment where the presence of the causal efficient
feature was manipulated as well as the overall similarity
(number of matched features), in the context of a slippery
slope argument. This is a 3 (number of matched features) X
2 (presence/absence of a causally relevant feature),
between-subjects design. We expect to see a main effect of
the causally relevant feature, regardless of the overall
similarity indicated by simple feature matching. In
consequence, arguments based on causally matched
information will be judged stronger.

2

A popular classification (Walton, 1992) classifies slippery
slope arguments into four types: Sorites, Causal, Precedent, and the
Full. It is worth stressing that this classification does not aim to
have psychological reality and it would not have any standing in
the current proposal.

Experiment
Participants
132 university students (77 female) with ages between 18
and 34 (m=21.25, sd=3.36) took part in this study. The
students came from several different undergraduate
programs. Participants were randomly allocated to one of
the six possible combinations, with 65 and 67 participants in
the causal condition and non-causal condition, respectively,
and 41, 42 and 39 for each one of the groups defined by the
number of matched features.
Materials and procedure
Participants were tested in groups at the end of one of
their classes. Each participant was provided with a fourpage booklet containing, in the first page, some general
instructions, in the following two pages the main task, and
in the last page participants were requested to provide basic
demographic information.
The main task involved making judgments relative to two
scenarios (drugs and fertilizers). The first part of each
scenario described a situation where a government agency
had to decide whether to allow the use of a new substance
(drug/fertilizer). The second part of the scenario included a
table comparing the features of a banned substance and the
corresponding characteristics of the new substance under
consideration. Each table had four items, where the number
of matched characteristics (1, 2 or 3) and the presence of the
key causal feature (matched or not) were manipulated. For
example, table 1 shows the information presented in the
fertilizer scenario, with two matched features in the noncausal condition. Polenoy is the currently banned fertilizer,
and Soilex the fertilizer the government is considering
whether to allow. In this case, the “high concentration of
nitric acid” was the key causal feature.
Causal features were selected from ratings provided by an
independent group of 20 participants who selected what
characteristic they considered more important for
banning/allowing fertilizers and potentially addictive
substances. Agreement on the most causal feature for the
fertilizer scenario was 100%, and in the drugs scenario was
80%.
Table 1: Information presented in a sample item
POLENOY SOILEX
Doses lower than 50kg per hectare
YES
YES
Highly soluble in water
YES
NO
Delivered with sprinklers
YES
NO
High concentration of nitric acid
YES
YES
An argument was then presented claiming that the new
substance should not be allowed, because allowing it would
inevitably lead to removing the ban on the former substance
too (“If we allow Soilex now, we are going to have to allow
Polenoy. In consequence, we should not allow Soilex”). In
both scenarios the arguments were uttered by fictitious
characters in positions of power. Participants were asked to
rate how convincing each argument was on a 10-point scale.
All of the participants rated both scenarios, with the
presentation order counterbalanced. Finally, participants
rated how negative/positive (on a scale of 1 to 10) they

2659

considered the consequence stated in the conclusion of each
argument to be, as a measure of the perceived utility.
Results
Results of each scenario were submitted to a 2
(presence/absence of a causally relevant feature) X 3
(number of matched items: 1, or 3) between subjects Anova.
Results for each scenario are considered separately because
their respective utility ratings differed (paired t(131)=4.56,
p<0.001), even though there was no significant difference
between their acceptance ratings (paired t(131)=0.6, p=.5)
For both items, there was a main effect of causal
information. People rated the argument with the matched
relevant causal feature as more convincing than the case
without the matched feature (5.8 vs. 3.7 for the drugs
scenario and 5.3 vs. 4 for the fertilizer scenario)(see table 2).
The differences are statistically significant in both cases, F
(2, 128) =19.95, p<0.01, η2=0.03; F (2,128) =3.92, p<0.05,
η2=0.18.
Table 2: Summary of argument strength ratings by causal
information and number of matched items
Scenario
Causal # of matched Mean (s.d)
Info
features
1
5.29 (3.15)
2
6.14 (2.41)
Yes
3
6.15 (3.26)
Total
5.76 (2.91)
Drugs
1
3.03 (2.56)
2
5.17 (2.71)
No
3
3.40 (1.64)
Total
3.69 (2.51)
1
4.91 (3.11)
2
5.72 (2.61)
Yes
3
5.35 (1.98)
Total
5.24 (2.69)
Fertilizers
1
4.50 (2.87)
2
5.76 (3.10)
No
3
2.15 (1.82)
Total
4.14 (2.99)
There was also a main effect of the number of matched
features (F(2, 126)=3.99, p<0.05, η2=0.05; F(2,126)=3.58,
p<0.01, η2=0.05, for fertilizer and drugs, respectively). The
degree of persuasion that an argument exerted changed with
the number of matched features for both scenarios. Post hoc
tests (Tukey) revealed that the mean acceptance rating was
lower when having only one matched feature (the causal
characteristic), compared to two or three matches. However,
there is no consistent pattern of differences across scenarios
when having more than one matched feature.
Interaction was significant for the fertilizer scenario (F(2,
128)= 3.62, p<0.05, η2=0.02) but not for drugs item (F=1.1).
In the fertilizers scenario, the difference between the causal
and non-causal condition was larger when having only one
feature matched. Maybe in this scenario having a single
feature matched was more salient.

Utility ratings were significantly higher for fertilizer than
for drugs (4.5 vs. 37, paired t(131)=4.56, p<0.01), which
means people were more in agreement with fertilizer use.
However, the utility ratings were not correlated with
acceptance ratings in either scenario (0.04 and 0.002) and
did not differ as a function of the inclusion of causal
information or matched items (F’s <1 for all anovas).
In short, both items were rated in the predicted direction,
with the more convincing arguments being those that have a
causally relevant matched feature to the sample item.
However, the number of items does not have a clear effect.
Increasing the number of matches is not linearly associated
with higher argument acceptance ratings, but adding a
matched feature does have an effect. The present experiment
does not support a firm conclusion about this aspect.

Discussion
People are sensitive to causal information in the assessment
of argument strength in SSA. In the case of the scenarios
used in this experiment, people recognise the causal feature
(e.g. concentration of nitric acid) as the key characteristic
that produces the undesirable consequence and thus
determines the acceptability of the SSA. This experiment
adds support to Corner et al’s proposal of category reappraisal as the mechanism at work in SSA, and also sets it
in the larger context of the use of causal information for
categorisation. A potential problem with the interpretation
of the data presented is that is not possible to discard that
the other features presented were also interpreted as causal.
This would explain why adding a matched feature was
associated to higher acceptance ratings. Even in this case, it
would still stand that matching the most causally efficient
feature is related with a significant increase in the
acceptability of the argument.

Summary and conclusions
Similarity clearly plays a role in argument evaluation. Here
we have presented evidence of a particular way in which
this can occur. The experiment presented shows that people
are sensitive to causal information when judging how
similar a new exemplar is to a known class. This finding
complements Corner et al’s (2011) work, by further
specifying the mechanism at play, beyond the case of a
geometrical notion of similarity. SSAs often imply an
evaluation of how “inevitable” an undesirable consequence
is once the proposed action has been effected, and in that
sense, causal knowledge linking the elements in the
argument is especially relevant.
Taking into account research in cognitive science on
similarity has several benefits. First, it makes it possible to
take further steps in the integration of dissimilar
perspectives in the study of argumentation (Hornikx &
Hahn, 2012). The different ways in which different
evaluations of similarity can play a role in argumentation
are still unexplored. Second, it can help predict cases where
arguments may be considered bad or fallacious, by
providing an understanding of similarity ratings of the

2660

elements under discussion. The reverse is also true: by
examining the way people assess arguments, it might be
possible to examine the conceptual representation of the
world, and the causal structure implied. The actual scope of
the causal similarity mechanism is a matter of empirical
research. For example, the perceived strength of ad
hominem arguments, such as the ad hitlerum (Harris et al,
2012), where adopting policy X would lead to the adoption
of other undesirable policies, might depend on the similarity
of the causally relevant links that connect policy X with
other undesirable policies. Third, the study of causal
similarity from a cognitive perspective can potentially
provide a unifying theme to the study of the argument
typologies proposed in informal logic. The dialectical
(Walton, 2010) and pragma dialectical (van Eemeren,
Houtlosser, & Snoeck, 2007) approaches propose typologies
that, useful as they are for the study of argumentation, might
conceal important unifying psychologically themes in the
evaluation of arguments. One of them, as suggested in this
paper, is the use of categorical causal information.
There are several other questions that can be explored
using judged causal similarity as a framework. For example,
it is clear that complex situations require the rapid
evaluation for alignable matches and mismatches (Gentner
& Markman, 1995). Are alignable differences more
important when they refer to causal characteristics? The
way similarity is assessed, in the absence of specific
characteristics to be matched (cf. geometrical models), will
probably have a differential impact on argument strength,
when compared to cases where the exemplars are fully
specified by a set of characteristics. A causal-based model
of categorisation offers a wealth of hypotheses to be
investigated.

Acknowledgments
William Jiménez-Leal was funded by the FAPA grant at
Universidad de los Andes.

References
Bex, F. (2009). “Analysing Stories Using Schemes.” In H.
Kaptein, H. Prakken and B. Verheij (Eds.),Legal Evidence
and Proof: Statistics, Stories, Logic. Farnham: Ashgate.
Corner, A., Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2011). The
psychological mechanism of the slippery slope argument.
Journal of Memory and Language, 64, 2, 133-152.
van Eemeren, F. H., Houtlosser, P., & Snoeck, H. A. F. (2007).
Argumentative indicators in discourse: A pragma-dialectical
study. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1995) . Similarity is like
analogy : Structural alignment in comparison. En C. Cacciari
(Ed.), Similarity in language, thought and perception.
Brussels: BREPOLS.
Goldstone, R. L., Day, S., & Son, J. Y. (2010). Comparison. In
B. Glatzeder, V. Goel, & A. von Müller (Eds.) On Thinking:
Volume II, towards a theory of thinking. Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer Verlag GmbH.

Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2007). The Rationality of Informal
Argumentation: A Bayesian Approach to Reasoning
Fallacies. Psychological Review, 114, 3, 704-732.
Harris, A. J. L., Hsu, A. S., & Madsen, J. K. (2012). Because
Hitler did it! Quantitative tests of Bayesian argumentation
using ad hominem. Thinking and Reasoning, 18 (3), 311343.
Hitchcock, D.
& Wagenmans, J. (2011) The pragmadialectical account of argument schemes. In van Eemeren, F.
H., Feteris, E. T., Garssen, B., & Snoeck, H. F. (Eds.)
Keeping in touch with pragma-dialectics: In honor of Frans
H. van Eemeren. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Pub. Co.
Hornikx, J., & Hahn, U. (2012). Reasoning and argumentation:
Towards an integrated psychology of argumentation.
Thinking and Reasoning, 18 (3), 225-243
Kemp, C., Shafto, P., Berke, A. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007).
Combining causal and similarity-based reasoning. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. 19.
Macagno, F, (2009) Reasoning from Classification and
Definition. Argumentation, Vol. 23, pp. 81-107,
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. General, 115 (1), 39-61
Osherson, D. N, Smith, E., Wilkie, O., López, A., Shafir, E.
(1990). Category-Based Induction. Psychological Review, 97
(2), 185-200.
Rehder, B. (2003). Categorization as causal reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 27, 5, 709-748.
Rehder, B. (2006). When similarity and causality compete in
category-based property generalization. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 1, 3-16.
Rehder, B. (2009). Causal-based property generalization.
Cognitive Science, 33, 3, 301-344.
Rehder, B & Burnett, R. (2005) Feature inference and the
causal structure of categories. Cognitive Science, 50: 264–
314, 2005.
Sloman, S. A., & Rips, L. J. (1998). Similarity and symbols in
human thinking. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Tindale, C. W. (2007). Fallacies and argument appraisal.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tversky, A. (1977) Features of Similarity. Psychological
Review, 84(4), Jul 1977, 327-352.
Verguts, T., Ameel, E., & Storms, G. (2004). Measures of
similarity in models of categorization. Memory & Cognition,
32, 3, 379-389.
Volokh, E. (2003). The Mechanisms of the Slippery Slope.
Harvard Law Review, 116, 1026-1138.
Walton, D. N. (1992). Slippery slope arguments. Oxford
England: Clarendon Press.
Walton, D.N.(2008) Arguing from Definition to Verbal
Classification: The Case of Redefining 'Planet' to Exclude
Pluto. Informal Logic, Vol. 28, No. 2 (2008), pp. 129-154.
Walton, D. N. (2010). Similarity, precedent and argument from
analogy. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 18 (3), 217-246.
Walton, D.N. (2012) Story Similarity in Arguments from
Analogy. Informal Logic, 32(2), 199-218.
Walton, D. N., Reed, C., & Macagno, F. (2008).
Argumentation schemes. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

2661

