UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simultaneous Contradictory Belief and the Two-Systems Hypothesis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3461n2g8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Mugg, Joshua

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simultaneous Contradictory Belief and the Two-System Hypothesis
Joshua Mugg (joshuamugg@gmail.com)
Department of Philosophy, 4700 Keele St.
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3 Canada

criticism of the two-system hypothesis has focused on the
kind claim (Samuels 2009; Evans 2011), I argue that
Sloman has not provided us with cases of SCB. I then offer
an experimental setup that would strongly support the
existence of SBC.

Abstract
The two-system hypothesis states that there are two kinds of
reasoning systems, the first of which is evolutionarily old,
heuristically (or associatively) based, automatic, fast, and is a
collection of independent systems. The second is
evolutionarily new, perhaps peculiar to humans, is rule-based,
controlled, slow, and is a single token system. Advocates of
the two-system hypothesis generally support their claim by an
inference to the best explanation: two systems are needed to
explain experimental data from the reasoning, heuristics, and
biases literature. The best evidence for this claim comes from
simultaneous contradictory belief (henceforth SCB) (Sloman
1996, 2002). I argue that Sloman has not provided us with
cases of SCB. In each of his examples there is no evidence
that the beliefs are held simultaneously. I then offer the
outline for an experimental setup that would offer compelling
evidence for the existence of SCB and thereby support the
two-system hypothesis.
Keywords:
Dual-process;
two-system
simultaneous contradictory belief.

Why SCB?

hypothesis;

Introduction
The two-system hypothesis states there are two reasoning
systems (or at least two kinds of reasoning systems), the
first of which (System 1 or ‘S1’) is evolutionarily old,
heuristically (or associatively) based, automatic, fast, and is
a collection of independent systems. The second (System 2
or ‘S2’) is evolutionarily new, perhaps peculiar to humans,
is rule-based, controlled, and slow.1 The advocate of the
two-system hypothesis must demonstrate that the two
systems are distinct (what I call the distinctness claim), that
the two systems are of different kinds (what I call the kind
claim), and that S2 is a single system. Advocates of the twosystem hypothesis (I have in mind Evans (2004); Evans &
Over (1996); Sloman (1993, 1996); Stanovich (1999, 2004);
Carruthers (2009); and Frankish (2004, 2009)) generally
support their claim by an inference to the best explanation:
two systems are needed to explain experimental data from
the reasoning, heuristics, and biases literature. The best
evidence for this claim comes from simultaneous
contradictory belief (henceforth SCB) (Sloman 1996, 2002).
However, their inference to the best explanation only
supports, if successful, the distinctness claim. While
1

For a complete list of the property clusters of S1 and S2,
sometimes called the ‘Standard Menu’, see Evans and Frankish
(2009). I take the two-system hypothesis to be stronger than the
existential claim that there are two systems of reasoning. The
thesis is that cognition is divided into two systems and that each
system has a certain set of properties associated with it—the
properties on the Standard Menu.

Before examining Sloman’s cases of SCB we need to
understand why SCB is good evidence for the two-system
hypothesis, and we need to understand what counts as
evidence for SCB. Sloman seems to have a rival explanation
in mind to account for human reasoning: there is just one
reasoning system (call this the one-system hypothesis). The
one-system hypothesis can and should allow that this system
operates differently under different circumstances. It should,
for example, sometimes operate deductively and other times
inductively. The two-system theorist allows for a single
system to operate inductively and deductive on different
occasions, since S1 and S2 engage in both forms of
reasoning. What, we should ask, would be the empirical
difference between there being one reasoning system that
operates differently under different stimuli and there being
multiple systems? One reasoning system cannot have
contradictory outputs for one input (Here I am in agreement
with Sloman (1996, 2002)). So the one-system hypothesis is
committed to the following claim: for any question
demanding reasoning and for which a reasoning system will
produce only one answer, subjects will only offer one
answer at any given time.
Sloman understands ‘belief’ broadly to mean “a
propensity, feeling, or conviction that a response is
appropriate even if it is not strong enough to be acted on”
(384). This definition is not uncontroversial, but (for the
sake of argument) I will grant it for the purpose of this
paper. From Sloman’s definition it follows that there are at
least two ways in which subjects might offer more than one
response at any given time. The first is behavioral. While
people might explicitly say that they believe that p, they
may exhibit behavior demonstrating that they believe not-p.
This would be evidence that there is more than one system
involved in reasoning. They believe (explicitly) that p but
believe (dispositionally, tacitly, or implicitly) not-p. Second,
a subject might feel a tension between p and not-p. This is
phenomenological evidence for SCB.
As an example of a task where subjects give simultaneous
contradictory responses which indicates the existence of
distinct systems, consider the Muller-Lyer illusion. Subjects
believe that the two lines are equal, but cannot help but see
them as different lengths, even after they have measured the

1044

two lines. Subjects perceive the lines as different lengths,
but believe that they are the same length. So the MullerLyer illusion supports the claim that perception and
reasoning are governed by distinct systems. Because there
are two systems operating simultaneously the tension
between believing that the lines are the same length and
seeing them as them as different lengths persists.
While in his (1996) Sloman seems to indicate that the
Muller-Lyer supports the two-system hypothesis about
reasoning, in his (2002) he mere takes it to indicate that
perception and knowledge are governed by distinct
systems—a conclusion he (2002) recognizes is consistent
with the one-system hypothesis. He explains that “the
conclusion that two independent systems are at work
depends critically on the fact that the perception and the
knowledge are maintained simultaneously” (385, emphasis
added). So the Muller-Lyer supports the existence of two
distinct systems, but not two distinct reasoning systems.
The preceding two paragraphs help elucidate what counts
as evidence for SCB. It would be too stringent to require
that subjects verbally claim p and not-p at the same time.
Alternatively, a subject might quickly alter her reposes (they
might say ‘it is valid…Wait, no it’s not. Wait, yes it is…’).
Call this a response toggle. A response toggle is neither
necessary nor sufficient for there being SCB, though it
might count in its favor. The two contradicting answers
might come from an uncertainty in a step of a single system
process (e.g. being asked whether an argument is sound, and
the argument is valid but the subject is unsure about the
truth of a premise). The uncertainty in that case reflects the
uncertainty of one or more premises rather than two
competing beliefs. So response toggle might count in favour
of SCB, but there are cases in which a subject will response
toggle without there being any SCB.2
While the existence of SCB would be good evidence for
the existence of two reasoning systems, it is possible that
there are two systems and that no SCB ever occurs. Indeed,
it is possible that two systems exist and that they make
(almost) no causal difference. I have two lungs, but (when
both function properly) they operate in essentially the same
way that one large lung would. So it is not the case that if
there are two systems then those two systems will differ.
That is, the existence of SCB is not necessary for the
establishment of the two-system hypothesis, but if there is
no SCB the case for the two-system hypothesis will be
much weaker. If we can explain all the data using one
system, then there is no need to posit a second system.
Furthermore, if both the one-system and two-systems
hypotheses offer equally plausible explanations then
Ockham’s Razor favours the one-system hypothesis since it
posits the least kinds (and number) of entities.
One might object that SCB does is not sufficient for the
establishment of the two-system hypothesis. One might
reason as follows: if the two-systems hypothesis is true and
2

Response toggle would be behavioral evidence for SCB rather
than phenomenological evidence (as in the ‘belief that p’, ‘feels
that not-p’ cases).

the two systems can deliver different solutions to the same
problem, then there may be cases in which subjects have
SCB. But then the existence of SCB supports a necessary
condition (rather than sufficient) for the two-system
hypothesis. Actually, the argument from SCB to the twosystem hypothesis is different. The reasoning is as follows:
1. There are cases of SCB.
2. If the one-system hypothesis is true, then there will
be no cases of SCB.
3. So the one-system hypothesis is false.
4. If the one-system hypothesis is false, then there must
be more than one reasoning system.
5. So there is more than one reasoning system.
It is true that this does not establish that there are only two
reasoning systems, but if we need to posit more than one
reasoning system a good place to start is with two reasoning
systems. I now turn to the Sloman’s examples of SCB.

Sloman’s cases of SCB
The first example of SCB to consider is Sloman’s (1998)
experiment in which subjects “tended to project properties
from a superordinate category to a subordinate category
only to the extent that the categories were similar” (2002,
387). He supports this claim through argument strength.
Subjects were asked, assuming the first statement was true,
to determine the strength of the following argument:
Argument 1
Fact: Every individual piece of electronic equipment
exhibits magnetic picofluctuation.
Conclusion: Every individual piece of audio equipment
exhibits magnetic picofluctuation.
The mean of the subjects who affirmed the conclusion was
.89, but of course if all audio equipment is electronic, then
(given that the ‘fact’ above is true) a rational subject would
give the conclusion a probability of 1. Sloman points out
that when the category in the conclusion was atypical of the
category in the premise, the judgments were even lower. For
the following argument (Argument 2) the mean probability
judgment was .76 (among those who claimed that all
kitchen appliances where electronic).
Argument 2
Fact: Every individual piece of electronic equipment
exhibits magnetic picofluctuation.
Conclusion: Every individual kitchen appliance exhibits
magnetic picofluctuation.
During debriefing interviews, subjects agreed that there
was good reason to assign this argument the maximum
probability because of the category inclusion. However,
subjects also thought that their lower probability
assessments were also sensible, though “they inevitably
failed to express why” (2002, 387). Sloman concludes that

1045

after being shown the correct answer they had an associative
S1 answer (a probability less than 1) and a rule-based S2
answer (a probability of 1).
There is a good alternative explanation to Sloman’s claim
that subjects had two answers in mind. There is an
enthymeme in both arguments crucial to the argument going
through. In Argument 1 it is “every individual piece of
audio equipment is a piece of electronic equipment” and in
Argument 2 it is “every individual kitchen appliance is a
piece of electronic equipment.” While both of these
propositions seem plausible we should consider just how
certain they are. Would a microphone stand count as part of
the sound equipment? Does my wine opener or manual egg
beater count as a kitchen appliance? Even if we answer
negatively, the questions give us pause. So the enthymeme
in the two arguments are not certain, and the level of each
enthymeme is gauged by association. I am more inclined to
exclude the microphone stand from audio equipment than I
am a manual egg beater from kitchen appliances, which
would explain why Argument 2 was deemed less certain
than Argument 1. I propose that the subjects’ responses
reflect this uncertainty about the truth of the enthymeme,
since subjects were not told to assume the enthymeme.
Sloman might respond that in debriefing interviews
subjects admitted that there was good reason to assign each
argument a probability of 1. When researchers pointed out
to subjects that they ought to have assigned each argument
maximal probability, I suggest that subjects then took the
enthymeme to be true. They were then considering a more
complete argument in the debriefing interview. However,
subjects can claim that their answers were reasonable, and
rightly so. Their answers simply reflected the probability
that the enthymeme was true, which is identical to the
probability of the conclusion given the fact. I conclude that
Sloman’s (1998) study does not give us a case of SCB.
Next, Sloman cites Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, Lopez, and
Shafir (1990) as a case of SCB. In this study subjects were
asked to compare the strength of two arguments:

following: “this is a striking example in which a compelling
logical argument fails to erase an even more compelling
intuition: How much evidence can a fact about robins
provide for an animal as dissimilar as an ostrich?” (2002,
388). So it is the intuition that is supposed to persist even
after subjects realize that Argument 4 is at least as strong as
Argument 3, but this is not a case of contradictory belief.
Our intuitions (inductive reasoning) tell us that Argument 4
cannot be very strong, but deductive reasoning might then
recognize that this implies that Argument 3 cannot be very
strong either. The competing answers might be held at
different times. First one thinks (wrongly) that Argument 3
is stronger than Argument 4. Then (after it being pointed out
that ostriches are a kind of bird) Argument 4 looks at least
as strong as Argument 3. There is no need for the two
beliefs to be held simultaneously.
Sloman offers an example from Revlin, Leirer, Yopp, and
Yopp (1980) as a case of SCB in syllogistic reasoning.
Subjects were asked which of the following five possible
conclusions followed from the premises:
Argument 5
No members of the ad-hoc committee are women.
Some U.S. senators are members of the ad-hoc
committee.
Therefore:
a. All U.S. senators are women.
b. No U.S. senators are women.
c. Some U.S. senators are women.
d. Some U.S. senators are not women.
e. None of the above is proven.
Argument 6
No U.S. governors are members of the Harem Club.
Some Arabian sheiks are members of the Harem Club.
Therefore:
a. All Arabian sheiks are U.S. governors.
b. No Arabian sheiks are U.S. governors.
c. Some Arabian sheiks are U.S. governors.
d. Some Arabian sheiks are not U.S. governors.
e. None of the above is proven.

Argument 3
Robins have an ulnar artery.
Therefore, birds have an ulnar artery.
Argument 4
Robins have an ulnar artery.
Therefore, ostriches have an ulnar artery.
Most subjects claimed that Argument 3 was stronger than
Argument 4. Sloman thinks that subjects believe the correct
answer—that Argument 4 is at least as strong as Argument
3. However they associate robins with birds more easily
than robins and ostriches, and so they claim that Argument
3 is stronger. Even assuming that subjects’ mistake is not
due to the ambiguity in quantification (which I suspect it is),
Sloman gives us no reason to think that subjects hold the
beliefs simultaneously. All that Sloman offers in support of
his claim that these beliefs are held simultaneously is the

83% responded correctly for Argument 5 (d. Some U.S.
senators are not women) while only 67% of participants
responded correctly to Argument 6 (d. Some Arabian sheiks
are not U.S. governors). In Argument 5 the right conclusion
accords with our standing beliefs while in Argument 6 our
standing beliefs tell us that the stronger answer (b No
Arabian sheiks are U.S. governors) is true. Sloman
concludes from this example that “empirical belief obtained
fairly directly through associative memory can inhibit the
response generated by psycho-logic” (2002, 389). Again,
Sloman has given us no reason to think that subjects
simultaneously believe that, in Argument 6, b and d both
follow and that only d follows. Do we currently have
behavioral evidence that subjects simultaneously believe b

1046

and only d? I think not. We only have evidence that more
subjects chose wrongly in Argument 6, and perhaps they do
so because when subjects lacks training in logic they fall
back on their standing knowledge.
A final (well-known) example is Linda the feminist bank
teller, which was devised by Tversky and Kahneman
(1983). Subjects were given the following information:
“Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken and very bright.
She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply
concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice,
and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations” (297).
Subjects were then asked which of the two following is
more likely: “A: Linda is a bank-teller. B: Linda is a bankteller and is active in the feminist movement” (297). In
some experimental trials more than 80% of subjects said
statement B was more likely than the statement A, but of
course a conjunction can never be more likely than one of
its conjuncts.
Sloman claims that he “can trace through the probability
argument and concede its validity, while sensing that a state
of affairs that [he] can imagine much more easily has a
greater chance of obtaining” (1996, 12). He offers the
phenomenological experience of another psychologist as
well: “I know that the [conjunction] is least probable, yet a
little homunculus in my head continues to jump up and
down, shouting at me—‘but she can’t just be a bank teller:
read the description’” (Gould, 469).
Sloman pointed out the difference in temporal relation
between the responses in the Muller-Lyer illusion and the
Necker cube illusion to five of his department colleagues.
Namely, in the Muller-Lyer case the illusion that the two
lines are different lengths persists even after one knows they
are the same length, while in the Necker cube illusion one is
only able to recognize one square as the front face at any
given time. Sloman then asked his colleagues whether their
experience in the Linda case was analogous to the MullerLyer or Necker cube case. All five agreed that it was like the
Muller-Lyer illusion. Sloman then asked his colleagues
whether the ‘Monty Hall’ case3 was analogous to the
Muller-Lyer or Necker cube illusion. All of them (as well as
Sloman) thought it was analogous to the Necker cube
illusion. Sloman concludes that in the Monty Hall case the
contradictory beliefs are not held simultaneously, whereas
for the Linda case they are.
We should not put much weight on the phenomenology of
the theorists. They are not naïve subjects and their
phenomenological reports are suspect. Behavioral evidence
of SCB from the subjects would be better. Sloman might
3
The Monty Hall case is as follows. A subject is invited to a
game show at which he or she may win a new car. The car is
behind one of three doors. Behind the other two is nothing. The
subject is told to pick a door. Monty, the game show host, opens
one of the doors which the subject did not pick. The subject is then
asked if he or she would like to change his or her answer. While it
might at first seem that it does not matter, in fact there is a 2/3
chance that the car is behind the door that the subject had not
picked.

object citing that his definition of belief is such that it is not
necessary that subject act upon their beliefs, and a belief
might not even make a behavioral difference. Although a
subject might not act upon his or her beliefs, if there is a
propensity, feeling, or conviction that a given proposition is
true then surely it will make some difference to the
cognitive processes or behavior of that subject. To be is to
have causal powers (Alexander’s Dictum). So if there is a
belief that p then that mental state has causal powers.
Furthermore our mental states do not constitute a totally
separate causal web from our behavior. That is, our behavior
and mental states are causally connected. Therefore, if a
subject believes that p then that subject’s behavior will be
different than if they did not believe that p, even if that
belief is too weak to deliberately act upon.

Experiment to test for SCB
According to the two-system hypothesis there are two
systems operating and the reason that subjects answer
incorrectly in the examples above is S2 is not given a
chance to make a computation or S2’s response is
overwhelmed by S1. Since the two systems operate in
parallel4 a subject who offers an incorrect answer and then
is told what the correct (S2) answer is will keep her S1
answer at the S1 level.5 Take the Linda case for example. If
the two-system hypothesis is right then subjects continue to
believe (in some sense) that it is more likely that Linda is a
feminist bank-teller than a mere bank-teller even after they
admit that it is at least as likely that she is merely a bankteller. A subject must suppress her S1 systems if she is to
maintain the correct answer while believing a contradictory
claim at the S1 level.6 This kind of suppression requires the
use of cognitive resources, thus temporarily depleting the
subject’s cognitive resources. So subjects who come to
believe the correct answer after the test expend more
cognitive energy than those who continue to believe
(wrongly) that Linda is more likely a feminist and bankteller than just a bank-teller. Let me offer a rough sketch of
an experimental setup (based on experiments performed by
Richeson & Shelton (2007)) to determine if this is right. A
similar test could be run for other cases that Sloman and
others think are instances of SBC.
In step one subjects are given a reasoning task that might
involve SCB (e.g the Linda case). Subjects who offer the
correct response should be dismissed. Those who offer the
incorrect response should then be divided into two groups.
The individuals are interviewed concerning the test that they
just underwent. The first group will be made aware of their
error during this interview. The experimenters will explain
the conjunction fallacy and apply it to the Linda case. The
4

Parallel as opposed to sequential. In the former the two
systems operate at the same time, in the later S1 operates first, then
may shut down while S2 performs its computations. Almost all
two-system advocates endorse a form of the parallel view.
5
On most accounts the S1 level of belief is the same as the
implicit level of belief.
6
This need not be a conscious suppression.

1047

second group will not be made aware of their error. In the
interviews with members of group two experimenters will
explain some unrelated fallacy that is supposed to be similar
in phenomenology to the Necker cube (say, the Monty Hall
example) (this is step two). Immediately following this
interaction members of both groups will be asked to
complete a Stroop Test, a typical measurement of executive
functioning and cognitive depletion7 (step three). If the twosystem hypothesis is right then we should expect that the
first group will have slower response times or less accurate
responses for the Stroop Test than the second because they
will have had to use their executive functioning to suppress
their S1 belief that it is more likely that Linda is a bankteller and feminist than she is a mere bank-teller.
It is important that those in group two have a conversation
that is cognitively depleting. Otherwise the cognitive
depletion in group one but not group two could be attributed
to subjects in group one’s having a conversation concerning
logic beforehand (which depleted their cognitive resources)
while the subjects in group two did not. Also, it will be
important that subjects in the second group do not come to
realize their mistake in the Linda case on their own.
Experimenters may want to check at the end of the
interview that subjects’ in group two have not changed their
responses. Alternatively, experimenters could ask subjects if
they have changed their response to the initial case after
completion of the Stroop Test.

Conclusion
Sloman has put forth the most explicit reasons for the twosystem hypothesis: at least some of the experiments in the
reasoning literature involve SCB, the explanation of which
requires at least two reasoning systems. I have argued that
the evidence thus far presented does not demonstrate that
the beliefs are held simultaneously. However this does not
imply a stalemate for advocates and skeptics of the twosystem hypothesis. I have offered the outline for an
experiment that would demonstrate the existence of SCB
and so give good evidence that humans have two distinct
reasoning systems.

References
Evans, Jonathan St. B. T.(Ed); Frankish, Keith(Ed) (2009a).
In Two Minds and Beyond. New York, NY, US: Oxford
University Press.
Evans, Jonathan St. B. T. and Frankish, Keith (2009b). “The
duality of mind: an historical perspective.” In In Two
7
This well-known test involves the subject being shown the
names of colors written in various colored prints. The subject is
asked to give the name of the print-color. The faster and more
accurately the participant gives the color of the print (rather than
the word), the higher executive functioning and less cognitively
depleted that participant, while the slower and less accurately the
participant gives the name of the color of print, the lower the
participant’s executive functioning and more cognitively depleted
the participant.

Minds and Beyond. Evans, Jonathan St. B. T.(Ed);
Frankish, Keith(Ed). New York, NY, US: Oxford
University Press.
Evans, Jonathan St. B. T (2003). In two minds: dual-process
accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Science 7:10,
454-459.
Evans, Jonathan St. B. T. (2011). Thinking twice: two minds
in one brain. Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press.
Frankish, K. (2004). Mind and Supermind. Cambridge
University Press.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Reber, A.S. (1993) Implicit Learning and Tacit Knowledge,
Oxford University Press.
Revlin, R., Leirer, V., Yopp, H., & Yopp, R. (1980). The
belief-bias effect in formal reasoning: The influence of
knowledge on logic. Memory & Cognition, 8, 584-592.
Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J. N. (2007). Negotiating
interracial interactions: Costs, consequences, and
possibilities. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 16(6), 316–320.
Osherson, D. Smith, E.E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., and E.
Shafir. (1990) Category-based induction. Psychological
Review, 97: 185-200.
Samuels, Richard. The magical number two, plus or minus:
Dual-process theory as a theory of cognitive kinds. In In
Two Minds and Beyond. Evans, Jonathan St. B. T.(Ed);
Frankish, Keith(Ed). New York, NY, US: Oxford
University Press.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25,231-280.
Sloman, S.A. (1996) “The Empirical Case for Two Systems
of Reasoning.” Psychological Bulletin 119, 3-22.
Sloman, S.A. (1998) “Categorical inference is not a tree:
The myth of inheritance hierarchies. Cognitive
Psychology, 35, 1-33.
Sloman, S.A. (2002) “Two Systems Reasoning.” In T
Gilovich, D. Griffin and D. Kahneman (Eds.) “Heuristics
and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment.”
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Stanovich, K. (1999). Who is Rational? Studies of
individual differences in reasoning. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stanovich, K. (2004). The Robot’s Rebellion: Finding
Meaning in the Age of Darwin. University of Chicago
Press: London.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.
Tverky, A. & Kahneman, D . (1986). Rational choice and
the framing of decisions. Journal of Business, 59 s251s278.

1048

