UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Snapshots of Working Memory: Using Early Eye Movements to Capture Temporal Dynamics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2t04c54n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lange, Nicholas
Thomas, Rick
Buttaccio, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Snapshots of Working Memory:
Using Early Eye Movements to Capture Temporal Dynamics
Nicholas D. Lange (ndlange@gmail.com) †‡
Rick P. Thomas (Rickey.P.Thomas-1@ou.edu) ‡
Daniel R. Buttaccio (buttacciodr@ou.edu)‡
Eddy J. Davelaar (e.davelaar@bbk.ac.uk) †
†Birkbeck, University of London, Department of Psychological Sciences,
Malet Street, London, UK, WC1E 7HX
‡University of Oklahoma, Department of Psychology
Lindsey Street, Norman, OK, USA 73019
The methodology forwarded here shares the same goal as
process-tracing techniques, namely to gain better
understanding of cognitive dynamics by measuring
information use as the task naturally unfolds. Our method,
however, takes a novel approach towards revealing the
content of working memory by relying on the recent
literature addressing attentional “top-down capture” effects
demonstrating a tight coupling between the content of WM
and the deployment of attention and eye movements. For
instance, Soto, Heinke, Humphreys, and Blanco (2005) and
Soto & Humphreys (2007) provide evidence that attention is
automatically captured by the contents of WM (although for
contrasting evidence see Woodman & Luck, 2007). As the
presently forwarded methodology relies on eye movement
data it is of particular importance that Soto et al. (2005)
found eye movements to be sensitive to the spatial
congruency of target and WM-matching items. Moreover,
Moores, Laiti, and & Chelazzi (2003) found that first
saccades were biased towards WM-matching items as well
as semantic associates of items maintained in WM.
As eye movements are biased by the content of WM, it
may be possible to capitalize on this bias to develop a
measure of WM content deployable in complex cognitive
tasks. Specifically, by presenting brief visual arrays
containing task related information at various points in time,
differences in the oculomotor guidance towards the items
contained in such “WM probe arrays” could be taken as
evidence regarding the active content of WM at the time of
the array presentations. In this way our methodology can be
thought of as an effort to capture snapshots of WM across
time. We refer to our methodology as the Memory
Activation Capture (MAC) procedure. Although the logic of
this procedure (as well as its specific advantages) have been
treated elsewhere (Lange, Thomas, Buttaccio, & Davelaar,
2012), the present experiment represents the first
deployment of this procedure in a complex cognitive task.
In the present paper, we deploy this procedure in the
context of a memory retrieval task to investigate the
temporal dynamics of hypothesis generation. We define
hypothesis generation as a general case of cued recall in
which the observation of one or multiple cues can lead to
the retrieval of one or multiple hypotheses (Dougherty,
Thomas, & Lange, 2010; Thomas, Dougherty, Sprenger, &
Harbison, 2008). In our day-to-day lives, we utilize this

Abstract
Research investigating top-down attentional capture has
demonstrated a tight coupling of working memory content
with attention and eye movements. By capitalizing on this
relationship, we have developed a novel methodology called
the Memory Activation Capture (MAC) procedure for
measuring the dynamics of working memory content
supporting complex cognitive tasks (e.g., decision making,
problem solving). By observing which items are preferentially
fixated in task irrelevant arrays containing task relevant
information, we gain a measure of working memory content
as the task evolves through time. The efficacy of the MAC
procedure is demonstrated in a hypothesis generation task.
Results suggest a two-stage process following hypothesis
retrieval whereby it undergoes a brief period of heightened
activation before entering a lower activation state while being
maintained for output. The present effects are of additional
general interest as they represent the first demonstrations of
top-down attentional capture driven by participant-established
WM content retrieved from long-term memory.
Keywords: attention, memory, decision making, eye
tracking, process tracing, hypothesis generation

Introduction
The considerable interest in understanding the cognitive
dynamics of information use over time is underscored by
the proliferation of process-tracing methodologies within
several domains. Think-aloud procedures, in which a
participant provides concurrent verbalization of their
cognitive states while performing a task, were among the
first of these techniques to be developed (Ericcson &
Simon, 1993; Ford, Schmitt, Schechtman, Hults, & Doherty,
1989; Montgomery & Svenson, 1976; Svenson, 1979) and
still enjoy widespread use today (Schulte-Mecklenbeck,
Kühberger & Ranyard, 2011). The usage of eye movements
as a window to dynamic cognitive processing has flourished
as of late with application in several fields including
decision making (Franco-Watkins & Johnson, 2011;
Glaholt, Wu, & Reingold, 2009, Glaholt & Reingold, 2011,
Sutterlin, Brunner, & Opwis, 2008), problem solving (Ellis,
Glaholt, & Reingold, 2011), categorization (Rehder &
Hoffman, 2005a, 2005b), language comprehension (Cooper,
1974; Tanenhaus, 1995), and diagnostic reasoning
(Renkewitz & Jahn, 2012).

864

process to better understand the occurrences we witness in
our environment. For instance, if a friend is acting
differently than usual you may generate various
explanations for their behavior. A professional example
comes to us through medical diagnosis in which a physician
observes various symptoms from a patient and retrieves
associated diagnoses from long term memory (LTM).
Recently, we have investigated the influences of time and
sequence on hypothesis generation by formulating a model
addressing the influence of WM dynamics during
information acquisition on the retrieval (i.e., generation) of
hypotheses and confirmed model predictions (Lange,
Thomas, and Davelaar, 2012 Lange, Thomas, Buttaccio,
Illingworth, & Davelaar, 2012, Lange, Davelaar, & Thomas,
In Press). This model assumes that the memory activation
associated with each piece of acquired information (i.e.,
data) undergoes a dynamic rise and fall over time in
accordance with 1) competition from other acquired items,
2) bottom-up activation, and 3) its self-recurrent excitation
(see Davelaar, Goshen-Gottstein, Ashkenazi, Haarmann, &
Usher (2005) for a fuller treatment and computational
details). We hypothesize that the memory activations of
acquired data and retrieved hypotheses are subject to the
same competitive WM dynamics. We now provide a
hypothetical example of how the memory activations of data
and hypotheses may trade off in a simplified medical
diagnosis task and use this example to illustrate a
hypothetical deployment of the MAC procedure.
Figure 1 provides a hypothetical example of the
deployment of our procedure in the context of a simplified
medical diagnosis task (e.g., hypothesis generation,
diagnostic reasoning). The task is initiated with the
presentation of a patient symptom (e.g., fever). As this
information is acquired, its associated memory
representation becomes activated and rises. Shortly after this
data has been acquired, the memory activation associated
with an associated diagnosis begins to rise and is generated
when its memory activation crosses a threshold
distinguishing the content of WM. The memory activation
of the diagnosis continues to rise while at the same time the
activation associated with the symptom decreases due to
competitive WM processes. The points labeled T1-T4
represent points at which the WM Probe Array could be
presented. In this example, we assume that the probe array
(represented visually) contains four items: the diagnosis and
three distractor items. At T1, the diagnosis would not be
fixated more than the distractors in the probe array.
However, at T2, the diagnosis has been retrieved and resides
in WM. At this point, we would expect to see the diagnosis
being fixated more often than the distractor items, indicating
that it is active in WM. Moreover, at time points T3 and T4
we might see a rise and fall in the fixation rate of the
diagnosis due to the rise and fall of its associated memory
activation. An important aspect regarding our use of topdown oculomotor capture as a measure of WM content is
that, unlike any visual search task, the WM Probe Arrays
used in the present experiments are completely task

irrelevant. That is, the participant does not have a task to
perform on the array and is not instructed for any response
to the arrays.

Figure 1: Hypothetical deployment of the MAC procedure
in the context of a simplified medical diagnosis task. Time
points T1-T4 represent the presentations of the WM Probe
Arrays where eye movements are measured.
We now present an experiment deploying the MAC
procedure to investigate the time course of memory retrieval
in the context of a hypothesis generation task. The task is
explained to the participants as a “Cause and Effect learning
task” in which they are to learn associations between colors,
some representing Causes and some representing Effects
emanating from those Causes. Thus, the present task
contains the essential structure for a hypothesis generation
task in which one reasons from events (Effects) to
explanations (Causes).

Deploying the MAC Procedure
In this experiment we test the efficacy of the MAC
procedure to detect the retrieval of a likely hypothesis into
working memory and its sensitivity to retrieval timing.
Participants Twenty-three participants from the University
of Oklahoma participated for course credit.
Apparatus, Stimuli, and Procedure Eye movements were
recorded monocularly (dominant eye) via an Eye Link 1000
(SR Research) at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz and a distance
of 60 cm from a 17” monitor. Stimulus presentation and
data recording were controlled via Experiment Builder. A
ResponsePixx box was used to collect manual responses
during the experiment. Eight colors were used during the
experiment (blue, green, orange, purple, red, salmon, white,
and yellow). Gray was used as the background color
throughout the experiment and the fixations were black.
Prior to the start of the experiment, the colors were
randomly assigned as causes, effects, or distractors.
The experiment consisted of two main phases, a training
phase in which the participants learned probabilistic
relationships between the Causes and Effects followed by an
elicitation phase in which the MAC procedure was
deployed. Training consisted of two parts, passive exemplar
training and active exemplar training in what could be
considered as a “probabilistic paired-associates category

865

learning task”. Participants first went through the passive
training portion which was followed by active training and
the entirety of the training phase constituted four repeated
pairings of passive and active blocks. In passive training,
the participant was presented with many individual
exemplars in which a single “Cause” and “Effect” pairing
with an arrow going from the Cause towards the Effect.
Each exemplar appeared for 1,500 ms after which point the
participant pressed the response box to view a new Cause
and Effect exemplar. There were four screen configurations
in which the pairing could appear and these were randomly
selected on each trial to ensure that the Causes and Effects
were balanced across spatial locations.
During active training, the participant was presented with
an exemplar in which the Cause was absent and the
participant had to select the likely Cause with a manual
button press. The participant then received feedback
(correct/incorrect) for each trial and was shown the correct
Cause on incorrect trials. For the first block of active
training, participants had 3,000 ms to respond with the
related Cause and this decreased to 1,500 ms for the second,
third, and fourth blocks.
The statistical associations between the Causes and
Effects were dictated by the values in Table 1. Note, Effect
1 was highly diagnostic of Cause 1 and Effect 2 was highly
diagnostic of Cause 2 (while Effects 3 and 4 were nondiagnostic). For example, there is a 90% chance that Effect
1 will be present given Cause 1 as described in Table 1,
therefore when Effect 1 is observed it is highly likely that
Cause 1 is responsible. Additionally, it is important to note
that Effect 1 and Effect 2 were complementary with one
another as were Effects 3 & 4. For instance, in medical
diagnosis context Effect 1 could represent “fever” and
Effect 2 would represent “no fever”.

(Causes & Distractors) were randomly assigned to these
four positions in the WM probe array.

Figure 2: Trial schematic demonstrating the sequence of
events for trials on which the WM Probe Array appeared.
The focal independent variable was the timing of the WM
Probe Array on the trials in which an array appeared. The
WM Probe Arrays were manipulated to appear at a variable
SOA following the onset of the Effect. For the Short SOA
condition, the ISI with a fixation cross was presented for a
brief duration (48 ms) and for the Long SOA condition the
fixation was presented for a longer duration (600 ms). The
relative duration of the second fixation cross was inverted
from the duration of the first fixation (600 ms for Short
SOA trials and 48 ms for Long SOA trials). On the
remaining third of trials, no WM Probe Array appeared.
These trials were included to limit the expectation of the
WM Probe Array’s appearance throughout elicitation. On
these “no-probe trials”, the Effect was followed by a
fixation for 1092 ms prior to the selection screen. Thus, total
trial time was equal across all trials. Participants completed
36 trials (12 Short SOA, 12 Long SOA, and 12 No-Probe
trials). Within each of these conditions, three trials occurred
with each Effect. Participants were not informed of WM
probe array’s appearance nor were they provided instruction
for any response when it appeared.
Although Effects 3 and 4 were presented in the elicitation
phase, we were not concerned with these trials as these
Effects were non-diagnostic. Effects 1 and 2, on the other
hand, were highly diagnostic and, accordingly, it is on these
trials where our interest and predictions fall. On these trials,
the likely hypothesis should be retrieved into WM and bias
eye movements towards its matching representation in the
WM probe array through top-down capture. Thus, we
hypothesized that participants would fixate the likely
hypothesis first more often than the unlikely hypothesis and
distractors. Additionally, we hypothesized that a difference
in the time course of the generation process might emerge
between the two SOA conditions as a result of the time
pressure applied in the active training.

Table 1: The Cause-Effect contingency table governing the
associations between the Causes and Effects.
Effect 1
Effect 2
Effect 3
Effect 4
0.9
0.1
0.9
0.1
Cause 1
0.1
0.9
0.9
0.1
Cause 2
The elicitation phase, in which we deployed the MAC
procedure (and recorded eye movements), commenced
following the fourth round of active training. In this phase,
participants were instructed that on each trial they would be
presented with an Effect and would have to respond
(manually with left/right button press) to select the most
likely Cause given the effect. On 2/3 of trials a WM Probe
Array was briefly presented for 396 ms containing four
colored disks (top to center = 15 mm and right to center =
14). Two of the colors were those of the Causes and the two
other colors were those assigned as distracter colors at the
beginning of the experiment (which had not appeared at any
point prior in the experiment). These four colored disks
were positioned around a circle (unseen) with a radius of 86
mm. Relative to a clock face one disk appeared at 1 or 2
o’clock, another at 4 or 5 o’clock, another at 7 or 8 o’clock,
and the last at 10 or 11 o’clock. Each of the four items

Results
For eye movement analyses, regions of interest (ROIs) were
centered on each colored disk appearing in the WM Probe
Arrays measuring 34.5 mm top to center and 32 mm right to
center. A disk was considered fixated when a fixation
landed in its corresponding ROI. For analysis we took our
primary DV as the first WM Probe Array disk fixated. Only
trials in which participants were presented with a diagnostic

866

Effect (i.e., Effect 1 or 2) were analyzed. Trials on which
the participant selected the less likely Cause at the end of
the trial were considered as incorrect trials and discarded
prior to analysis (24 %)1. Two additional criteria were
applied to each trial for inclusion in the analysis 1) the
participant must have been fixating within an ROI at the
center of the screen at the beginning of the trial (32 mm tall
x 34 mm wide) and 2) an item in the array must have been
fixated. An additional 8% of the total trials were discarded
for central fixation criterion and an additional 37% of the
total trials were discarded for the array item fixation
criterion.
As displayed in Figure 3 the likely Cause was more often
fixated first than the unlikely Cause and distractors in the
Short SOA condition, z = 4.3, p < 0.001, and z = 4.96, p <
0.001, as well as in the Long SOA condition, z = 1.91, p <
0.056, and z = 3.45, p < 0.001 (although this difference was
marginal between the likely and unlikely Cause). More
importantly, logistic regression revealed that the likely
Cause was more often fixated first in the Short SOA
condition than in the Long SOA condition, χ 2(1) = 5.92, p <
.05. No such differences were found for the unlikely Cause,
χ2(1) = 1.36, p = .24, or distractors, χ2(1) = 2.9, p = .08.

and changes in the representations utilized en route to final
task output. By capitalizing on the tight connection between
WM content and attentional allocation via top-down capture
(Soto, Heinke, Humphreys, & Blanco, 2005; Soto &
Humphreys, 2007), we have developed a new method of
such assessment. Moreover, by designing our procedure to
assess WM content briefly and on task-irrelevant arrays, we
have aimed to develop a procedure that will be less
interfering to the processes under investigation than
traditional processing measures which essentially constrain
the participant with a dual-task (see Russo, 1978; Russo,
Johnson, & Stevens, 1989).
Two important effects manifest in the present experiment:
1) The Likely Cause was most often fixated first relative to
the other items in the WM probe arrays, and 2) There was
an effect of SOA such that the likely Cause was more likely
to be fixated at the shorter SOA. It has previously been
suggested (Makovski & Jiang, 2008) that biases towards
WM matching content, as revealed through RTs, are
sensitive to the representational strength of the WM content.
Additionally, Lange, Thomas, Buttaccio, & Davelaar (2012)
provide preliminary evidence that eye movements are
sensitive to WM activation. We interpret the present effect
of SOA for the likely hypothesis as demonstrating
differences in the memory activation (i.e., representational
strength) possessed by the likely hypothesis between the
short and long SOAs. The present results suggest that
shortly after a hypothesis is retrieved into WM, it undergoes
a brief period of heightened activation before moving into a
decreased state of activation as it is maintained for output.
We refer to this initial heighted stage as a “retrieval input”
stage as it is the act of retrieval from LTM that endows the
hypothesis with this heightened activation state. We refer to
the following stage of decreased activation as a
“maintenance” stage as the hypothesis is being maintained
in WM for eventual overt output. This account is readily
captured by the context-activation model (Davelaar et al.,
2005) which we have recently incorporated into a
temporally dynamic model of hypothesis generation (Lange,
Thomas, & Davelaar, 2012). In the context-activation
model, the memory activation of an item at each time step is
determined by the item’s activation on the previous time
step, self-recurrent excitation that it recycles onto itself,
inhibition from the other active items, external input, and
noise2. Besides external input, the model can also be excited
by information retrieved from LTM and the model readily
produces the trend we see in the fixation data at the short
and long SOAs. As demonstrated in Figure 4, when the
model is provided “retrieval input” for 500 iterations, which
is then removed for the final 500 iterations, the trend
evidenced in the data is produced. Although the focus of
this paper is not in modeling the empirical data, it is
encouraging to see that a crucial component of our
theoretical framework accounts for the data with such ease.

Figure 3: Proportion of trials on which each item type was
the first array item fixated. Results demonstrate increased
fixation of the Likely Cause at the Short SOA relative to the
Long SOA and greater fixation rates for the Likely Cause
relative to the Unlikely Cause and Distractors.

Discussion
We have developed a novel methodology to non-intrusively
measure the content of WM in complex cognitive tasks as
they unfold over time. Here we deployed the MAC
procedure in the context of a hypothesis generation task in
which participants retrieved a hypothesis from LTM based
on the presentation of an associated cue. Our procedure
shares the aims of the multitude of process tracing
approaches that have been developed over the last thirty
years – to assess moment by moment cognitive dynamics
1

The plotted numerical values change very little with the
inclusion of incorrect trials and the pattern of statistical results
remains identical.

2

867

Please see Davelaar et al. (2005) for computational details.

Lastly, although we have focused primarily on the domain
of hypothesis generation and diagnostic reasoning here, it is
important to note that the MAC procedure itself is entirely
domain general. Although specific procedural details would
need to be tailored for deployment in additional tasks (e.g.,
specific array stimuli), there is nothing in the logic or
mechanics of the procedure that exclude it from use in other
domains. We are hopeful that the application of the MAC
procedure in domains such as problem solving, multiattribute choice, probability judgment, and hypothesis
testing will foster additional insights concerning the
cognitive dynamics operating in these domains as well.

Figure 4: Context-Activation Model account of the SOA
difference observed in Experiment 2 for the likely
hypothesis. Shortly after retrieval, the hypothesis enjoys a
brief period of heightened activation in WM (measured at
the short SOA) before moving into a less activated
maintenance state (measured at the long SOA) prior to
output.

References
Cooper, R. M. (1974). The control of eye fixation by the
meaning of spoken language: A new methodology for the
real-time investigation of speech perception, memory, and
language processing. Cognitive Psychology, 6, 84−107.
Davelaar, E. J., Goshen-Gottstein,Y, Ashkenazi, A.,
Haarmann, H. J., & Usher, M. (2005). The demise of
short term memory revisited: Empirical and
computational investigations of recency effects.
Psychological Review, 112(1), 3-42. doi: 10.1037/0033295X.112.1.3
de Groot, A. D. (1965). Thought and choice in chess (1st
ed.). The Hague: Mouton Publishers.
Dougherty, M.R.P., & Hunter, J.E. (2003a). Probability
judgment and subadditivity: The role of WMC and
constraining retrieval. Memory & Cognition, 31(6), 968982.
Dougherty, M.R.P., & Hunter, J.E. (2003b). Hypothesis
generation, probability judgment, and working memory
capacity. Acta Psychologica, 113(3), 263-282.
Dougherty, M.R.P. & Sprenger, A. (2006). The influence of
improper sets of information on judgment: How irrelevant
information can bias judged probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 135(2), 262-281.
Dougherty, M., Thomas, R., & Lange, N. (2010). Toward an
integrative theory of hypothesis generation, probability
judgment, and hypothesis testing. In B. H. Ross, B. H.
Ross (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation:
Advances in research and theory (Vol 52) (pp. 299-342).
San Diego, CA US: Elsevier Academic Press.
Ellis, J. J., Glaholt, M. G., & Reingold, E. M. (2011). Eye
movements reveal solution knowledge prior to insight.
Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 768–776.
Ericsson, K.A. & Simon, H.A. (1980). Verbal reports as
data. Psychological Review, 87, 215- 251.
Ericsson K. A. & Simon H. A. (1993). Protocol Analysis:
Verbal Reports as Data. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ferreira, F., Apel, J., & Henderson, J. M. (2008). Taking a
new look at looking at nothing. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12, 405–410. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.07.007
Franco-Watkins, A.M. & Johnson, J.G. (2011) Applying the
decision moving window to risky choice: Comparison of
eye-tracking and mouse-tracing methods. Judgment and
Decision Making, 6, 740-749.
Ford, J. K., Schmitt, N., Schechtman, S. L., Hults, B. M., &

Two related and recently developed methodological
approaches deserve further consideration. Mehlhorn,
Taatgen, Lebiere, and Krems (2011) used a lexical decision
task to measure memory activation of candidate hypotheses
in a diagnostic reasoning task. By interspersing the lexical
decision task (yes/no response to indicate “hypothesis or
not”) at different time points in a diagnostic reasoning task
they were able to draw conclusions regarding memory
activation by assessing the relative speed with which the
lexical decision was made for the various hypotheses of
interest. This procedure and the MAC procedure share an
emphasis on quickly assessing the content of memory with a
brief “probe” presented to the participant. However, as with
traditional process tracing, this modified lexical decision
procedure requires a secondary (albeit not entirely
concurrent) task in addition to the primary task of interest.
Despite this difference, we believe the procedure of
Mehlhorn et al. (2011) to be highly complementary to ours.
Also of note is the “memory indexing” technique of
Renkewitz and Jahn (2012) capitalizing on the phenomenon
of looking-at-nothing (Ferreira, Apel, & Henderson, 2008).
By holding the spatial locations of the task relevant
information constant throughout the experiment, they were
able to use eye movements relating to the spatial locations
of this information in the testing phase as an index of what
was actively being considered across time in the task
(despite the fact that the screen was mostly blank as this
data was collected and the participants were looking at
nothing). This procedure has been successfully utilized to
investigate multi-attribute choice (Renkewitz & Jahn, 2012)
as well as diagnostic reasoning (Jahn & Braatz, 2012). Each
of these three procedures (memory activation capture,
modified lexical decision, and memory indexing) has their
own strengths and weaknesses. By coordinating their
utilization within the domain of hypothesis generation and
diagnostic reasoning we may be well poised to gain a much
deeper understanding of the dynamic memorial
underpinnings of these tasks.

868

Doherty, M. L. (1989). Process tracing methods:
Contributions, problems, and neglected research
questions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 43, 75–117.
Glaholt, M. G. & Reingold, E. M. (2011). Eye Movement
Monitoring as a Process Tracing Methodology in
Decision Making Research. Journal of Neuroscience,
Psychology, and Economics,4, 125-146.
Glaholt, M. G., Wu, M., & Reingold, E. M. (2009).
Predicting preference from fixations. PsychNology
Journal, 7, 141–158.
Jahn, G. & Braatz, J. (2012) Memory Indexing of
Sequential Symptom Processing in Diagnostic Reasoning.
In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 497-502). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Lange, N.D., Davelaar, E.J., & Thomas, R.P. (In Press).
Data Acquisition Dynamics and Hypothesis Generation.
Cognitive Systems Research. Invited Submission for
Special Issue: Best of International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling. doi: 10.1016/j.cogsys.2012.12.006
Lange, N.D, Thomas, R.P., & Davelaar, E.J. (2012)
Temporal dynamics of hypothesis generation: Influences
of data serial order, data consistency, and elicitation
timing. Frontiers in Psychology: Cognitive Science 3:215.
Lange, N.D., Thomas, R.P., Buttaccio, D.R. & Davelaar,
E.J. (2012) Catching a glimpse of working memory: Topdown capture as a tool for measuring the content of the
mind. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics,
74(8):1562-7. doi: 10.3758/s13414-012-0378-9
Makovski, T. & Jiang, Y. V. (2008). Indirect assessment of
visual working memory for simple and complex objects.
Memory & Cognition, (36)6, 1132-1143. doi:
10.3758/MC.36.6.1132
Mehlhorn, K., Taatgen, N. A., Lebiere, C., & Krems, J. F.
(2011). Memory activation and the availability of
explanations in sequential diagnostic reasoning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37(6), 1391-1411.
Montgomery, H., & Svenson, O. (1976). On decision rules
and information processing strategies in multiattribute
decision making. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology,
17, 283-291.
Moores, E., Laiti, L., & Chelazzi, L. (2003). Associative
knowledge controls deployment of visual selective
attention. Nature Neuroscience, 6(2), 182-189. doi:
10.1038/nn996
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005a). Eyetracking and
selective attention in category learning. Cognitive
Psychology, 51, 1–41.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005b). Thirty something
categorization results explained: Selective attention,
eyetracking, and models of category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 31, 811–829.

Renkewitz, F., & Jahn, G. (2012, April 30). Memory
Indexing: A Novel Method for Tracing Memory
Processes in Complex Cognitive Tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psychology:Learning, Memory, and
Cognition.
Advance
online
publication.
doi:
10.1037/a0028073
Russo, J.E., Johnson, E.J., & Stephens, D.L. (1989). The
validity of verbal protocols. Memory & Cognition, 17,
759-769.
Russo, J.E. (1978) Eye Fixations Can Save the World: A
Critical Evaluation and A Comparison Between Eye
Fixations
and
Other
Information
Processing
Methodologies. Advances in Consumer Research, 5, 561570.
Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., Kühberger, A. & Ranyard, R.
(Eds.). (2011). A Handbook of Process Tracing Methods
for Decision Research: A Critical Review and User’s
Guide. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Soto, D., Heinke, D., Humphreys, G.W., & Blanco, M.
(2005). Early, involuntary top-down guidance of
attention from working memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31(2),
248-261. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.31.2.248
Soto, D. & D., Humphreys (2007). Automatic guidance of
attention from verbal working memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance,33(3),730-757.
doi:
10.1037/00961523.33.3.730
Sprenger, A.M., Dougherty, M.R., Atkins, S.M., FrancoWatkins, A.M., Thomas, R.P., Lange, N., & Abbs, B.
(2011) Implications of cognitive load for hypothesis
generation and probability judgment. Frontiers in
Psychology:
Cognitive
Science,
2:129.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00129
Sutterlin, B., Brunner, T. A., & Opwis, K. (2008).Eyetracking the cancellation and focus model for preference
judgments. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
44, 904–911.
Svenson, O. (1979). Process descriptions of decision
making. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 23, 86-112.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632−1634.
Thomas,R.P, Dougherty, M.R., Sprenger, A.M., and
Harbison, J.I. (2008). Diagnostic hypothesis generation
and human judgment. Psychological Review, 115, 155185.
Woodman, G.F. & Luck, S.J. (2007). Do the contents of
working memory automatically influence attentional
selection during visual search? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 3(22),
363-377. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.33.2.363

869

