UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social categories create (biased) semantic interference during face naming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/71m4n84n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Packer, Dominic J.
O'Seaghdha, Pardraig G.
Hupbach, Almut
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social categories create (biased) semantic interference during face naming
Dominic J. Packer (djp208@lehigh.edu)
Psychology and Cognitive Science, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Dr. E.
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Pádraig G. O’Séaghdha (pat.oseaghdha@lehigh.edu)
Psychology and Cognitive Science, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Dr. E.
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Almut Hupbach (hupbach@lehigh.edu)
Psychology and Cognitive Science, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Dr. E.
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Joseph E. Bates (x5a512@lehigh.edu)
Psychology, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Dr. E.
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Abstract

Semantic Interference in Language Production

Semantic interference in word retrieval has been observed for
both well-learned and ad hoc inter-item relations. We tested
whether such semantic interference extends to the blocked
cyclic naming of racially homogeneous vs. heterogeneous
faces. No information except arbitrarily assigned names was
provided for novel faces. Yet we observed interference in
naming individuals in homogeneous groups. Moreover,
consistent with other findings in the social domain,
interference occurred for other-race but not for own-race
faces. Because this interference effect does not require a rich
knowledge base about individuals, it is consistent with the
view that interference arises in adjustments to the strength of
conceptual-lexical links rather than in knowledge structures
themselves. Evidence of modulation by target race further
suggests that interference effects may provide an effective
tool for exploration of social categorization processes.
Keywords: Semantic interference; language production;
blocked cyclic naming; social categorization; intergroup bias

Introduction
This paper presents an initial investigation of how basic
memory retrieval and language production processes are
affected by social context. When people name objects, they
often exhibit semantic interference in which retrieving a
target word from memory disrupts retrieval of words that
belong to the same semantic category (e.g., Damian,
Viglocco & Levelt, 2001). In the current research, we
examined whether similar interference effects occur when
naming faces of members from social categories,
specifically, racial groups. We further investigated whether
people exhibit a ‘name retrieval bias’, such that there is
greater interference when naming other-race compared to
own-race faces.

Semantic interference highlights the competitive nature of
word selection in language production. In the blockedcyclic naming paradigm, for example, participants
repeatedly name small sets of pictures (e.g., four pictures
each named individually four times). The pictures are either
presented in homogenous blocks in which they share a
common semantic relation, or in heterogeneous blocks in
which they do not have identifiable semantic links. Naming
times are slower in homogeneous than heterogeneous
blocks, and the level of interference often increases over
cycles (e.g., Damian et al., 2001; Schnur et al., 2009).
Semantic interference occurs in this and similar paradigms
because retrieving a word co-activates semantically related
words, which compete with and slow selection of the target
word. Further, retrieving a word primes its subsequent
retrieval, making it a stronger competitor when later naming
related words (Howard, Nickels, Coltheart & Cole-Virtue,
2006). The change in lexical accessibility is long lasting,
suggesting that a learning mechanism that damps
accessibility of competitors while strengthening the current
item, rather than short-term modulation of activation, is at
the core of semantic interference (Oppenheim, Dell &
Schwartz, 2010; see Navarrete, DelPrato & Mahon, 2012).
fMRI studies have localized lexical selection to left inferior
frontal gyrus [LIFG] (believed to be involved in competition
resolution) and linked areas of temporal cortex (Schnur et
al., 2009).
Traditionally, semantic interference experiments have
investigated how shared membership in fixed taxonomic
categories (e.g., animals, vegetables, minerals) generates
interference. In these cases, items share both category
memberships and overlapping semantic features (e.g., legs,
heads, locomotion). However, recent research has also
shown interference for items linked by a semantic theme

1109

(e.g., garden links slug, gardener and rake; see Abdel
Rahman & Melinger, 2007), as well as for items that are
linked as members of an ad hoc category. Abdel Rahman
and Melinger (2011) had participants complete a cyclicblocked naming task with pictures that had no obvious
semantic relation to one another (e.g., stool, knife, bucket,
river), but that could be combined as members of an ad hoc
category (e.g., “things present on a fishing trip”). No
interference was found when participants were unaware of
the ad hoc category; however, interference (longer naming
latencies) arose when participants were informed about the
category. These findings demonstrate the highly dynamic
nature of the semantic system, such that items without fixed
shared semantic features nevertheless rapidly become
associated (i.e., exhibit shared activation and competition)
when linked by a thematic context.

Effects of Social Categories
Social categories (e.g., racial group memberships) function
in many ways like other categories. People tend, for
example, to exaggerate within group similarities and
between group differences for both social and non-social
categories (e.g., Levin & Angelone, 2002; Tajfel & Wilkes,
1963). As such, by virtue of their category membership,
individuals are assumed to possess common features, and
are often stereotyped accordingly (e.g., Kunda & Spencer,
2003). Further, the effects of social categories often emerge
rapidly and automatically (e.g., Devine, 1989). For example,
ERP studies have observed category-based differences in
neural signals associated with early visual processing of
different race faces (Ito & Bartholow, 2009). In these
studies, white participants show heightened P100 and N170
responses (which have been linked to early face processing)
when viewing White versus Black faces (e.g., Ito & Urland,
2003; Cunningham, Van Bavel, Arbuckle, Packer &
Waggoner, 2012). The robust influence of social categories
extends to a wide range of cognitive and affective processes,
ultimately shaping behaviors including affiliation,
cooperation and conflict (Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher &
Wetherell, 1987).
Prior research has also shown effects of social categories
on language use, such that people strategically use language
to enhance ingroups and derogate outgroups.
In a
phenomenon known as the ‘linguistic intergroup bias’,
people tend to describe positive ingroup and negative
outgroup behaviors more abstractly than they describe
negative ingroup and positive outgroup behaviors (Maass,
1999; Maass, Salvi, Arcuri & Semin, 1989). The use of
relatively abstract words (e.g., adjectives – helpful,
aggressive) to communicate “our” desirable and “their”
undesirable actions implies that these are enduring and
global characteristics. In contrast, using relatively concrete
words (e.g., action verbs – help, hit) to communicate our
undesirable and their desirable actions conveys that these
behaviors are situationally-specific and transient.
In the current research, we investigated whether social
categories affect basic language production processes under

controlled experimental conditions. We did this in the
domain of face naming. Specifically, we asked whether
shared social categories induce semantic interference effects
during person (face) naming. We had participants learn the
names of 16 novel faces belonging to four different racial
groups (four faces in each). They then completed a
blocked-cyclic naming task with these faces.
In
homogenous blocks, participants cycled through naming
four faces that all belonged to the same racial group; in
heterogeneous blocks, participants cycled through naming
four faces that each belonged to a different racial group.
In contrast to common objects, faces are processed
through partly specialized cortical networks, including
fusiform gyrus. In addition, because person names are
arbitrary, their retrieval from face configurations may be
more difficult than object naming (e.g., Valentine, Brennen
& Brédart, 1996; see also Griffin, 2010). However, given
that social categories exert robust effects on a wide range of
psychological processes and function similarly to non-social
categories, we expected to observe semantic interference in
face naming. Due to their common category membership
(and overlapping visual and possibly semantic features –
e.g., stereotypes), retrieving the name of one group member
should increase co-activation of the names of other
members, which will compete with and slow selection of the
target name.

Social Categorization Biases
Social categories are not entirely analogous to non-social
categories. In particular, people often exhibit intergroup
biases, such that members of ingroups and outgroups are
processed differently (e.g., the linguistic intergroup bias
described above). These biases come in different forms, but
many are reducible to the observation that outgroup
members tend to be processed more categorically than
ingroup members. Whereas ingroup members are typically
individuated and treated as distinct entities, outgroup
members are often treated as relatively interchangeable
exemplars of their group (Brewer, 1988; Fiske & Neuberg,
1990).
One such bias emerges in facial recognition. The ‘other
race effect’ (or ‘own race bias’) refers to the well-replicated
finding that people are generally better at recognizing
members of their own versus other racial groups (e.g., in
incidental recognition paradigms). Although perceptual
expertise is a contributor (i.e., people typically have more
experience processing own than other race faces), recent
research suggests that this bias is largely a categorization
driven effect (Hugenberg, Young, Bernstein & Sacco, 2010;
Van Bavel, Packer & Cunningham, 2011). According to
Hugenberg et al.’s (2010) Categorization-Individuation
Model, for example, classifying faces as exemplars of a
category focuses attention on category-diagnostic (shared)
features, which reduces subsequent ability to discriminate
among category members. In contrast, when faces are not
categorized but instead individuated, attention is focused on
distinct features, enhancing the ability to discriminate them

1110

later. Critically, intergroup biases in facial recognition
emerge because outgroup faces tend to activate their
categories more strongly than ingroup faces (Hugenberg et
al., 2010; Levin, 1996, 2000; Stroessner, 1996).
We anticipated that a similar bias might also occur in
name production. If outgroup faces invoke categorization
more strongly than ingroup faces, semantic interference
should be stronger for outgroup than ingroup faces.
Retrieving an outgroup member’s name should co-activate
the names of other outgroup members. In contrast, because
ingroup members tend to be individuated, retrieving the
name of an ingroup member should not increase activation
of other ingroup members’ names, at least not to the same
extent. If so, homogenous ingroup naming may not differ
from heterogeneous condition naming.
To summarize, we predicted semantic interference during
naming of faces when they are racially grouped. Based on
ingroup/outgroup differences in social-cognitive processing,
we further hypothesized that such interference would be
stronger for other-race than own-race faces.

Methods
Participants
Eighteen introductory psychology students at Lehigh
University participated for partial course credit. This sample
size provides good power because the repeated measures
design collects many observations from each participant.
The average age was 19.22 years, and there were 9 males
and 8 females (one did not report gender). All participants
spoke English as a first language, and reported European
ethnic origins during pre-testing. A racially homogeneous
sample was important in this case for testing hypothesized
ingroup/outgroup differences. During testing, one
participant indicated a mixed ethnic background (European
and Asian). Analyses including vs. excluding this
participant yielded identical findings; we therefore report
analyses including all participants.

Design
We used a 2 (Context: heterogeneous, homogeneous) X 4
(Race: Asian, Black, Middle-Eastern, White) X 4
Replication (1, 2, 3, 4) within subjects design.

Procedure
Learning Phase. After familiarization with the picture
naming set-up, participants first learned arbitrarily assigned
names for 16 male faces. Four faces belonged to each of
four racial groups: Asian, Black, Middle Eastern and White.
All names were single syllable, of European origin, and
common in the North American context. Each name also
started with a different letter (e.g., Bill, Chris, Dan). The
names were assigned to faces in two different
randomizations, which were counter-balanced across
participants. Participants initially viewed the 16 face/name
pairings in a randomized 4 X 4 matrix on the computer

screen for 2 minutes, and were instructed to try to memorize
as many as they could. Each face/name was then presented
twice for two seconds in random order, with participants
instructed to read the names aloud.
Testing Phase. The testing phase consisted of four
replications, each containing eight sets of 16 trials. Each set
comprised four faces repeated semi-randomly (for each
participant) across four repetition cycles. Four of the sets
were racially homogenous, four were racially
heterogeneous, and the order of sets within each replication
was randomly determined for each participant. In total,
participants completed 512 trials.
At the beginning of each set, participants were shown four
faces along with their names and were asked to read each
name aloud. Then, to confirm that they remembered the
names, they were presented with each face individually (in
random order) and were asked to provide the name (which
appeared on the screen upon vocalization to confirm or
correct participants’ responses). This was repeated until
participants named all four faces correctly. In most cases,
no repetitions were required.
Each trial began with a fixation cue (*) displayed for 100
-milliseconds (ms), along with a warning sound, followed
by a face. Naming latencies were measured with a voice
key. The face remained on the screen until a name was
produced, or for a maximum of 1500 ms. After naming, the
face disappeared and was followed by a blank screen for
1500 ms. Participants were instructed to speak clearly, and
to name the faces as quickly and accurately as possible.

Results
Following standard practice for this type of design, the
heterogeneous context responses in each replication were
sorted to match the corresponding homogeneous groupings.
We then conducted a 2 (Context: heterogeneous,
homogeneous) X 4 (Race: Asian, Black, Middle-Eastern,
White) X 4 Replication (1, 2, 3, 4) analysis on the speed
with which participants named faces. Specifically, we
implemented a multi-level model in which trials were nested
within participants using the PROC MIXED procedure in
SAS. Multi-level models allow for more accurate estimates
of effects by accounting for interdependence among trials
within participants. We removed error trials on which
participants named a face incorrectly (1.7%), the voice key
was triggered by something other than a name (e.g., a cough
or stutter, 0.9%) or participants did not respond within the
time window (1.0%). We also removed trials with RTs <
200ms.
Extending prior research on semantic interference effects
in blocked cyclic naming paradigms, there was a significant
main effect of Context, F (1, 17) = 20.05, p < .001. Overall,
participants were slower to name faces in racially
homogeneous (M = 701, SD = 179) versus heterogeneous
contexts (M = 671, SD = 160). Critically, however, the
effect of Context was modulated by Race [Context x Race
interaction: F (3, 51) = 3.56, p < .05]. As shown in Figure
1A, naming faces in homogenous (vs. heterogeneous)

1111

contexts produced statistically significant interference
effects for Asian (p < .05), Black and Middle-Eastern faces
(ps < .01). However, there was no evidence of an effect for
White faces (p > .30). The Context X Race interaction was
not moderated by Replication (F (9, 107) = 0.85, p > .50),
indicating that the pattern was stable throughout the
experiment.
Although they were relatively rare, examination of
naming errors showed that they exhibited the same pattern
as the reaction time data. Specifically, naming errors were
more frequent in homogeneous than heterogeneous contexts
for faces of all races except White (see Figure 1B)

Figure 1: Response Times and Error Rates as a Function
of Race and Heterogeneous or Homogeneous Context.
(RTs and their standard errors (pooled) are estimated
from the multi-level model).
A. Response Times

Discussion
Our study shows several novel findings. First, we observed
semantic interference in proper name retrieval in blocked
cyclic naming. To our knowledge, this has not been reported
previously. Second, the basis of the interference was racial
grouping of the faces, extending previous reports of
semantic interference among taxonomic, thematic or ad hoc
associates to social categories instantiated by facial features.
In this domain, the basis for interference in name retrieval is
quite slender, comprising modulation of the mapping from
face to name by the mere knowledge that the named
individuals belong to a distinct racial group. Third, the
effect was present for three “other race” groups, but was
absent for the “own race” of the white participants. This is
interesting both as a new manifestation of the own race bias
(i.e., a name retrieval bias), and as evidence that semantic
interference does not arise under all conditions. The set of
white faces could certainly be construed as a category in the
context of this experiment, and yet we observed no evidence
of interference. The error data even suggest that naming of
homogeneous white faces may have been facilitated.
Previous researchers of semantic interference have taken
pains to show that the effect is not an artifact of visual
similarity (e.g., Damian et al., 2001). This concern also
arises in the case of face naming, because racially
homogeneous faces might be more difficult to discriminate.
However, the data do not support this possibility. The
visual similarity explanation would predict a context effect
for all of the groups (not the case), and greater difficulty in
naming outgroup than ingroup members in heterogeneous
contexts (also not the case). Thus our findings are clearly
driven by categorization of outgroup faces and not by a
perceptual similarity confound.
One way to interpret our findings (and link them to
previous findings with ad hoc categories) is that an
autonomous face recognition process is followed by
categorically constrained name retrieval. Against this,
however, is the finding of Van Bavel et al. (2011) that social
categories other than race affect the functioning of the
fusiform face area and that nonracial group affiliations can
even trump visually salient characteristics such as race. If
context dynamically modulates the functioning of face
processing areas, it may be more appropriate to conceive of

B. Face Naming Errors

semantic interference in name retrieval as engaging
relatively extensive neural networks.
To our knowledge, the present study is the first to
demonstrate interference in name retrieval for faces from
different racial categories. Research currently under way in
our research group attempts to shed light on the basis of this
effect by teasing apart whether common category
membership, overlapping semantic features, or even shared
visual features contribute to the effect. Another question we
may examine in future is the cultural domain of the names.
In this experiment, the names were all European in origin
and they may have been perceived as more congruent with
the White category. It is not clear, however, that this could
account for the observed pattern of effects because tighter
linkages among the names within the White category should
presumably tend to increase rather than decrease
interference and vice-versa for the other ethnic groups.
Additionally, we are investigating whether the observed
name retrieval bias is specific to racial groups or extends to
other social categories. Ongoing research is, for example,

1112

using a minimal group paradigm in which participants are
randomly assigned to novel and arbitrary groups (e.g.,
teams). Minimal groups trigger many of the same biases as
other social categories (e.g., in face recognition; Van Bavel
et al., 2011), and we anticipate that they may in this domain
as well. Importantly, minimal groups do not differ
systematically in visual features (e.g., members of all groups
can belong to the same race), and participants do not possess
semantic information (e.g., stereotypes) about the groups.
To the extent that similar effects are observed with minimal
groups, it will illuminate the role that categorization per se
can play in interference effects. Our research contributes to
the mounting evidence that influences of categorization on
interference effects in word/name retrieval are dynamic,
shifting as a function of currently available or salient
categories (Abdel Rahman & Melinger, 2011).

Wider Implications
The own race bias in facial recognition has profound and
disturbing social implications. For example, difficulties
distinguishing between members of other races may be a
significant cause of eyewitness misidentification and
wrongful conviction in criminal cases (Scheck, Neufeld &
Dwyer, 2003). The current research suggests that a similar
bias may occur in name retrieval, such that people have
greater difficulty retrieving the names of other race
individuals. Most of the time, the consequences of a name
retrieval bias may be minor, but in certain contexts this bias
could have pernicious effects. For example, teachers may
be less likely to call on other race students, perhaps
particularly if those students tend to be encountered
proximally (e.g., seated together). The correlates and
consequences of the name retrieval bias shown here merit
further investigation.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Lehigh University CORE
(Collaborative Research Opportunity) award. We thank
Nevada Heft for contributions to the project.

References
Abdel Rahman, R. & Melinger, A. (2007). When bees
hamper the production of honey: Lexical interference
from associates in speech production. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33, 604-614.
Abdel Rahman, R. & Melinger, A. (2011). The dynamic
microstructure of speech production: Semantic
interference built on the fly. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37, 149161.
Brewer, M. B. (1988). A dual process model of impression
formation. In T. Srull & R. Wyer (Eds.), Advances in
Social Cognition, Vol. 1 (pp. 1–36). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Cunningham, W. A., Van Bavel, J. J., Arbuckle, N. L.,
Packer, D. J., & Waggoner, A. S. (2012). Rapid social
perception is flexible: approach and avoidance
motivational states shape P100 responses to other-race
faces. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6.
Damian, M. F., Vigliocco, G., & Levelt, W. J. (2001).
Effects of semantic context in the naming of pictures and
words. Cognition, 81, B77-B86.
Devine, P. G. (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: Their
automatic and controlled components. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 5-18.
Fiske, S. T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990). A continuum of
impression-formation,
from
category-base
to
individuating processes: Influence of information and
motivation on attention and interpretation. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 1-74.
Griffin, Z. M. (2010). Retrieving personal names, referring
expressions, and terms of address. Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, 53, 345-387.
Howard, D., Nickels, L., Coltheart, M., & Cole-Virtue, J.
(2006). Cumulative semantic inhibition in picture naming:
Experimental and computational studies. Cognition, 100,
464-482.
Hugenberg, K., Young, S. G., Bernstein, M. J., & Sacco, D.
F. (2010). The categorization-individuation model: An
integrative account of the other-race recognition deficit.
Psychological Review, 117, 1168-1187.
Ito, T. A., & Bartholow, B. D. (2009). The neural correlates
of race. Trends in cognitive sciences, 13(12), 524-531.
Ito, T. A., & Urland, G. R. (2003). Race and gender on the
brain: electrocortical measures of attention to the race and
gender of multiply categorizable individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 616-626.
Kunda, Z., & Spencer, S. J. (2003). When do stereotypes
come to mind and when do they color judgment? A goalbased theoretical framework for stereotype activation and
application. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 522-544.
Levin, D. T. (1996). Classifying faces by race: The structure
of face categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 1364-1382.
Levin, D. T. (2000). Race as a visual feature: Using visual
search and perceptual discrimination tasks to understand
face categories and the cross-race recognition deficit.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 559574.
Levin, D. T., & Angelone, B. L. (2002). Categorical
perception of race. Perception, 31, 567-578.
Maass, A. (1999). Linguistic intergroup bias: Stereotype
perpetuation through language. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 31, 79-121.
Maass, A., Salvi, D., Arcuri, L., & Semin, G. R. (1989).
Language use in intergroup contexts: The linguistic
intergroup bias. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 57, 981-993.

1113

Navarrete, E., Del Prato, P., and Mahon, B. (2012).Factors
determining semantic facilitation and interference in the
cyclic naming paradigm. Frontiers in Psychology, 3,
Article 38, 1-15.
Oppenheim, G. M., Dell, G. S., & Schwartz, M. F. (2010).
The dark side of incremental learning: A model of
cumulative semantic interference during lexical access in
speech production. Cognition, 114, 227-252.
Scheck, B., Neufeld, P., & Dwyer, J. (2003). Actual
innocence: When justice goes wrong and how to make it
right. New American Library.
Schnur, T., Schwartz, M., Kimberg, D., Hirshorn, E.,
Coslett, H., & Thompson-Schill, S. (2009). Localizing
interference during naming: Convergent neuroimaging
and neuropsychological evidence for the function of
Broca’s area. PNAS, 106, 322-327.
Stroessner, S. J. (1996). Social categorization by race or sex:
Effects of perceived non-normalcy on response times.
Social Cognition, 14, 247-276.
Tajfel, H., & Wilkes, A. L. (1963). Classification and
quantitative judgement. British Journal of Psychology,
54, 101-114.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., &
Wetherell, M. S. (1987). Rediscovering the Social Group:
A Self-Categorization Theory. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell.
Valentine, T., Brennen, T., & Brédart, S. (1996). The
cognitive psychology of proper names: On the importance
of being Ernest. London: Routledge.
Van Bavel, J. J., Packer, D. J., & Cunningham, W. A.
(2011). Modulation of the fusiform face area following
minimal exposure to motivationally relevant faces:
evidence of in-group enhancement (not out-group
disregard). Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 33433354.

1114

