UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Cognition, Culture and the Self. An interdisciplinary investigation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5vs2p0j9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Newen, Albert
Bente, Gary
Kitayama, Shinobu
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Cognition, Culture and the Self
Albert Newen (albert.newen@rub.de)
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Institut für Philosophie II
Gary Bente (bente@uni-koeln.de)
Universität Köln, Dept. of Psychology
Shinobu Kitayama
University of Michigan, Dept. of Psychology
Shihui Han
Peking University, Dept. of Psychology
Kai Vogeley
Clinic of Psychiatry, Universität Köln
Abstract
The processing of social information belongs to the most
complex cognitive capacities of humans, enabling us to live
together in social communities. The symposium will focus
on the everyday competence to form social impressions and
understand others. This capability includes 1. the
understanding of oneself on the basis of an explicit selfconstrual, 2. the understanding of others by processing their
mental and bodily characteristics and states 3. the
understanding of social encounters by adequately
interpreting actions, communicative signals and social roles.
Human communication is essentially embedded in cultural
contexts and is shaped by it; at the same time it constitutes
the cultural background shared by the interactants. The main
goal of this symposium is to investigate the role of cognitive
and cultural factors influencing self-construal, person
perception and understanding of others. Thus we deal with
the following leading questions: How do we understand
other human beings, what are the best theoretical
perspectives, what can we learn from cognitive psychology
and neurosciences and what is the role of culture in the
process of understanding oneself and others? In the recent
development of social cognition it has become clear that we
not only have to account for the observational stance
towards other people but that we also have to systematically
consider situations of online interaction with other human
beings (2nd person perspective). The main aim of the
symposium is to present the state of the art of some key
topics of social and cultural cognition from the perspectives
of philosophy of mind, cross-cultural psychology and
social-cognitive neuroscience as well as to outline some
paradigmatic lines for future research.

Albert Newen: The Place of Culture and Self
in Theories of Social Understanding
How do we make sense of the behaviour of other people?
Theory-Theory and Simulation Theory both only account
for an observational understanding of others. This motivated
the development of the interaction theory (S. Gallagher/D.
Hutto). I will shortly outline a main deficit of the latter

before I develop an alternative approach: the Person Model
Theory. Person models are the basis for our ability to
register and evaluate behaviour. I argue that there are two
kinds of person models we rely on, nonconceptual person
schemata and conceptual person images (and both kinds are
developed for groups and for individuals). This theoretical
approach accounts for two levels of understanding: intuitive
and inferential understanding. Furthermore, it has the
advantage to account for the difference of understanding
very familiar persons (relying on person models of
individuals), on the one hand, and complete strangers
(reyling on person model for groups and thus understanding
a person by his social role as a student), on the other. The
person model theory accounts for modelling myself by
presupposing self-models in addition to models of others.
The theory allows to spell out the interaction of relying on
modelling oneself and others and finally it explicitly
accounts for the role of culture as shaping the mind. (s.
Newen/Schlicht 2009; de Bruin/Newen 2011).

Gary Bente & T. Dratsch: The Role of Tacit
Cues and Social Order in Observing Others.
Analyzing Nonverbal Behaviour and
Impression Formation across Cultures
There is ample evidence that visual cues including
physical appearance and nonverbal behaviour play a crucial
role in person perception and impression formation. A short
look at a face can lead to attributions of trustworthiness, a
body posture or movement can be perceived as dominant
and a smile can lead to warm feelings of connectedness.
Humans are highly sensitive to nonverbal signals and our
responses are fast and mostly beyond awareness and
conscious control. There is also evidence supporting the
notion that culture plays a prominent role in molding our
nonverbal behaviors. In a series of studies we investigated
the role of culture in the processing of nonverbal cues in
conflict laden interactions, collaborative tasks as well as
economic games focusing on the dimensions of liking,
power/control and trust. The studies involving German,
American, Chinese and Arab participants clearly point to
cultural specificities indicating that distinct cultural values

95

as described for Westerners and Easterners are also
implemented on the micro-level of social interactions.(see
Bente et al. 2008, 2010; Goergescu et al. in press)

Shinobu Kitayama: Error-Related
Brain Activity Reveals Self-Centric Motivation
To secure the interest of the personal self (versus social
others) is considered a fundamental human motive, but the
nature of the motivation to secure self-interest is not well
understood. To address this issue, we assessed
electrocortical responses of European Americans and Asians
as they performed a flanker task while instructed to earn as
many reward points as possible either for the self or for their
same-sex friend. For European Americans, error-related
negativity (ERN) —an event-related-potential component
contingent on error responses—was significantly greater in
the self condition than in the friend condition. Moreover,
post-error slowing—an index of cognitive control to reduce
errors—was observed in the self condition but not in the
friend condition. Neither of these self-centric effects was
observed among Asians, consistent with prior cross-cultural
behavioral evidence. Interdependent self-construal mediated
the effect of culture on the ERN self-centric effect. Our
findings provide the first evidence for a neural correlate of
self-centric motivation, which becomes more salient outside
of interdependent social relations (see Markus & Kitayama
1991; Kitayama et al. 2011).

Shihui Han: What constitutes the self?
Cultural neuroscience studies of
neurocognitive representation of the self
The self is a mixture of both biological and social
construction. How is the self represented in the human
brain? I'll present psychological and brain imaging studies
of self-face recognition and self-concept published by our
group during the last years. These studies investigated how
neurocognitive processing of the self undergo cultural and
biological influences. Our findings have implications for our
understanding of the biosocial nature of the human brain
and mental health. (see Han et al. 2008; Ma et al. in press).

Kai Vogeley: Person perception and culture.
The perspective of neuroscience
Psychology and neuroscience have recently started to reintroduce culture as an independent factor into the
experimental designs of empirical studies focusing on
cognitive processes and neural mechanisms. On a
conceptual level culture cannot be treated as a rigid body of
generalized features of different cultural backgrounds as
defined by nationality or language, but has to be
conceptualized more adequately as a dialectic exchange
between individual members and their collectives with

respect to habits, practices and belief systems. However,
experimental studies require operationalized approaches.
We have recently used Asian-looking and European-looking
virtual characters that expressed anger and happiness while
gazing at the participant or another third invisible person in
a Chinese and a German population. Overall, expressions
are perceived more pronounced if the participant was looked
at. Direct gaze emphasized the perceived emotion of ethnic
out-group members, but not of ethnic in-group members.
These results suggest that social interaction supervenes or is
at least as influential as culture related differences in the
perception of emotions. (see Vogeley et al. 2009; Han et al.
2013).

References
Bente, G., Senokozlieva, M., Pennig, S., Al-Issa, A., & Fischer, O.
(2008). Deciphering the secret code. A New Methodology for
the Cross-Cultural Analysis of Nonverbal Behavior. Behavior
Research Methods, 40(1), 269-277.
Bente, G., Leuschner, H., Al-Issa, A., & Blascovich, J. J. (2010).
The others: Universals and cultural specificities in the
perception of status and dominance from nonverbal behavior.
Consciousness and Cognition, 19(3), 762-777.
De Bruin, L. C., & Newen, A. (2012): An association account of
false
belief
understanding.
Cognition
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2011.12.016
Georgescu, A.L., Kuzmanovic, B., Santos, N.S., Tepest, R., Bente,
G., Tittgemeyer, M. & Vogeley, K. (in press). Perceiving
Nonverbal Behavior: Neural Correlates of Processing
Movement Fluency and Contingency in Dyadic Interactions.
Human Brain Mapping.
Han, S., Northoff, G. (2008). Culture-sensitive neural substrates of
human cognition: A transcultural neuroimaging approach.
Nature Review Neuroscience, 9, 646-654.
Han S, Northoff G, Vogeley K, Wexler BE, Kitayama S, Varnum
MEW (2013): Cultural Neuroscience Approach to the
Biosocial Nature of Humans. Ann Rev Psychol 64, 335-359.
Kitayama, S., & Uskul, A. K. (2011). Culture, mind, and the brain:
Current evidence and future directions. Annual Review of
Psychology, 62, 419-449.
Ma, Y., Bang, D., Wang, C., Allen, M., Frith, C., Roepstorff, A.,
Han, S.(in press).Sociocultural patterning of neural activity
during self-reflection. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self:
Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation.
Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Newen, A., Schlicht, T. (2009): Understanding Other Minds: A
criticism of Goldman’s simulation theory and an outline of the
Person Model Theory. Grazer Philosophische Studien 79, 209242
Vogeley K, Roepstorff A (2009): Contextualising Culture and
Social Cognition. Trends in Cognitive Science 13, 511-516

96

