UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Reasoning in Native Speakers of Russian and German

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/103664hx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Mikheeva, Maria
Bucher, Leandra
Nejasmic, Jelica
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Reasoning in Native Speakers of Russian and German
Maria Mikheeva (maria.micheewa@mail.ru)
Kazan (Volga Region) Federal University, Department of Psychology, Kremlyovskaya-Str. 18,
420008 Kazan, Russian Federation

Leandra Bucher (leandra.bucher@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany

Jelica Nejasmic (jelica.nejasmic@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany

Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany

Abstract
The relationship between reasoning and language has been
frequently studied. Here we explore principles of spatial
reasoning in Germans and Russians. We compared the
performance of Russians in three different settings to the
performance of Germans. The task was to construct layouts of
wooden blocks according to verbal instructions, describing the
relations of these blocks. Subsequently pieces of new
information, introduced as incontrovertible facts and partly
contradicting the initial descriptions, were given. Participants
re-arranged the blocks to take into account the new facts.
Recent research conducted with Germans has shown that –
although alternatives are logical equivalent - there are
preferences for certain solutions. The question was whether
Russians show the same or different preferences. Our results
suggest that construction and revision of spatial models follow
similar principles. However, we observed differences between
the groups regarding the flexibility to apply a principle based
on the order of words in a sentence.
Keywords: Spatial reasoning; Relational reasoning, Crosscultural similarities; Language; Russia; Belief revision

Introduction
Misunderstandings happen so often between people from
different countries, triggering the important question: how is
language connected to our mental representation of the
world? What role does it play in reasoning? Answers
suggested to that question are provided by an important
theory in that area: the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis affirms that
language influences thought (Zvegintsev, 1960; Levinson,
Kita, Haun, & Rasch, 2002; Levinson & Meira, 2003). On
the other hand, there is the view that the mind is organized
in a modular way with separate modules dedicated to certain
abilities (e.g. Tsimmerling, 2000; Nowak, Komarova, &
Niyogi, 2001; Kulikov, 2012). A further important question,
to some extent related to language, is: how do mental
representations differ across different cultures? What role do
cultural backgrounds play in reasoning? While some studies
suggest cultural dissimilarities (e.g. Oyserman & Lee,

2008), other studies show that there are common cognitive
principles used by reasoners of different cultures. Crosscultural similarities have, for instance, been shown in
topological reasoning (Knauff & Ragni, 2011; Knauff,
2013).
The present study is concerned with spatial relational
reasoning and the influence of language and culture. We
briefly analyze relevant work on linguistic influence on
thinking, comparative topology of German and Russian, and
spatial relational reasoning. We then present an experiment,
designed to investigate the construction and revision of
spatial models.

Construction and Revision of Spatial Mental
Models
Imagine you need to find the house № 28 in a street,
unfamiliar to you. You have received the following
description of the precise location by friend A, informing
you that:
(1)
“There is a hotel to the right of a café.”, and
(2)
“The house № 28 is to the left of the café.”
The description allows for one (determinate) model to
construct. In order to construct the model, spatial
information is inserted successively. Based on the
information given by statement (1), the model
(3)
“Café – Hotel”
is initiated and extended by (2) “House № 28”, resulting
into the model:
(4)
House № 28 – Café – Hotel
A lot of studies have explored factors that influence
reasoners when they construct models, among them the
order of objects as inserted into the model, and other order
effects (e.g. Payne, 1993; Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982;
Payne & Baguley, 2006; Bucher, Krumnack, Nejasmic, &
Knauff, 2011; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011;
Nejasmic, Krumnack, Bucher, & Knauff, 2011).

3038

Imagine you find out a little later that the information
uttered by friend A is unreliable. Friend B – who lives in the
street in question – informs you that as a fact:
(5)
“The house № 28 is to the right of the hotel.”
The more reliable and incontrovertible information
partially contradicts friend A´s description needs to be taken
into account. The following alternatives are possible:
(6)
Café - Hotel - House № 28
(7)
Hotel – House № 28 – Café
Both variations of the initial model are logically
equivalent. Nevertheless, when confronted with ambiguous
relational information, human reasoners frequently prefer
one alternative over the other (Jahn, Knauff, & JohnsonLaird, 2007; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2010;
Bucher et al., 2011; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, Nebel, &
Knauff, 2011; Bucher & Nejasmic, 2012; Knauff, Bucher,
Krumnack, & Nejasmic, 2013).

Preferred model revision
The process of model revision with verbal descriptions,
using binary relations r(X,Y) as facts has been shown to rely
on the following principle: the functional distinction of X as
the “to-be- located object” (LO) in contrast to Y as the
“reference object” (RO) specifies the location of the LO
relative to the known location of the RO (e.g. Huttenlocher
& Strauss, 1968; Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976; Talmy,
1983; Landau & Jackendoff, 1993). For the revision of
horizontal linear arrangements, the following finding
concerning reasoners´ preferences is characteristic
Initial arrangement
ABC
Counterfact
C is left of A,
with C as the relation´s LO
Preferred revision:
CAB
Note that the logical equivalent (non-preferred) alternative
for revising the initial model by relocating the counterfact´s
RO (here: A) would results in the revised model: B C A. We
refer to the preferred principle as the LO-principle
(compared to the RO-principle).

Linguistic Influence on Thought and
Comparative Typology of German and Russian
Languages
The Sapir–Whorf hypothesis postulates that language
determines thought or at least that linguistic categories
influence thought and certain kinds of non-linguistic
behavior (Zvegintsev, 1960). Li and Gleitman (2002)
investigated influences of individual languages (e.g. English
and Dutch) on spatial reasoning. Chatterjee (2011) studied
language as a form of mental representation of space. With
the current study, we investigate influences of different
languages (Russian vs. German) on spatial mental
representations. Moreover, to dissociate between influences
that result from linguistic aspects on the one and cultural
aspects on the other hand, the study took place in two
cultural settings (in Germany and in Russia).

First, we briefly explain the structures of both languages in
terms of comparative typology. Both languages are from the
Indo–European family. German belongs to the West
Germanic family, Russian is a Slavic language. They are
inflexional languages (from Lat. Flectivus «flexible»). The
term refers to a language, where word-building with
inflexions dominates. Inflexions are morphemes which can
have much significance; e.g. the article „die“ (as in “die
Katze”, “the cat”) in German, indicates the gender
(feminine), the case (nominative), and the number
(singular). Russian is even more inflexional compared to
German. Inflexional languages can be synthetic or analytic.
The German language is between the synthetic and analytic
languages, it has some characteristics of both language
types. In a synthetic language, a word contains all the
grammar, e.g., by inflexional endings, prefixes, suffixes. An
analytic language is a language which reproduces
grammatical relationships syntactically. Accordingly, it uses
only unbound morphemes, and only separate words like
articles etc. (Anokhina & Kostrova, 2006). For instance:
“хорошая новость” and “eine gute Neuigkeit” (“good
news”) – in Russian, the ending „ая“, and in German the
(additionally needed) article „eine“ indicates: feminine,
nominative, singular. There are some more differences
between German and Russian which we do not want to
explain here in detail. What is relevant for the current study
is the flexibility in word order in the two languages. In
German, the possibility of ordering words within a sentence
in a certain way is much more limited compared to Russian.
Of course, the “freedom” of word order in Russian is not
unlimited and also regulated by semantic and stylistic
factors (as in German) (Anokhina & Kostrova, 2006). An
example is given in table 1.
Table 1. Word order in German and Russians languages
Russian
Я люблю тебя
Тебя я люблю

Exact meaning
I love you
I love you, exactly
you, not another
person
Я тебя люблю Word
order I love you, exactly
not possible
you, not another
person
Люблю я тебя Word
order I love you (with an
not possible*
even
stronger
significance in the
sense that I can do
nothing about it)
Люблю тебя я Word
order You are loved by me,
not possible** not someone else
Тебя люблю я Dich liebe ich I love you, exactly
you, not another
person
*the word order would be possible in a German question
(“Liebe ich Dich?”); **the word order would be possible in
a German passive sentence (“Du wirst von mir geliebt.”)

3039

German
Ich liebe Dich
Word order
not possible

Analogously, the Russian spatial language is also more
flexible than the German language. For example, dynamic
local relations in German indicate source locations (“where
from?”) and directions of motion (“where to?”), while in
Russian such relations have a triple function, they indicate:
location (“where”), source location, and direction
(Khoruzhaya, 2007).
To summarize, there are major differences between
German and Russian. Previous research on spatial relational
reasoning suggests that reasoners have strong preferences
which are often based on linguistic cues that are connected
to the sentence structure. The main finding in a range of
experiments on the variation of spatial models (Bucher et
al., 2011; Krumnack et al., 2011; Bucher & Nejasmic, 2012;
Knauff, et al., 2013) is that the variation is preferably done
by the relocation of objects that are perceived as more
flexible compared to other objects. These objects are usually
the so called to-be-located objects (LO) of a relational
statement as compared to reference objects (RO) which are
perceived as more stationary. We refer to this preference as
the LO-principle.
The question is whether cognitive principles such as the
LO-principle are used independently from linguistic or
cultural aspects. Concerning the language aspect, it would
be plausible if Russians, i.e. native speakers of a language
that is by nature very flexible concerning the word order and
sentence structure are accordingly more flexible in the
application of such cognitive principles. In this specific case
they might use the RO-principle more frequently as an
alternative solution in the reasoning task. Culture is another
important aspect to look at when we look at similarities of
cognitive principles. There are many definitions of culture.
Oyserman and Lee (2008, p. 311) say that “culture matters
to the extent that individuals living in different societies are
likely to have differing experiences”. Criado (2009, p. 295)
explains that culture is “a set of shared values, beliefs,
expectations, customs, jargon, and rituals”. What seems to
be indisputable is that a cultural environment can have an
impact on the way an individual thinks.
In order to explore both, language and culture influence,
we conducted the same experiment with native speakers of
German and of Russian as participants. Three different
samples of Russian participants were tested in two different
cultural environments:
1. The first sample was tested in German, in Germany
2. The second sample was tested in Russian in Germany
3. The third sample was tested in Russian in Russia
The purpose was to control for both, the language and the
cultural setting.

Experiment: Construction and Revision of
Block Arrangements
Method
The first part of the experiment can be referred to as
“construction phase”. The task was to physically construct
layouts of wooden blocks according to a verbal instruction,

describing the relations of these blocks. The second part can
be titled “revision phase”. Once a layout was constructed, a
piece of new information, introduced as an incontrovertible
fact contradicted a part of the initial description. The task
was to re-arrange the blocks such that it cohered with the
“fact”.
Participants Altogether, we tested 76 volunteers who
performed in the task either in German or in Russian in
Germany or in Russia. All participants gave informed
consent to participation. Participants were tested
individually. Each participant was tested only once.
Language abilities were assessed by self-report. Russian
participants tested in Germany rated their German language
abilities as “very good”, and reported to be capable of
writing and speaking fluently. They were fluent in Russian
as their mother tongue and in German as a second language,
and have been living and were educated in Germany for a
considerable time. Russian participants tested in Russia
reported to be not familiar with the German language while
German participants reported to be not familiar with the
Russian language.
The sample of Germans tested in German in Germany
consisted of 11 (5 male; age: M = 24.91; SD =2.95) native
speakers of German, all students from the University of
Giessen. None of them has ever studied Russian.
The sample of Russians tested in German in Germany
consisted of 19 (3 male; age: M =24.05; SD =4.18) native
speakers of Russian.
The sample of Russians tested in Russian in Germany
consisted of 20 (3 male; age: M =25.45; SD =5.26) native
speakers of Russian.
The sample of Russians tested in Russian in Russia
consisted of 26 (1 male; age: M =20.35; SD = 0.63) native
speakers of Russian. They were all students from the Federal
University of Kazan (among them 19 students of
psychology). None of them has ever studied German or has
been to Germany.
Materials, Procedure, and Design 32 items were
presented, each consisting of two premises and an
inconsistent fact. The task was presented on a 19``-computer
screen, using Microsoft PowerPoint (Version 2007) running
in the windows environment XP on a standard personal
computer. PowerPoint slides were presented by the
experimenter in a sequentially and individually adapted
manner according to participants´ performance.
In all items, the two premises and the contradictory fact
(presented in red) had the surface structure as follows: first
object - relation (either “left of” or “right of”) – second
object.
Example: “Yellow left of red”
Participants were provided with wooden square blocks (size:
2.5 x 2.5 x 2.5 cm), red, green, yellow, and blue colored on a
plate in front of them and instructed to construct and
subsequently revise their block layouts.
The construction phase: participants were instructed to
pick up the colored blocks, one at a time using one hand,
and arrange them according to the information provided by

3040

Results and discussion
Construction: Mean percentage rate of correctly
constructed orders was 97% (SD=4.46). There was no
difference in number of mistakes in construction between
the samples (p > 0.30). We analyzed the order of objects put
down during the construction in every sample, running
Wilcoxon´s tests for each sample, separately (Siegal &
Castellan, 1988). In the German sample the 1-2-3-order was

used more frequently compared to the 2-1-3-order (z = 2.01; p < 0.05). The same applies to the remaining samples:
Russians tested in German in Germany (z =-3.93; p < 0.01),
Russians tested in Russian in Germany (z = -3.97; p < 0.01),
and Russians tested in Russian in Russia (z = -4.49; p <
0.01). Our results provide evidence that the same principle
(putting down blocks in word order 1-2-3 rather than in the
order 2-1-3) was applied similarly by participants of all four
samples. Thus, we can conclude that the cognitive principle
is not affected by linguistic aspects. Russians tested in
Germany as well as Russians tested in Russia used the same
principle, suggesting cross-cultural similarities.
We continued our analysis by comparing the magnitude of
the preference applied by Germans and Russians in the
different settings. The Kruskall-Wallis test revealed a
difference between the samples (p < 0.05). Pair wise
comparisons, using Wilcoxon´s tests revealed that the group
of Germans differed from all Russian samples (all ps > .05).
Despite the overall similarities found across all samples,
we found that Russians were more strictly in the application
of this principle. The Germans performed more flexible in
the task, using the alternative word order (2-1-3) more
frequently. Figure 1 depicts the result graphically. We
continue to discuss this difference in the General Discussion
of this paper.
Revision: Mean percentage rate of correctly revised
models was 99.14% (SD = 1.74). There were no differences
in the amount of mistakes between the samples (p > 0.40).
Erroneous problems were excluded from further analyses.
We ran Wilcoxon´s tests for each sample, separately. That
was to analyze which principle the revision followed. The
tests indicated that in the German sample LOs were
relocated more frequently then ROs (z = -2.95; p < 0.01).
The same principle was applied by reasoners in the other
samples: Russians tested in German in Germany (z =-3.83; p
< 0.01), Russians tested in Russian in Germany (z = -3.96; p
< 0.01), and Russians tested in Russian in Russia (z = -4.56;
p < 0.01). Again, our results suggest similarities across both
language groups. There was a clear preference for LO
relocations across all samples (figure 2 depicts the results
graphically). The principle was equally used by Russian
native speakers, who were tested in Russian and in German.
This suggests that linguistic aspects were not modulating the
effect. Russians tested in Germany as well as
Word Order
1-2-3 [%]

the premises into a linear one-dimensional order. The
premises informed about the determinate order of the blocks
with the blocks represented by the respective colors (red,
green, yellow, and blue).
Example:
1st premise: “Blue right of red”
2nd premise: “Green right of blue”
Spatial arrangement: red – blue – green
The location of the third object was counter-balanced across
all problems. In a recent experiment, very similar to the one
reported here, and presented in German to German
participants, word order has been shown to be crucial for the
physical construction of spatial models (Bucher et al., 2011,
Experiment 2). Here, accordingly, based on the description
of the 1st premise, two possible construction orders were
possible:
1. Starting on the left side and continue to the right, e.g.
(consider the 1st premise from the above example)
putting down the red block first and placing the blue
block to the red one´s right side.
2. Starting on the right side and continue to the left, e.g.
putting down the blue block first and placing the red
block to the blue one´s left side
The resulting orders are describable as 1 – 2 – 3 and 2 – 1 –
3, with the numbers indicating the order by which objects
had been put down; e.g. red first – blue second – green third
(order 1 – 2 – 3) and red second – blue first – green third
(order 2 – 1 – 3). The question was whether there would be
order effects when constructing the arrangements in the
Russian samples similar to those found in Germans.
The revision phase: subsequently after participants had
constructed the order of the three colored blocks, they were
asked to revise their order according to the inconsistent fact.
Example-fact: “Green left of red”
Participants were free with the revision of their initially
constructed arrangements. After each trial, the wooden
blocks were put back onto the plate by the experimenter.
Four practice trials (neither recorded nor analyzed) preceded
the experimental trials. Performance was recorded on a
video tape by the experimenter and analyzed after the
experimental session (Bucher et al., 2011).
In previous experiments, using a very similar experimental
set-up, presented in German to German participants, the
finding was that of a clear preference (e.g. 89.52 %, SD =
11.30; see Bucher et al., 2011, experiment 2) of LO
relocations as compared to RO relocations. The question
was whether participants of the Russian samples would
apply the LO-principle similarly to the German participants.

100
80
60
40
20
0

p < 0.01

Russians

Germans

Figure 1. The figure depicts the difference between Germans
and Russians during the construction of block arrangements.
The word order effect was more pronounced in Russians
than in Germans. Error bars indicate standard errors.

3041

Relocated
Objects [%]

100
80
60
40
20
0

p <0.01

LO

RO

Figure 2. For revision, the LO principle (relocation of the tobe-located object, LO as opposed to the reference object,
RO) was preferably applied by participants of all samples.
Error bars indicate standard errors.
Russians tested in Russia used the same principle,
suggesting similarity across the cultures. We continued our
analysis by comparing the magnitude of the preference
applied by Germans and Russians in the different settings.
The Kruskall-Wallis test revealed that there are no
differences between the samples (p > 0.30). Unlike the word
order effect, the LO effect was equally strong across all
groups. This finding further corroborates the assumption of
a cross-cultural and cross-linguistc cognitive principle.

General Discussion
The present study investigates aspects of spatial relational
reasoning in reasoners from Germany and Russia. We
explored principles applied for the construction and the
revision of spatial models in four types of samples. A
sample of German native speakers who were tested in
German in Germany, a sample of Russian native speakers,
tested under the same conditions, a sample of Russian native
speakers tested in their mother tongue but in the German
cultural environment, and a sample of native speakers of
Russian who were naive to the German language, tested in
their native Russian cultural environment.
The study was motivated by recent findings that principles
applied by German reasoners in spatial relational reasoning
tasks were based on linguistic cues. One study (Bucher et
al., 2011) suggests that during the physical construction of
spatial (block) arrangements, the word order plays a role in
guiding the construction process while for the revision of
these models the asymmetry of LOs and ROs of relational
statements provide the crucial cues for reasoners (Bucher &
Nejasmic, 2012; Knauff et al., 2013). Here as a novelty, a
similar task was presented to native speakers of Russian. We
were concerned with the dissociation of linguistic and
cultural aspects. In order to dissociate these aspects to a
certain degree, we splitted the Russian group into three subsamples, allowing a rough distinction of cultural from
linguistic influences. The results indicate cross-cultural
similarities for both cognitive principles applied during
construction and revision of spatial models. Across all
samples (German and Russians), the construction followed
the word-order-principle. This effect has been previously
shown in Germans (Bucher et al., 2011) and could be
repetitively shown here. The revision was found to be

guided by the LO-principle. This principle had been
repeatedly shown in German reasoners and here – for the
first time – in Russians. The effect was comparable in
magnitude across all samples. We conclude that both
principles reflect similar mechanisms.
However, Germans used the alternative principle
(starting construction with the second object) more often
compared to the Russian samples and performed thus
construction processes more flexible. Please, note that with
the current experiment, it is not distinguishable whether
reasoners used the first object mentioned in the premise or
the LO as a starting point for their construction, because the
first object in a statement was identical with the LO.
However, Bucher et al. (2011) argue that different cognitive
principles are applied during construction (first vs. second
object as starting object) and revision (relocation of LO vs.
RO), respectively. The authors also provide empirical
evidence for their view. The results of the current study
show that German native speakers are more flexible when
applying the word order principle, compared to Russians,
while the LO-principle is applied equally robustly by both
groups. This can be taken as corroborating evidence that the
cognitive mechanisms underlying construction and revision
are distinguishable, however comparable for Germans and
Russians.
Nevertheless, we found differences in the manifestations
of the word-order effect between the groups. The effect was
stronger in Russians compared to Germans. This indicates
that Russians used the alternative word order less frequently
than Germans did when they constructed their models.
When we bear in mind that the Russian language allows for
many variations of word orders in a sentence, the result
might look counterintuitive, at the first glance. However, we
must note that speakers of Russian already make many
decisions when they construct a sentence. Maybe, it is the
compensation for this “liberty” in the canonical word order
of the Russian language which we find reflected by the high
adherence to the word order principle. Also important in the
present context is that although we might have found crosscultural similarities between Germans and Russians, as well
as cross-linguistic principles that were applied during the
construction phase, there is an alternative interpretation of
the results. While (as in previous experiments) German
reasoners might have based the construction preferably on
the word order, it is possible that Russian reasoners applied
the LO principle, i.e. put the LO as first object on the table.
With the present study we cannot rule out this alternative
interpretation but we are currently running experiments
designed to look at this problem.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by a grant of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, (KN 465/6-2). It has been carried
out in the framework of the partnership between Kazan
(Volga Region) Federal University and Justus-Liebig
University Giessen. We thank Anja Gatzsche for assistance
with the experiment.

3042

References
Anokhina, S. P. & Kostrova, О. А. (2006). Сравнительная
типология немецкого и русского языков: Учебное
пособие. СамГПУ Press.
Bucher L., Krumnack А., Nejasmic J., & Knauff, М. (2011).
Cognitive processes underlying spatial belief revision. In
L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 3477-3482). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Bucher, L. & Nejasmic, J. (2012). Relocating multiple
objects during belief revision. In C. Stachniss, K. Schill,
& D. Uttal (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence:
Spatial Cognition (pp. 476-491). Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
Chatterjee, A. (2011). Language and space: Some
interactions. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 55-61.
Criado, R. (2002) Taking scripts as a model of lesson
organisation for the integration of culture and language in
ELT. Revista Alicantina de Estudios Ingleses 22, 295-314.
Ehrlich, K. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982) Spatial
descriptions and referential continuity. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 296—306.
Huttenlocher, J. & Strauss, S. (1968). Comprehension and a
statement’s relation to the situation it describes. Journal of
Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 7, 300-304.
Jahn, G., Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2007).
Preferred mental models in reasoning about spatial
relations. Memory and Cognition, 35, 2075-2078.
Khoruzhaya, U. (2007) Семантические функции пространственных и временных предлогов в немецком и
русском языках. Kuban State University Press.
Knauff, M. (2013). Space to Reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Knauff, M. & Ragni, M. (2011). Cross-Cultural Preferences
in Spatial. Reasoning. Journal of Cognition and Culture,
11, 1-21.
Knauff, M., Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., & Nejasmic, J.
(2013). Spatial belief revision. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 1, 1-10.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2010). Spatial reasoning as verbal reasoning. In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1002 – 1007). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Efficiency and minimal change in spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2270-2275). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., Nebel, B., &
Knauff, M. (2011). A model for relational reasoning as
verbal reasoning. Cognitive Systems Research, 11, 377392.

Kulikov, D. (2012). Гипотеза лингвистической
относительности
Сепира-Уорфа
и
её
методологическая оценка в работах М.К.Петрова.
Политическая концептология, 2, 189-199.
Landau, B. & Jackendoff, R. (1993) “What” and “where” in
spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16, 217–265.
Levinson, S. C. & Meira, S. (2003). ‘Natural concepts’ in
the spatial topological domain. Language 79, 485-516.
Levinson, S., Kita, S., Haun, D., & Rasch, B. (2002).
Returning the tables: Language affects spatial reasoning.
Cognition, 84, 155-188.
Li, P. & Gleitman, L. (2002). Language and spatial
reasoning. Cognition, 3, 265 – 294.
Miller, G. A. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
Perception. Cambridge MA: Havard University Press.
Nejasmic, J., Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying the continuity
effect in spatial reasoning In L. Carlson, C. Holscher, &
T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 11271132). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Nowak, M., Komarova, N., & Niyogi, P. (2001). Evolution
of universal grammar. Science, 291, 114-118.
Oyserman, D. & Lee, S. (2008). Does culture influence what
and how we think? Effects of priming individualism and
collectivism. Psychological Bulletin, 2, 311-342.
Payne, S. J. (1993). Memory for mental models of spatial
descriptions: An episodic construction trace account.
Memory & Cognition, 21, 591–603.
Payne, S. & Baguley, T. (2006). Memory for the process of
constructing an integrated mental model. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 817-825.
Siegal, S. & Castellan, N. J. (1988). Nonparametric tests for
the behavioral sciences. McGraw-Hill College
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. L.
Pick & L. P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial Orientation:
Theory, Research and Application (pp. 225-282). London,
UK: Plenum.
Tsimmerlimg, A. (2000). Американская лингвистика
сегодняшнего дня глазами отечественных языковедов.
Вопросы языкознания, 2, 1-20.
Zvegintsev, V. A. (1960). Теоретико - лингвистические
предпосылки гипотезы Сепира – Уорфа. Новое в
лингвистике, 1, 111-134.

3043

