UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial cognition: the return path

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0f0642jf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hamburger, Kai
Dienelt, Lena E.
Strickrodt, Marianne
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial cognition: the return path
Kai Hamburger (kai.hamburger@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Lena E. Dienelt (lena-eowyn.dienelt@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Marianne Strickrodt (marianne.strickrodt@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Florian Röser (florian.roeser@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University Giessen, Department of Psychology,
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science
Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10 F
35394 Giessen, Germany

goal without being distracted or being led into a wrong
direction? Or, would it be better to supplement the verbal
description with a map, or maybe make only use of the map
instead? This is not only a question of not getting lost (e.g.,
Dudchenko, 2010), but also a question about cognitive
economy, namely, reaching the goal with the least cognitive
or physical effort. Let us assume that we successfully
reached the goal. We are now faced with a new, maybe
more difficult, problem. We need to return to our hotel!
Finding a return path is an everyday problem but has
rarely been investigated empirically (retrace the same route;
e.g., Golledge, 1997, Büchner, Hölscher, & Strube, 2007;
Papinski, Scott, & Doherty, 2009). We are able to manage
this task, but we do not yet know the underlying cognitive
and neural processes enabling us to find the return path.
One of the most important aspects for the return path is
probably the structure of the environment (e.g., structural
landmark salience; Sorrows & Hirtle, 1999; Klippel &
Winter, 2005). Since we assume visual salience (or better
perceptual salience) –that is how much an object stands out
from its environment (e.g., Caduff & Timpf, 2008)– and
semantic salience of landmarks –that is for example its
name, meaning, or function (e.g., Hamburger & Knauff,
2011)– to be less important, we here try to control for these
aspects and rather focus on the structural aspects as we have
done in several previous experiments on structural salience
(e.g., Röser, Hamburger, Krumnack, & Knauff, 2012a;
Röser, Krumnack, Hamburger, & Knauff, 2012b).
There are two optimal positions for landmarks to be
located on a regular/initial path: before the intersection
(Klippel & Winter, 2005) in direction of the turn and behind
the intersection in direction of the turn (Röser et al., 2012a).
Most important is that the landmark is located somewhere in
direction of the turn (Röser et al., 2012a). But, for the return
path, two different positions might be the optimal ones: the
positions before the intersection in direction of the turn and
behind the intersection opposite to the direction of the turn.
These positions are invariant for the return path (they
remain unchanged). The other two positions are variant,
since they have to be mentally and verbally transformed for
the return path (e.g., “before the intersection opposite to the
direction of turn” becomes “behind the intersection and in
direction of the turn” on the way back). Further details on

Abstract
The cognitive representation of a return path is a rather
unexplored topic including different issues, e.g., perception,
mental imagery, mental spatial processing, and language. We
here investigated the return path with landmarks located on
different positions (optimal, suboptimal). Participants learned
a total of 24 routes and had to produce the return paths
(N=20). In a second experiment the different positions plus
map learning versus verbal directions were investigated
(N=20). Both experiments reveal that the position of a
landmark at an intersection (structural salience) has an
influence on wayfinding performance. However, the results
are somehow ambiguous. Therefore, we also present first
approaches for predicting behavior (e.g., optimal route
descriptions) and for modeling the perceptual and cognitive
processes involved in finding the return path, including
visibility, structural salience, mental representation/
transformation, and language.
Keywords: return path; structural salience; landmarks;
mental transformation

Introduction
Imagine that you are on a vacation in an unknown foreign
city. After your arrival at the hotel you want to explore the
surroundings and maybe visit a place of interest or a
touristic feature (e.g., a famous building such as the Eiffel
Tower in Paris). You may base your search on different
means for successfully reaching your goal. You may want to
use a verbal description that you received at the reception
desk of your hotel, maybe you want to make use of a city
map in your tourist guide, or, if you do not have these
means at hand, you may want to ask a pedestrian on the
street for giving you directions to your goal location. There
is also the possibility of using a mobile navigation system.
This latter example is part of the debate on “extended
cognition” (e.g., Clark & Chalmers, 1998), which is beyond
the scope of this project. Here, the focus is rather on the
“innate” navigation system, perceptual and cognitive
processes that enable humans to navigate without getting
lost (most of the times). In general, wayfinders use so-called
landmarks, objects or buildings that stand out of their
environment, to aid navigation (e.g., Lynch, 1960; Presson
& Montello, 1988; Caduff & Timpf, 2008). Let us return to
our initial example. One important question is whether the
verbal description is on its own sufficient for reaching the

537

this theoretical assumption are provided in the section
“Theoretical assumptions, modeling, future research”.

To control for direction or landmark position effects, the
number of right/left turns and the position of landmarks
(before or after the intersection, in or against moving
direction) were balanced for single routes. This balancing
applies to both the regular travel direction (forward) in the
learning phase and to the return path in the wayfinding
phase.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
A total of 20 Psychology students from the University of
Giessen participated (16 females). They had a mean age of
23.5 years (SD=4.08). All participants were naive with
respect to this study, provided informed written consent, and
received course credits for participation. They had normal or
corrected-to-normal visual acuity and were free of any preexisting psychiatric or neurologic illness (e.g., epilepsy).

Procedure
Participants learned a route of eight intersections via
successively presented pictures of each of the intersections
(Figure 1). Every intersection was shown for duration of
eight seconds (learning phase). Subsequently, participants
were instructed to find the same path again either in the
normal (forward from origin to destination) or the reverse
travel direction (backwards from destination to origin;
wayfinding phase). Every intersection was presented via
pictures and served as a decision point (right or left) for
which direction decisions had to be made.
After one route was navigated (eight direction decisions),
the learning phase of the next route started. No feedback
about the decisions was given. The total of 24 routes had to
be learned by each participant. Overall, half of the routes
had to be found in the forward run direction, while for the
other half the return path was required. Therefore, two
experimental versions were used where navigation direction
in the wayfinding phase was interchanged (e.g., Route 1 had
to be found again in forward direction in version 1, but in
the backwards direction in version 2). The order of the
routes was randomized for every participant. Correct
decisions and response times served as dependent variables.
At the end participants were asked to indicate any strategies
they had used during the experiment.

Materials
The equipment included a custom 19’’ monitor (Dell), a
Personal Computer (HP Compaq 6000 Pro), and a Response
Pad (RB-530 Cedrus Corporation©). For presentation and
data recording SuperLab 4.0 Stimulus Presentation Software
(Cedrus Corporation©) was employed.
The virtual environment (maze) was set up with Google©
SketchUp 8 (compare to SQUARELAND; Hamburger &
Knauff, 2011), which in its original version is made of
10×10
cuboids,
representing
regular
orthogonal
intersections, and proofed very flexible in terms of
experimental manipulations. Here, 24 routes, each with
eight intersections in an egocentric perspective, were
created. The directions left or right were used. Every
intersection (24×8=192) contained one distinct landmark –
one of 192 different words on a white sign (Figure 1). These
distinct landmark words were used to prevent interferences
of previously learned landmark and direction combinations
(e.g., in Route 1 you have to turn right when you see the
word “horse”; in a later route you might have to turn left
when you see the word “horse”). Hence, a landmark which
was shown once to the participant does not appear again
later in another route. We controlled for all landmarks being
comparably imaginable by using familiar, everyday words.
A landmark was placed on both sides of the corresponding
facades of a corner, so it was visible from both directions of
travel.

Results
The mean correct route decisions on the return path were
about 87% in this experiment (chance level 50%).
An analysis of variance with repeated measures for the
wayfinding phase was performed. Within-subject factors
were navigation direction (forward/backward) and landmark
position (all four possible positions). Both for correct
decisions and response times a significant main effect for
navigation direction (correct decisions: F(1,19)=19.865,
p<.001; response times: F(1,19)=21.571, p<.001), but not
for landmark position (correct decisions: F(3,57)=1.020,
p=.391; response times: F(3,57)=.871, p=.461) could be
found. Participants were better and faster in navigating the
original route direction (forward) compared to the reverse
direction (backwards), but the position of a landmark did
not lead to any performance differences.
A wide range and variability of learning strategies was
reported by the participants and different levels of selfconfidence in performance were expressed. Thus, we were
interested in possible group differences. Therefore, we
divided our sample in participants with an overall better
(N=14) and an overall worse performance (N=6) with
respect to mean overall performance. This mean-

Figure 1: Screenshot of an intersection in the virtual
maze (decision point). The landmark (word; Apfel =
apple) is presented on both facades at one corner
(position).

538

performance-grouping now functioned as a between-subject
factor in a re-analysis of variance with repeated measures.
For response times again only a main effect for direction
(F(1,18)=16.196, p=.001), but not for landmark position
(F(3,54)=.508, p<.678) occurred. However, for correct
decisions again a significant main effect for direction
(F(1,18)=22.322, p<.001) and an additional interaction of
navigation direction × landmark position × group
(F(3,54)=3.895, p=.025) emerged. This means that the
wayfinding performance with landmarks on varying
positions differs with navigation direction and depends on
the participant being a high or a low performer.

facades of a corner (position), so they were visible from
both directions of travel.
Videos of the two routes were generated from an
egocentric perspective, with an eye height of 1.70m and a
constant walking speed of about 2m/s. For presentation and
data recording SuperLab 4.0 Stimulus Presentation Software
(Cedrus Corporation©) was employed.

Procedure
Participants were assigned to two groups: One of them
learned a path with 20 intersections via a map, the other one
through verbal description (allocentric vs. egocentric
learning condition). After a five minute break, the learned
path was shown as video in reverse order through the virtual
maze, which was stopped at every intersection (decision
point) for participants to indicate the path directions right,
left, or straight (wayfinding phase). Learning condition
(map/description) and landmark position (optimal/
suboptimal) served as independent variables while correct
route decisions and response times served as dependent
variables.

Discussion
An overall effect for the wayfinding direction could be
found. People were faster and better when travelling the
route in the originally learned direction (forward) compared
to navigating the return path, which is not very surprising
but has not been investigated systematically before. No
landmark position effect was found. Only the mean
performance of low performers indicates that some people
(maybe depending on spatial ability and learning strategy)
might be affected by structural differences (positions), and
that the helpfulness of a landmark might differ depending
on the direction of travel (forward, backwards). Such data
need to be further analyzed in future research with the focus
on individual strategies (wayfinding performance vs. senseof-direction; e.g., Kato & Takeuchi, 2003).
In Experiment 2 we used a more realistic setup: video
sequence from an egocentric perspective with approximated
true physical sizes on a projection screen; only one route but
with the option of going straight; two learning conditions;
more than just eight intersections, etc.

Results
With landmarks being located in (assumed) optimal
positions correct decisions on the return path were made in
about 67.5% (chance level 33.3%) if the initial path was
learned via a route description. When the path was encoded
via a map about 65% correct route decisions were made.
With landmark objects being in suboptimal positions on the
return path, 59% correct decisions were made for the
description condition and 65% for the map condition.
For the optimal positions the response times were lower
(3900ms) in the description condition, compared to the map
condition (4960ms). Responses for intersections with
landmarks on suboptimal positions revealed again a shorter
response time for the description condition (4175ms), in
comparison to the map condition (4825ms).
An analysis of variance with the within-subject factor
landmark position (optimal/suboptimal) and the betweensubject factor learning condition (map/verbal description)
was performed. It revealed a significantly higher
performance for landmarks on optimal positions
(F(1,18)=4.99, p=.038). But, the position did not reveal
significant differences according to the response times
(F(1,18)=.033, p=.858). The learning conditions did neither
differ significantly in the wayfinding phase with respect to
correct decisions (F(1,18)=.066, p=.800), nor with respect
to response times (F(1,18)=.621, p=.441). The three
possible options of choice on the intersections (left, right,
straight on) did not lead to significant differences according
to correct decisions (F(2,38)=.818, p=.449). No interactions
were obtained.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
A total of 20 Psychology students from the University of
Giessen participated (13 females). They had a mean age of
26.1 years (SD=9.03). All participants were naive with
respect to this study, provided informed written consent, and
received course credits for participation. They had normal or
corrected-to-normal visual acuity and were free of any preexisting psychiatric or neurologic illness (e.g., epilepsy).

Materials
The same setup was used as in Experiment 1 but this time
the routes were presented on a customary projection screen
(171x238 cm) with a projector (Panasonic PT-F100NT).
For the experiment two different routes through the maze,
with 20 intersections each, were created. Therefore, a total
of 20 different words served as landmark objects (Figure 1).
The words were derived from a catalog of pictograms which
made them visually similar, realistic, and easy to imagine.
In the maze the landmarks were again placed on both

Discussion
The landmark position led to significant differences in
performance (correct decisions), though this was not the
case for the decision times. Consistent with the expectations

539

better decisions were made if landmarks were located on
optimal positions. Since no decision time differences could
be obtained, this effect cannot be due to longer viewing
times for the landmarks. We may therefore conclude that the
quality of a landmark as a point of reference for finding the
return path very much depends on its position, as has
previously been assumed for the “initial path” (forward run;
Klippel & Winter, 2005; Röser et al., 2012a,b).
The different learning conditions map and description
(allocentric/egocentric) did not lead to a significant
difference in the wayfinding phase, neither for correct
decisions nor for the response times. This absence of an
effect may be explained by the “dual coding theory of
human wayfinding knowledge” (Meilinger, Knauff, &
Bülthoff, 2008). It assumes that environmental information
is (sometimes) encoded in a spatial format alone but
sometimes additionally in a verbal format. Information
learned through maps (allocentric) is encoded verbally as
well as information learned through descriptions (egocentric
mental imagery). The similar performances after studying a
map or a verbal description may be attributed to verbal
representations existing for both encoding conditions
(Meilinger & Knauff, 2008).
In Experiment 2 position effects were found in
comparison to Experiment 1. It is possible that Experiment
1 only tested the direction memory (memory task), while
Experiment 2 represents a realistic wayfinding task. Since
these results are not conclusive, more theoretically driven
assumptions and empirical research are required.

Figure 2: Possible optimal (dark gray) and
suboptimal (light gray) landmark positions for the
forward run and the return path in the allocentric and
egocentric perspective. See text for details.
Another important issue in the egocentric perspective is
the so-called “visibility” (Winter, 2003; Röser et al., 2012b).
This means that different locations have different visibilities
depending on the observers own position (Figure 3). Visual
attention is generally paid to the direction of turn. It seems
that in an egocentric perspective it is important that a
landmark is at least located in direction of the turn and that
before and behind become less important.

Theoretical assumptions, modeling, future
research
In the following we present current ideas on how landmarks,
places, and directions might be cognitively processed for the
return path. As we have seen so far from our first two
experiments on the return path and which role landmarks
and landmark positions play in this context, more systematic
empirical work is required.
As can be seen in Figure 2 we need to differentiate
between an allocentric and an egocentric perspective. In the
allocentric perspective (forward run) the assumed optimal
position (Klippel & Winter, 2005; Röser et al., 2012a) is
position D, before the intersection and in direction of the
turn. For the forward run optimal positions have been
suggested theoretically/mathematically (Klippel & Winter,
2005) and have been evaluated empirically (Röser et al.,
2012a,b). For the return path the optimal positions are not
yet known. We assume that position D should still be
optimal, since it is before the intersection in direction of the
turn (identical to the initial path), and this position is
invariant independent of direction (no right/left encoding
necessary). According to the findings by Röser et al.
(2012a) position C could be optimal as well in the
egocentric perspective and A could be optimal in both
perspectives, since A is also invariant (opposite to the
direction of the turn) as is the case for D.

Figure 3: Visibility from two different positions:
initial path (left) and return path (right). X = position
of individual;  = walking direction. In the
allocentric perspective each position is equally
visible for both directions, not so for the return path.
The small images on the bottom visualize the sight
in the egocentric perspective. See text for details.
For the return path it is important to take this into account.
This means that for the return path the optimal position in
the allocentric perspective remains the same (D), since this
location is still before the intersection and in direction of the
turn (invariant; see central section of Figure 2). According
to the above findings and the previous logic, in the
egocentric perspective the optimal positions should now be
C and D. However, position C was a suboptimal one on the
forward run and therefore it may now be doubted that it
becomes optimal on the return path, since it is a variant

540

position (forward run: before the intersection and opposite
to the direction of the turn; return path: behind the
intersection and in direction of the turn). This would require
some additional mental transformation for the observer in
order to correctly find the return path.
Now it is interesting to see that positions D and A are
invariant for the initial and the return path, while B and C
are variant locations (see right section of Figure 2). But, this
is only the case if the spatial information is unspecific; that
is right has to be transformed into left on the return path
(direction specific), while turn into direction of D or turn in
the opposite direction of A remain the same for the return
path (direction unspecific).
According to the concept of “advanced visibility” (Winter,
2003) it is furthermore important in the egocentric
perspective, whether both facades at one location at the
intersection are visually identical/similar (e.g., same color,
texture) or totally different (e.g., one facade is brown and
the other white). This may change the recognizability on the
return path in a dramatic way (Figure 3). For instance, if
both facades are similar, then this information can be used
for the return path, but if they differ significantly, then
position D becomes useless on the return path, since it
cannot be recognized anymore (only if the observer turns
the head on the initial path at the intersection). From a
perceptual point of view the object must be recognizable. If
this condition is not fulfilled, the former optimal position D
might become totally worthless (see Tables 1 and 2 for
theoretical predictions; please note the lower right value,
which has the most dramatic effects depending on visibility
and equal appearance).
Not only the visibility represents an important issue but
also language and how it is used when giving instructions,
learning new pathways, and transforming them mentally
(for the return path). As mentioned above, there are at least
two ways of spatial directions: direction specific and
direction unspecific information (Figure 4).

Table 2: Visibilities for the different landmark
positions. In comparison to Table 1 we now assume
that the two facades of each building are different in
their appearance. This leads to a visibility of 0 for
position D, since here the new facade on the return
path does not contain any information about this
position compared to the initial path.
Path
Position
A
B
C
D

Return Path
(hypothetical)

Return Path
(real)

1
1
0.5
0.5

1
0.5
1
0.5

1
0.5
0.5
0.0

Figure 4: Examples for verbal directions in the
forward run and the return path. Note that the
descriptions for positions D and A vary only slightly
(if at all), while larger changes occur for positions C
and B.

Table 1: Visibilities for the different landmark
positions (A-D) in Figures 2 and 3 for the initial
path, the theoretical return path, and for the real
return path; 0 indicates that no facade is visible, 0.5
indicates that one facade in visible, and 1 means that
both possible facades of a building at an intersection
are visible. Here, both facades of a single building
have the same characteristics/appearance. Thus,
position D has a visibility of 0.5 on the return path,
since the visible facade is similar to the one seen on
the initial path.
Path
Position
A
B
C
D

Initial
Path

Initial
Path

Return Path
(hypothetical)

Return Path
(real)

1
1
0.5
0.5

1
0.5
1
0.5

1
0.5
1
0.5

541

Direction specific here means that a precise direction with
a single spatial word is provided, e.g., left or right. At first
glance this information is easy to understand and simple to
use. But, it becomes complicated if the return path has to be
constructed, since then a left turn needs to become a right
turn and vice versa (note that straight remains straight on
the return path). Thus, an additional mental transformation
is required. Additional in this sense means that it is also
possible to encode directions in an unspecific way (without
directions but rather based on landmark locations). In other
words, the verbal direction turn in the direction of the gas
station does not need to be verbally or mentally transformed
if it is located on position D (the same is true for position A
with the instruction turn in opposite direction of A). On the
return path, both locations and unspecific directions would
remain the same: in the mental representation the gas station
would still either be in direction of the turn (D) or opposite
to the direction of the turn (A). This would require one
mental processing step less, since no transformation would

be required (left  right) resulting in less cognitive load.
But, is this how wayfinders encode spatial information and
spatial directions? Theoretically, direction unspecific
information would be less effortful and therefore preferable
over a direction specific strategy that results in higher
cognitive load.
Therefore, it is important in a first step to systematically
investigate how wayfinders encode given (unfamiliar)
routes and how they transform them into a return path; and
in a second step it is necessary to model the optimal
strategies (also with respect to individual abilities) to make
predictions about spatial performance.

Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M. (2011). SQUARELAND: A
virtual environment for investigating cognitive processes
in human wayfinding. PsychNology Journal, 9(2), 137163.
Hamburger, K., & Röser, F. (2011). The meaning of Gestalt
for human wayfinding – How much does it cost to switch
modalities? Gestalt Theory, 33(3/4), 363-382.
Kato, Y., & Takeuchi, Y. (2003). Individual differences in
wayfinding strategies. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 23(2), 171-188.
Klippel, A., & Winter, S. (2005). Structural salience of
landmarks for route discrimination. In A. G. Cohn & D.
Mark (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory. International
Conference COSIT (pp. 347-362). Berlin: Springer.
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Meilinger, T., Knauff, M., & Bülthoff, H. H. (2008).
Working memory in wayfinding- a dual task experiment
in a virtual city. Cognitive Science, 32(4), 755-770.
Meilinger, T., & Knauff, M. (2008). Ask for your way or
use a map: A field experiment on spatial orientation and
wayfinding in an urban environment. Journal of Spatial
Science, 53(2), 13-23.
Papinski, D., Scott, D. M., & Doherty, S. T. (2009).
Exploring the route choice decision-making process: A
comparison of planned and observed routes obtained
using person-based GPS. Transportation Research Part
F, 12(4), 347-358.
Presson, C. C., & Montello, D. R. (1988). Points of
reference in spatial cognition: Stalking the elusive
landmark. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
6(4), 378-381.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M. (2011). The
Giessen virtual environment laboratory: Human
wayfinding and landmark salience. Cognitive Processing,
12(1), 209-214.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., Krumnack, A., & Knauff, M.
(2012a). The structural salience of landmarks: Results
from an on-line study and a virtual environment
experiment. Journal of Spatial Science, 57(1), 37-50.
Röser, F., Krumnack, A., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M.
(2012b). A four factor model of landmark salience – A
new approach. In N. Rußwinkel, U. Drewitz & H van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Cognitive Modeling (ICCM) (pp. 82-87). Berlin.
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The nature of
landmarks for real and electronic spaces. In C. Freksa &
D. M. Mark (Eds). Spatial Information Theory: Cognitive
and Computational Foundations of Geographic
Information Science, International Conference COSIT
1999 (pp. 37-50). Stade: Springer.
Winter, S. (2003). Route adaptive selection of salient
features. In W. Kuhn, M.F. Worboys & S. Timpf (Eds.),
Spatial
Information
Theory:
Cognitive
and
Computational Foundations of Geographic Information
Science, International Conference COSIT (pp. 37-50).
Berlin: Springer.

General Discussion and Conclusion
In this position paper we presented first empirical data on
return path research and how this information is processed
to aid wayfinding (unfortunately, we could not present all
empirical research within this study). As can be seen from
our theoretical assumptions, much more research is required
within this context. We offered a few interesting issues, e.g.,
structural importance, visibility, language, mental
transformation, which should be investigated further. So far
we did not focus on brain imaging and neural correlates of
wayfinding. But, investigating the cognitive processes of
how we learn and encode initial pathways and how we later
transform them into new routes (especially return paths) is
also of relevance for the neuroscientific branch of this
research. Thus, our findings and assumptions about the
return path make up an interesting project for
interdisciplinary future cognitive research.

Acknowledgement
This study was supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG HA5954/1-1). We thank Markus Knauff
for valuable comments on the manuscript.

References
Büchner, S. J., Hölscher, C., & Strube, G. (2007). Path
choice heuristics for navigation related to mental
representations of a building. In S. Vosniadou, D. Kayser,
A. Protopapas (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd European
Cognitive Science Conference (pp. 504-509). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Caduff, D., & Timpf, S. (2008). On the assessment of
landmark salience for human wayfinding. Cognitive
Processing, 9(4), 249-267.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58(1), 7-19.
Dudchenko, P. A. (2010). Why people get lost – The
psychology and neuroscience of spatial cognition.
Oxford: University Press.
Golledge, R. G. (1997). Defining criteria in path selection.
In D. F. Ettema & H. J. P. Timmermans (Eds.), Activitybased approaches to travel analysis (pp. 151-169). New
York: Elsevier.

542

