UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial meanings for function words? The link between conjunctions and spatial
representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vp808v3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Guerra, Ernesto
Marghetis, Tyler
Knoeferle, Pia

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial meanings for function words?
The link between conjunctions and spatial representations
Ernesto Guerra (ernesto.guerra@uni-bielefeld.de)
Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Cluster and Department of Linguistics, Bielefeld University,
Morgenbreede 39, 33615, Bielefeld, Germany

Tyler Marghetis (tmarghet@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla CA 92093-0515, USA

Pia Knoeferle (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Cluster and Department of Linguistics, Bielefeld University,
Morgenbreede 39, 33615, Bielefeld, Germany
Abstract
While formal theories of language consider function words to
have little semantic content, more recent theoretical work has
argued that even function words have meaning. Yet, there is
little experimental work on the representations underlying the
meaning of function words such as conjunctions. In two
offline experiments, we examined whether conjunctions (and,
or, but, either…or) are associated in systematic but distinctive
ways with spatial information. In Experiment 1, participants
drew schematic representations to depict how two abstract
conjuncts might be connected by each of the four
conjunctions. These drawing were evaluated on three spatial
dimensions (distance, containment and size). In Experiment 2,
participants evaluated how well schematic sketches (that
differed in distance, containment, and size) represented
different conjunctions. In both experiments, spatial
information was systematically and distinctively associated
with conjunctions. Either… or and or conjunctions were
reliably associated with the use of large distance and
separation via containment of the conjuncts. And, by contrast,
was associated with shorter distance between, and no
containment of, the conjuncts. Finally, but was associated
with differences in size. We discuss implications of these
results for the spatial foundation of linguistic meaning, and
the link between lexical semantics and logic.
Keywords: Conjunctions, spatial representation, drawing,
rating, simulation, embodiment.

Introduction
Natural language conjunctions such as and and or are used
in ways that differ markedly from their logical or ―truthtabular‖ senses. For instance, and often expresses the
temporal order of two conjoined events (Bloom et al, 1980).
Thus, (1) and (2) mean quite different things:
(1) He ran through the door and slipped on a banana peel.
(2) He slipped on a banana peel and ran through the door.
While (1) and (2) differ only in the order of the conjuncts,
this results in a different temporal ordering of the events.
Conjunctions can also express causality, counterfactuals, or
subordination (see Culicover & Jackendoff, 1997). This
departure from formal logic has long been recognized by
linguists of all stripes (e.g., Hoeksema, 1987; Klinedinst &
Rothschild, 2012). But what about those cases where and

and or are used in a sparse discursive context and actually
appear to express a simple logical relation? What are the
lexical semantics of and and or in their most austere uses?
On a classic formal account, the semantics of these
function words is impoverished, contributing to the meaning
of an utterance only in virtue of the meaning of the
conjoined content words (e.g., Keenan & Faltz, 1985; cf.
Boole, 1854). More recent work, however, has prompted a
reconsideration of the semantics of function words, and of
the semantic content of grammar more generally. Langacker
(2008) has argued that grammar is inseparable from
meaning, since it shapes conceptualization in subtle but
reliable ways. According to Langacker (1987), conjunctions
like and and or prompt the ―juxtaposition‖ of two or more
objects or events in a dynamic conceptualization. Moreover,
he and others (e.g. Landau & Jackendoff, 2003; Talmy,
2000) have argued that schematic spatial information may
lie at the core of linguistic meaning. Could the
―juxtaposition‖ prompted by conjunctions rely on implicit
spatial representations?
This possibility aligns with recent evidence that language
comprehension involves the dynamic construction of an
embodied mental simulation. In contrast with approaches
that posit abstract, symbolic representations (e.g. Landauer
& Dumais, 1997; Markman & Dietrich, 2000), embodied
approaches argue that linguistic meaning is fundamentally
tied to perceptual, motor and affective representations
(Barsalou, 1999). Understanding ―He threw the apple into
the air,‖ might involve activating cortical circuits implicated
in perceiving the color red (Connell, 2007), perceiving
motion (Saygin et al, 2012), or performing the action of
throwing (Masson, Bub, & Warren 2008). To account for
how less concrete language is grounded in perception and
action, proponents of some embodied approaches to
language comprehension have appealed to ―metaphorical‖
representations that map concrete experience to abstract
linguistic content (Gibbs, 2006; Gallese & Lakoff, 2005).
For instance, respect can be conceptualized in terms of
vertical height—―I look up to my superiors‖—while
similarity can be conceptualized in terms of closeness—
―Our ideas are quite close‖ (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). And,
in fact, comprehending language about respect, similarity,

2458

and other abstract concepts appears to involve schematic
spatial representations (Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012;
Richardson et al., 2003; but see Bergen et al., 2007). Thus,
the meaning of content words—both concrete and
abstract—may include schematic spatial information.
But what about function words, such as conjunctions?
Could their meaning also involve schematic spatial
information, co-opting space to juxtapose conjuncts? There
is evidence that grammatical tense, for instance, activates
spatial representations. Santiago and colleagues (2007)
found that participants were faster to categorize words as
referring in the past tense when words were presented on the
left (vs. right) side of the screen, but faster for words in the
future tense when presented on the right (vs. left)—as if
grammatical tense activated a left-to-right mental timeline
(see also Torralbo, Santiago & Lupiáñez, 2006). The
―juxtaposition‖ prompted by conjunctions may also rely on
schematic spatial representations, such as containment (see
Glenberg, 2010). Comprehension of and, for instance, could
involve a spatial grouping of the conjuncts, while or could
mark alternatives by separating them spatially via
containment. However, there is no clear experimental
evidence showing that function words such as conjunctions
are indeed related to spatial representations.
In the present two studies, we used two offline tasks to
probe spatial representations underlying the meaning of
conjunctions. In the first drawing study, participants created
schematic sketches of conjunctions; in the second rating
study, they rated schematic spatial diagrams on how well
they represented different conjunctions. Both drawing and
rating tasks have been used to study spatial representations
activated by language, but only for concrete and abstract
content words (Richardson et al, 2001). If conjunctions also
co-opt spatial schemas to keep track of conceptual relations
between conjuncts, then we should see a reliable, systematic
use of spatial properties like distance, size, or containment
to represent different conjunctions.

Experiment 1: Drawing study
Experiment 1 used a drawing paradigm to examine whether
representations of space are used to understand and visually
depict the relationships expressed by four conjunctions
(and, or, but, and either… or). If spatial representations are
co-opted, then participants should systematically use spatial
information to differentially represent the relations
expressed by conjunctions. Alternatively, if conjunctions
relate the meaning of the conjuncts in an abstract or logical
fashion, no reliable differences in the use of spatial
information should emerge.

Method
Participants 108 native speakers of German completed the
drawing task. They all gave informed consent and received
monetary compensation for their participation.
Materials Three German conjunctions (und ‗and‘; aber,
‗but‘; and oder ‗or‘) and a German correlative conjunction

(entweder… oder, ‗either… or‘) were presented on a single
sheet of paper (Fig. 1). Each conjunction appeared as
―Object X conjunction Object Y‖ at the top of a blank
square. Participants could select objects and frames for their
drawings (Fig. 2).

Figure 1: Example of the drawings from a single participant.

Figure 2: Objects and frames of different shapes and sizes to
be used in the drawings.
Design and procedure In a within-subjects design, with
conjunction as a factor (‗and‘, ‗but‘, ‗or‘, ‗either… or‘),
each participant was instructed to make one drawing for
each conjunction (see Fig. 1) using the objects in Figure 2.
Participants saw two examples for the prepositions with and
without. They were told that there were no correct or
incorrect answers. The order of the conjunctions (Fig. 1)
was counterbalanced.
Analysis We examined the drawings‘ spatial dimensions of
distance, containment and size. Distance was defined as
millimeters (mm) between objects‘ centers; containment
codes whether objects were (or weren‘t) separated by one or
more frames; size codes whether the objects had the same or
a different size. Normalized distance scores (z-scores) were
analyzed with linear mixed effect regression (LMER, lme4
package for R statistical software). Mixed-effects models
are suitable for analyzing unbalanced data and capture
participants‘ variation around multiple fixed effects similar
to ANOVAs (Quené & van den Bergh, 2008). Our LMER
modeled distance with conjunction as fixed effect,
participant as random intercept, and the fixed effect as
random slope.
For the analyses with containment and size, we calculated
the percentage of representations that used these dimensions
(e.g., containment was scored as present when an object was
drawn with a frame around it, and size when differentlysized objects were used). A binomial test evaluated whether
these percentages differed significantly from chance.

2459

Results
Distance Figure 3 shows the normalized mean distances
between objects by conjunction. A positive deviation from
zero (the intercept and grand mean) indicates objects were
drawn farther apart than the grand mean object distance; a
negative deviation indicates they were closer together.
Figure 3 illustrates that while objects were drawn farther
apart than average for ‗either… or‘ and ‗or‘, they were
drawn closer together for ‗and‘. Object distance for ‗but‘ did
not differ from average. The LMER1 model confirmed a
main effect of conjunction for distance (p<.001).

Figure 3: Normalized mean distances between objects for
each conjunction. Error bars represent standard errors.
Post-hoc comparisons (Bonferroni corrected) confirmed
shorter between-object distance for ‗and‘ than any of the
other conjunctions (ps<.001); objects for ‗either…or‘ were
significantly farther apart than those for ‗but‘ (p=.01). The
difference in distance between ‗or‘ and ‗but‘ did not reach
significance (p=.24; uncorrected p=.037), and ‗either…or‘
and ‗or‘ did not differ (p=1).

Figure 4: Participant percentage using containment (upper
graph) and size (lower graph) for each of the conjunctions.
Containment & Size Figure 4 illustrates, for each
conjunction, the percentage of participants who used frames
around objects and different object sizes in their drawings.
1
We report p-values calculated using a MCMC simulation (R
code: pvals.fnc) for a mixed-effects model without random
correlations. The R code is: lmer (distance ~ conjunction +
(1|participant) + (0+conjunction | participant), data).

For ‗but‘, the use of containment did not differ from chance
(47%, p=.6). Instead, differently-sized objects distinguished
the conjuncts (62%, p=.017). For ‗either… or‘, containment
(61%, p=.026), but not size (36%, p=.008) was used above
chance. For ‗or‘, the use of containment did not differ from
chance (47%, p=.6), but differences in size were
systematically avoided (37%, p=.012). Finally, drawings for
‗and‘ avoided the use of containment (28%, p<.001) and
used size at the level of chance (46%, p=.4).

Discussion
As predicted, different conjunctions were reliably associated
with particular spatial dimensions. When two objects were
conjoined by ‗and‘, they were drawn close together and not
separated by frames. By contrast, for ‗or‘ and ‗either…or‘
objects were drawn farther apart and separated by frames.
Finally, depictions of ‗but‘ relied on size to contrast the
objects, but made no use of containment or distance. These
conjunctions, therefore, elicited reliable spatial depictions in
the absence of content words or linguistic context.
But do these results reflect spontaneous associations
between conjunctions and space, or task-induced strategic
reflection? To rule out that participants interpreted all four
conjunctions and planned their sketches, perhaps to contrast
them, we conducted a self-paced rating study based on the
results of Experiment 1. In the rating study, participants
only saw one conjunction-schema pair at a time. If sketches
served to contrast the conjunctions, then use of space should
disappear, or at least be greatly diminished in the rating task
when only one pair is rated at a given time.

Experiment 2: Rating study
Each conjunction (‗and‘, ‗or‘, ‗but‘, ‗either…or‘) was paired
with each of eight spatial schemas, designed to contrast
three spatial dimensions: distance, containment, and size
(Figure 5). These conjunction-schema pairs were randomly
presented, so that participants could not predict the ensuing
schema-conjunction pair. If the use of spatial information
was not strategic, then ratings of how well a given depiction
illustrates the meaning of a conjunction should replicate
findings from Experiment 1. Specifically, we predict higher
ratings for ‗either… or‘, and ‗or‘ when paired with schemas
representing far (vs. close) distance and separated
containers (vs. objects-contained). By contrast, ratings for
‗and‘ should be higher with schemas representing close (vs.
far) distance and objects-contained (vs. separated
containers). Finally, we predict no differences for ‗but‘ on
distance- or containment-related schema ratings, but higher
than average ratings for size-related schemas.

Method
Participants A further twenty-four native German speakers
completed Experiment 2. They all gave informed consent
and received monetary compensation for their participation.
Materials Figure 5 shows the schematic depictions. Seven
visual schemas covered the three dimensions analyzed in

2460

Experiment 1 (i.e., distance, containment, size, Fig. 5, A-G);
an eighth schema served as a baseline (Fig. 5 H). Each
schema was presented on the computer screen with each one
of the four conjunctions from Experiment 1.

p=.018, respectively). The pattern reversed for ‗and‘, for
which the close schema was reliably preferred (p<.001).

Figure 5: Depictions for the spatial schemas: far (A); close
(B); big (C), small (D), one-container (E); two-containers
(F); objects-contained (G); and baseline (H).
Design and procedure A within-subjects design, had
schema (eight schemas; Fig. 5) and conjunction (‗and‘, ‗or‘,
‗but‘, ‗either…or‘) as factors. Participants rated each
possible pairing on how well a schema depicted a
conjunction using a 7-point scale (1=very bad to 7=very
good). Items were presented one at a time on a computer
monitor, and participants responded self paced. Experiment
Builder v10.6 software (SR Research) recorded responses
and randomized trial order.
Analysis For each conjunction, we normalized participants‘
raw ratings relative to their rating of the baseline schema H
by subtracting their baseline rating from their other ratings2.
Thus, within a conjunction, schemas that were judged more
acceptable than baseline received a positive score, but a
negative score if they were less acceptable than baseline.
Schema ratings were split into three subsets, based on the
three spatial dimensions analyzed in Experiment 1. The
distance subset included ratings for far and close schemas;
the containment subset included ratings for one-container,
two-containers and objects-contained schemas; and the size
subset included ratings for big and small schemas. Each set
of normalized ratings was then analyzed separately using an
LMER model, with schema and conjunction as fixed effects,
participant as random intercept, and the main effects and
interaction of the fixed effects as random slopes. Planned
dependent t-tests (Bonferroni corrected) compared ratings
for each schema within conjunctions.

Figure 6: Normalized-to-baseline mean rate for far and
close schemas for all conjunctions. Error bars represent
standard errors.
Containment LMER analyses showed a reliable main effect
of conjunction (p=.002) but not of schema (p=.3); schema
and conjunction interacted, as predicted (p<.001, Fig. 7).
Planned pairwise comparisons examined containment
preferences for each conjunction. For ‗either… or‘, the twocontainers schema—which maximally separates the two
objects—was rated higher than both the objects-contained
and the one-container schemas (both p<.001). Similarly, for
‗or‘, the two-container schema was significantly preferred
over the one-container schema (p=.002), and was
marginally preferred over the objects-contained schema
(p=.08; uncorrected p=.027). By contrast, for ‗and‘, the
objects-contained schema—which groups both objects
together—received the highest ratings among the
containment-related schemas. The one-container schema
was significantly disliked, compared to both the objectscontained and the two-container schemas (both p<.001, ps
for the other comparisons, n.s.).

Results
Distance The LMER showed neither main effects of
schema nor conjunction (ps>.29). However, as predicted,
schema and conjunction interacted (p=.011), with higher
ratings for the far schema for ‗and‘, but the close schema
for ‗either…or‘ and ‗or‘ (Fig. 6).
Planned pairwise comparisons assessed the effect for each
conjunction. For ‗but‘, ratings did not differ for the far and
close schemas (p=.92). For both ‗either… or‘ and ‗or‘, by
contrast, the far schema received higher ratings (p<.001 and
2

For instance, if the and + baseline schema was rated as a 4,
and and + objects-contained was rated a 6, the normalized rating
for and + objects-contained was 6 - 4 = 2.

Figure 7: Normalized-to-baseline mean rate for onecontainer, two-container and objects-contained schemas.
Error bars represent standard errors.
Size The LMER showed a main effect of conjunction
(p=.002). Schemas that highlighted differences in size were
rated highly for ‗but‘, nevertheless, dispreferred for all other
conjunctions (Fig. 8, other ps n.s.).

2461

Figure 8: Normalized-to-baseline mean rate for big and
small schemas for all conjunctions. Error bars represent
standard errors.

Discussion
Experiment 2 confirmed that participants exhibit systematic
preferences for spatial representations of conjunctions. Both
‗either…or‘ and ‗or‘ were rated higher with larger distances
between objects, while ‗and‘ was rater higher for shorter
object distances. These conjunctions were also contrasted by
the ratings for containment: the two-container schema was
preferred for both ‗either…or‘ and ‗or‘, while the top-rated
schema for ‗and‘ contained both objects in a single frame.
Finally, schemas that depicted size differences were reliably
preferred for ‗but‘, and rejected for all other conjunctions.

General Discussion
Although previously suggested in the literature (e.g.,
Glenberg, 2010; Langacker, 2008), until now there was no
experimental evidence that space might play a role in the
representation of function words such as conjunctions. In
two experiments, conjunctions were systematically
associated with schematic spatial information, both when
participants produced and when they rated spatial
representations in the context of conjunctions.
We have framed these results in terms of semantics, and
we believe they can shed light on the comprehension of
conjunctions in natural language. But they may also tell us
something about norms of visual representations or the
communicative use of space. Logic and mathematics are rife
with spatial diagrams used to represent and reason about
logical relations, including and and or diagrams that are
strikingly similar to the spatial representations in the current
studies (Fig. 9; Guaquinto, 2007). Similarly, Langacker‘s
Cognitive Grammar (2008) relies on spatial diagrams to
represent relations between grammar and conceptualization.
Sketches and diagrams, after all, are powerful tools for
representing abstract concepts (Tversky, 2011).

If conjunctions are associated with spatial representations,
then this may even account for some of the varied senses of
and and or that have been discussed in the literature (e.g.
Culicover & Jackendoff, 1997). For instance, since time is
also associated with spatial representations (e.g. Santiago et
al., 2007), an implicit schematic spatial representation of the
conjuncts could perhaps also induce a temporal ordering.
Where does this leave the relation between lexical
semantics and logic? Perhaps closer than ever. In their book
on the conceptualization of mathematics, Lakoff and Núñez
(2000) suggest that ―much of what is often called logical
inference is in fact spatial inference mapped onto an abstract
logic domain‖ (p.43). If so, then reasoning about logical
relations, such as and and or, may rely on ―metaphoric‖
representations of containment and distance (see, e.g., Boot
& Pecher, 2011; Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012). If both the
semantics of conjunctions and formal logic turn out to rely
on space, then natural language semantics may be closer to
formal logic than recently supposed—if we‘re willing to
accept an appropriately naturalized version of formal logic,
and an appropriately embodied version of lexical semantics.
Indeed, a question that remains unaddressed is whether
schematic spatial information plays a spontaneous role in
the real-time comprehension of conjunctions, when space is
not an explicit part of the task. Suggestively, this is the case
for content words. Richardson and colleagues (2001) used
two offline norming studies to elicit schematic spatial
representations associated with both concrete and abstract
verbs (e.g. give, respect). They later found that these spatial
schemas systematically influenced real-time comprehension
of the associated verbs (Richardson et al, 2003), suggesting
that the schemas elicited by the offline tasks were active
during online language processing. We hypothesize that
similar spatial processing may occur during the processing
of conjunctions—that is, that the online comprehension of
conjunctions may also involve schematic spatial
representations of the kind examined here. Such online
measures are necessary before we can draw definite
conclusions about the semantics of conjunctions.
We do know, however, that conjunctions such as
either…or modulate online sentence comprehension (e.g.
Frazier, Munn & Clifton, 2000 for and-coordinations). In a
reading study, Staub & Clifton (2006) examined the effect
of the presence or absence of the word either on reading
times for the second conjunct of or-coordinated structures
(both for noun phrases and independent clauses). They
found that the presence of either facilitated the reading of
the content that followed the word or. These findings
showed that conjunctions (and, either… or) can influence
online sentence interpretation. Future studies should
investigate whether these online effects extend to influences
on spatial processing.

Conclusion
Figure 9: Venn diagrams use spatial containment to depict
logical relations: and (left) and or (right). And is depicted by
a compact area, while or involves two separated areas.

We have shown that different conjunctions are distinctively
associated with spatial dimensions of distance, containment,
and size. In both a drawing and a rating task, people

2462

associated ‗and‘ with closeness and containment; ‗or‘ and
‗either…or‘ with distance and separation; and ‗but‘ with
contrasting size. Future work will investigate whether these
schematic spatial properties are activated during online
comprehension, and determine their functional contribution.
Nevertheless, the present experiments highlight the use of
space to distinguish abstract grammatical relations,
suggesting the meaning of different function words can be
expressed through distinct visual spatial representations.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction
Technology Excellence Cluster (German Research
Foundation) and by a PhD scholarship awarded to EG by
the Ministry of Education, Government of Chile. We thank
the members of the Language & Cognition Lab (CITEC,
University of Bielefeld) for their help with data collection.

References
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. BBS, 22,
577-660.
Bergen, B, Lindsay, S., Matlock, T., & Narayanan, S.
(2007). Spatial and linguistic aspects of visual imagery in
sentence comprehension. Cognitive Science, 31, 733-764.
Bloom, L., Lahey, M., Hood, L., Lifter, K., & Fiess, K.
(1980). Complex sentences: Acquisition of syntactic
connectives and the semantic relations they encode.
Journal of Child Language, 7, 235-261.
Boole, G. (1854). An investigation of the laws of thought on
which are founded the mathematical theories of logic and
probabilities. Cambridge, UK: MacMillan and Co.
Boot, I., & Pecher, D. (2011). Representation of categories:
Metaphorical use of the container schema. Experimental
Psychology, 58, 162-170.
Connell, L. (2007). Representing object colour in language
comprehension. Cognition, 102, 476-485.
Culicover, P., & Jackendoff, R. (1997). Semantic
subordination despite syntactic coordination. Linguistic
Inquiry, 28, 195-217.
Gallese, V., & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain‘s concepts: The
role of the sensory–motor system in conceptual
knowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22, 455–479.
Gibbs, R. (2006). Metaphor interpretation as embodied
simulation. Mind & Language, 21, 434–458.
Giaquinto, M. (2007). Visual thinking in mathematics: An
epistemological study. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Glenberg, A. (2010). Embodiment as a unifying perspective
for psychology. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Cognitive Science, 1, 586-596.
Guerra, E., & Knoeferle, P. (2012). Abstract language
comprehension is incrementally modulated by nonreferential spatial information: evidence from eyetracking. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1620-1625). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

Frazier, L., Munn, A., & Clifton, C. (2000). Processing
coordinate structure. JPR, 29, 343–368.
Hoeksema, J. (1987). The semantics of non-boolean ―and.‖
Journal of Semantics, 6, 19-40.
Keenan, E., & Faltz, L. (1985). Boolean Semantics for
Natural language. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel.
Klinedinst, N & Rothschild, D. (2012). Connectives without
truth tables. Natural Language Semantics, 20, 1-39.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes
from: How the embodied mind brings mathematics into
being. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). ―What‖ and ―where‖
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Landauer, T., & Dumais, S. (1997). A solution to Plato's
problem: the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Langacker, R. (1987). Foundations of Cognitive Grammar.
Standford, CA: Standford Universtity Press.
Langacker, R. (2008). Cognitive Grammar: A Basic
Introduction. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Markman, A. & Dietrich, E. (2000). Extending the classical
view of representation. TiCS, 4, 470-475.
Masson, M., Bub, D. & Warren, C. (2008). Kicking
calculators: Contribution of embodied representations to
sentence comprehension. JML, 59, 256-265.
Quené, H. & van den Bergh, H. (2008). Examples of mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects and with
binomial data. JML, 59, 413-425.
Richardson, D., Spivey, M., Barsalou, L., McRae, K.
(2003). Spatial representations activated during real-time
comprehension of verbs. Cognitive Science, 27, 767-780.
Richardson, D., Spivey, M., Edelman, S. & Naples, A.
(2001). "Language is spatial": Experimental evidence for
image schemas of concrete and abstract verbs.
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mawhah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Santiago, J., Lupiáñez, J., Perez, E., & Fuenes, M.J. (2007)
Time (also) flies from left to right. PB & R, 14, 512–516.
Saygin, A., McCullough, S., Alac, M., & Emmorey, K.
(2010). Modulation of BOLD response in motion
sensitive lateral temporal cortex by real and fictive motion
sentences. J Cog Neur, 22, 2480-90.
Staub, A. & Clifton, C. (2006). Syntactic prediction in
language comprehension: Evidence from Either… or.
JEP: LMC, 32, 425-436.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics, Volume I:
Concept structuring systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupianez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. Cognitive Science, 30, 745–757.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizations of thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 499-535.

2463

