UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial terms across languages support near-optimal communication: Evidence from
Peruvian Amazonia, and computational analyses

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g79r2md

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Khetarpal, Naveen
Neveu, Grace
Majid, Asifa
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial terms across languages support near-optimal communication:
Evidence from Peruvian Amazonia, and computational analyses
Naveen Khetarpal (khetarpal@uchicago.edu)a
Grace Neveu (gkneveu@berkeley.edu)b
Asifa Majid (a.majid@let.ru.nl)c
Lev Michael (levmichael@berkeley.edu)b
Terry Regier (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)b,d
a

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Department of Linguistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
c
Center for Language Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands
d
Cognitive Science Program, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
b

A central question in cognitive science is why languages
have the categories they do – in this case, why spatial
categories exhibit the constrained cross-language variation
they do (Bowerman & Pederson, 1992; Bowerman, 1996;
Talmy, 2000; Levinson et al., 2003).

Abstract
Why do languages have the categories they do? It has been
argued that spatial terms in the world’s languages reflect
categories that support highly informative communication,
and that this accounts for the spatial categories found across
languages. However, this proposal has been tested against
only nine languages, and in a limited fashion. Here, we
consider two new languages: Maijɨki, an under-documented
language of Peruvian Amazonia, and English. We analyze
spatial data from these two new languages and the original
nine, using thorough and theoretically targeted computational
tests. The results support the hypothesis that spatial terms
across dissimilar languages enable near-optimally informative
communication, over an influential competing hypothesis.

Informative communication
Recently, an answer to this question has been proposed that
is grounded in general communicative principles.
Khetarpal, Majid, & Regier (2009) argued that across
languages, spatial categories are shaped by the need to
support informative communication. On this view, the
many different spatial systems observed across languages
represent different means to this same end. This argument
mirrors analogous arguments that have recently been
advanced for the semantic domains of color (Regier, Kay, &
Khetarpal, 2007) and kinship (Kemp & Regier, 2012), and
also reflects a more general recent focus on informative
communication as a central force that explains why
languages take the forms they do (e.g. Fedzechkina, Jaeger,
& Newport, 2012; Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson, 2011).
Khetarpal et al. (2009) considered the 71 spatial scenes of
the TOPOLOGICAL RELATIONS PICTURE SERIES or TRPS
(Bowerman & Pederson, 1992), illustrated in part in Figure
1, as named by speakers of 9 unrelated languages: Basque,
Dutch, Ewe, Lao, Lavukaleve, Tiriyó, Trumai, Yélî-Dnye,
and Yukatek (Levinson et al., 2003). Each of these
languages groups TRPS scenes together into languagespecific spatial categories, and Khetarpal et al. (2009) asked
whether these attested groupings support near-optimally
informative communication. In a series of computational
simulations, they asked whether each of these linguistic
spatial systems supports informative communication better
than a comparison class of hypothetical systems. They
found that this is indeed the case. They concluded that
spatial terms across languages reflect near-optimally
informative spatial categories, and that this functional force
may help to explain which spatial categories appear in the
world’s languages.
However, this earlier work is limited in three important
respects. First, it considered data from only nine languages.

Keywords: Spatial terms; semantic universals; informative
communication; language and thought; semantic maps.

Spatial categories across languages
Spatial terms across languages often pick out different
categories, as illustrated in Figure 1. Yet at the same time
similar or comparable categories often recur across
unrelated languages.

Figure 1: 10 spatial scenes, as categorized in 2 languages:
Tiriyó and Yélî-Dnye. Source: Levinson et al. (2003).

764

Michael (in preparation). Spatial meanings are conveyed in
Maijɨki by several means, including spatial adpositions and
spatial verbs. For simplicity we focus on the major spatial
adpositions, listed in Table 1 (tone marks are suppressed
here and elsewhere in this paper).

Such data are difficult and time-consuming to collect, and
we are grateful to our colleagues at the MPI Nijmegen for
sharing their data with us. Still, this is a very small sample,
so it is possible that other languages would break the
generalization made on the basis of these nine. Second, the
earlier work tested the near-optimality claim against these
nine languages in a narrow and limited way. Each language
was compared to only 69 hypothetical systems that were
intended to be comparable to it. Thus it is possible that
many other, unexamined hypothetical systems may exist
that are more informative than the attested system – again
potentially breaking the generalization and undercutting the
central theoretical claim. Third, the earlier work did not test
the
informativeness
proposal
against
alternative
explanations for constrained semantic variation.
Here we bring new data and analyses to bear on the claim
that spatial categories across languages support informative
communication, and that this force may account for the
observed variation in spatial systems. The new data are
from Maijɨki, an under-documented language of Peruvian
Amazonia, and English. The new analyses compare eleven
languages (Maijɨki, English, and the nine languages from
Levinson et al., 2003) to much larger and more theoretically
targeted sets of hypothetical systems. Critically, unlike the
earlier analyses, the new analyses explicitly pit the claim of
near-optimal informativeness against the competing and
influential theoretical claim that semantic categories tend to
pick out connected regions of conceptual or perceptual
space (e.g. Croft, 2003; Haspelmath, 2003; Roberson,
Davies, & Davidoff, 2000; Roberson, 2005).
In what follows we first describe Maijɨki and its spatial
system, comparing it with that of English. We then lay out
the hypotheses to be tested, our analyses of the eleven
languages under consideration, and the results of these
analyses. We conclude from these results that spatial
systems across languages do indeed reflect near-optimally
informative categories, and that this proposal is supported
over the competing claim that categories pick out connected
regions of conceptual or perceptual space. We suggest that
the functional goal of informative communication may
account for the wide but constrained variation found in
spatial systems across languages.

Table 1: Spatial adpositions in Maijɨki.
Adposition
guibɨ
gunu
ɨmɨjai
jeteruru
sanu

Approximate meaning
under
near an edge
on top or above
behind
inside at bottom

The extensions of these Maijɨki spatial adpositions are
illustrated in Figure 2 below, as subsets of the full set of 71
scenes in the TRPS. Also shown for comparison are spatial
categories in English. In each of the 71 scenes, the figure
object is shown in orange, the ground object in black, and
the corresponding spatial meaning is the spatial relation
between the figure and the ground. As can be seen, the
spatial categories of Maijɨki differ from those of English.
We seek general principles that help to determine which
logically possible groupings of scenes constitute categories
that are attested in the world’s languages.

Hypotheses
We consider two hypotheses, which our analyses pit against
each other, using data from Maijɨki, English, and the nine
languages of Levinson et al. (2003).

Near-optimally informative communication
The first hypothesis is the one sketched above: that spatial
categories across languages appear as they do because these
categories maximize or near-maximize the informativeness
of communication. We take a communicative system to be
informative to the extent that it supports accurate mental
reconstruction by a listener of a speaker’s intended meaning
(cf. communication accuracy: Lantz & Stefflre, 1964). This
general idea, which also applies to other semantic domains,
can be made concrete through the following communicative
scenario.
A speaker has a particular spatial relation in mind, and
wishes to communicate it to a listener. To that end, the
speaker produces a spatial term that describes this spatial
relation. The listener must then mentally reconstruct the
original spatial relation that the speaker intended, from the
term used. Because the listener knows only that the
intended spatial relation falls in the general category named
by the spatial term, the listener’s mental reconstruction is
the set of all spatial relations that are named by the term.
We define the reconstruction accuracy to be the similarity
of this mental reconstruction to the original intended spatial
relation. In general, we hold that informative categories, and
informative systems of categories, are those that support
high reconstruction accuracy.

Maijɨki
Maijɨki is an under-documented Western Tukanoan
language of Peruvian Amazonia, spoken in the departmento
of Loreto, near the Colombian-Peruvian border. The
language is spoken by approximately 100 individuals, of
whom some 25 are Maijɨki-dominant, although there are no
monolingual speakers. The language is currently being
documented as part of the Maijɨki Project, a multi-year
effort to produce a grammar, text collection, and dictionary
of the language (Michael, Beier, & Farmer, 2012). Maijɨki is
unrelated to the other languages that we consider in this
paper.
The spatial system of Maijɨki has only recently been
investigated, and is described in detail by Neveu and

765

Figure 2: A semantic map showing spatial categories from Maijɨki (red) and English (blue). Categories that appear in both
languages are shown in black. Links connect scenes that are presumed to be universally related across languages. All
displayed categories in both Maijɨki and English pick out connected regions of the map.

We formalize these ideas as follows.1 Let S be the set of
all possible spatial relations (here approximated by the
spatial scenes of the TRPS, or the subset of those scenes that
are assigned names by a given language). Let sim(x,y) be
the similarity between two spatial relations x and y (here,
similarity is gauged empirically as described below, and
ranges from 0 = completely dissimilar to 1 = maximally

similar). Let s be the specific spatial relation the speaker
intends to convey, let t be the spatial term used to describe
that spatial relation, and let cat(t) be the category or set of
all spatial relations described by t, including s. Finally, let
era(s) be the expected reconstruction accuracy of scene s,
i.e. the similarity between the target spatial relation s and
the listener’s reconstruction of that spatial relation, based on
the speaker’s spatial term t. This is the average, over all
spatial relations r in the same named category cat(t) as s, of
the similarity between r and s:

1

Khetarpal et al. (2009) used a slightly different formalization
of these ideas. We use this one because it maps cleanly onto the
communicative scenario sketched above, in which a listener tries to
understand a speaker’s meaning. The results reported below
remain qualitatively unchanged if the original formalization is used
instead.

era ( s) =

766

1
∑ sim(r , s)
| cat (t ) | r ∈cat (t )

(1)

The overall expected accuracy of reconstruction, over all
possible stimuli, is then given by:
1
R=
∑ era( s)
(2)
| S | s∈S
R is a measure of how well a given communicative system
supports informative communication. The first hypothesis
we consider is that attested linguistic spatial systems will
tend to exhibit high R, compared with hypothetical systems.

Goal of our analyses
It has been previously suggested (e.g. Croft, 2003: 138;
Cysouw, 2001: 609; Regier et al., in press) that
connectedness in a semantic map may be too loose a
constraint on category shape, in part because it allows
elongated categories with no clear central region; thus,
semantic categories in actuality may tend to be more
compact and coherent than is suggested by this constraint
alone. However it has not yet been determined whether
informativeness provides a better account of cross-language
variation in semantic systems. The analyses we present
below seek to answer this open question, by deliberately
pitting informativeness and connectedness against each
other.

The semantic map connectivity hypothesis
The second hypothesis we consider holds instead that
attested categories pick out connected regions of a universal
network of meanings called a semantic map (e.g. Croft,
2003; Haspelmath, 2003). Figure 2, in which we saw the
spatial systems of Maijɨki and English, is an example of a
semantic map. Here the meanings are spatial meanings,
represented by the spatial scenes of the TRPS. These spatial
meanings are assumed to be universally available, and the
links in the network represent presumed universally
available connections between closely related spatial
meanings. As we have seen, different languages often
group these meanings into categories differently, and these
language-specific groupings are also displayed in the map.
Thus a semantic map represents both presumed universal
semantic structure and language-specific parcelings of that
structure.
The core idea behind a semantic map is that across
languages, semantic categories will always pick out
connected regions of the network. In other words, a
category should correspond to a group of meanings (here,
scenes) that are connected in the sense that one may travel
from any meaning in the category to any other by repeatedly
traversing links in the network. The semantic map in Figure
2 was inferred automatically (Regier, Khetarpal, & Majid,
in press) to accommodate, as connected regions, the spatial
categories of the nine languages of Levinson et al. (2003).
As can be seen, this network generalizes well to Maijɨki and
English: all the displayed Maijɨki and English spatial
categories also pick out connected regions of this map,
although Maijɨki and English were not considered in its
construction.2 This fact suggests that the inferred universal
structure of this semantic map, and the criterion of
connectedness implicit in it, may in fact be an important
constraint on semantic categories across languages. Similar
ideas emphasizing the importance of connectedness as a
determinant of what makes a good or natural category may
also be found elsewhere (e.g. Levinson et al., 2003;
Roberson, Davies, & Davidoff, 2000; Roberson, 2005).

Analyses
We reasoned with the following predictions. The
informativeness hypothesis predicts that attested linguistic
spatial systems will support informative communication
more effectively than almost all hypothetical systems – even
if those hypothetical systems all pick out connected regions
of a semantic map. The connectedness hypothesis in
contrast does not make this prediction. Instead, on that
hypothesis, it is connectedness rather than informativeness
that plays a privileged role in determining which possible
systems are actually attested – and so the informativeness of
an attested linguistic spatial system should not tend to be
any greater than the informativeness of other connected
hypothetical systems.
For this reason, in our analyses we compared the
informativeness of an actual linguistic spatial system with
that of hypothetical variants, all of which correspond to
connected regions of the semantic map of Figure 2. If
informativeness is a major determinant of attested category
systems, we expect the actual linguistic spatial system to
support informative communication better than the
connected hypothetical variants.

Crawling a semantic map
We generated hypothetical connected variants of existing
systems by randomly “crawling” a semantic map, by
analogy with web-crawling – that is, through random graph
traversal of a semantic map. We began with the semantic
map in Figure 2, but with no labels assigned to the scenes.
Then, for a given target language (e.g. English), we
construct a hypothetical connected variant of that language
as follows. Start by randomly selecting one the spatial terms
in the language—call this term t and the number of scenes
associated with it k. Now randomly select one of the scenes
in the graph and label it t. Then select another scene at
random from the set of as-yet-unlabeled scenes directly
connected to some scene already labeled t, and label that
new scene t as well; if there are no such scenes from which
to select, the procedure terminates and begins again with no
labels on any nodes. This step of extending the label t to
neighboring scenes is repeated until there are k scenes

2
Regier et al. (in press) presented slightly different extensions
of English categories against this map, one of which was not
connected. We have chosen these extensions instead because (1)
they allow English categories to be connected in this map, (2) that
connectedness allows us to include English in our upcoming
analyses, and (3) these extensions agree well with our linguistic
intuitions.

767

associated with t. The process as a whole is repeated for all
terms in the language.

hypothetical connected variants.
These results are
consistent with the claim that languages tend to have highly
informative spatial systems, and that informativeness is
more relevant to the shape of such systems than is
connectedness. Similar results from other languages would
strengthen this conclusion.
Figure 4 below presents analogous results for English.
Again, the actual English system supports informative
communication more effectively than any of the sampled
hypothetical connected variants.

Methods
We conducted semantic-map-crawling analyses separately
for each of the eleven languages under consideration:
Maijɨki, English, Basque, Dutch, Ewe, Lao, Lavukaleve,
Tiriyó, Trumai, Yélî-Dnye, and Yukatek.
For each
language, 2000 hypothetical connected variants were
generated as described above, each with the same number of
categories, and the same number of scenes per category, as
the original. For each real or hypothetical spatial naming
system, we calculated R, our measure of reconstruction
accuracy, using equations 1 and 2 above. The categories
cat(t) used to label specific scenes were determined by the
naming system under consideration. The similarity of each
pair of scenes x and y, sim(x,y), was determined empirically
by pile-sorting. Khetarpal et al. (2009) had asked speakers
of English and Dutch to sort the TRPS scenes into piles on
the basis of the similarity of the spatial relation portrayed,
and they took the similarity of any two scenes to be the
proportion of all their participants who sorted those two
scenes into the same pile.3 We used the pile-sort-derived
similarity judgments from that earlier study. For each
language, we then compared the reconstruction accuracy R
for the language itself to the distribution of R obtained for
hypothetical connected variants of that system.

Figure 4: Informativeness of communication supported by
the English spatial system (red line), compared with that
supported by 2000 hypothetical variants derived by
randomly crawling a semantic map (blue histogram).
Finally, Table 2 below presents summary results of
semantic map crawling analyses for all eleven languages we
consider. In this case, the results are given numerically, as
the proportion of hypothetical variants that the actual
linguistic system scores higher than in R (reconstruction
accuracy). The results shown here for Maijɨki and English
summarize the results from the histograms displayed above;
for the remaining nine languages, we present results in
summary form only, to conserve space. In all cases, the
actual linguistic system outperforms most of the sampled
hypothetical connected variants, and in several cases it
outperforms all of them.

Results
Figure 3 below presents the results of our analysis of
Maijɨki. The red line shows the informativeness (R) of the
Maijɨki spatial adpositional system, and the blue histogram
shows the frequency with which various values of R were
exhibited by hypothetical connected variants of Maijɨki,
obtained by randomly crawling the semantic map of Figure
2.

Table 2: Summary results of semantic map crawling
analyses for all languages considered in this study.
Language
Basque
Dutch
English
Ewe
Lao
Lavukaleve
Maijɨki
Tiriyó
Trumai
Yélî-Dnye
Yukatek

Figure 3: Informativeness of communication supported by
the Maijɨki spatial adpositional system (red line), compared
with that supported by 2000 hypothetical variants derived
by randomly crawling a semantic map (blue histogram).
The actual Maijɨki system supports informative
communication more effectively than any of the sampled

Result
> 99.95%
> 100.00%
> 100.00%
> 99.95%
> 96.20%
> 99.75%
> 100.00%
> 100.00%
> 100.00%
> 97.35%
> 99.95%

In sum, each of the 11 languages considered supports
informative communication more effectively than most
sampled hypothetical variants of those systems – even when

3

A followup study found that these pile-sorts were broadly
similar across the two languages, although they did reflect the
sorter’s native language to some extent (Khetarpal et al., 2010).

768

Cysouw, M. (2001). Review of Martin Haspelmath,
Indefinite Pronouns (1997). Journal of Linguistics 37,
607-612.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012).
Language learners restructure their input to facilitate
efficient communication. PNAS early edition.
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Potomac, MD: L. Erlbaum Associates
Haspelmath, M. (2003). The geometry of grammatical
meaning: Semantic maps and cross-linguistic comparison.
In M. Tomasello (Ed.), The new psychology of language,
vol. 2 (pp. 211-242). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kemp, C. & Regier, T. (2012). Kinship categories across
languages reflect general communicative principles.
Science, 336, 1049-1054.
Khetarpal, N., Majid, A., Malt, B., Sloman, S., & Regier, T.
(2010). Similarity judgments reflect both language and
cross-language tendencies: Evidence from two semantic
domains. In S. Ohlsson and R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Khetarpal, N., Majid, A., & Regier, T. (2009). Spatial terms
reflect near-optimal spatial categories. In N. Taatgen et al.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Lantz, D., & Stefflre, V. (1964). Language and cognition
revisited. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
69, 472-481.
Levinson, S., Meira, S., & the Language and Cognition
group (2003). ‘Natural concepts’ in the spatial topological
domain—adpositional meanings in crosslinguistic
perspective: An exercise in semantic typology. Language,
79, 485-516.
Michael, L., Beier C., & Farmer, S. (2012). Diccionario
Bilingüe Maijɨki-Castellano y Castellano-Maijɨki. Maijɨki
Project.
Neveu, G., & Michael, L. (in preparation). The semantics
and pragmatics of topological spatial relations in Maijɨki.
Ms.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word
lengths are optimized for efficient communication. PNAS,
108, 3526-3529.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 104,
1436-1441.
Regier, T., Khetarpal, N., & Majid, A. (in press). Inferring
semantic maps. Linguistic Typology.
Roberson, D., Davies I. & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color
categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a stone-age culture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 369-398.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I.R.L., & Shapiro, L.R.
(2005). Color categories: Evidence for the cultural
relativity hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 378-411.
Talmy, L. (2000). How language structures space. In L.
Talmy (Ed.) Toward a cognitive semantics, Volume 1 (pp.
177-254). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

the variants are connected regions of a semantic map. These
results are consistent with the hypothesis that
informativeness shapes category systems across languages,
and that it does so more than connectedness in a semantic
map.

Conclusions
Our findings support the claim that spatial systems across
languages reflect the need for informative communication.
They do so based on new evidence, including evidence from
an under-documented language, and on new large-scale
analyses that directly pit informativeness against the
competing claim that natural categories pick out connected
regions of a semantic map.
These findings also leave a number of issues unresolved,
suggesting directions for future investigation. Theoretically,
our analyses have focused on the informativeness of a given
system, by comparing that system to competitors of
comparable complexity – thus deliberately controlling for,
and not investigating, the complexity of these systems. A
more complete account would investigate both
informativeness and complexity, and the tradeoff between
these two general forces (e.g. Kemp & Regier, 2012).
Empirically, eleven languages is still a small sample when
considered relative to all existing languages. We feel that
every new language considered adds important evidence,
particularly under-documented languages such as Maijɨki –
but consideration of more languages will allow more
definitive conclusions.
Nonetheless, the present results lend substantial new
support to the hypothesis that informativeness plays an
important role in shaping spatial semantic systems across
languages. In so doing, these results add to the current
literature that suggests that the need for informative
communication may be a key functional force that explains
why languages have the forms that they do.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF under grants SBE0541957 and SBE-1041707, the Spatial Intelligence and
Learning Center (SILC). We thank Alex Carstensen for her
help with the Maijɨki data.

References
Bowerman, M. (1996). Learning how to structure space for
language: A cross-linguistic perspective. In P. Bloom, M.
Peterson, M. Garrett, & L. Nadel (Eds.) Language and
space (pp. 385–436). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bowerman, M. & Pederson, E. (1992). Cross-linguistic
studies of spatial semantic organization. In Annual Report
of the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 1992
(pp. 53-56).
Croft, W. (2003). Typology and universals: Second edition.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

769

