UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Syllable Frequency and Stress Priming Interact in Reading Italian Aloud

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/25p1t801

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sulpizio, Simone
Job, Remo

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Syllable Frequency and Stress Priming Interact in Reading Italian Aloud
Simone Sulpizio (simone.sulpizio@unitn.it)
Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Corso Bettini 31
38068 Rovereto (Tn), Italy

Remo Job (remo.job@unitn.it)
Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Corso Bettini 31
38068 Rovereto (Tn), Italy
Abstract
In current theories of word reading the structure and operations of
the phonological buffer are quite underspecified. We investigated
this issue by running a reading aloud experiment in Italian. We
adopted a priming paradigm, with three-syllabic words as primes
and targets and we jointly manipulated two effects ascribed to the
stage of phonological and phonetic encoding, that is stress priming
and syllable frequency. Target words varying for the frequency of
their initial syllable were preceded by words congruent or
incongruent for the stress pattern. The results showed an
interaction between syllable frequency and stress prime, with the
stress congruency effect larger for the targets with low-frequency
first syllable. This result suggests that, in reading aloud, stress
assignment and syllable computation have a tight time dynamics in
the phonological output buffer, and that the process at the level of
phonology-to-phonetic interface operates interactively.
Keywords: Lexical stress; syllable frequency; phonologicalto-phonetic interface; phonological buffer; reading aloud.

Introduction
Reading aloud requires the execution of multiple
operations, e.g., perceiving the stimulus, converting the
printed information in a speech signal, and articulating the
word’s sounds, taking into account both segmental (e.g.,
sounds) and suprasegmental (e.g., stress) information. While
many reading studies have investigated the operations
involved in word recognition, the phonological encoding of
a word and its phonetic realization have received less
attention. The same happens with computational models of
reading aloud: They usually implement in a detailed way the
procedures readers use to recognize words, but they are less
specific about those phenomena related to the production
stages (see, e.g., Coltheart, Rastle, Perry, Langdon, &
Ziegler, 2001), and the very few that have attempted to
implement procedures for stress assignment differ in the
solutions they propose (see, e.g., Arciuli, Monaghan, &
Seva, 2010; Perry, Ziegler, & Zorzi, 2010; Rastle &
Coltheart, 2000; Sibley, Kello, & Seidenberg, 2010).
The investigation of the production stage of reading
aloud can benefit from the speech production literature, as it
has been argued that speech production and reading aloud
may share the last stages of processing, specifically the
phonological and phonetic encoding of the word (Roelofs,
2004). In the model developed by Levelt and colleagues
(Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999) it is assumed that during

phonological encoding speakers retrieve in parallel the
segmental material and the metrical structure – number of
syllables and word’s stress pattern – and combine them into
the phonological word (see also Roelofs & Meyer, 1998).
At this point, the phonological word is phonetically encoded
and it is then translated into its phonetic realization.
A detailed architecture of the phonological and phonetic
encoding, however, has never been proposed by any model
of word reading and how the reading system converts
abstract
phonological
information
into
phonetic
representations is still an open issue. An effort in this
direction has been done by Perry and colleagues (2010): In
their CDP++ model of reading, at the level of phonological
output buffer, the authors implement a double process
analogous to the one proposed for word production, with
two different loci for stress and phonemes activation. In
particular, the model presents stress-output nodes, i.e. nodes
specifying the position of the stress within the lexical string.
Such nodes are activated autonomously from the segmental
information, although full processing of the latter is
conditional upon the former: Articulation of the word
phonemes cannot be initiated until the word stress has been
fully determined. However, despite the improvement of the
phonological output buffer, nothing is said about how
segmental and suprasegmental information are assembled
together, and how the selected phonological information is
converted into a phonetic representation.
Recent empirical data that can help to better understand
how the phonological and phonetic encoding work within
the reading system. Some studies run in Italian (Colombo &
Zevin, 2009; Sulpizio, Boureux, Burani, Deguchi, &
Colombo, 2012a; Sulpizio, Job, & Burani, 2012b), support
the view that metrical and segmental information are
autonomously involved in planning and assembling an
utterance, both when stress is sub-lexically computed
(Colombo & Zevin, 2009; Sulpizio et al., 2012a) or lexically
retrieved (Sulpizio et al., 2012b). In particular, the latter
study showed an effect of stress position priming for
segmentally different prime-target pairs. Specifically,
readers are faster in reading a word when it is preceded by a
word with the same stress, e.g., TESsera (card) – BUfala
(hoax), than when in is preceded by a word with a different
stress, e.g,. cuGIno (cousin) – BUfala (hoax)1. The pattern
was interpreted as showing that stress priming affects the

1402

1

Capital letters indicate stressed syllable.

stage of phonological word encoding in the phonological
buffer.
An effect that has also been ascribed to the later stages
of reading aloud is that of syllable frequency. Researches in
different languages have shown that participants are faster
in producing a word that starts with a high-frequency
syllable than one with a low-frequency syllable (see, e.g,,
for Dutch: Cholin, Levelt, & Schiller, 2006; English:
Cholin, Dell, & Levelt, 2011; French: Laganaro & Alario,
2006; Italian: Sulpizio & Job, 2010; Spanish: Carreiras &
Perea, 2004) and there is consensus on the claim that such
effect is attributed to the phonetic encoding, when readers
convert the abstract phonological word into abstract motor
programs.
Jointly considering the effects of stress assignment and
of syllable frequency in reading aloud may allow us to
better articulate the operations involved in the phonologicalto-phonetics interface, the rather neglected and
oversimplified component of reading models. Both stress
priming and syllable frequency are assumed to affect the
latest stages of reading process, when readers (a) spell out
segmental and metrical information and (b) plan the
articulation of the word, with syllable frequency affecting
the word’s phonetic encoding (Carreiras, Mechelli, & Price,
2006; Laganaro & Alario, 2006). Thus, an additive pattern
of syllable frequency and stress priming would be consistent
with the proposal of two separate consecutive stages for the
two effects, or with the assumption of a threshold of
activation for one component before the other may start its
computations (Perry et al., 2010): In such a view, word
phonetic encoding can start only after the processing of
stress assignment ends, with the consequence that a delay in
the computation of stress would affect the phonetic encoder
independently from how fast its content might be computed.
Differently, an interaction between syllable frequency and
stress priming would suggest that both the effects may
concurrently affect the same stage of processing, i.e. the
phonological-to-phonetic interface. If this is the case, it
would suggest that: a) there is no reason to postulate a
threshold setting the timing of either segmental or
suprasegmental activation; b) the mapping of the
phonological word into phonetic codes may occur through
an interactive process.

the two patterns are lexically stored within the phonological
lexicon and the asymmetry does not affect lexical reading
(Paizi, Zoccolotti, & Burani, 2011).
By jointly manipulating stress priming and syllable
frequency we aimed at investigating the operations involved
in the phonological-to-phonetic interface that take place
during the later stages of word reading. Specifically, if stress
priming and syllable frequency originate at two separate
stages of processing or the former is governed by a
threshold mechanism, then the stress priming effect should
be of similar size for both words starting with a high- and
words staring with a low-frequency syllable. Differently, if
stress priming and syllable frequency may concurrently
affect the phonological-to-phonetic interface, an interaction
between the two effects should be expected.

Method
Participants
Twenty-four students (14 male, mean age: 24, sd: 3.8) of
the University of Trento. They were all Italian native
speakers and they had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
They received credit course for their participation.

Materials and Design
Four sets of three-syllabic words were used as targets. The
sets were selected by combining two variables: Frequency
of the first syllable (high or low) and stress pattern
(penultimate or antepenultimate). Each set was composed of
22 low-frequency words selected from the CoLFIS database
(Bertinetto et al., 2005). Stimuli were matched on length in
letters, orthographic neighborhood size, orthographic
neighbors’ summed frequency, frequency of the second and
third syllable, mean bigram frequency, orthographic
complexity, initial phoneme (Table 1), and had a stress
neighborhood composed mainly of stress friends (Burani &
Arduino, 2004).
Table 1. Summary statistics: means (and standard
deviations) for the three-syllabic target words.

Experiment
Three-syllabic Italian words were used as stimuli as stress
position for these words is not always predictable. Indeed,
Italian three-syllabic words have two main stress patterns
(Thornton, Iacobini, & Burani, 1997): Antepenultimate
stress (i.e., the first syllable bears stress, e.g., TAvolo
‘table’), and penultimate stress (i.e., the second syllable
bears stress, e.g., coLOre ‘color’). Although their
distribution differs – 80% of three-syllable words bear
penultimate stress and 18% bear antepenultimate stress 2 –
2

The remaining 2% of three-syllabic words bears stress on the
final syllable, and in this case stress it is graphically marked (e.g.,
coliBRÌ, hummingbird).

1403

First Syllable
Frequency
Second+third
Syllable
Frequency
Word frequency
Length in letters
Mean Bigram
frequency
N of orthographic
neighbors

Pen.
stress
690
(561)
1588
(847)
4.5
(4.9)
7
(0.6)
11.6
(0.2)
1
(1.2)

First Syllable Frequency
High
Low
Antep.
Pen.
Antep.
stress
Stress
Stress
720
28
41
(505)
(25)
(30)
1711
2088
2228
(809)
(919)
(769)
6.5
(11.2)
6.8
(0.4)
11.5
(0.2)
1
(1.1)

7.1
(12)
7.1
(0.3)
11.4
(0.2)
1.1
(0.9)

6.05
(7.3)
7
(0.2)
11.5
(0.4)
1
(1)

Neighbors’
summed frequency

4.7
(9.9)

8.1
(22.9)

2.1
(2.8)

6
(14.9)

Mean Bigram frequency
N of orthographic neighbours

Note: Pen. = penultimate stress; Antep. = antepenultimate stress;
syllable frequency measures are calculated out of 1 milion
occurrences (Stella & Job, 2001); word frequency measures are
calculated out of 1 million occurrences (Bertinetto et al., 2005);
mean bigram frequency is log transformed on the basis of the
natural logarithm.

Targets were pre-tested to ensure that none of the initial
syllables was a probabilistic orthographic cue for stress
(Arciuli, Monaghan, & Ševa, 2010). Thus, syllable
frequency was not expected to interact with word’s stress
pattern. To further rule out such possibility, we ran a pilot
experiment asking 18 university students to read aloud all
targets. Stimuli appeared in capital letters in the center of
the screen, after a fixation cross displayed for 400 ms. Each
stimulus remained on the screen until the participant began
to read or for a maximum of 1500 ms. The presentation
order was randomized between participants. Mean RTs for
correct responses were submitted to a 2 (high- vs. lowfrequency syllable) x 2 (penultimate vs. antepenultimate
stress) ANOVA. The analysis showed an effect of syllable
frequency (F1 (1,17) = 22.19, MSE = 1246, p < .01; F2 (1,84)
= 17.29, MSE = 2033, p < .01), with faster reaction time for
words with a high-frequency syllable. Neither stress type
(F1 (1,17) = 1.60, MSE = 246; F2 < 1) nor the interaction
were significant (F1 (1,17) = 3.60, MSE = 217; F2 < 1). No
effect was significant in the analysis of errors (4.8%).
Results of the pilot experiment suggest that targets' first
syllables are not preferentially associated with a certain
stress pattern, as suggested by the absence of a syllable
frequency by stress type interaction.
Two sets of 44 high frequency three-syllabic words were
used as primes. One set included penultimate stress words
and the other antepenultimate stress words, all selected from
CoLFIS (Bertinetto et al., 2005). The two sets were matched
on: Length in letters, orthographic neighborhood size,
orthographic neighbors’ summed frequency, mean bigram
frequency, and initial phoneme (Table 2). Primes were
paired with target words in such a way that neither semantic
relation nor orthographic overlapping existed between prime
and target. Targets were divided between the two prime
stress conditions (congruent and incongruent) and each
prime word was paired with both a congruent (e.g., niPOte
'nephew' – laSAgna 'lasagna') and an incongruent stress
target (e.g., niPOte 'nephew' – MUscolo 'muscle').
Table 2. Summary statistics: means (and standard
deviations) for the three-syllabic prime words.

Word frequency
Length in letters

Stress Type
Pen.
Antep.
216
228
(118)
(127)
6.9
6.7
(0.7)
(0.7)

Neighbors’ summed frequency

11.5
(0.4)
1.9
(1.7)
51.5
(68.7)

11.4
(0.3)
1.8
(1.4)
52.6
(65.1)

Note: Pen. = penultimate stress; Antep. = antepenultimate stress;
syllable Word frequency measures are calculated out of 1 million
occurrences (Bertinetto et al., 2005); mean bigram frequency is log
transformed on the basis of the natural logarithm.

The Experiment had a 2 (congruent vs. incongruent
stress pattern) x 2 (high- vs. low-syllable frequency) design.
Following the procedure adopted by Sulpizio and colleagues
(2012b), prime-target pairs were divided in 4 pure blocks
(prime and target sharing the stress pattern & target with a
high-frequency initial syllable; prime and target sharing the
stress pattern & target with a low-frequency initial syllable;
prime and target with different stress patterns & target with
a high-frequency initial syllable; prime and target with
different stress patterns & target with a low-frequency initial
syllable). Furthermore, in each block, half of the targets had
penultimate stress and half had antepenultimate stress, and
in no case prime and target shared the initial phoneme. The
order of stimuli was randomized within blocks and block
order was counterbalanced across participants. Primes and
targets were paired in such a way that for half of the
participants a target was in a congruent stress condition
(prime and target having same stress), and for the other half
the same target was presented in the incongruent stress
position (prime and target having different stress).

Apparatus and procedure
Participants were tested individually. They were instructed
to read the targets as quickly and accurately as possible.
Each trial started with a fixation cross, centered on the
screen, for 400 ms. The prime was then presented in lowercase letters just above the center of the screen for 86 ms and
it was followed by a 86 ms blank; then, the target stimulus
was displayed in upper-case letters just below the center of
the screen. The target remained on the screen until the
participant began to read it or for a maximum of 1500 ms.
The inter-stimulus interval was 1500 ms. A practice session
with 8 trials preceded the experiment. Naming times were
recorded by means of E-Prime software. The experimenter
noted the naming errors.

Results
Responses shorter than 250 ms or longer than 1500 ms
(2.4% of all data points) were excluded from the analyses.
Naming errors, including both phonemic and stress errors,
summed to 2.7% of all data points and were not analyzed.
Results are reported in Figure 1.
A 2x2 analysis of variance with syllable frequency
(high- vs. low-frequency syllable) and condition (congruent
vs. incongruent stress) was conducted on the reaction times
(RTs) of correct responses. The factors were within

1404

participants (F1) and between items (F2). The main effect of
condition was significant, with congruent target words read
faster than incongruent target words (F1 (1,23) = 10.49,
MSE = 3771, p < .01, η2 = .27; F2 (1,176) = 51.49, MSE =
1558, p < .001, η2 = .23). The main effect of syllable
frequency was also significant, showing that targets with an
initial high-frequency syllable were read faster than targets
with a low-frequency syllable (F1 (1,23) = 8.73, MSE = 995,
p < .01, η2 = .31; F2 (1,176) = 10.24, MSE = 1558, p < .01,
η2 = .15). Finally, there was a significant interaction between
congruency condition and syllable frequency, (F1 (1,23) =
4.39, MSE = 675, p < .05, η2 = .16; F2 (1,176) = 4.26, MSE =
1558, p < .05, η2 = .12): LSD post-hoc comparisons showed
that the 55 ms stress priming effect (p < .005, η2 = .31) for
targets with a low-frequency initial syllable was
significantly different from the 31 ms effect (p < .05, η2 = .
23) for the targets with a high-frequency initial syllable.

3.01
3.07
2.09

1.08

Figure 1. Reaction times and percentage of errors by
condition
The results of the present experiment are clear. Word
targets preceded by stress-congruent primes were read faster
than targets preceded by stress-incongruent primes.
Moreover, words with a high-frequency first syllable were
read faster than words with a low-frequency first syllable.
Finally, the priming effect was larger for targets with a lowfrequency first syllable than for those with a high-frequency
first syllable.

Discussion
The main finding of our study is that syllable frequency and
stress priming interact: Reading times are longer to
incongruent prime-target stress pairs for both high- and lowfrequency syllable targets, but for the latter the difference is
larger than for the former. Thus, syllable frequency
modulates the impact of stress priming. The findings allow
us to better understand some aspects of the mechanics of
phonological and phonetic encoding during reading. They
also provide hints on the relative timing of the operations
underlying stress retrieval and word articulation in reading
aloud.
The effect of syllable frequency has been generally

ascribed to the phonetic encoding level by assuming that
speakers are facilitated in articulating those syllables they
produce frequently. Specifically, Levelt et al. (1999) argue
that high-frequency syllables can be retrieved from a mental
syllabary, while low-frequency syllables are assembled
using the phonological word as input. The assumption of a
mental syllabary has been accepted by most of the reading
literature which reported effects of syllable frequency in
word and pseuwdoword reading tasks (Carreiras & Perea,
2004; Carreiras et al., 2006; Laganaro & Alario, 2006;
Perea & Carreiras, 1998; Sulpizio & Job, 2010). Thus, also
in word reading, the effect of syllable frequency can be
located at the stage of phonetic encoding, that is in the
phonological output buffer.
The effect of stress priming has been ascribed to
mechanisms operating at the level of the phonological
buffer (Sulpizio et al. 2012b; see also Colombo & Zevin,
2009; Sulpizio et al., 2012a). In such a view, the
preactivation of metrical information by a prime word
would affect the component of the phonological buffer
responsible for metrical encoding by affecting the timing of
the operations the system performs to retrieve and assign the
correct stress pattern to the target word.
The interaction we report suggests that syllable
frequency and stress assignment may affect a common
locus, and that such locus is the phonological output buffer,
where the phonological word is phonetically encoded and
thus realized. One might argue – contra Levelt at al. (1999)
– that syllable frequency may affect reading during the
orthography-to-phonology conversion. If that were the case,
the syllable frequency effect would have emerged only in
the congruent stress condition; in the incongruent stress
condition, in fact, the time needed to account for the stress
mismatch would have delayed the assembling of segmental
and metrical information, with the result of allowing enough
time for fully computing low-frequency syllables. This
being the case, the syllable frequency effect would have
been greatly reduced or even annulled. This is not the case,
and our results support the proposal that syllable frequency
effect arises at the phonetic encoding (Levelt et al., 1999).
The difference in speed of processing between high- and
low-frequency first syllables for congruent and incongruent
stress targets seems to be the critical factor in the pattern we
obtained and the interaction suggests that, at the level of
phonology-to-phonetic interface, words with a highfrequency initial syllable are less prone to interference from
the stress mismatch. Although the present data do not allow
us to finely specify the nature of such interaction – that is, it
is hard to establish whether the nature of the stress priming
effect is facilitatory or an inhibitory – a possible
interpretation of our finding can still be sketched by
referring to the different procedures for syllabification of
high- and low-frequency syllables. According to the mental
syllabary theory (Levelt et al.’s, 1999), the former are
retrieved from the repertoire of syllables while for the latter
a composition from their constituent phonemes is
postulated. The syllable stored in the repertoire are used to

1405

drive the motor programs, that is they allow the speakers to
map the abstract phonological syllabic representations into
phonetic packages, which are still partially abstract
representations of the to-be-performed articulatory gestures,
and each syllable can thus be still prone to be articulated in
different ways (e.g., with longer or shorter duration, with
more or less force, or with different kinds of pitch
modulation; Levelt, 1989). Therefore, in case of a stimulus
with a high-frequency first syllable, the reading system may
start the phonological-to-phonetic mapping by processing
the segmental information up to the syllable repertoire and
independently of how fast the computation of the
suprasegmental information occurs; then, as soon as the
stress system determines the correct stress pattern the
activated phonetic syllable is specified in terms of stress. In
such a view, the phonetic code retrieval of a high-frequency
syllable is weakly affected by the prime computation as the
former can proceed independently from the latter. Thus, for
words starting with a high-frequency syllable, the
difference between targets in the congruent- and
incongruent-stress prime condition would be only due to the
different timing required for the specification of the correct
stress pattern of the target in the two conditions.
A different process, however, can be postulated for
words starting with low-frequency syllables as they do not
have a stored representation in the syllabary and are thus
assembled on-line. As a consequence, to map the abstract
phonological constituents of a syllabic unit into a
corresponding phonetic-detailed representation, the reading
system needs all the relevant information – the phonemes
and the specification of stress (i.e., if the syllable is either
stressed or unstressed) – to be both in the phonological
output buffer, as a partial or incomplete activation of either
segmental or suprasegmental information would make the
buffer unable to assemble a well-formed phonetic unit. In
such a view, the large priming effect reported for lowfrequency syllables may emerge because, for such stimuli,
the operations of stress assignment and phonetic syllable
computation are sequential. The implication of such
assumption is that the time required to assemble a lowfrequency syllable is a function of the time required to
correctly assign the stress pattern to the word, as the latter
can speed up or delay the initiation of phonetic encoding of
the former.
The CDP++ model of reading (Perry et al., 2010), which
was recently implemented for English bisyllables, explicitly
assumes that the start of articulation is conditional to stress
retrieval, and thus may be used to frame our interpretation
of the pattern of results. In the Perry et al.’s (2010) model,
the phonological output buffer includes two distinct
mechanisms
for
segmental
and
suprasegmental
computation, i.e., phonological output nodes and stress
output nodes, with the latter nodes being responsible for
stress assignment. This is consistent with our claim that the
locus of the interaction is the phonological output buffer.
However, the functional architecture of the model seems to
be still underspecified to be able to fully account for our

results since in the model the timing of the operations in the
phonological output buffer is such that only after the
relevant stress pattern has been activated the word
constituent phonemes, structured in their syllabic
constituents, can be overtly articulated. Such architecture
would predict an additive effect of stress assignment and
syllabification, with the consequence that a delay in the
processing of stress assignment should equally affect both
word with a high-frequency first syllable and words with a
low-frequency first syllable. Although our data support the
view that stress assignment is essential for articulation to
take place, they also suggest different procedures for highand low-frequency syllables, i.e. an interactive process at
the level of phonology-to-phonetic interface (for a similar
proposal, see Perret, Schneider, Dayer, & Laganaro, 2012).
To conclude, our findings show that words with an initial
low-frequency syllable are more strongly affected by
manipulation of incongruent stress priming than words with
a high-frequency initial syllable. This is the first evidence
showing that, in word reading, the processes of stress
assignment and syllable computation may interact within the
phonological output buffer. The finding is consistent with
the view that the phonological buffer acts as the locus of
phonological-to-phonetics interface, where the abstract
phonological word is converted into its phonetic
representation, and where stress and syllable information
may interact.
References
Arciuli, J., Monaghan, P., & Seva, N. (2010). Learning to
assign lexical stress during reading aloud: Corpus,
behavioral, and computational investigations. Journal of
Memory and Language, 63, 180-196.
Bertinetto, P. M., Burani, C., Laudanna, A., Marconi, L.,
Ratti, D., Rolando, C., & Thorton, A. M. (2005). Corpus
e Lessico di frequenza dell’italiano scritto (CoLFIS).
[CoLFIS. Corpus and Frequency Lexicon of Written
Italian],http://www.istc.cnr.it/material/database/colfis/ind
ex_eng.shtml.
Burani, C., & Arduino, L. S. (2004). Stress regularity or
consistency? Reading aloud Italian polysyllables with
different stress patterns. Brain and Language, 90, 318-25.
Carreiras, M., Mechelli, A., & Price, C. J. (2006). Effect of
Word and Syllable Frequency on Activation During
Lexical Decision and Reading Aloud. Human Brain
Mapping, 27, 963-972.
Carreiras, M., Perea, M. (2004). Naming pseudowords in
Spanish: Effects of syllable frequency. Brain and
Language, 90, 393-400.
Cholin, J., Dell, G. S., & Levelt, W. J. M. (2011). Planning
and Articulation in Incremental Word Production:
Syllable-Frequency effects in English. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 37, 109-122.
Cholin, J., Levelt, W. J. M., & Schiller, N. O. (2006).
Effects of syllable frequency in speech production.
Cognition, 99, 205–235.

1406

Colombo, L., & Zevin, J. (2009). Stress priming in reading
and the selective modulation of lexical and sub-lexical
pathways. PLoS ONE, 4, e7219.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegler,
J. (2001). DRC: A Dual Route Cascaded model of visual
word recognition and reading aloud. Psychological
Review, 108, 204-256.
Ferrand, L., Segui, J., & Grainger, J. (1996). Masked
priming of words and picture naming: The role of syllabic
units. Journal of Memory & Language, 35, 708–723.
Laganaro, M., Alario, F. X. (2006). On the locus of the
syllable frequency effect in speech production. Journal of
Memory and Language, 55, 178-196.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-75.
Paizi, D., Zoccolotti, P., & Burani, C. (2011). Lexical stress
assignment in Italian development dyslexia. Reading and
Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 24, 443-461.
Perret, C., Schneider, L., Dayer, G., & Laganaro, M. (2012):
Convergences and divergences between neurolinguistic
and psycholinguistic data in the study of phonological and
phonetic encoding: A parallel investigation of syllable
frequency effects in brain-damaged and healthy speakers.
Language and Cognitive Processes.
Perry, C., Ziegler, J. C., & Zorzi, M. (2010). Beyond single
syllables: Large-scale modeling of reading aloud with the
Connectionist Dual Process (CDP++) model. Cognitive
Psychology, 61, 106-151.
Rastle, K., & Coltheart, M. (2000). Lexical and Nonlexical
Print-to-Sound Translation of Disyllabic Words and
Nonwords. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 342364.
Roelofs, A. (2004). Seriality of phonological encoding in
naming objects and reading their names. Memory &
Cognition, 32, 212-222.
Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1998). Metrical structure in
planning the production of spoken words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 24, 922-939.
Sibley, D. E., Kello, C. T., Seidenberg, M. S. (2010).
Learning orthographic and phonological representations
in models of monosyllabic and bisyllabic naming.
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 22, 650-668.
Stella, V., & Job, R. (2001). Le sillabe PD/DPSS. Una base
di dati sulla frequenza sillabica dell’italiano scritto [The
syllables PD/DPSS. A database for syllable frequency of
written Italian]. Giornale Italiano di Psicologia, 3, 633642, http://dpss.psy.unipd.it/files/strumenti.php.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages:
Extensions of Donders’ method. Acta Psychologica, 30,
267–315.

Sulpizio, S., & Job, R. (2010). L’intervento delle sillabe nei
processi di produzione e riconoscimento visivo delle
parole [The role of syllable in word production and visual
word recognition]. Giornale Italiano di Psicologia, 3,
731-738.
Sulpizio, S., Boureux, M., Burani, C., Deguchi, C., &
Colombo, L. (2012a). Stress assignment in the
development of reading aloud: Nonword priming effects
on Italian children. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P.
Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 23692374). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Sulpizio, S., Job, R., & Burani, C. (2012b). Priming lexical
stress in reading Italian aloud. Language & Cognitive
Processes, 27, 808-820.
Thornton, A. M., Iacobini, C., & Burani, C. (1997).
BDVBD. Una base di dati sul vocabolario di base della
lingua italiana [BDVDB: A database for the Italian basic
dictionary]. Roma, Bulzoni.

1407

