UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Syntactic priming in language comprehension allows linguistic expectations to converge on
the statistics of the input

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1rf0406v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Fine, Alex
Jaeger, T. Florian

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Syntactic priming in language comprehension allows linguistic expectations to
converge on the statistics of the input
Alex B. Fine (afine@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences and Department of Linguistics, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences and Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract
Human language is characterized by variability in that the
way in which language is used varies depending, for example,
on facts about the identity of the speaker or author, the social
context, and surrounding linguistic material. Variability poses
formidable challenges to the systems underlying language
comprehension, which are known to exploit statistical
contingencies in the input to overcome the inherent noisiness
of perception; nevertheless, we seem to comprehend language
with apparent ease. How is this possible? Here we argue that
we are able to comprehend language efficiently in part by
continuously adapting to the statistics of novel linguistic
situations. We argue further that adaptation specifically
allows comprehenders’ expectations to converge towards the
actual statistics of the linguistic input. Concretely, we show
that readers can adjust their linguistic expectations in light of
recent experience such that (a) previously difficult structures
become easier to process, and, even more strikingly, (b)
previously easy to process structures come to incur a
processing cost.
Keywords: Sentence processing; experience-based language
processing; parsing; reading; learning; adaptation; priming

Introduction
Human language is variable in the sense that the way in
which language is used varies across situations according to,
for example, the social context, the surrounding linguistic
material, and various facts about the identity of the speaker
or author. Variability in this sense pervades our linguistic
experience, and has been observed at virtually every level of
linguistic representation.
Despite the extent to which language use varies,
communication is typically successful. That is, even when
faced with novel speakers or accents, we seem to be able to
quickly and accurately infer the messages intended by our
interlocutors.
Our apparent facility with language is particularly
remarkable considering the extent to which linguistic
experience has been demonstrated to play a role in language
processing.
Experience-based accounts of language
processing hold that comprehenders generate expectations—
about the probability of observing particular sounds, words,
sentence structures, etc.—during online language
processing, and that these expectations are informed by and
reflect the statistics of previous linguistic experience. By
generating expectations that reflect the actual distribution of

events in the environment, comprehenders should, in
principle, be able to reduce the average prediction error
experienced during online processing, and thus process
language efficiently. But if the distribution of words or
sentence structures varies according to individual speakers,
dialects, etc., then, at first blush, it is no longer clear that
generating online linguistic expectations that reflect
aggregate statistics over previous experience would be
advantageous to the comprehender.
How do we
comprehend language as well as we do despite variability in
the linguistic signal?
Here we present evidence that comprehenders are able to
rapidly adapt to or implicitly learn the statistics of novel
linguistic situations, focusing specifically on sentence
comprehension (“parsing”).
We argue that syntactic
adaptation allows comprehenders’ expectations about the
statistics of the input to converge towards the actual
statistics, providing an explanation for why experiencebased processing is advantageous despite the variability
present in the statistics of the signal. Our experiments build
on and attempt to synthesize insights from three lines of
research that have till now proceeded largely in parallel: (1)
experience-based language processing (e.g., MacDonald,
Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994), (2) syntactic priming
(e.g., Traxler, 2008), and (3) research exploring the link
between online processing and implicit learning (e.g.,
Misyak & Christiansen, 2012; Wells, Christiansen, Race,
Acheson, & MacDonald, 2009).
To test our hypothesis, we exploit a well-known
temporary syntactic ambiguity that provides a window onto
comprehenders’ expectations, illustrated in (1).
1. The experienced soldiers…
a. …warned about the dangers before the midnight
raid.
b. …spoke about the dangers before the midnight
raid.
c. …warned about the dangers conducted the
midnight raid.
d. …who were warned about the dangers conducted
the midnight raid.
Verbs like warned give rise to temporary ambiguities
since they may occur both as the main verb (MV) of a

2279

sentence ((1a)) or as the verb in a relative clause (RC; (1c)).
Sentences (1a) and (1c) can be disambiguated toward the
RC reading at conducted, like in (1c). By contrast, (1b) is
unambiguously an MV structure because spoke is
unambiguously a past tense matrix verb; (1d) is
unambiguously an RC because of the relativizer who, which
serves as an early disambiguating cue. Sentences like (1c)
consistently elicit what are known as ambiguity or gardenpath effects: reading times (RTs) in the disambiguating
region (in bold) spike when the ambiguity is resolved
towards the relative clause interpretation (1c), compared to
unambiguous RCs (1d). No such ambiguity effect is found
for ambiguous compared to unambiguous MVs.
Experienced-based accounts predict the garden-path effect
because verbs like warned are overwhelmingly more likely
to occur with MVs than RCs in subjects’ previous
experience, as evidenced in corpora of written and spoken
language.
Given that this frequency difference has a reliable
correlate in human behavior, we can take advantage of the
MV-RC ambiguity to explore syntactic adaptation. We
provide subjects with experience with written language in
which the environment-specific syntactic statistics differ
sharply from subjects’ previous experience with language. If
subjects are adapting to the statistics of the input, as we
propose, then the manner in which subjects process these
structures should change over the course of the experiment.
Specifically, if exposed to locally stationary syntactic
distributions—i.e., distributions whose parameters remain
fixed within the environment—comprehenders’ syntactic
expectations should converge towards the statistics of the
environment. In Experiment 1, we find evidence for rapid,
incremental, and cumulative syntactic adaptation: over the
course of an experiment where RCs are many times more
likely than in subjects’ previous experience, the ambiguity
effect for these structures continuously decreases until it
disappears. Experiment 2 goes a step further. There, we
reason that if subjects indeed adapt their expectations to
converge towards the statistics of the input, then as subjects
come to assign a higher subjective probability to RCs, they
should commensurately come to assign a lower subjective
probability to MVs. Since MVs by hypothesis compete with
RCs for probability mass (in the type of garden path
sentences we investigate) it should be possible to make
MVs sufficiently unlikely that this structure would actually
come to incur a processing cost. This is what we find.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we ask whether comprehenders can rapidly
adjust their syntactic expectations in response to the
statistics of a novel linguistic situation (i.e., in response to
the statistics of the experiment). We expose subjects to 40
ambiguous and unambiguous RCs, as in (1c) and (1d).
Because RCs are infrequent structures, we predict that
subjects will display an initially high processing cost for
ambiguous relative to unambiguous RCs (i.e., a large
ambiguity effect), but as the experiment progresses, and

evidence accumulates that RCs are highly probable within
the context of the experiment, we predict that the ambiguity
effect should diminish.

Subjects
80 subjects were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
platform. Only subjects with US IP addresses were allowed
to participate. Additionally, instructions clearly indicated
that subjects were required to be native speakers of English,
and only subjects with at least a 95% approval rating from
previous jobs were included.

Materials
Critical items were constructed from sentence pairs like (1c)
and (1d). Eight different verbs giving rise to the MV/RC
ambiguity (watched, washed, taught, served, called,
warned, dropped, pushed) were repeated 5 times to yield 40
critical items (only the verbs were repeated; the remainder
of the sentences differed between items). Ambiguity was
counter-balanced across two experimental lists. In addition,
each list contained the same 80 fillers. Filler sentences
featured a variety of syntactic structures and, crucially, did
not include verbs that give rise to the MV/RC ambiguity
(e.g., All the undergraduates in the class had trouble
keeping up; The foreign delegates arrived at the embassy
surrounded by security guards). Both lists presented stimuli
in the same, pseudo-randomized order with 1-3 fillers
between each critical item. Two additional lists were
created in which the order of items was reversed, yielding a
total of 4 orders.

Procedure
Stimuli were presented in a self-paced moving window
display. At the beginning of each trial, the sentence
appeared on the screen with all non-space characters
replaced by a dash. Subjects pressed the space bar using
their dominant hand to view each consecutive word in the
sentence. Durations between space bar presses were
recorded. At each press of the space bar, the currently
viewed word reverted to dashes as the next word was
converted to letters. A yes/no comprehension question
followed all experimental and filler sentences, with the
correct answer to half of all comprehension questions being
“yes”.

Results
RTs less than 100ms or greater than 2000ms were excluded
before computing length-corrected RTs (i.e., RTs with the
effect of word length removed) following a procedure
similar to the one described in Ferreira and Clifton (1986).
Length-corrected RTs during the disambiguating region
(in bold in (1) above) were regressed, using mixed effects
regression, onto the full factorial design (i.e., all main
effects and interactions) of ambiguity (ambiguous vs.
unambiguous) and item order (coded 1-40 and centered).
Item order captures the number of RCs observed at a given
point in the experiment. Additionally, we included a main

2280

200

"AMBIGUITY EFFECT"

50

-50

0

50

100

150

150

RC AMBIGUOUS
RC UNAMBIGUOUS

10

20

30

40

0

0

-50

LENGTH-CORRECTED RTs (MS)

effect of log-transformed stimulus order, which provides an
index of how many trials (including both critical items and
fillers) have been read at a given point in the experiment.
Stimulus order captures the effect of “task adaptation”, i.e.,
general speed-up effects, which can be rather strong in selfpaced reading experiments (all results reported below hold
with or without this predictor, and regardless of whether it is
log-transformed). For this and all other analyses reported in
this paper, we included the maximal random effects
structure justified by the data (Jaeger, 2009).
We replicated the significant main effect of ambiguity
found in previous studies: RTs in the disambiguating region
were greater for ambiguous relative to unambiguous
sentences (!=19, p<.001). Also replicating previous work,
we found a significant main effect of log stimulus order
(!=-39, p<.05) and a marginally significant main effect of
item order (!=-2, p=.09). That is, subjects read stimuli
increasingly faster as the experiment progressed,
presumably reflecting task adaptation effect (getting used to
the self-paced reading paradigm, Fine, Qian, Jaeger, &
Jacobs, 2010) Crucially, there was a significant two-way
interaction between ambiguity and item order:
the
processing cost incurred by ambiguous RCs—the ambiguity
effect—significantly diminished as experience with RCs
accumulated (!=-1, p<.05). In Figure 1, we visualize this
interaction by plotting mean length-corrected RTs for
ambiguous and unambiguous sentences across four bins of
item order, and by plotting the ambiguity effect at all 40
points in the course of the experiment. Both the ambiguity
effect and its interaction with item order were observed only
in the disambiguating region. The effect of stimulus order
was significant or marginally significant in all sentence
regions.

1-10

11-20

21-30

ITEM ORDER

31-40

across the course of the experiment. Error bars give 95%
confidence intervals on the mean.

Discussion
Experiment 1 demonstrates that comprehenders are capable
of rapidly, incrementally, and cumulatively adapting to the
statistics of a novel linguistic environment, even after
controlling for the effect of practice or task adaptation.
In the Introduction we articulated a conceptualization of
syntactic adaptation according to which subjects
continuously adjust their expectations such that their
expectations about the linguistic environment converge
towards the statistics of the linguistic environment. The
results of Experiment 1 are compatible with such an
interpretation, but do not rule out other plausible ones. For
example, it is possible that the results of Experiment 1 are
driven by boosts in the base-level activation of the RC
structure, but that this happens without specific reference to
the statistics of the input (Pickering & Garrod, 2004), or that
adaptation occurs by virtue of episodic memory for the
repeatedly encountered structure, which similarly would not
need to make reference to the statistics of the environment
(Kaschak & Glenberg, 2004). In Experiment 2, we present
a more direct test of the prediction that comprehenders
adjust their expectations to converge towards the statistics
of the input.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 exploits the same temporary ambiguity
between MVs and RCs used in Experiment 1. However,
unlike in Experiment 1, we expose subjects to both RCs and
MVs. As we mentioned above, the ambiguity effect
observed for sentences like (1) is driven by large differences
in the probabilities of the two structures: upon observing
the string The experienced soldiers warned…, subjects have
a stronger a priori expectation for an MV interpretation
relative to the RC interpretation. In other words, MVs and
RCs compete for probability mass: MVs receive a high
subjective probability at the expense of RCs. Therefore, if
the results of Experiment 1 are driven by convergence
towards the statistics of the input, then as subjects come to
find RCs more probable, they should also, in turn, find MVs
less probable. This effect should be observable in a
decreased ambiguity effect for RCs and an increased
ambiguity effect for MVs as the experiment progresses.
Experiment 2 employs a between-subject block design to
test this prediction. In this experiment, subjects were
assigned to one of two groups, which we will call the FillerFirst and the RC-First groups. Subjects were exposed to
three blocks of sentences. The composition of the materials
in each block, for each group, is shown in Table 1.

Figure 1:
Mean length-corrected RTs during the
disambiguating region for ambiguous and unambiguous
RCs across four bins of item order in Experiment 1, with
embedded visualization of the change in ambiguity effect

2281

Table 1: Summary of the between-subject, block design of
Experiment 2.
Group
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
RC-First
10 RCs (5 10 MVs (5
16 RCs (8
(n=40)
ambiguous) + ambiguous) +
ambiguous)
20 fillers
15 fillers
Filler10 RCs (5 10 MVs (5
First
16 fillers
ambiguous) + ambiguous) +
(n=40)
20 fillers
15 fillers
We conducted Experiment 2 with three specific
predictions in mind. We predict (1) that the ambiguity effect
for RCs will be diminished from block 1 to block 2 for the
RC-first group.
This would conceptually replicate
Experiment 1. We further predict (2) that the ambiguity
effect for RCs during block 2 for the Filler-First group will
be greater than that of the RC-first group.
If the effects
observed in Experiment 1 are due to task adaptation or
fatigue, then the ambiguity effect for RCs in Block 2 should
be the same for both the Filler-First and the RC-First group.
In other words, reading a given number of sentences should
have the same effect on reading times regardless of the
content of those sentences. Finally, and most crucially, we
predict (3) that the ambiguity effect for MVs should
increase as experience with RCs increases. If adaptation is a
matter of subjects’ expectations converging on the statistics
of the input, then as the ambiguity effect for RCs decreases,
the ambiguity effect for MVs should increase. Thus, we
predict a greater ambiguity effect for MVs in block 3 for the
RC-First group (where subjects have encountered more RCs
by the time they reach block 3) relative to the Filler-First
group.

Subjects
80 subjects were recruited from the University of Rochester
community. Informed consent was obtained from all
subjects according to the University’s scientific research
ethics policies. Subjects received $10 for their participation.

Materials
Subjects read a total of 71 sentences over 3 blocks (as
outlined in Table 1). RC and MV sentences were created
that followed the same template as the critical items from
Experiment 1. Two experimental lists were constructed for
each group that counter-balanced the conditions (ambiguous
vs. unambiguous) for the sentence type (MV or RC) used
within each block, totaling four lists. It is important to note
that the block structure of the experiment was entirely
implicit. From the perspective of the subjects, they simply
read 71 sentences without breaks.

Procedure
The same procedure as in Experiment 1.

Results

RTs less than 100ms or greater than 2000ms were excluded
before computing length-corrected RTs, as in Experiment 1.
We tested three predictions that follow from the hypothesis
that readers adapt to the local statistics of the linguistic
environment, enumerated above.
Prediction 1 (does the ambiguity effect in the RC-First
group diminish from block 1 to block 2?): We regressed
length-corrected RTs during the disambiguating region
(underlined in (1)) of sentences read during blocks 1 and 2
in the RC-First group onto ambiguity (ambiguous vs.
unambiguous), block (block 1 vs. block 2), and the two-way
interaction between these predictors. There was a significant
effect of ambiguity (!=65, p<.05): ambiguous RCs were
read more slowly than unambiguous RCs. There was also a
significant main effect of block (!=-72, p<.05): subjects
read faster during the second block relative to the first
block. Finally, the interaction between these two variables,
capturing the change in the ambiguity effect from block 1 to
block 2, was in the predicted direction and trended towards
but did not reach significance (!=18, p=.2). It is likely that
the binned comparison of reading times across blocks 1 and
2, combined with fewer observations than in Experiment 1,
provides less power than the treatment of RCs as a
continuous variable in Experiment 1. To address this, we
took data from blocks 1 and 2 for the RC-First group and
submitted it to the same analysis reported for Experiment 1.
We examined length-corrected RTs during the
disambiguating region using the same analysis as in
Experiment 1. All critical effects from Experiment 1 were
replicated including, importantly, a two-way interaction
between ambiguity and item order (!=2, p<.05, after
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons), replicating
Experiment 1.
Prediction 2 (is the ambiguity effect in block 2 greater
for the RC-First group than for the Filler-First group?): we
regressed length-corrected RTs during the disambiguating
region onto group (RC-First vs. Filler-First), ambiguity
(ambiguous vs. unambiguous), and the interaction between
these two variables. Again, there was a main effect of
ambiguity RCs (!=19, p<.05). There was also a main effect
of group: subjects in the RC-First group had overall faster
reading times (!=-7, p<.05). Crucially, the two-way
interaction between ambiguity and group was marginally
significant (!=-5, p=.08): the ambiguity effect was smaller
in the RC-First group than in the Filler-First group. That is,
reading a block of filler sentences does not reduce the
processing cost of RCs to the same extent that reading a
block of RCs does. This result is shown by the pairs of bars
corresponding to block 2 for both groups in Figure 2.
Prediction 3 (is the ambiguity effect for MVs in block 3
greater for subjects who have seen more RCs, i.e. for the
RC-First group?): We regressed length-corrected RTs
during the disambiguating region of sentences read during
block 3 onto ambiguity (ambiguous MV vs. unambiguous
MV), group (RC-First vs. Filler-First), and the interaction
between these variables. There was a main effect of
ambiguity, such that ambiguous MVs were read more

2282

1

BLOCK

2

3

BLOCK

1

2

3

0

50

100

150

RC AMBIGUOUS
RC UNAMBIGUOUS
MV AMBIGUOUS
MV UNAMBIGUOUS

-50

Length-corrected Reading Times

200

slowly than unambiguous MVs (!=8, p<.05). The main
effect of group did not reach significance (!=4, p=.3).
Crucially, the two-way interaction between ambiguity and
group was significant (!=5, p<.05): the ambiguity effect for
MVs during block 3 was greater for the RC-First group than
for the Filler-First group. In other words, subjects who read
more RCs subsequently experienced both (1) a reduction in
the ambiguity effect for RCs and (2) an increase in the
ambiguity effect for MVs. This pattern is visualized in
Figure 2 in the right-most pair of bars for each group.

RC-First

Filler-First

Exposure Group

Figure 2:
Mean length-corrected RTs during the
disambiguating region for ambiguous and unambiguous
conditions across all three blocks of Experiment 2. Error
bars give 95% confidence intervals on the mean.

Discussion
Experiment 2 was designed to further address the hypothesis
that comprehenders adjust their syntactic expectations to
converge towards the statistics of the input. Specifically, we
predicted that, since RCs and MVs compete with each other
for probability mass, when subjects come to assign a higher
probability to one structure, they should come to assign a
lower probability to the other. In Experiment 2, this led to
the concrete prediction that a diminished ambiguity effect
for RCs should lead to a larger ambiguity effect for MVs,
and that this should be greater for the RC-first relative to the
Filler-first group. This is what we observed (cf. Figure 2).

General Discussion
We tested the hypothesis that language comprehenders are
able to adapt their syntactic expectations to novel linguistic
environments according to the statistics of those
environments. In two reading experiments, we provided
subjects with experience with distributions of syntactic
structures that diverged sharply from their previous
experience with English. We predicted that subjects would
adapt their expectations (as reflected in changes in RTs)

according to their cumulative recent experience.
As
predicted, in Experiment 1 subjects came to process a priori
infrequent structures that had initially produced longer RTs
more quickly when those structures were frequent in the
experiment. Experiment 2 replicated this and went a step
further: there, subjects not only came to process an a priori
infrequent structure more quickly, but also came to process
an a priori frequent structure more slowly when it was
infrequent in the experiment. Our experiments suggest that
readers are capable of adapting to the relative frequencies
(/probabilities) of syntactic structures in the current
linguistic environment. The results of our experiments have
implications for questions concerning the mechanisms
underlying language comprehension and for debates about
the mechanism underlying syntactic priming. We discuss
these in turn.
Previous work on syntactic adaptation has demonstrated
that exposure to syntactic structures can have immediate
(Traxler, 2008) and cumulative (Kaschak & Glenberg,
2004) effects on language comprehension, that these effects
can be indexed to individual talkers (Kamide, 2012), and
that the effects may endure for several days (Wells et al.,
2009).
Moreover, work on statistical learning has
demonstrated a remarkable capacity in children and adults
to rapidly extract statistical regularities in novel artificial
languages (cf. Gómez & Gerken, 2000), and has suggested
that statistical learning may correlate with language
processing in general (Misyak & Christiansen, 2012). As
mentioned in the introduction, however, previous work on
experience-based processing, syntactic priming, and
statistical learning has all proceeded largely in parallel, and
has left open the question of how the immediate effect of
experience on language comprehension accumulates over
time to give rise to cumulative priming, experience-based
processing effects, and environment-specific adaptation.
We have attempted to build on all of this work by
demonstrating that syntactic adaptation can be profitably
construed as the rapid, incremental, and cumulative
convergence towards the statistics of a novel linguistic
environment. Syntactic adaptation of the kind observed
here may therefore offer a route by which the immediate
effects of experience (“priming”) accumulate to give rise to
long-term experience-based processing.
Our results also speak to ongoing debates surrounding the
type of mechanism that underlies syntactic priming. Two
main views have emerged from previous work. Transient
activation accounts hold that priming results from a shortlived boost in the activation of a syntactic representation
(Pickering & Garrod, 2004). By contrast, implicit learning
accounts hold that priming is a consequence of an implicit
learning mechanism (Chang, Dell, & Bock, 2006). We
believe that implicit learning accounts cover the current
results most naturally for at least two reasons. First,
subjects in both experiments were sensitive to the
cumulative statistics of the environment: the degree to
which subjects’ expectations for a structure had changed at a
given point in the experiment depends on how many times

2283

subjects saw (a) that structure and (b) other structures
competing with it for probability mass. To the extent that
transient activation accounts do not predict cumulative
priming and insofar as learning accounts do (cf. Kaschak,
Loney, & Borreggine, 2006), our results appear to support
an implicit learning account. Second, our results provide
indirect evidence for error-sensitivity: we observed changes
in RTs over the course of both experiments for both RCs
and MVs, but changes of a greater magnitude for RCs
relative to MVs (see Figure 2): observing a low-probability
linguistic event (and therefore one with a relatively large
error signal) leads to greater changes in RTs. Errorsensitivity has been argued to be a hallmark of implicit
learning (Chang et al., 2006; Fine & Jaeger, 2013; Jaeger &
Snider, 2013).
Taken together with recent work on adaptation in
phonetics and pragmatics (Kurumada, Brown, &
Tanenhaus, 2012; Norris, McQueen, & Cutler, 2003), our
results suggest that adaptation is likely to be a general
property of language processing, and a manifestation of a
general ability to cope with a dynamic environment.
Finally, our findings demonstrate the fundamental role
that experience plays in language processing. Our work
suggests that not only is language processing influenced by
aggregated prior experience (e.g., MacDonald et al., 1994),
but that experience incrementally and rapidly shapes our
expectations about the language we speak, thereby allowing
us to comprehend language more efficiently.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge Andrew Watts and Narissa
Gogos for their assistance in collecting the data reported in
this paper. The work presented here was partially funded by
an NSF GRF to ABF and NSF IIS-1150028 as well as an
Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship to TFJ.

Jaeger, T. F., & Snider, N. E. (2013). Alignment as a
consequence of expectation adaptation : syntactic
priming is affected by the prime ’ s prediction error
given both prior and recent experience. Cognition,
127(1), 57–83.
Kamide, Y. (2012). Learning individual talkers’ structural
preferences. Cognition, 124(1), 66–71.
Kaschak, M. P., & Glenberg, A. M. (2004). This
construction needs learned. Journal of experimental
psychology. General, 133(3), 450–67.
Kaschak, M. P., Loney, R. A., & Borreggine, K. L. (2006).
Recent experience affects the strength of structural
priming. Cognition, 99, B73–B82.
Kurumada, C., Brown, M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2012).
Pragmatic interpretation of speech: It looks like
speech adaptation. CogSci 2012. Sapporo, Japan.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1994). The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Psych. Review, 101, 676–703.
Misyak, J. B., & Christiansen, M. H. (2012). Statistical
Learning and Language: An Individual Differences
Study. Language Learning, 62(1), 302–331.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., & Cutler, A. (2003). Perceptual
learning in speech. Cognitive Psychology, 47(2),
204–238.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27(2), 169–226.
Traxler, M. J. (2008). Lexically independent priming in
online sentence comprehension. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 15(1), 149–155.
Wells, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Race, D. S., Acheson, D.
J., & MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Experience and
sentence processing: statistical learning and relative
clause comprehension. Cognitive psychology, 58(2),
250–71.

References
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological review, 113(2), 234–72.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. E. (1986). The independence of
syntactic processing. Journal of Memory and
Language, 25, 348–368.
Fine, A. B., & Jaeger, T. F. (2013). Evidence for implicit
learning in syntactic comprehension. Cognitive
Science, 37(3), 578–591.
Fine, A. B., Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Jacobs, R. A. (2010).
Syntactic Adaptation in Language Comprehension.
Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational
Linguistics (pp. 18–26). Uppsala, Sweden: ACL.
Gómez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (2000). Infant artificial
language learning and language acquisition. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 178–186.
Jaeger, T. F. (2009). Random effect: Should I stay or should
I
go?
Retrieved
from
http://hlplab.wordpress.com/2009/05/14/randomeffect-structure/

2284

