UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tell Us Your Story: Investigating the Linguistic Features of Trauma Narrative

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/95n9p15n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Luno, Jeremy A.
Louwerse, Max
Beck, J. Gayle

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Tell Us Your Story: Investigating the Linguistic Features of Trauma Narrative
Jeremy A. Luno (jaluno@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
400 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA

J. Gayle Beck (jgbeck@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology / University of Memphis
202 Psychology Building, Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Max Louwerse (maxlouwerse@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
400 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract
Linguistic features can predict several aspects of human
behavior. Little is known, however, about whether syntactic,
semantic and structural language features can also predict
psychological disorders such as posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD). The current study investigated whether the linguistic
properties in trauma narratives written by survivors of a
Motor Vehicle Accident (MVA), change as function of the
intensity of PTSD symptoms. A short form diagnostic tool
known as the Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Checklist (PCL)
was used to determine the severity of participant PTSD
symptomatology. Using a text capture paradigm participants
were then asked to write a neutral narrative or a narrative that
described their traumatic event. PCL scores were compared to
linguistic variables from eight different computational
linguistic algorithms. Results from this study suggested that
the relative intensity of PTSD symptomatology affects
syntactic, semantic, and structural aspects of the narrative.
Keywords: Posttraumatic Stress Disorder; PTSD; Trauma
Narrative; Linguistic Features.

Introduction
Language patterns can be good predictors of relations in
the world. For instance, language statistics can predict the
modality of a word (Louwerse & Connell, 2011), the iconic
relationship of words (Louwerse, 2008), social networks
(Hutchinson, Datla, & Louwerse, 2011), and even
geographical locations of cities (Louwerse & Benesh, 2012;
Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009). Language patterns have also
shown to be predictors of aspects of human behavior. For
instance, linguistic features predict fraudulent events
(Louwerse, Lin, & Semin, 2010), predict an individual’s
personality type (Gill, Nowson, & Oberlander, 2009),
whether they are lying (Hancock, 2004), and even to what
extent they visit their doctor’s office (Campbell &
Pennebaker, 2003).
Despite the predictive utility of language, there is very
little computational linguistic research that investigates
whether language features predict psychological symptoms
such as those associated with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

(PTSD). Considering the ability of linguistic patterns to
demonstrate mental processes and behaviors, and the
concise delineations of PTSD symptomatology, the question
can be raised whether linguistic patterns in written
narratives from trauma survivors can be related to the
severity of the trauma. More specifically, can language use
reflect PTSD symptoms and their relative intensity? This
research question was investigated in the current study.
PTSD is an anxiety disorder diagnosed to persons having
“experienced, witnessed, or having been confronted with
events that involve potential death, serious injury, or a threat
to the physical integrity of oneself or others” (DSM-IV,
2000, p. 467). PTSD patients will persistently re-experience
the event, while simultaneously avoiding thoughts, and/or
environmental reminders of the event, with some or all of
these symptoms lasting for longer than one month. Specific
symptoms include re-experiencing the traumatic event,
avoiding thoughts of the event, mental/emotional numbing,
as well as hyper-arousal. These symptoms are further
delineated to include flashbacks, nightmares, sleep
difficulties, and irritability. These symptoms are clustered
into three overarching categories, “Re-experiencing
Symptoms”, “Avoidance Symptoms”, and “Hyperarousal
Symptoms (DSM-IV, 2000), even though not all symptoms
are necessary for a PTSD diagnosis.
In recent years the prevalence of PTSD has increased.
Studies indicate that 20% of women and 9% of men will
develop PTSD, while 6.8% of those diagnosed will live with
the disorder indefinitely (Kessler et al., 1995). This increase
is due not only to an awareness of the disorder in the clinical
community, but also to the development of diagnostic tools
such as the PTSD Checklist (PCL). The PCL is a 17-item
self-report measure that monitors trauma symptomatology
much like the 30-item structured interview, Clinician
Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS). Despite the CAPS being
the longstanding method to PTSD diagnosis, current
research validates that the PCL correlates highly with the
CAPS measure as well as with its diagnostic efficiency
(Blanchard, Jones-Alexander, Buckley, & Fomeris, 1996).

2955

For instance, one study demonstrated the reliability of the
PCL even within highly specific civilian populations (e.g.
college students, Motor Vehicle Accident survivors) (Elhai,
Gray, Docherty, Kashdan, & Kose, 2007). These direct
questions administered in both the CAPS and PCL have
proven to be a valid way of determining PTSD (Blanchard
et al., 1996). However, it would be desirable to have an
alternative, perhaps less direct, measure that reveals PTSD
symptoms identified by the CAPS and PCL. This would
allow for patients to be prescreened. Given the evidence
from computational linguistic measures predicting human
behavior, it might be the case that the language used by
PTSD patients predicts the severity of the disorder.
There are indications that language use in PTSD patients
might be indicative of the disorder. For instance, one main
issue impeding recovery from the disorder is that sufferers
have difficulty mentally integrating the event into their
current cognitive schemas (Dalgleish, 2004). Traumatic
experience is mentally represented by two constructs,
situationally accessible memories (SAMs), and verbally
accessible memories (VAMs), but only VAMs can be
deliberately retrieved; SAMs are activated by situation
dependent reminders of the event (Brewin et al., 1996).
Ironically, even though VAMs are memory representations
that are readily accessible, PTSD patients will still report
confusion of the details, as well as difficulty in forming
coherent accounts of the traumatic event (Ehlers, Ehring, &
Kleim, 2012). The language of a PTSD patient might reflect
this confusion, or reflect their lack of clarity in recalling the
details of the traumatic event.
Language use of trauma survivors has been studied before
(i.e. therapeutic measures and interventions) (Sloan et al.,
2012). One such example comes from work conducted by
Tausczik and Pennebaker (2010). In their study writing
samples collected in temporal units (e.g. over an extended
time period). Some of these samples were related to a
participant’s traumatic experience, while others were nonemotional in nature. Tausczik and Pennebaker not only
demonstrated the health benefits of narrative production by
noticing a decrease in doctor visits for those writing about
the traumatic experiences, but they were also able to
identify word categories related to depression (e.g.
pronouns), seeing similar patterns in health improvements
as a function of increases or decreases in the usage of these
categories.
Similarly, Smyth, Stone, Hurewitz, and Kaell (1999)
investigated the effectiveness of PTSD treatment as a result
of narrative production rather than fragmented discourse
(i.e., discourse without narrative structure) In their study
narrative production showed to alter a trauma survivor’s
tendency to avoid thoughts, as well as aid their recovery.
The implication here is that the mental integration of
traumatic events can be facilitated by means of narrative
production. Smyth et al. (1999) also showed that writing
leads to a reduction in symptoms of patients with chronic
illness. The Smyth et al. (1999; 2001) findings support those
of Tausczik and Pennebaker (2010) by isolating the type of

writing task that produces the greatest benefit; specifically,
narrative production vs. fragmented and/or controlled
discourse.
Often, the analyses of trauma language include global
characteristics. For instance, Mansfield et al. (2010)
described the foci of their analysis with terms such as
complexity, personal growth, and resolution, which indicate
positive change in thinking when reflecting on a difficult
event, the ability to see different perspectives and outcomes,
or the reconciliation with difficult life experiences.
Similarly, Tuval-Mashiach et al. (2004) used terms such as
coherence, self-evaluation, and meaning. Clearly, these
concepts are not problematic in themselves – interrater
reliability avoids that the abstract terms might lead to
ambiguity – yet a computational operationalization of such
concepts is difficult.
Rather than focusing on the global characteristics of
trauma language, our analyses of trauma narratives utilized
word-level linguistic models that not only offer a large
spectrum of linguistic dimensions, but also provide
theoretical grounding in the organization of their categories.
Based on the theoretical frameworks these models provide,
it is possible to isolate constructs similar to those of the
aforementioned studies, while simultaneously revealing
constructs previously unconsidered?
Because little computational linguistic work has been
done on the analysis of trauma narratives, computational
linguistic algorithms to analyze the data covered a wide
range of dimensions, including syntactic and semantic
algorithms. These algorithms can generally be classified
into general structural (e.g., word count), syntactic (e.g.,
connectives) and semantic (e.g., word choice) dimensions of
language, whereby some used a bag-of-word approach (e.g.
LIWC), whereas others used a probability approach (MRC),
whereas yet others relied on the computation of different
factors (e.g., type-token ratio). Eight different algorithms
were used, categorized in Figure 1.
Within the syntactic dimension, two algorithms were
used, one focusing on general linguistic features, the other
on interclausal relationships. For general linguistic features,
we used 67 features from the Biber model (1988). These
features primarily operate at the word level (e.g., parts-ofspeech) and can be categorized as tense and aspect markers,
place and time adverbials, pronouns and pro-verbs,
questions, nominal forms, passives, stative forms,
subordination features, prepositional phrases, adjectives and
adverbs, lexical specificity, lexical classes, modals,
specialized verb classes, reduced forms, dispreferred
structures, and co-ordinations and negations.
Specific interclausal relationships were captured using
Louwerse’s (2002) parameterization, including positive
additive, (e.g. also, moreover), negative additive (e.g.
however, but), positive temporal (e.g. after, before),
negative temporal (e.g. until), and causal (e.g. because, so)
connectives.
The semantic dimension can be broken down in three
subdivisions:
psycholinguistic
ratings,
conceptual

2956

Figure 1. Linguistic Category Distinctions
relations,
and
comprehensive
classifications.
Psycholinguistic ratings are computed using the MRC
Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981), to get ratings
on the familiarity, concreteness, imagability and
meaningfulness of words.
The conceptual dimension covers three categories:
interpersonal, social and emotional language. Interpersonal
language use is captured by the linguistic category model
(LCM) (Semin & Fiedler, 1991). The model consists of a
classification of interpersonal (transitive) verbs that are used
to describe actions or psychological states and adjectives
that are employed to characterize persons. This
classification gives insight into the meanings of verbs and
adjectives that people use when they communicate about
actors and their social events. The model makes a
distinction between five different categories of interpersonal
terms
Social language features were captured by Pennebaker et
al.’s (2007) Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC).
LIWC consists of 63 syntactic (e.g., pronouns) and semantic
word categories (e.g., death, family) that focus on semantic
aspects of discourse, namely aspects of discourse related to
social phenomenon.
Emotional words are captured by the classification
proposed by Johnson-Laird and Oatley (1989). These words
are classified into two classes, broadly basic emotions
(anger, fear, disgust, happiness etc.) and complex emotions
(guilt, pity, tenderness etc.). The basic emotions indicate no
cognitive load hence they are also called raw emotions,
whereas the complex emotions indicate cognitive load.
For the comprehensive category WordNet (Miller &
Fellbaum, 1998) was used, consisting of 150,000 words in
44 base types, including 25 primitive groups for nouns (e.g.
time, location, person, etc.), 15 for verbs (e.g.
communication, cognition, etc.), 3 groups of adjectives, and
1 group of adverbs. For the structural dimension, discourse
features such as type/token ratio and word count were used.

The current study aims to utilize these linguistic
categories to analyze written narratives produced by
participants who experienced an MVA. The intent is to
complement the aforementioned studies on the basis of
trauma narrative language, but to include measures that have
yet to be utilized in these studies; namely the categories
featured here, but also participant scores on the PCL. The
PCL scores obtained in our sample population will act as a
dependent variable from which the associated linguistic
features will be compared. Due to PCL scores resting on a
continuum, it is possible that the usage of certain linguistic
categories will increase and/or decrease as a function of
these scores.
Following the analyses of texts captured in this study, the
linguistic patterns found will be used as predictor variables
to analyze texts collected in studies conducted by Shipherd
and Beck (1999, 2005). Two data sets from their studies
will be analyzed; texts collected from MVA survivors, as
well as texts collected from survivors of sexual trauma. In
both data sets, there are samples from trauma survivors
suffering from PTSD, as well as individuals exposed to
trauma though not suffering from PTSD. All of the subjects
included in their studies were evaluated using the CAPS or
PCL criteria. This allows for a parallel analysis of all of
their texts as well as those collected here. The intent is to
not only support the reliability of the predictor variables, but
also to confirm or deny the possibility that these variables
will dependently fluctuate within the range of PCL scores
obtained, as we have demonstrated here.

Experiment
The current pilot study utilized linguistic category
frequencies to analyze written narratives produced by
participants who experienced an MVA. These frequencies
were then compared with different levels of participant
PTSD symptomatology as measured by the PCL.

2957

Category
Determiners (Biber Model)

Table 1: Six featured linguistic categories.
Examples
these, those, few, many , every, any, much, a, an, the, some, all

Death (LIWC Model)

died, dead, dying, fatal, alive, grief, mortal, demise, decease(d)

Function (LIWC Model)

definitely, ahead, might, nearly, across, enough, among, been

Causal Negation (Connectives Model)

although, nevertheless, unless, provided that

Punctuation (Biber Model)

.‘,“/?!()–

Word Count

(count of words per document)

Methods
Participants
Forty-three undergraduate students from the University of
Memphis (31 females) participated in the study for course
credit. Participants were prescreened to assess PCL scores
and to determine whether they had experienced an MVA.
All participants in this study had at some time experienced
an MVA, though not all participants suffered from PTSD.
Procedure
A 2x2 design was employed, both counterbalanced and
randomized, where half of the participants first wrote about
their MVA, while the others completed the neutral text first.
Each condition included both tasks. Both text capture tasks
were ten minutes in length. Each task, regardless of order,
was partitioned by a ten minute cognitive distractor task to
minimize carryover effects. The cognitive distractor task
utilized in this experiment was a number-based Sudoku
puzzle.

Results and Discussion
PCL scores ranged from 17-65 (M = 25.07, SD = 9.38).
Five participants from the study (10% of the sample
population) had PCL scores high enough to suggest a PTSD
diagnosis (composite score of 35 of higher), falling within
the range of earlier reported estimates of PTSD prevalence
(Kessler et al., 1995).
Mixed effects regression analyses were conducted on the
normalized frequencies of the linguistic variables with PCL
scores and text type (trauma or neutral) as fixed factors, and
condition (neutral and trauma narrative) as a random factor
(Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). The model was fitted
using the restricted maximum likelihood estimation
(REML) for the continuous variable (PCL scores). F-test
denominator degrees of freedom were estimated using the
Kenward-Roger’s degrees of freedom adjustment to reduce
the chances of Type I error (Littell, Stroup, & Freund,
2002).
Results suggested a significant relationship between PCL
scores and six linguistic variables, four categories from the
syntactic dimension, and one from both the semantic and
structural dimensions. (See Table 1).

PCL scores were related to the use of punctuation, F(1,
81.09) = 13.474, p < .001, such that when PCL scores
increased the more punctuations were found. Word Count
and PCL score were related, F(1, 81.029) = 4.467, p < .05,
with high PCL scores yielding longer texts. The relevance
of these categories might be explained by the fact that the
patient is unable to lock in the event’s specifics, instead
using more words in an attempt to accurately describe the
event. The presence of these linguistic units could be a
byproduct of suppression, in that they are avoiding the
acknowledgement of the traumatic event’s specifics.
Another variable related to PCL scores were the
frequency of determiners (Biber), F(1, 82.004) = 8.597, p <
.01, with higher PCL scores yielding fewer determiners.
Determiners, in written and spoken discourse, are used to
add discrete specification to the information being conveyed
(Argamon et al., 2003; Biber et al 1998; Mulac & Lundell
1994). It makes sense that determiners in texts written by a
PTSD sufferer would find less use, as the disorder affects an
individual’s ability to concretize specifics from the event.
Negative causal connectives (e.g., although, nevertheless)
showed a positive relation with PCL scores, F(1, 81.136) =
4.74, p < .05. The increase of negative causal connectives as
a function of higher PCL scores might be explained both by
suppression and avoidance. Negative causal connectives
imply a causal relation that is negated, perhaps to create a
distance to the events described, or reflecting an uncertainty
in the claims made in the preceding clause.
In addition, the LIWC semantic category “death” was
related to PCL scores, F(1, 81.127) = 7.113, p < .01, likely
explained by the inherent nature of traumatic events
regardless of whether the trauma experienced was
psychological or physical in nature. Also from LIWC, the
category ”function” yielded a positive relation with PCL
scores, F(1, 82) = 6.911, p = .01 (e.g. as PCL scores
increased, the use of “function” words increased).
Interestingly, emotions categories from the LIWC and
Johnson-Laird and Oatley Emotions models did not reach
significance in relationship to PCL scores. However,
“Negative Emotions” from the LIWC model reached
significance in comparison of text types, F(1, 81.151) =
4.955, p < .05, as well as “Basic Emotions” from the
Johnson-Laird and Oatley Emotion model, F(1, 81) = 9.742,
p = .002. The findings here imply an emotional foundation

2958

in texts written about the PTSD sufferer’s recall of the
traumatic event.

General Discussion
Previous research has shown that linguistic features can
predict a multitude of aspects of human behavior. Whether
linguistic features might also be indicative of psychological
disorders is however less clear. We investigated whether the
linguistic properties in trauma narratives written by
survivors of a Motor Vehicle Accident (MVA), change as a
function of the intensity of posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) symptoms. The severity of participant PTSD
symptomatology was compared to linguistic variables from
eight different computational algorithms.
It may not be surprising from the quantity of variables
used in our analysis that some would demonstrate the
hypothesized relationship between PCL scores and language
use. However, the results featured here can be grounded in
theoretical constructs that are in line with what would be
expected from the clinical psychological literature. Just as
well, since not all of the associated PTSD symptoms are
required for a PTSD diagnosis, it is possible that not all of
the symptom clusters would emerge in the texts collected.
Of the three main PTSD symptom clusters, the variables
revealed in our analyses align most with that of the
“Avoidance” distinction. The Avoidance cluster of the
PTSD symptom inventory identifies a PTSD sufferer’s
propensity to avoid thoughts and reminders of the event.
This cluster includes the thought suppression behavioral
phenomenon often associated with PTSD as well (DSM-IV,
2000).
For example, Chung and Pennebaker (2007) have
highlighted the ability of function words to reveal
psychological states. Function words are subjectively
personal, and have a multifaceted utility in the
personalization of discourse. Due to the personal nature of
traumatic experience it is notable that function word usage
would fluctuate as a result of the severity of the traumatic
event. The difficulty in mentally integrating the traumatic
experience could be one reason why higher PCL scores
would reflect a decreased usage of this category. The PTSD
patient is unable to work the experience into their current
cognitive schemas. The lack of personalization in the
narrative reflects the individual’s inability to map the
experience into long-term memory.
The deficiency of the determiners category can be
explained through “Avoidance” symptoms. Determiners, in
written and spoken discourse, are used to add discrete
specification to the information being conveyed (Argamon
et al., 2003, Mulac & Lundell 1994; Biber et al 1998). It
makes sense that determiners in texts written by a PTSD
sufferer would find less use, as the disorder affects an
individual’s ability to concretize specifics from the event.
An increase in negative causal connectives aligns with the
“Avoidance” distinction as well, as though an individual
suffering from PTSD second-guesses their statements,
demonstrating uncertainty as a product of cognitive

distancing. The word count and punctuation could be
explained here as well, as the participant is unable to lock in
the specifics, and instead uses more words in an attempt to
accurately describe the event. The presence of these
linguistic units could be a byproduct of suppression, in that
they are avoiding the acknowledgement of the traumatic
event’s specifics. Or just as well, as suggested earlier, PTSD
survivors are unable to recall these specifics. From these
relationships there is evidence that a person suffering from
PTSD trauma can cognitively distance themselves from the
details of the event. And while it does not map well in the
“Avoidance” cluster, the revealed presence of words from
the semantic category “Death” can be explained by the
inherent nature of traumatic events regardless of whether the
trauma experienced was psychological or physical in nature.
The emotion categories that were shown to differ across
text types can be reasoned to explain a PTSD patient’s
propensity for emotional numbing. Despite the existence of
emotional numbing, emotions are still attached to the
experience. In writing about the traumatic experience these
emotions are faced and thus resurface. This might explain
the relative intensity of emotion word usage when
describing the traumatic event and the lack of presence in
narratives irrelevant to this experience.
Even though the computational linguistic variables show
a relationship with PTSD measures, it is clearly not the case
that a direct relationship can be assumed, nor should the
findings here be seen as an attempt to replace existing
clinical psychology measures of diagnosis. At the same
time, the current study is encouraging enough to pursue
further analysis that might provide a first filter to identify
those at risk of PTSD. The categories revealed here are
promising, as they align with crucial aspects of the
fragmented nature of a PTSD sufferer’s recall of their
traumatic experience. As well, from the categories
discovered here, it is reasonable to presume these same
categories and patterns will appear in the analysis of texts
collected during the Shipherd and Beck (1999, 2005)
studies.

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000) Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (Revised 4th ed.)
Washington, DC: Author.
Argamon, S.; Koppel, M.; Fine, J.; and Shimoni, A. 2003.
Gender, genre, and writing style in formal written texts.
Text 23(3).
Biber, D. (1988). Variation Across Speech and Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blanchard, Edward B. Jones-Alexander, Jacqueline
Buckley, Todd C. Forneris, Catherine A. ; Behaviour
Research and Therapy, Vol 34(8), Aug, 1996. pp. 669673.
Campbell, R. S., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2003). The Secret
Life of Pronouns Flexibility in Writing Style and Physical
Health. Psychological Science, 14(1), 60-65.

2959

Chung, C. K., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). The
psychological function of function words. Social
communication: Frontiers of social psychology, 343-359.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic database.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
Section A , 33 (4), 497-505.
Dalgleish, T. T. (2004). What might not have been: An
investigation of the nature of counterfactual thinking in
survivors of trauma. Psychological Medicine, 34(7),
1215-1225.
Ehlers, A., Ehring, T., & Kleim, B. (2012). Information
Processing in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. In J. Beck,
& D. Sloan (Eds), The Oxford Handbook of Traumatic
Stress Disorders (pp. 191-218). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Elhai, J. D., Gray, M. J., Docherty, A. R., Kashdan, T. B., &
Kose, S. (2007). Structural validity of the posttraumatic
Stress disorder checklist among college students with
A trauma history. Journal of Interpersonal Violence , 22
(11), 1471-1478.
Gill, A. J., Nowson, S., & Oberlander, J. (2009). What are
they blogging about? Personality, topic and motivation in
blogs. In E. Adar, M. Hurst, T. Finin, N. S. Glance, N.
Nicolov, B. L. Tseng (Eds.): Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
ICWSM 2009, San Jose, California, USA, The AAAI
Press 2009.
Hancock, Jeffrey T. Curry, Lauren E. Goorha, Saurabh
Woodworth, Michael ; Discourse Processes, Vol 45(1),
Jan-Feb, 2008. pp. 1-23.
Hutchinson, S., Datla, V., & Louwerse, M. M. (2012).
Social networks are encoded in language. In N. Miyake,
D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the
34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 491-496). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Oatley, K. (1989). The Language of
Emotions: An Analysis of a Semantic Field. Cognition
and Emotion , 3 (2), 81-123.
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., &
Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in the
National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of general
psychiatry, 52(12), 1048.
Louwerse, M. (2002). An analytic and cognitive
parameterization of coherence relations. Cognitive
Linguistics , 291-315.
Louwerse, M.M. (2008). Embodied representations are
encoded in language. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
15, 838-844.
Louwerse, M.M. & Benesh, N. (2012). Representing spatial
structure through maps and language: Lord of the Rings
encodes the spatial structure of Middle Earth. Cognitive
Science.
Louwerse, M.M. & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science , 35, 381-398.

Louwerse, M.M., Lin, K., Drescher, A., & Semin, G.
(2010). Linguistic cues predict fraudulent events in a
corporate social network. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 961-966). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Louwerse, M.M. & Zwaan, R.A. (2009). Language encodes
geographical information. Cognitive Science, 33, 51-73.
Mansfield, C. D., McLean, K. C., & Lilgendahl, J. P.
(2010). Narrating traumas and transgressions: Links
between narrative processing, wisdom, and wellbeing. Narrative Inquiry, 20(2), 246-273.
Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: a lexical database for
English. Communications of the ACM, 38(11), 39-41.
Mulac, A. & T. L. Lundell, (1994). Effects of gender-linked
language differences in adults' written discourse:
Multivariate tests of language effects, Language &
Communication 14(3).
Pennebaker, J. W., Chung, C. K., Ireland, M., Gonzales, A.,
& Booth, R. J. (2007). The development and
psychometric properties of LIWC2007. Austin, TX,
LIWC. Net.
Semin, G. R., & Fiedler, K. (1989). The Cognitive
Functions of Linguistic Categories in Describing Persons:
Social Cognition and Language. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology , 54 (4), 558-568.
Semin, G. R., & Fiedler, K. (1991). The Linguistic Category
Model, its Bases, Applications and Range. European
Review of Social Psychology , 2.
Shipherd, J. C., & Beck, J. G. (1999). The effects of
suppressing trauma-related thoughts on women with raperelated posttraumatic stress disorder. Behavior Research
and Therapy , 37, 99-112.
Shipherd, J. C., & Beck, J. G. (2005). The Role of Thought
Suppression in Posstraumatic Stress Disorder. Behavior
Therapy , 36, 277-287.
Sloan, Denise M. Marx, Brian P. Bovin, Michelle J.
Feinstein, Brian A. Gallagher, Matthew W. ; Behaviour
Research and Therapy, Vol 50(10), Oct, 2012. pp. 627635.
Smyth, J. M., Stone, A. A., Hurewitz, A., & Kaell, A.
(1999). Effects of writing about stressful experiences on
symptom reduction in patients with asthma or rheumatoid
arthritis. JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical
Association, 281(14), 1304-1309.
Smyth, J., True, N., & Souto, J. (2001). Effects of Writing
about Traumatic Experiences: The Necessity for Narrative
Structuring. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology ,
20 (2), 161-172.
Tausczik, Y. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The
Psychological Meaning of Words: LIWC and
Computerized Text Analysis Methods . Journal of
Language and Social Psychology , 29 (1), 24-54.
Tuval-Mashiach, R., Freedman, S., Bargai, N., Boker, R.,
Hadar, H., & Shalev, A. Y. (2004). Coping with trauma:
Narrative and cognitive perspectives. Psychiatry:
Interpersonal and Biological Processes, 67(3), 280-293.

2960

