UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The dynamics of pragmatic enrichment during metaphor processing: activation vs.
suppression

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/91f3d464

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tomlinson, Jr., John M.
Assimakopoulos, Stavros

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The dynamics of pragmatic enrichment during metaphor processing: activation vs.
suppression.
John M. Tomlinson, Jr. (tomlinson@zas.gwz-berlin.de)
Zentrum für allegemeine Sprachwissenschaft (ZAS)
Berlin 10117 Germany
Stavros Assimakopoulos (stavros.assimakopoulos@um.edu.mt)
Institute of Linguistics, University of Malta
Msida MSD 2080 Malta

Abstract

Metaphors and language processing

In this paper, we test between suppression and activation accounts
of metaphor processing by means of a novel metaphor interference
paradigm that makes use of mouse-tracking. The goal is to
understand how context influences the activation of salient and
non-salient features of a concept during the on-line processing of a
metaphor. In two mouse-tracking experiments, we examine the
activation and availability of conceptual features that were either
irrelevant or relevant for understanding a metaphor across various
contexts. Our findings support the conclusion that context works
primarily by rapidly suppressing salient features of a concept that
are not relevant for the particular metaphorical interpretation. What
is more, it seems that even further contextual manipulation does
not facilitate the activation of non-salient metaphor relevant
features.
Keywords: Figurative language,
psycholinguistics, mouse-tracking.

lexical

Many early experimental studies have demonstrated that
metaphor processing is incompatible with the standard
“literal-first” Gricean view of pragmatics (Gibbs, 2002).
This is because figurative speech is understood just as
quickly, and in some cases even more quickly, than literal
speech (see Glucksberg, 2001 & Glucksberg, 2003 for
extensive reviews). Processing delays reported in the
literature are more likely to occur for unfamiliar metaphors,
due to the relative difficulty needed to integrate contextual
information into the novel interpretation at hand (Shinjo &
Meyers, 1987), while reaction time differences might
ultimately stem from speed-accuracy trade-off issues.
McElree & Nordlie (1999), for example, observed that
literal and figurative meanings might be derived equally
fast, but the overall accuracy of figurative speech
interpretation seems to be lower than that of literal speech at
both early and late processing times. These findings suggest
that strong contexts should not decrease the processing time
for figurative language, but only increases the likelihood
that the intended interpretation will be understood.
The finding that both literal and metaphorical speech is
understood with the same speed and facility has been a
central tenet of numerous theoretical accounts in
psychology. One example is the class inclusion model
(Hampton, 1988; Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990), according
to which, understanding a metaphor such as “his job is a
jail” amounts to updating the topic’s category structure by
integrating select features of the vehicle ‘jail’ (e.g.
“confinement”, “no exit”, etc.) into it. Experimental work
seems to suggest that this is done by first suppressing basic
level meanings of a category (Gernsbacher, Keysar,
Robertson, & Werner, 2001) and then creating ad hoc
categories from the combination of topic and vehicle
features (Barsalou, 1983).
Another prominent account that incorporates the lack of
processing time difference between literal and metaphorical
speech is that of Cognitive Linguistics (Lakoff & Johnson,
1983), which suggests that literal and metaphorical
interpretation do not rely on different processing
mechanisms. According to this approach, understanding

pragmatics,

Introduction
Among the most intriguing aspects of language are the
creative ways in which we can use it. We often use words
and sentences in novel ways that create nonce
interpretations of a stable linguistic repertoire for various
social and pragmatic purposes. One particularly contentious
debate surrounding creative language use is how we
understand figurative language. While much research has
sought to understand the various linguistic and conceptual
mechanisms needed to understand figurative meaning
(Glucksberg, 1998, Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), less attention
has been paid to the pragmatic enrichment mechanisms
needed to rapidly integrate contextual information into
figurative interpretations (Gibbs, 2002).
In this paper, we address this question by using a novel
mouse-tracking paradigm in an attempt to better understand
how context affects the on-line processing of figurative
language. Specifically, we examine metaphorical
interpretations, which have received the greatest amount
attention in the psycholinguistics literature, and report the
results from two experiments designed to test between two
contrasting views of how context can aid the comprehension
of metaphors; either by suppressing information not relevant
for the metaphorical interpretation or by increasing the
accessibility of information needed to reach it..

145

literal and metaphorical speech involves the recognition of
patterns as opposed to complex mappings assumed in other
theories; in the case of “my job is a jail”, for example, both
“job” and “jail” share the “container” relationship.

study, we make use of a novel paradigm to further test how
suppression and activation mechanisms are implemented
during on-line metaphor comprehension. We use mousetracking because via motor movements it can provide a
window into the way in which listeners’ access conceptual
information during processing, since it “breaks up” the
button press (Freeman & Ambady, 2010). More specifically,
we examine how both metaphor relevant and metaphor
irrelevant features can interfere with mouse-trajectories
toward metaphorical interpretation.

Figurative language and lexical pragmatics
In linguistics, researchers have sought to integrate the
findings mentioned above into both more formal and
processing-oriented theories. For example, Relevance
Theory currently offers an account of metaphor as a case of
conceptual broadening and narrowing (Sperber & Wilson
2008). Relying on the aforementioned idea of ad-hoc
categories (Barsalou 1983), relevance theorists also hold
that nonce conceptual categories are constructed for each
contextually specific metaphorical use. For example, in a
metaphor such as “the goalie is a spider”, the vehicle
‘spider’ is assumed to encompass encyclopaedic
information (“insect”, “has 6 legs”, “fangs”, “catches prey
in web”, etc.), which is selectively combined into a
contextually relevant ad-hoc category SPIDER* (denoting
something like “catches things near its web”) after certain
features of the lexically encoded concept SPIDER are
suppressed.
Other accounts seem to rely more on processes of
activation when it comes to explaining how context helps
process figurative language on-line. The direct access view,
for instance, holds that context primes the relevant features
needed to interpret the figurative meaning to the extent that
figurative meanings are interpreted in an almost identical
manner to literal meanings (Gibbs, 2002). This account
differs from the relevance-theoretic one in that it predicts
that context affects the way in which conceptual/semantic
information is accessed from the start rather than further
processed once a lexical meaning is retrieved during some
decoding process. This view is consistent with Recanati
(1995)’s theory of truth-conditional pragmatics, which holds
that when interpreting a sentence such as “my job is jail”, a
strong biasing context would make the properties of the
concept JAIL that are needed for the figurative
interpretation directly available (e.g. “confined space” as
opposed to “punishment”).
Prior work investigating suppression and activation in
metaphor processing has relied on various priming and
lexical decision paradigms (see Glucksberg, 2003 for a
review). For example, Rubio-Fernadez (2007) tested the
idea of active suppression in a cross modal priming
paradigm and found that after reading metaphorical
utterances, metaphor relevant properties remained active at
longer intervals than metaphor inconsistent properties. This
suggests that all properties of a given concept are activated
and then properties not relevant for the metaphor are
suppressed. One limitation of such studies, however, is that
reaction time measurements might mask the continuous
changes in the accessibility of properties. In other words,
similar reaction times at a given interval might not
necessarily reflect equal activation levels. In the present

Overview of Experiments
In the following two experiments, a metaphor interference
paradigm (Glucksberg, Gildea, & Bookin, 1982; Wolff &
Gentner, 2000) was combined with mouse-tracking. This
paradigm offers a novel test of the on-line availability and
competition of salient and contextually relevant features
during the interpretation of a metaphor. Participants read
metaphors such as “the goalie is a spider” along with filler
items such as “the apple is red”. They then clicked on either
one of two pictures that best captured the overall meaning of
the utterance. In the critical trials, one of these pictures, the
correct target, depicted the topic in its metaphorical state
(goalie making a save), while the other picture, a competitor
image, was either an attribute from the vehicle available in
the metaphorical state (spider web) or one only available in
its non-figurative meaning (spider close-up). The
interference of competitor target images on participants’
mouse trajectories was compared across both literal and
figurative utterances (Experiment 1) and then across strong
and weak contexts (Experiment 2).
Prior to both of these experiments, participants completed
a picture norming experiment to determine the relative
salience of the various attributes for the metaphorical
vehicle and become familiar with the pictures used in the
main experiment. For this, they were shown the topic of the
metaphor in isolation (SPIDER) and were asked to choose
between the two competitor target pictures (web or closeup). This allowed for the experimental items (metaphorical
utterances) to be separated into two groups:
1)
2)

Salient (metaphor) relevant feature group - the
figurative attribute of the vehicle has more baseline
salience than the literal attribute.
Salient (metaphor) irrelevant feature group - the literal
attribute of the vehicle has more baseline salience than
the figurative attribute.

Experiment 1
28 participants at Cardiff University took part in both the
picture-norming and main experiment in exchange for
course credits. Participants completed both parts of the
experiment within 30 minutes.
Stimuli Forty metaphorical sentences were adapted from
Jones & Estes (2006), in which both the topics and vehicles
of which had been already been normed for aptness and
conventionality. In Jones & Estes (2006), aptness was

146

defined as the extent to which the vehicle’s figurative
meaning expresses an important feature of the topic.
Conventionality was defined as the strength of the
association between the metaphor vehicle and its figurative
meaning. This allowed us to use a variety of metaphors that
differed along these parameters.
Various pictures that depicted either relevant (spider web)
or irrelevant (spider eyes/fangs) features of the metaphorical
topic in this particular context were collected using Google
Search. During the collection, multiple candidate pictures
expressing the metaphorical meaning of the vehicle were
collected (e.g. an outstretched goalie making a diving save,
a tall goalie, a goalie stretching, etc.), and several research
assistants independently decided which one best expressed
the metaphorical meaning of the utterance at hand. The
same pictures were used for both the norming and the main
parts of experiment.

Design and Procedure In the main experiment, participants
read metaphors such as “The goalie is a spider” as well as
literal filler items such as “The apple is red”. The filler
items were included to make sure that participants listened
until the end of the sentence. Without these sentences,
listeners could have made their decisions just after hearing
the metaphor topic. In the filler sentences participants would
choose between two competing images, which were only
distinguished by the final word in the utterance (“The apple
is red” vs. “The apple is green”). For the 40 metaphor items,
participants saw either one of three target-competitor picture
versions for metaphorical items. In the relevant feature
condition, participants chose between a picture of the
metaphor relevant feature (spider web) and a picture of the
topic in its metaphorical state (the outstretched goalie
making a save). In the irrelevant feature condition, the same
picture of the topic was used, but in conjunction with a
metaphor irrelevant feature picture (frontal close up of a
spider). In the control condition, the same topic picture was
also used, but the competitor picture had no relationship to
the topic or vehicle (e.g. an apple). Three lists were created
so that each participant saw only one version of each item.
To start a trial, the participant would click on the START
button at the bottom center of the screen. Each item was
presented word by word at an interval of 350ms per word.
Participants were allowed to move the mouse towards a
picture target, located at the top corners of the screen, only
at the onset of the final word in the utterance. The trial
ended once a target was clicked on.

Norming experiment
In order to establish the relative salience of the feature
pictures prior to the main experiment, participants were
presented with the metaphor topics (spider) and had to click
on the feature picture that best represented the word. This
allowed us to distinguish a relative baseline for which
feature picture was more salient for the topic. For example,
participants read the word VOLCANO (from “his anger is a
volcano”) and clicked on either a picture of an inactive
volcano (metaphor irrelevant feature) or a picture of hot lava
(metaphor relevant feature). In order for an item to be
assigned to a group (salient metaphor relevant feature group
or salient metaphor irrelevant feature group), the average
ratings for a picture response for a given topic had to be
above 66%. Two items that were towards chance, i.e. 50/50,
were excluded from the analysis of the main experiment. 18
of the 40 metaphor vehicles were rated as having a salient
(metaphor) relevant feature and 20 of the 40 metaphor
vehicles were rated as having a salient (metaphor) irrelevant
feature. This part of the experiment also served as a way of
familiarizing participants with the pictures used in the main
experiment.

Predictions If participants first access the salient meaning
of the concept at hand, then salient picture features should
interfere at an earlier point during the response. This should
happen for both relevant and irrelevant features, however
irrelevant features should not interfere later on in the
response, as these features are not part of the figurative
meaning, i.e. they become suppressed. Put differently, if a
metaphor irrelevant feature is indeed the most salient, this
should interfere with responses towards the correct target
(picture of topic in metaphorical state) early on during the
response because it would be “active” during lexical access.
Similarly, if a metaphor relevant feature is not salient, later
interference in responses should occur. When metaphor
relevant features have higher salience than metaphor
irrelevant features, both early and late interference should be
noticed because this feature would be active both during
lexical access as well as during the construction of the
figurative meaning.

Main experiment
After completing the norming study, participants were
instructed to read a sentence and choose the picture that best
corresponds to its overall meaning. For metaphors,
participants had to click on the correct target, e.g. a picture
of the metaphor topic in its figurative state (goalie making a
save). Different feature pictures (metaphor relevant or
metaphor irrelevant) were used as competitors to test 1) the
amount of interference with the correct target and 2) the
stage in processing (early or late) during which the
interference occurs. Early interference would suggest that a
feature is available during lexical access, whereas later
interference would suggest that this feature becomes
available at a later stage, i.e. during pragmatic enrichment.

Results and Discussion
Figures 1 and 2 show the mouse paths for correct responses
for the relevant and irrelevant features groups, across salient
and non-salient items respectively. Control groups were not
included because mouse paths went directly to the target. To
examine the relative interference of competitor pictures on
participants’ mouse paths to the correct targets, the average
x-coordinates for mouse paths across the feature conditions

147

and saliency groups were compared. The time points for the
x-coordinates from the normalized mouse paths (101 time
stamps) were collapsed into 10 groups (or time bins) in
order to better operationalize early vs. late processing. A
mixed-model was used to analyze the x-coordinates of the
mouse paths, which used time-bin, competitor (relevant vs.
irrelevant), and feature salience as fixed effects. Subjects
and items were used as random effects.
Interaction terms for feature competitors and feature
salience were significant at time bins 30 to 40, t = 2.83, p <
.05 and time bins 50 to 60, t = 2.51, p < .05. Figure 2 shows
the mouse paths for the relevant and irrelevant feature
competitors only for items for which the irrelevant feature
was rated as more typical of the metaphor vehicle. A crossover pattern for x-coordinate position is observed, in which
metaphor irrelevant features interfere early on in the
response (time bins 30-40), whereas the metaphor relevant
feature interfere later on (time bins 50-60). This replicates
several findings from different paradigms in that salient
features seem to be more active, i.e. interfere more, during
early processing and less salient features are accessed later,
i.e. interfere later during the response. In the next
experiment, we sought to replicate the cross-over pattern for
feature interference and then investigate how priming versus
neutral contexts mediate the availability of features when
interpreting metaphors.

Figure 2. Time- normalized mouse paths for relevant vs.
irrelevant features in the salient irrelevant feature group.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, prior to each metaphor, participants read
either a “strong” and “neutral” preceding context. This
allowed us to test whether contextual information can
rapidly adjust the relative salience of a feature of a concept,
as activation accounts would predict. Specifically, “strong”
contexts should explicitly promote the status/activation of
metaphor relevant features, whereas “neutral”, albeit
felicitous ones should not. The direct access view would
predict that the (late) interference effect found for nonsalient metaphor relevant features should occur at an earlier
time bin when preceded by strong contexts because of the
increased activation of these features by the context.
Suppression accounts, on the other hand, would predict that
the early interference account for irrelevant features should
be more diminished in strong when compared to weak
contexts.

Norming experiment
Prior to the main experiment, the same norming experiment
as Experiment 1 was repeated. The two excluded items from
Experiment 1 were rated as having high salience metaphor
relevant features, however 1 of the remaining items was
now excluded because it did not meet the 66% threshold.
This resulted in 20 items in the high salience relevant
feature group and 19 items in the high salience irrelevant
feature group.

Figure 1. Time- normalized mouse paths for all conditions
(competitor feature type vs. salience groups).

Main experiment
The main experiment was identical to Experiment 1 except
that items were preceded by either neutral or strong
contexts. Details are discussed below.
Stimuli The stimuli were the same used in Experiment 1.
The only difference was that items were preceded by a
strong or weak context. For example, in our example item
“the goalie is a spider”, the strong context was: “We had
many opportunities to score, but the ball was always

148

stopped” while the neutral one was: “We had many
opportunities to score but couldn’t convert our chances”.
Design and Procedure The design and procedure were the
same as in Experiment 1. The only difference was that
contexts were presented prior to the onset of the metaphor
or literal utterance. Participants were able to read each
context at their own pace and press the enter key in order for
the word-by-word presentation of the item to start.

Results and Discussion
Figures 3 and 4 show mouse paths for the two conditions.
Using the same time bins from Experiment 1, a mixed
regression model was used to examine the interaction of
context, feature competitor, and feature salience. When
collapsed across contexts, the same interaction terms for
feature competitor and feature salience were significant at
time bins 30 to 40, t = 1.89, p < .05 and at time bins 50 to
60, t = 3.07, p <. 01. When context was included in the
interaction terms, they were not significant; time bins 30 to
40, t = 95, p =.69 and time bins 50 to 60, t = .34, p = 71.
Context was, however, a significant predictor at time bins
30-40 for salient irrelevant features when the irrelevant
features were the competitor, t = 2.61, p < .03, but not at
time bins 50-60, t =.75, p = 53.
Experiment 2 replicated the findings from Experiment 1 in
that early interference effects were observed for irrelevant
features and late interference effects were observed for
relevant features when the irrelevant feature was the most
salient. Both neutral and strong contexts showed the crossover interaction, however strong contexts only reduced the
early interference effects of irrelevant features for items for
which irrelevant features were the most salient. Taken
together, these findings provide evidence for suppression
accounts because relevant features still showed late
interaction effects even with strong contexts. This is not
predicted by the direct access view.

Figure 4. Time- normalized mouse paths for relevant vs.
irrelevant features in the salient irrelevant feature groups in
strong contexts.

Figure 5. Time- normalized mouse paths for irrelevant
features in the salient irrelevant feature groups across weak
and strong contexts.

Conclusion
In two mouse-tracking experiments, we tested the on-line
availability of conceptual information when interpreting
figurative language. Our main question was whether context
acts primarily by suppressing context-independent features
during lexical access for metaphorical interpretation or
whether it increases the availability of non-salient features
needed to understand the metaphor under question.
Experiment 1 showed that salient metaphor irrelevant
features of the vehicle provided early interference in
participants’ mouse paths towards correct targets. Nonsalient features of the vehicle relevant to the interpretation
interfered much later on in the participants’ mouse paths
towards the correct target. Experiment 2 tested whether the

Figure 3. Time- normalized mouse paths for relevant vs.
irrelevant features in the salient irrelevant feature groups in
weak (neutral) contexts.

149

presence of a biasing context primes the activation of the
salient feature that is relevant to the metaphor earlier on in
processing, but the same cross-over pattern found in
Experiment 1 was replicated in both the neutral context and
the strong context conditions. What context seemed to do
was reduce the early interference effect for metaphor
irrelevant features when these same features were salient
features of the vehicle. Taken together, the findings from
Experiment 2 provide support for suppression accounts.
While our paradigm did not find increased activation for
non-salient metaphor relevant features in strong contexts,
one possibility is that our strong contexts might not have
been strong enough to adequately test direct access
accounts. We used one sentence introductory context, when
classical studies, such as Swinney’s (1979) “bug” task, use
an entire paragraph of context. In this vein, Noveck, Bianco,
& Castry (2001) showed that longer contexts speed up
metaphor processing in comparison to shorter ones. It may
well be the case that the priming effects associated with
activation accounts operate on a larger time scale than
suppression mechanisms. We feel that this is a worthy topic
for future research, for which our mouse-tracking paradigm
is well suited to test.

Hampton, J. (1981). An investigation of the nature of
abstract and concepts. Memory & Cognition, 9, 149-I 56.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago
McElree, B., & Nordlie, J. (1999). Literal and figurative
interpretations are computed in equal time.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 486-494.
Noveck, I., Bianco, M. & Castry, A. (2001). The costs and
benefits of metaphor. Metaphor and Symbol 16, 109–121.
Recanati, F. (1995). On the alleged priority of literal
interpretation. Cognitive Science 19, 207–222.
Rubio Fernández, P. (2007). Suppression in metaphor
interpretation: Differences between meaning selection and
meaning construction. Journal of Semantics, 24, 345-371.
Shinjo, M. & Myers, J., (1987). The role of context in
metaphor comprehension. Journal of Memory and
Language 26, 226–241.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (2008) A deflationary account of
metaphors. In R. Gibbs The Cambridge Handbook of
Metaphor and Thought. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Swinney, D. (1979). Lexical access during sentence
comprehension: (Re) consideration of context effects.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 645659
Wolff, P., & Gentner, D. (2011). Structure-mapping in
metaphor comprehension. Cognitive Science, 35. 1456–
1448.

Acknowledgments
The second author was supported by ESRC grant RES-06223-240 and all of the authors were supported by the ESF
EuroXPrag grant “Varieties of Lexical Adjustment”. We
would like to thank Elena Chepucova for helping with the
preparation of the pictures and audio files.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories . Memory &
Cognition,11, 211– 27.
Gernsbacher, M. A., Keysar, B., Robertson, R. R. W., &
Werner, N. K. (2001). The role of suppression and
enhancement in understanding metaphors. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 433-450.
Gibbs, R. (2002). A new look at literal meaning in
understanding what is said and implicated. Journal of
Pragmatics, 34, 457-486.
Glucksberg, S. Gildea, P. & Bookin, H. E. (1982). On
Understanding nonliteral speech: Can people ignore
metaphors? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 21, 85-98.
Glucksberg, S. & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical
comparisons:
Beyond
similarity.
Psychological Review, 97(1), 3-18.
Glucksberg, S. (1998). Understanding Metaphors. Current
Directions, 7, 39-43
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding Figurative Language:
From Metaphors to Idioms. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Glucksberg, S. (2003). The Psycholinguistics of Metaphor.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 7, 92-96

150

