UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The intrinsic structure of spatial configurations and the partner’s viewpoint shape spatial
memories and descriptions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8h92k809

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Galati, Alexia
Avraamides, Marios N.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The intrinsic structure of spatial configurations and the partner’s viewpoint
shape spatial memories and descriptions
Alexia Galatia (galati@ucy.ac.cy)
&

Marios N. Avraamidesa, b (mariosav@ucy.ac.cy)
a

b

Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus
Centre for Applied Neuroscience, University of Cyprus
Nicosia, Cyprus

Abstract

instructions), it’s possible that speakers don’t spontaneously
represent their partner’s viewpoint in spatial memory, and
instead resort to egocentric preferences for organizing
information.
We recently adapted Shelton and McNamara’s (2004)
study to ask whether in fact speakers spontaneously
represent their partner’s viewpoint in memory. In Galati et
al. (2013), one participant (the Director) first studied a
randomly configured array, while either knowing or not
knowing their partner’s (the Matcher’s) subsequent
viewpoint, which was misaligned by 90°, 135°, or 180°. In
memory tests preceding descriptions, rather than finding
facilitation for the partner’s viewpoint when it was available
(cf. Shelton & McNamara, 2004), we found that speakers
represented that viewpoint in memory without using it as an
organizing direction. Directors took longer to imagine
orienting to perspectives known to be aligned with their
Matcher (at least for 90° and 135°) and rotated their array
drawings toward the Matcher’s viewpoint. Nonetheless,
these findings could indicate that, under those
circumstances, speakers did not have sufficient pragmatic
motivation to invest the cognitive effort to organize spatial
relations around a non-egocentric viewpoint, so they simply
represented it and used it as needed.
In the present study, our first goal is to elucidate whether,
under different circumstances, the partner’s viewpoint could
be used as an organizing direction in memory. In particular,
we ask whether, in collaborative tasks, a given partner’s
alignment with the array’s intrinsic structure affords
sufficient pragmatic motivation to organize spatial relations
around that viewpoint. Our view is that, when selecting an
organizing direction, people consider a confluence of
different sources of information, including egocentric cues
(e.g., their own learning viewpoint), representational cues
(e.g., the array’s intrinsic orientation) and social cues (e.g.,
the partner’s viewpoint). Thus, the partner’s viewpoint
could be used as an organizing direction if it is reinforced by
additional cues, like the array’s intrinsic orientation. This
prediction follows the proposal that in collaboration people
try to minimize their collective effort, with one partner
investing greater cognitive effort to ensure mutual
understanding upon appraising that the other is likely to find
the interaction difficult (e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986).
In spatial perspective-taking, attributions about the partner’s

We examined how the intrinsic orientation of spatial layouts and
the conversational partner’s viewpoint shape how people
organize spatial information in memory and subsequently
describe it. In 24 pairs, Directors first studied an array with a
symmetrical structure while either knowing their Matcher’s
subsequent viewpoint or not. When describing the array to the
Matcher, the array’s intrinsic orientation was aligned with the
Director, the Matcher, or neither partner. Memory tests
preceding descriptions revealed that Directors misaligned with
the structure organized information according to a priori
knowledge, being more likely to use the structure as an
organizing orientation when knowing that Matchers were
aligned with it. The perspective of Directors’ descriptions was
also influenced both by the partners’ alignment with the
structure and their advance knowledge of that. Altogether,
speakers are guided by converging social and representational
cues to adapt flexibly the organization of their memories and
perspectives of their descriptions.
Keywords: perspective-taking; spatial memory; intrinsic
structure; audience design; common ground; spatial
descriptions

Introduction
When people make spatial judgments they access memory
representations that maintain spatial relations around a
preferred direction (e.g., Mou, McNamara, Valiquette, &
Rump, 2004). This preferred direction can be influenced by
egocentric preferences for organizing information, based on
one’s learning perspective (Shelton & McNamara, 2001)
and on representational cues like the symmetry of the spatial
configuration (Mou & McNamara, 2002; Li et al, 2011) or
the geometry of the environment (Shelton & McNamara,
2001). However, the extent to which people take into
account their conversational partner’s viewpoint when
organizing information in memory and communicating this
information is still unclear.
A study by Shelton and McNamara (2004) addressed
whether describing information from the partner’s
viewpoint influences speakers’ resulting memory
representations. Indeed, after describing an array to their
partner, speakers were more accurate to make spatial
judgments from perspectives aligned with the one that had
been occupied by their partner (vs. other perspectives).
However, since speakers learned the arrays while describing
them from the partner’s viewpoint (following explicit

466

ability to contribute to the task, based on social cues, should
influence whether the partner’s perspective is adopted.
This is in line with findings concerning the interpretation of
spatial descriptions. For instance, when people believe that
their partner doesn’t know their viewpoint they are more
likely to interpret spatial descriptions from the partner’s
perspective, whereas when they believe that their partner is
real (vs. simulated) they are more likely to interpret them
egocentrically presumably because they shift the burden of
ensuring mutual understanding to the partner (Duran, Dale,
& Kreuz, 2011). Related findings come from production
tasks as well. People invest the cognitive effort to describe
information from their partner’s perspective when the
partner does not share their viewpoint (Schober,
1993),cannot provide feedback (Shelton & McNamara,
2004), or has worse spatial abilities than them (Schober,
2009). People are also more likely to help their partners by
using available environmental features, like the intrinsic
axes of objects, as the basis of their descriptions’
perspective, instead of their own egocentric perspective
(Tenbrink, Coventry, Andonova, & 2011), and referring to
more landmarks for orienting, and navigating along fewer,
larger and more prominent streets when describing routes to
a partner unfamiliar with the environment (Hölscher,
Tenbrink, & Wiener, 2011).
Thus, the second goal of our study is to examine how
people adapt their spatial descriptions when faced with
different cues. Specifically, we aim to clarify the extent to
which they rely on their memory representations when
describing information. We do so by dissociating the
learning of spatial arrays from their description (cf., Shelton
& McNamara, 2004). Our earlier work suggests that
speakers don’t merely rely on their initial representations
during descriptions, but are able to use available perceptual
information (i.e., their degree of misalignment from their
partners) to adapt descriptions appropriately (Galati et al.,
2013). Here, we examine whether advance knowledge of the
partner’s viewpoint guides speakers in selecting a
perspective for their descriptions, depending on whether the
intrinsic structure is aligned with the speaker, their partner,
or neither partner during the description. If the convergence
of available cues during the description strongly biases a
particular perspective, then advance knowledge of the
partner’s viewpoint may not influence descriptions
significantly. On the other hand, advance knowledge of the
partner’s viewpoint and its relation to the intrinsic structure
may highlight alternative perspectives for both encoding and
describing the array.

reconstructed the array on the basis of the Directors’
descriptions. We manipulated the alignment of the array’s
intrinsic structure with either partner during the description
phase, as well as the partners’ advance knowledge of that. In
a third of the pairs, Directors studied arrays while aligned
with its intrinsic structure (referred to as 0°, see Figure 1),
and later described it to Matchers who were offset by 135°
measured counterclockwise (Aligned with Director
condition). In another third of the pairs, Directors studied
arrays from 225° and later described it to Matchers who
were at 0° (Aligned with Matcher condition). In the final
third of the pairs, Directors studied arrays again from 225°
and later described to Matchers who were offset by 135°;
thus both partners were misaligned with the structure
(Aligned with Neither condition). Half of the Directors in
each condition studied the array while knowing where their
Matcher would later be, whereas the remaining half didn’t.

Figure 1: The seven-object array used,
indicating 0º, 135º, and 225º headings.

Participants
Forty-eight undergraduate and graduate students from the
University of Cyprus participated, half of them as Directors
and half as Matchers, in 24 pairs. Six were female-female
pairs, 6 were male-male pairs, 6 were mixed-gender pairs
with female Directors, and 6 were mixed-gendered pairs
with male Directors. All pairs of participants were recruited
to be friends.

Procedure
Study phase After a practice phase during which Directors
were familiarized with the Judgments of Relative Direction
(JRD) task (see below), Directors studied an array with an
intrinsic axis of symmetry, comprising seven common
objects that lacked intrinsic front-back and left-right axes,
displayed on a 70 cm-diameter circular table (Figure 1).
Directors studied the array while either aligned or
misaligned with its structure (from either 0° or 225°), while
either knowing where their Matcher would be during the

Method
Design
Directors first studied an array with an intrinsic structure,
then had their memory of the array tested, and finally
described the array to a partner, their Matcher, who

467

description phase or not. When the Matcher’s viewpoint was
known, Matchers sat at a separate, identical table next to the
Director’s (see Figure 2), at the position they would occupy
during the description (at 0° or at 135°).
Testing phase After ensuring that Directors memorized the
array, Directors moved to an adjacent room to complete the
memory tasks (JRDs and the drawing task). On JRD trials,
Directors were instructed to imagine being at one location
facing a second, constituting an imagined heading or
viewpoint, and to point to a third object, the target (e.g.,
Imagine being at the bucket, facing the marble. Point to the
candle.). Directors first read a statement in this form (i.e.,
“Imagine being at x, facing y”), pressed a button on a
joystick once they adopted that heading, and then responded
to the second statement (“Point to z”) by deflecting the
joystick in the direction of z as if they were facing y and
pressing a button to log in their response. Sixty-four such
trials were presented individually on a computer screen.
They included eight imagined headings (0°, 45°, 90°, 135°,
180°, 225°, 270°, 315° relative to the intrinsic structure) and
their order was randomized.
After the JRDs, Directors did an array drawing task. They
were given 20 cm-diameter grid (with 1 mm lines) and were
asked to reconstruct as accurately as possible the studied
array by placing seven circular transparent markers, each
labeled with a name of the array’s objects, on the grid.
Description phase After their testing phase, Directors
returned to the original room for the description. Pairs sat at
the positions prescribed by their condition of alignment with
the array’s intrinsic structure. Directors described the
array’s configuration from memory, while the Matcher used
the seven objects to reconstruct the array at their table.
Instructions emphasized that participants could interact
freely and that they should reconstruct the array so that,
given the Director’s study viewpoint, objects be translated
to the Matcher’s table (i.e., not rotated by the Matcher’s
offset). Although pairs could interact freely, Directors could
not look over the barrier (113 cm tall) separating the two
tables; they could see each other’s faces but not each other’s
tabletops. After turning on the cameras, the experimenter
left the room for the description phase. After completing the
description phase, pairs were debriefed and compensated for
their time, if participating for payment.

Figure 2: Set-up of a study phase in which the Director
was aligned with the array’s intrinsic structure (at 0°), while
the Matcher was misaligned with it (at 135°).
d.

Neutral,
capturing
inter-object
relations
independently of a particular viewpoint, e.g., “it’s
close to the bucket” or “they form a triangle”
e. Other headings, not coinciding with the Director’s,
the Matcher’s, or the structure’s intrinsic
orientation, e.g., “say the candle is facing the
bucket; from the bucket, it’s on the left”
f. Ambiguous, when expressions could be interpreted
as involving more than one of coding categories
Three more categories (both-centered, environmentcentered, and object-centered) will not be considered further
since they constituted less than 1.5% of all 1609 spatial
expressions.
Reliability The first author coded 20 pairs, while a second
coder redundantly coded 6 pairs as well as the remaining 4
pairs. Prior to comparing their judgments, the coders
discussed 52 instances for which there was disagreement
over the segmentation of spatial expressions (i.e., cases
where one coder identified a spatial expression while the
other didn’t, or parsed a phrase as two spatial expressions
while the other did as one). These disagreements were
resolved by discussing them until consensus was reached;
the remaining, non-redundantly coded dialogues were
checked for consistent application of the agreed upon
criteria. For the 383 spatial expressions from the
redundantly coded dialogues, the two coders made identical
classifications 98% of the time, Kappa= .98, p < .001.

Coding of Spatial Descriptions
Each pair’s interaction during the description phase was
transcribed in detail, including contributions by both
Directors and Matchers. We adapted our coding scheme
from Galati et al. (2013) to classify spatial expressions in
the Directors’ turns as:
a. Director-centered, e.g., “in front of me is the
marble”
b. Matcher-centered, e.g., “the vase is to your left”
c. Structure-centered, e.g., “it’s on the perpendicular
line. You’re supposed to be on one side on the left,
and I’m on one right side of the table”

Results
Spatial Memory
Array drawings When Directors studied the array while
aligned with the intrinsic structure (from 0°), all of them
used the structure as the organizing direction of their
drawings, whether they knew the Matcher’s viewpoint
(135°) or not. On the other hand, as Table 1 shows, when

468

they studied the array while misaligned with its structure
(from 225°), the orientation of their drawings depended on
whether they knew their Matcher’s viewpoint. When the
Matcher’s viewpoint was unavailable, they were more likely
to use their learning viewpoint (225°) to draw the array. But
when they had known in advance that the Matcher was
aligned with the array’s structure, they used the structure’s
axis as an organizing direction more frequently. And when
they had known in advance that the Matcher would also be
misaligned with the structure (at 135°), half of the Directors
opted for their learning viewpoint, while half used the axis
of the structure as their organizing direction. The probability
that the overall distribution of the drawings’ orientation was
observed by chance is small (p= .03, Fisher’s exact test).

minimums at 0º and 180º, adequately described the
orientation latencies of Directors who drew arrays aligned
with the structure, F(1, 14)=10.34, p <.01, accounting for
88% of the variance associated with the imagined heading
and leaving a non-significant amount of variance
unaccounted for (p= .98). For Directors who drew arrays
from their 225º study viewpoint, the sawtooth contrast with
the minimums at 225° and its counteralinged heading (45°)
also described performance adequately, F(1, 8)=6.43, p
<.05, accounting for 62% of the variance associated with the
imagined heading and leaving a non-significant amount of
variance unaccounted for (p= .82).

Table 1: Proportion of Directors who drew arrays as
aligned with the intrinsic structure vs. from own viewpoint,
when having studied arrays from 225°.

Knows Matcher
is at 0°
Knows Matcher
at 135°
Does not know
Matcher’s
viewpoint

Aligned with
intrinsic
structure
.75

Aligned with
learning
viewpoint
.25

.50

.50

.25

.75

Figure 3: Orientation latencies (in secs) across imagined
headings according to how Directors had drawn arrays
The same pattern was observed for Directors’ response
latency (the time to point to the target after adopting an
imagined heading) and their pointing error (the unsigned
angular deviation of the joystick response from the veridical
response). For brevity, these analyses are not reported here.

Judgments of Relative Direction Analyses of JRD
performance were initially conducted while ignoring the
organization suggested by the Directors’ drawings.
However, these results were obfuscated by the fact that, as
Table 1 illustrates, when misaligned with the structure,
Directors were split in their preferred orientation at any
given condition of availability of the Matcher’s viewpoint.
For instance, although most Directors preferred the
structure’s axes when knowing that the Matcher would be
aligned with the structure, some still preferred their learning
orientation. Thus, subsequent analyses of JRD performance
centered on corroborating that Directors organized object
relations in memory as indicated by their drawings’
orientation.
As Figure 3 illustrates, the Directors’ orientation latency
(time to orient to an imagined heading) was consistent with
the preferred orientation of their array drawings. Directors
whose drawings were aligned with the structure were
generally faster to orient to the structure’s canonical axes
(0°, 90°, 180°, 270°) than to the oblique headings (45°,
135°, 225°, 315°). This pattern was reversed when Directors
had drawn arrays from 225°. Indeed, the interaction between
the heading from which the array was drawn and the JRD
trial’s imagined heading was significant, F(7, 154)= 4.96, p
< .001.
We examined this sawtooth pattern of performance by
fitting planned contrasts with weights: - 1.625, .875, -0.625,
1.375, -1.625, 1.375, -0.625, .875. This contrast, with the

Spatial Descriptions
Overall, Directors produced most frequently Neutral
expressions in their descriptions (48% of all spatial
expressions),
with
Matcher-centered
expressions
constituting 20%, Director-centered 15%, Structurecentered 8%, other headings 2%, and ambiguous
expressions 5% of all expressions.
We will focus on the distribution of Director-centered,
Matcher-centered, and Structure-centered expressions, given
our manipulation of the alignment of the intrinsic structure
with either partner. The distribution of these three types of
spatial expressions indeed depended on the partners’
alignment of the intrinsic structure during the description,
F(4, 36)= 3.96, p < .01. This interaction was driven by
Directors using more Matcher-centered expressions than
Director-centered ones when the Matchers were aligned
with the structure (95% CI[-.56, -.15], p < .01), whereas the
reverse was true when Directors were the ones aligned with
the structure (though this difference was not statistically
significant: 95% CI[-.09, .32], p= .27).
On its own, the availability of the Matcher’s viewpoint
didn’t reliably affect the distribution of these spatial

469

expressions; this interaction was not significant, F(2, 36)=
1.83, p= .18. Nonetheless, Directors used significantly more
Matcher-centered expressions than Director-centered ones
(26% vs. 7%) when they knew the Matcher’s viewpoint in
advance (95% CI[-.36, - .02], p < .05), whereas they used
comparable proportions (21% vs. 20%) when they hadn’t
known their Matcher’s viewpoint (95% CI[-.18, .15], n.s.).

Directors hadn’t known the Matcher’s viewpoint in
advance, they used numerically more egocentric than
Matcher-centered expressions (27% vs. 10%; 95% CI: [-.13,
.46], p= .25), whereas as Figure 4a shows, when they had
known it in advance, they used more Matcher-centered than
egocentric expressions (29% vs. 1%; 95% CI: [-.58, .01], p=
.06). Moreover, as suggested by the white bars across the
two figures, Directors used numerically more Structurebased descriptions when they knew in advance that
Matchers would also be misaligned with the structure than
when they didn’t (95% CI: [-.33, .02], p= .08).
The distribution of spatial expressions that Directors used
was not influenced by the pair’s gender combination or the
gender of the Director; the interaction of each of these
factors with the type of spatial expression was not
significant: F (6, 40)= .87, p= .52, for the pair’s gender
combination, and F (6, 40)= .85, p= .44 for the Director’s
gender.

Discussion

(a)

Our findings suggest that people consider both
representational and communicative factors when
organizing spatial information in memory and when
selecting the perspective from which to describe that
information. The preferred direction around which people
organize spatial relations in memory depends on whose
viewpoint is reinforced by the configuration’s intrinsic
orientation. This was demonstrated by the Directors’
drawings and was corroborated by their performance in the
JRD task. When Directors were aligned with the intrinsic
structure, they defaulted to their own viewpoint as the
organizing direction, regardless of what they knew about
their partner’s viewpoint. On the other hand, when they
were misaligned with the structure during learning, knowing
that their Matchers would be aligned with the structure’s
orientation increased the probability of using the structure’s
axes as an organizing direction. Moreover, knowing that the
Matcher would also be misaligned with the structure
increased the probability of using the structure’s axes as an
organizing direction compared to not knowing the
Matcher’s viewpoint.
These findings suggest that a given partner’s alignment
with the intrinsic structure affords sufficient pragmatic
motivation to organize spatial relations from that
orientation: when the structure’s orientation is aligned with
a partner’s viewpoint, these converging cues influence the
preferred orientation that people use. This extends our
earlier findings that, when no intrinsic structure is available,
people encode the partner’s viewpoint in memory but don’t
necessarily use it as an organizing direction, likely due to
insufficient pragmatic motivation to do so when they can
freely interact with their partner (Galati et al, 2013).
We propose that, when selecting the preferred orientation
of their spatial memories, people combine probabilistically
different sources of information. When the intrinsic
structure and their own learning viewpoint converge, they

(b)
Figure 4: Proportion of Director-centered, Matchercentered, and Structure-centered expressions when the
Matcher’s viewpoint was available (a) or unavailable (b) at
study, across the partners’ alignment with the intrinsic
structure.
As Figure 4a shows, Directors who studied arrays from 0°
while knowing that their Matcher would be offset by 135°
used comparable proportions of egocentric and Matchercentered expressions in their descriptions (17% vs. 18%;
95% CI[-.31, .27], n.s.). On the other hand, as Figure 4b
shows, they tended to use more egocentric expressions (34%
vs. 10%) when their Matcher’s viewpoint wasn’t available
at study (95% CI[-.05, .54], p= .10). When the Matcher was
at 0° during the description, Directors used predominately
Matcher-centered expressions whether this information was
available in advance or not. Finally, when neither partner
was aligned with the structure during the description, the
distribution of expressions differed depending on whether
Directors knew this in advance. As Figure 4b shows, when

470

use that egocentric viewpoint; when the intrinsic structure
and their partner’s viewpoint converge, they opt for the
partner’s viewpoint. This also held for how speakers
adapted their spatial descriptions. When the intrinsic
structure and the Director’s learning viewpoint converged,
Directors tended to describe spatial information from their
own perspective, with Matchers having to unpack the spatial
mappings of these Director-centered descriptions. When the
intrinsic structure and Matcher’s viewpoint converged,
Directors alleviated the Matcher’s cognitive burden by
describing spatial information from the Matcher’s
viewpoint. Speakers used the available social and
representational cues to adapt their descriptions in ways that
minimized their collective effort (e.g., Clark & WilkesGibbs, 1986), with the assumption here being that a
perspective supported by converging cues is optimally
effective.
Moreover, speakers flexibly used information that was
perceptually available in the communicative setting and
didn’t merely rely on the organization of the memories. For
instance, when Directors who studied the array from 225°
without knowing their Matchers viewpoint later interacted
with a Matcher at 0°, they used overwhelmingly Matchercentered descriptions, even though most of them had used
their own viewpoint as an organizing direction in memory.
This is consistent with findings that, in describing spatial
information, people do not always adhere to their memory’s
organizing direction when it conflicts with perceptual
evidence (Li et al, 2011). Altogether, the adaptation we
report here underscores that people use all relevant
information as soon as it becomes available (whether at
study or at collaboration) to make attributions about their
respective ability to contribute to the task. This is in line
with the view that probabilistic constraints on information
processing influence perspective-taking behavior in
conversation (e.g., Hanna, Tanenhaus, & Trueswell, 2003).
Our study offers a caveat on earlier demonstrations that
the misalignment between partners influences perspectivetaking (e.g., Duran, Dale, & Kreuz, 2011; Schober, 1993),
by highlighting that misalignment interacts with other
representational cues. When Directors were at 0° and
Matchers at 135°, Directors overall opted for their own
perspective in descriptions, presumably because reasoning
from an oblique perspective was computationally more
difficult (especially when not made salient at study).
However, when Matchers were at 0° and Directors at 225°
(also a 135° offset), Directors readily adopted their partner’s
perspective in descriptions. Thus, misalignment on its own
does not determine the preferred perspective of speakers’
descriptions.
In sum, in collaborative spatial tasks people adapt their
memory representations and linguistic behavior in nuanced
ways. They consider converging communicative and
representational cues, whenever they become available, to
appraise whose perspective would be optimal for efficient
coordination; this influences whether they encode their

partner’s available viewpoint in memory and adopt it in
descriptions.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the European
Research Council under grant 206912-OSSMA to M.A. We
are grateful to Chrystalleni Nicolaou and Margarita
Antoniou for assistance with data collection and coding.

References
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., & Kreuz, R. J. (2011). Listeners
invest in an assumed other’s perspective despite cognitive
cost. Cognition, 121, 22-40.
Galati, A., Michael, C., Mello, C., Greenauer, N. M., &
Avraamides, M. N. (2013). The conversational partner’s
perspective affects spatial memory and descriptions.
Journal of Memory and Language, 68, 140-159.
Hanna, J. E., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C. (2003).
The effects of common ground and perspective on
domains of referential interpretation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 49, 43–61.
Hölscher, C., Tenbrink, T., & Wiener, J. M. (2011). Would
you follow your own route description? Cognitive
strategies in urban route planning. Cognition, 121, 228247.
Li, X., Carlson, L. A., Mou, W., Williams, M. R., & Miller,
J. E. (2011). Describing spatial locations from perception
and memory: The influence of intrinsic axes on reference
object selection, Journal of Memory and Language, 65,
222-236.
Mou, W., & McNamara, T. P. (2002). Intrinsic frames of
reference in spatial memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 162170.
Mou, W., McNamara, T.P., Valiquette, C. M., & Rump, B.
(2004). Allocentric and egocentric updating of spatial
memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 142-157.
Schober, M.F. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in
conversation. Cognition, 47, 1-24.
Shelton, A.L., & McNamara, T.P. (2001). Visual memories
from nonvisual experiences. Psychological Science, 12,
343-347.
Shelton, A. L., & McNamara, T. P. (2004). Spatial memory
and perspective taking. Memory and Cognition, 32, 416426.
Tenbrink, T., Coventry, K. R., Andonova, E. (2011). Spatial
strategies in the description of complex configurations.
Discourse Processes, 48, 237-266.

471

