UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Left-Hand Gestures on Metaphor Explanation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5jt143s0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Argyriou, Paraskevi
Kita, Sotaro

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Left-Hand Gestures on Metaphor Explanation
Paraskevi Argyriou (pxa180@bham.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Frankland Building, University of Birmingham,
Edgbaston, B15 2TT, UK

Sotaro Kita (S.Kita@bham.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Hills Building, University of Birmingham,
Edgbaston, B15 2TT, UK

Abstract
Research suggests that gestures influence cognitive processes,
but the exact mechanism is not clear. Additionally, it has been
shown that when a linguistic task (metaphor explanation)
involves the right brain hemisphere, the left hand becomes
more gesturally active. We hypothesized that gestures with a
particular hand activate cognitive processes in the contralateral hemisphere. We examined whether gestures with the
left hand enhance metaphoricity in verbal responses. Results
showed participants produced more metaphoric explanations
when instructed to produce gestures with their left hand as
compared to the right hand or not gesture at all. In addition,
we measured the mouth asymmetry during metaphorical
speech to determine individual differences in righthemisphere involvement in metaphor processing. The leftside mouth dominance, indicating stronger right-hemisphere
involvement, positively correlated with the left-hand-overright-hand advantage in gestural facilitation of metaphorical
speech. We concluded that left-hand gestures enhance
metaphorical thinking in the right hemisphere.
Keywords: Metaphor; representational gestures;
hemispheric lateralization; mouth asymmetry.

brain

Introduction
There are many studies providing evidence for the
relationship between gestures and cognitive processes, and
several theoretical accounts explaining how gestures may
determine cognitive processing. However, there is a debate
about the type of processes gesture influences (e.g., lexical
retrieval, imagery maintenance, and conceptualization; for a
review see Kita, 2000), and the mechanism through which
gesture influences cognitive processes is not yet clear. In
this study, we will focus on the self-oriented functions, that
is, the effect that gestures – and in particular
representational gestures – have for those who produce
them, and we will explore a neural mechanism for gestures'
self-oriented functions, which has not been investigated in
the literature.
According to the Lexical Retrieval Hypothesis gestures
help speakers retrieve the lexical form on a surface level. In
particular, it is suggested that gesture related information
enters the speech production system to help the grammatical
and/or phonological encoding (for a review see Krauss &
Hadar, 2001). Evidence for this hypothesis comes mainly
from speech fluency studies. For example, Rauscher,
Krauss, and Chen (1996) showed that gesture prohibition

led to more dysfluencies and slower speech rate when
talking about spatial concepts. Therefore, it is proposed that
gestures promote and facilitate speech production.
Alternatively, according to the Image Maintenance
Hypothesis (de Ruiter, 2000) gestures have been thought to
help the working memory maintain mental imagery during
speech production. In particular, Wesp, Hesse, Keutmann,
and Wheaton (2001) have shown that when speakers
described images from memory, they used more gestures
compared to talking about images they had a physical
experience with; thus, indicating that gestures facilitate
speakers to represent spatial information and maintain
spatial imagery in working memory.
Finally, according to the Information Packaging
Hypothesis, gestures help speakers at the conceptualization
level; that is to formulate the concept to be uttered. In
particular, Alibali, Kita, and Young (2000) showed that
speakers gestured differently in two lexically comparable
yet conceptually different tasks. Similarly, a gesture
prohibition study (Alibali & Kita, 2010) showed that
children who were allowed to gesture could focus more on
present perceptual-motor information in their verbal
descriptions compared to those who were prohibited from
gesturing. Thus, it is suggested that gestures help speakers
focus on relevant information, and plan concepts in the way
suitable for verbalization.
The above theoretical accounts – which are not
necessarily mutually exclusive, rather complementary –
have attempted to explain how gestures may influence
various cognitive processes. However, the mechanism for
such effects remains to be explored. The aim of the present
study is to determine whether gestures activate cognitive
processes in the contra-lateral hemisphere. This is plausible
because the hand choice for gesturing is influenced by the
brain hemisphere that is predominantly active in a given
linguistic task. In particular, Kita, de Condappa, and Mohr
(2007) have shown that in right-handers the right-hand over
left-hand preference for gesturing is significantly weaker
whilst interpreting metaphoric expressions compared to
non-metaphoric ones. This finding has been explained in
terms of differential hemispheric specialization for linguistic
processes, and in particular the key role that the right
hemisphere has in the processing of figurative language
(following the Right Hemisphere Hypothesis for Metaphor;
see for example, Brownell, et al., 2007; for alternative
views, see Cardillo et al., 2012 and Rapp, et al., 2007); that

1762

is when a metaphor task activates the right hemisphere, this
activation increases the frequency of the left-hand gestures.
The present study tested the reverse causality: Do left-hand
gestures activate metaphorical processes?
To investigate this hypothesis, we manipulated which
hand is used for gesturing and assessed the performance in a
metaphor explanation task. More specifically, participants
were asked to explain the metaphorical mapping in English
idiomatic expressions with metaphorical meaning (e.g., “to
spill the beans” meaning “to reveal secrets”). These
expressions and task have been previously shown to engage
metaphorical thinking, and furthermore to activate the right
hemisphere. For example, when participants explain such
metaphorical expressions they demonstrate reduced righthand choice for gesturing (Kita et al., 2007), and reduced
right-sided mouth dominance (Argyriou & Kita, in prep.)
than when they explain non-metaphorical expressions.
Gesture production was manipulated within-participants by
asking subjects to gesture with their left hand only, right
only, or do not gesture at all. If gestures activate cognitive
processes in the contra-lateral hemisphere, then metaphor
explanations should demonstrate higher level of
metaphoricity when participants gestured with their left
hand compared to the other two gesturing conditions.
In addition, in order to further support the hypothesis,
mouth asymmetry measurements during metaphor
explanation were collected from the same group of
participants. Mouth asymmetry has been agreed to indicate
relative hemispheric specialization for speech production,
and in particular the right-sided mouth asymmetry observed
during verbal tasks has been related to the left hemisphere
cerebral specialization for language production (for a review
see Graves & Landis, 1990). Moreover, Argyriou and Kita
(in prep.) showed that mouth openings are more left-side
dominant in a metaphor explanation task than in a concrete
phrase explanation task, indicating the right-hemispheric
specialization for metaphor. Therefore, we expected that the
observed left-side bias in mouth openings during metaphor
explanation would be positively correlated with the lefthand gesture advantage on speech metaphoricity.

Method
Participants
31 right-handed, male, native English speakers and
monolinguals before the age of 5 years (age: M= 20.35, SD=
2.86) participated in the experiment for course credit or £4.
They were all right-handed according to a standardized 12item handedness questionnaire (Oldfield, 1971): a score of
“1”, “0.5” and “0” was given for each right-hand, either and
left-hand preference respectively. We calculated the mean
of the sum of these scores, and defined as right-handed
those participants who scored at least 8.5. None of the
participants had any previous serious injury to the face or
jaw. All of them were recruited at the University of
Birmingham. We focused on male speakers because

bilateral representation of language processing in men is
less compared to women (McGlone, 1980).

Stimuli
For the main descriptive task we used eighteen English
expressions with metaphorical meaning. We created three
(plus one in case one expression was unknown) additional
metaphorical and concrete expressions for the mouth
asymmetry task (see Table 1).
Table 1: Complete list of stimuli for the two tasks.
Metaphorical expressions for main descriptive task
To
burst
someone‟s To sit on the fence
bubble
To skate on thin ice
To cross that bridge later
To spill the beans
To dodge the bullet
To stand your ground
To fall back down to earth To take the bull by the horns
with a bump
To tie up loose ends
To get back in the saddle
To turn a corner
To get hot under the collar To turn the tables
To hold all the cards
Water under the bridge
To leave a bad taste in the
mouth
To look on the bright side
Metaphorical expressions for the mouth asymmetry task
To pour oil onto the fire
To spin a yarn
To set your sights higher
(To hit the nail on the head)
Concrete expressions for the mouth asymmetry task
To pour oil into the pan
To spin a golf ball
To put a shelf higher
(To hit someone on the head)

Procedure
Participants were tested individually. They were seated on a
chair, which was located between two tables of the same
height (71 cm tall). The experimenter was facing the
participant, and the video camera (Sanyo HD camera) was
placed next to the experimenter. Stimuli were presented one
by one on a white sheet of paper (font size 72, Times New
Roman), which was held by the experimenter until the
participant started the description.
Participants were instructed to explain the meaning of
stimuli as if they were explaining it to a non-native English
speaker. To encourage metaphorical thinking, participants
were instructed to include an explanation as to how the
literal meaning can be mapped on to the metaphorical
meaning of the expression (e.g., in the expression “to spill
the beans”, “beans” refer to secrets, and “spilling” refers to
spreading them to everybody). During the description,
participants were told to place one of their hands on the
indicated marks (white sticky dots) on the surface of the
table(s), and to keep it still for the whole procedure. For the
total prohibition condition, participants were asked to place
both their hands on the tables (see Figure 1). For the
gesturing conditions, they were instructed to gesture with

1763

their free hand during the description (gesture
encouragement instruction followed the paradigm in Chu &
Kita, 2011). Participants were debriefed about the purpose
of the hands immobilization after the experiment and the
permission to use the data was allowed. Order of stimuli
(forward - reverse), and order of hand(s) prohibition was
counterbalanced across participants in a within-participants
design.

Figure 1: Experimental conditions (from left to right) Right
Hand Gesturing, Left Hand Gesturing, No Gesturing.
In the mouth asymmetry task participants were instructed
to explain metaphorical expressions, just as in the main task,
and concrete expressions whilst both hands were prohibited.
The order of the tasks (concrete – metaphor) was
counterbalanced across participants. Hand prohibition was a
necessary experimental control in order to collect a pure
measurement of participants‟ hemispheric specialization for
metaphor without any influence from gesturing. Videorecording zoomed-in on the face area.

Measures
The verbal responses from the main task were transcribed
and coded for their level of metaphoricity. The level of
metaphoricity was measured based on whether the
explanations included an explicit link between the literal
and metaphorical meanings, and whether participants
explicitly referred to the mapping between the source and
target domains of the conceptual metaphor underlying each
idiomatic expression (adopted from McGlone, 1996). More
specifically1, a „„0‟‟ rating indicated that the explanation did
not contain words or phrases referring to the source domain
of the relevant conceptual metaphor, therefore there was no
1
To illustrate how the 0–2 metaphoricity coding has been used,
consider the following explanations generated for the item “to spill
the beans”: (a) “To spill the beans is to tell someone a secret or
gossip” was coded with 0 because the explanation includes the
meaning of the expression only. (b) “To spill the beans means to
let something out, to tell someone something perhaps that you
shouldn‟t been telling them; I guess the beans like information
make a mess once spilling them” was coded with 1 because there is
an implicit reference to the beans representing the information. (c)
“To spill the beans is to tell someone something that you were not
meant to tell; something which was confidential, private, and the
beans represent the information that was private and by spilling
them you are telling the news.” was coded with 2 because it
includes an explicit mapping between the source and target
domains, and participant mentions the representation of each
concept.

metaphorical cross-domain mapping; a rating of „„1‟‟
indicated that the explanation contained words or phrases
that might be construed as references to the source domain,
but the references were ambiguous, and the mapping
between the two domains implicit; a rating of „„2‟‟ indicated
that the explanation contained words or phrases that clearly
refer to the source and target domains, and the mapping was
explicit.
One individual “blind” coder was trained and coded 33%
of the total verbal responses in terms of metaphoricity. All
answers from 10 randomly selected participants were coded
(in total 180 trials were double coded). Coding of
metaphoricity matched between the two coders 76% of the
time (Cohen‟s weighted kappa κw= .68, p< .001, kappa
maximum κmax= .91).
Video recordings from the three gesturing conditions in
the main task were analyzed using ELAN software
(developed by the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguists,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands). They were coded on a trial-bytrial basis to locate the existence of at least one gesture type;
that is representational gestures, palm-revealing gestures,
conduit, and other (e.g., beats).
Video recordings from the mouth asymmetry task were
analyzed on a frame-by-frame basis using ELAN software.
The first ten mouth openings were coded per trial for each
participant (sixty mouth openings in total). We measured the
laterality at each maximum mouth opening. One maximum
opening was defined as the widest point the mouth opens
since the lips open to the lips resting or the lips meeting
completely. The options for laterality classification were:
right-side dominant, left-side dominant, or sides equally
open (see Figure 2 for examples). Maximum openings
during filled-pauses were included, but not the ones for nonspeaking purposes (e.g., smile), nor the ones whilst
participants were repeating the phrase to be explained.

Figure 2: (From left to right) Examples of right, left, equal
maximum mouth openings. “Right” and “left” refer to the
speaker's right and left.
One individual “blind” coder was trained and coded 22%
of the data in terms of right, left or equal dominance of
mouth openings. All mouth openings from 7 randomly
selected participants were coded (in total 414 maximum
mouth openings were double coded). Coding of dominance
matched between the two coders 79% of the time (Cohen‟s
kappa κ= .66, p< .001).
The degree of left-side mouth dominance was computed
for each participant based on the laterality (right-R, left-L,
equal-E) of their 30 maximum mouth openings for each task
(concrete and metaphor), and using the following formula:

1764

(L-R)/(L+R+E) (adopted and adjusted from Holowka &
Petitto, 2002). Thus, a positive and/or low negative mean
score indicated more instances of left-side dominant mouth
openings during metaphor explanation (right-hemispheric
lateralization), and a high negative score indicated more
instances of right-side dominant mouth openings (lefthemispheric lateralization).
In addition, we calculated a left-hand gesture advantage
index whilst participants gestured and explain metaphors in
the main descriptive task. That is, the average metaphoricity
per participant when gesturing with the left hand minus the
average metaphoricity when gesturing with the right hand.
Thus, a high and positive mean score indicated that
participants were more metaphoric when gesturing with
their left hand compared to the right (= left-hand gesturing
advantage on metaphoricity). A negative or low positive
mean score indicated that participants were more
metaphoric when gesturing with their right hand compared
to the left.

speech. Specifically, gestures, especially, those by the left
hand, improved metaphorical thinking.
We focused on trials in which only representational
gestures were produced, and we limited the analysis to
individuals who had trials with representational gestures
only (2 participants were excluded; N= 29). Pattern of the
results remained the same: left-hand gesturing (M= 1.53,
SE= .08), not gesturing (M= 1.15, SE= .06), right-hand
gesturing (M= 1.39, SE= .08). Also, the one-way repeated
measures ANOVA remained significant (F(2,56) = 14.87,
p< .001, η2= .35). Thus, there is evidence that effect of the
gesturing hand is due to representational gestures.

Design & Analysis
Out of the 522 trials in total in the main task, 4% was
excluded as failed trials; that is when the participants did not
proceed as instructed (e.g., no gesture production when right
or left hand was free), and when they did not know the
expressions. The independent variable was which hand was
free to gesture: right-hand gesturing, left-hand gesturing, not
gesturing. The dependent variable was the level of the
metaphoricity of the explanations (see the section
Measures).

Results and discussion
Out of the 354 gesturing trials, 99% included at least one
representational gesture; 23% included at least one palmrevealing gesture; 7% included at least one conduit gesture;
18% included at least one “other” gesture – comprising
mainly of beat and metacognitive gestures. Thus, the
instruction to produce gesture was effective and we may
assume that whatever the gesturing effect is, it will be due to
representational gestures during the gesturing trials.
One-way repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to
compare the effect of gesturing hand on level of speech
metaphoricity in the three gesturing conditions (left-hand
gesturing, right-hand gesturing, not gesturing at all). There
was a significant effect of the gesturing hand, F(2,60)=
13.92, p< .001, η2= .32. Post hoc comparisons with
Bonferroni correction between conditions indicated that
level of speech metaphoricity was significantly higher when
participants gestured with the left hand than not gesturing
(t(30)= 2.81, p< .001); metaphoricity was significantly
higher when gesturing with the right hand than not gesturing
(t(30)= 1.38, p= .028); and metaphoricity was significantly
higher when gesturing with the left hand compared to right
hand (t(30)= 1.43, p= .038) (see Figure 3). Thus, the
gesturing hand had an effect on the level of metaphoricity in

Figure 3: Average metaphoricity in speech in the three
gesturing conditions. Error bars represent standard errors.
Next we compared the left-side bias in mouth openings
during concrete and metaphor explanations. A one-way
repeated-measures ANOVA performed on the left-side
mouth dominance index with linguistic task as the
independent variable yielded significant effect of the task,
F(1,30)= 6.45, p= .016, η2= .18. The left-side bias was
higher during metaphor explanations (M = -.11, SE = .08)
compared to the concrete ones (M = -.24, SE = .09), thus
suggesting a reduced right-sided mouth asymmetry during
explanation of metaphorical expressions. More importantly,
we assessed the relationship between the left-side bias in
mouth openings and the left-hand gesturing advantage
during metaphor explanation. The range on the mouth
asymmetry measurement was -0.90 to 0.77, where positive
scores indicate a right-hemispheric lateralization (= that is
participants open their left side of the mouth wider than the
right whilst explaining metaphors). The range on the lefthand gesture advantage index was -0.30 to 0.83, where
higher positive scores indicate that participants were more
metaphoric when they gestured with the left than with the
right hand. There was a significant positive correlation
between the two scores (r(29) = .38, p = .036) (see Figure
4). Thus, the participants for whom the left-hand gesturing
advantage was bigger tended to have a stronger righthemisphere involvement in metaphoric speech production.
Note further that the mouth asymmetry during explanation

1765

of concrete expressions did not significantly correlate with
the left-hand gesture advantage (r(29)= .32, p> .05).

Figure 4: The scatter plot for the correlation between the
left-side mouth dominance and left-hand gesture advantage
during metaphor explanations.

General Discussion
The goal of the present study was to investigate a neural
mechanism for gestures‟ self-oriented functions. We
measured the level of metaphoricity in metaphor
explanations as a function of the hand used for gesture: the
right hand, the left hand, no hands. We found that speakers
produced more metaphoric verbal responses when they
gestured with either hand compared to not gesturing at all,
and when they gestured with the left hand compared to the
right. We propose that left-hand gestures led to better
performance in metaphor explanation because they activated
metaphorical processing in the right hemisphere.
The present findings are in line with the Information
Packaging Hypothesis (e.g., Alibali, Kita, & Young, 2000),
indicating that gesture helps the conceptual planning of the
speech, and in particular the conceptual mapping for
metaphorical speech.
In addition, the present results are compatible with
previous studies on gesture and metaphor. For example, the
present study found that metaphoricity was higher when
gesturing, regardless of the hand, than when not gesturing.
This is compatible with the observations that gesture
inhibition reduces the use of metaphorical spatial language
(Bos & Cienki, 2011). More importantly, the findings shed
new light on the inter-relation between the hand used for
gesturing and hemispheric specialization. Kita et al. (2007)
showed that hand choice for gesturing can be determined by
the relative hemispheric specialization during different
linguistic tasks. Thus, right-hand preference is reduced
during metaphor explanations compared to concrete or
abstract ones. Our findings provide evidence for the reverse
causal link. That is, the gesturing hand can determine the
level of speech metaphoricity, and in particular left-hand
gestures enhance metaphor explanations. So, there seems to
be a bi-directional causal relationship between left-hand
gestures and metaphorical processing.

Although there are several studies, which manipulate
gesturing in order to assess gestures‟ effect on cognitive
processes (e.g., Alibali & Kita, 2010; Rauscher et al., 1996),
as far as we know, this is the first study to explore the neural
mechanism for gestures‟ self-oriented functions, and link it
with the hemispheric lateralization of cognitive processes.
Crucially, the left-hand gesture advantage for metaphoricity
significantly correlated with the left-side dominance in
mouth openings for metaphorical expressions, but not for
concrete expressions. That is, the left-hand gesture
advantage is stronger in speakers who have strong righthemispheric control for metaphor. Thus, it further supports
the idea that gesturing activates cognitive processes in the
contra-lateral hemisphere.
But, how exactly this neural mechanism works? We may
speculate how based on our current findings, and also in
light of metaphor theories. Metaphor is considered as a
matter of conceptualizing one conceptual domain in terms
of another (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), and specifically the
metaphorical mapping requires speakers to map a concrete
concept on to a more abstract one. In addition, this mapping
requires the conceptualization of a distant semantic
relationship between the source and target domains of the
metaphor, and it is considered to be predominantly
computed in the right hemisphere, which processes coarse
grained semantic information (Jung-Beeman, 2005). For
example, in the expression to “spill the beans” participants
had to represent the abstract concept of IDEAS (target) in
terms of the distant concrete concept of OBJECTS (source).
Our findings revealed that left-hand gestures were
particularly beneficial compared to the right-hand ones for
the metaphorical mapping. Therefore, we suggest that lefthand gestures make the distant semantic relationship
between target and source domains of the metaphor to
become closer, and then speakers can represent the
metaphorical mapping in speech, thus become more
metaphoric. It seems that left-hand gestures give some kind
of “feedback” to the contra-lateral right hemisphere
(“Hemisphere-Specific Feedback Hypothesis”) and promote
metaphorical processing, which crucially involves the right
hemisphere.
The present study did not account for what aspects of
gestural hand movement influences metaphorical thinking.
More specifically, our findings cannot address the question,
“is it the gesture or the arm movement per se which
activates the processes in the contra-lateral hemisphere?”
Previous studies (Ravizza, 2003) have shown that
meaningless arm movements, such as tapping, may facilitate
lexical retrieval. However, this is only in tasks where lexical
items have been selected by automatic spreading activations
but not sufficiently so, and not in tasks where words have to
be strategically searched. We may assume that metaphorical
mapping requires strategic search of semantic fields, thus
arm movement per se may not facilitate the process. Thus, it
is the depictive nature of the gestural movement as
described above that enhanced participants‟ performance
rather than merely the arm movement. Moreover, even

1766

when the analysis included trials with representational
gestures only, the results remained significant and
demonstrated the same pattern (= left-hand gesture
advantage). Thus, it provided implicit support for the effect
of the depictive nature of representational gestures.
However, future research to compare the effect of
meaningless versus meaningful arm movements on
metaphorical thinking would directly assess this issue.
In conclusion, the current study has advanced our
knowledge of and enhanced theoretical accounts on a neural
mechanism for gestures‟ self-oriented functions, which have
received little attention so far. We propose that gestures
activate cognitive process in the contra-lateral hemisphere
such that left-hand gestures enhance a right-hemispheric
specialized process such as metaphor processing.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Paraskevi‟s Argyriou ESRC
award for pursuing Ph.D. studies at the University of
Birmingham. We would like to thank the financial support
from the School of Psychology at the University of
Birmingham for the study. We thank Sarah Byfield and
Monica Leverton for their help with data coding.

References
Alibali, M. W., & Kita, S. (2010). Gesture highlights
perceptually present information for speakers. Gesture,
10(1), 3-28. doi: 10.1075/gest.10.1.02ali
Alibali, M. W., Kita, S., & Young, A. J. (2000). Gesture and
the process of speech production: We think, therefore we
gesture. Language and Cognitive Processes, 15(6), 593613.
Argyriou, P., & Kita, S. (in prep.). Metaphor explanation
reduces the right-sided mouth asymmetry during speech
production.
Bos, A., & Cienki, A. (2011). Inhibiting gesture reduces the
amount of spatial metaphors in speech. Paper presented at
the GESPIN Gesture and Speech in Interaction, Bielefeld,
Germany.
Brownell, H., Lundgren, K., Cayer-Meade, C., Nichols, M.,
Caddick, K., & Spitzer, J. (2007). Assessing quality of
metaphor interpretation by right hemisphere damaged
patients. Brain and Language, 103(1-2), 197-198. doi:
10.1016/j.bandl.2007.07.113
Cardillo, E. R., Watson, C. E., Schmidt, G. L., Kranjec, A.,
& Chatterjee, A. (2012). From novel to familiar: Tuning
the brain for metaphors. Neuroimage, 59(4), 3212-3221.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.079
Chu, M. Y., & Kita, S. (2011). The Nature of Gestures'
Beneficial Role in Spatial Problem Solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology-General, 140(1), 102-116. doi:
10.1037/a0021790
de Ruiter, J. P. (2000). The production of gesture and
speech. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Holowka, S., & Petitto, L. A. (2002). Left hemisphere
cerebral specialization for babies while babbling. Science,
297(5586), 1515-1515. doi: 10.1126/science.1074941
Jung-Beeman, M. (2005). Bilateral brain processes for
comprehending natural language. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9(11), 512-518. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2005.09.009
Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help
speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kita, S., de Condappa, O., & Mohr, C. (2007). Metaphor
explanation attenuates the right-hand preference for
depictive co-speech gestures that imitate actions. Brain
and
Language,
101(3),
185-197.
doi:
10.1016/j.bandl.2006.11.006
Krauss, R., & Hadar, U. (2001). The Role of SpeechRelated Arm/Hand Gestures in Word Retrieval. In R.
Campbell & L. Messing (Eds.), Gesture, speech, and sign.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McGlone, J. (1980). Sex-differences in human-brain
asymmetry - a critical survey. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 3(2), 215-227.
McGlone, M. S. (1996). Conceptual metaphors and
figurative language interpretation: Food for thought?
Journal of Memory and Language, 35(4), 544-565. doi:
10.1006/jmla.1996.0029
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9(1), 97-113. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(71)90067-4
Rapp, A. M., Leube, D. T., Erb, M., Grodd, W., & Kircher,
T. T. J. (2007). Laterality in metaphor processing: Lack of
evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging for
the right hemisphere theory. Brain and Language, 100(2),
142-149. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2006.04.004
Rauscher, F. H., Krauss, R. M., & Chen, Y. S. (1996).
Gesture, speech, and lexical access: The role of lexical
movements in speech production. Psychological Science,
7(4), 226-231. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.1996.tb00364.x
Ravizza, S. (2003). Movement and lexical access: Do
noniconic gestures aid in retrieval? Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 10(3), 610-615. doi: 10.3758/bf03196522
Wesp, R., Hesse, J., Keutmann, D., & Wheaton, K. (2001).
Gestures maintain spatial imagery. American Journal of
Psychology, 114(4), 591-600. doi: 10.2307/1423612

1767

