UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cross-Domain Re-interpretation of Artistic Ideas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6s2232kv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ranjan, Apara
Gabora, Liane
O'Connor, Brian

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cross-Domain Re-interpretation of Artistic Ideas
Apara Ranjan (apara.ranjan@ubc.ca), Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca),
and Brian O’Connor (brian.oconnor@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan campus, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA
Abstract
The goal of this study was to investigate the translate-ability
of creative works into other domains. We tested whether
people were able to recognize which works of art were
inspired by which pieces of music. Three expert painters
created four paintings, each of which was the artist’s
interpretation of one of four different pieces of instrumental
music. Participants were able to identify which paintings were
inspired by which pieces of music at statistically significant
above-chance levels. The findings support the hypothesis that
creative ideas can exist in an at least somewhat domainindependent state of potentiality and become more welldefined as they are actualized in accordance with the
constraints of a particular domain.
Keywords: art; artifacts; common coding; creativity; domain
generality; ekphrastic expression; individual differences;
interpretation; music; self-expression; style; potentiality;
synesthesia; translation.

Introduction
Although much social interaction occurs directly through
words or actions, a great deal of what humans attempt to
communicate, such as ideas for works of art, science, or
technology, are not readily expressed through these
channels. Complex ideas are therefore often communicated
indirectly by way of artifacts. There is evidence that artists
leave something of themselves—their own personal
signatures or creative styles—in their artifacts, and that
creators’ identities are recognizably present in their creative
works. For example, creative writing students familiar with
each other’s writing identified significantly above chance,
not just which of their creative writing classmates had
written each particular piece of writing but which of their
creative writing classmates had created each artwork
(Gabora, 2010; Gabora, O’Connor, & Ranjan, 2012). Thus,
at least in some cases, if a viewer is familiar with the works
of creators in a particular domain (such as creative writing),
it is possible for the viewer to recognize which creator
generated which work, and this is even the case if the works
are in a different domain (such as art).
This does not, however, imply that creative artifacts are
just the external expression of individual style. We suggest
that artifacts constitute a beehive of hidden social
interaction, and that their forms reflect, in part, the attempt
to transcend one’s individuality, i.e., to relinquish oneself to
the essence of an idea. We suggest that when personal style
is recognizably evident in a work, this is not necessarily due
to an attempt to express this style, but a side effect of

participating in the human enterprise of interactively
evolving cultural outputs by adapting them to different
personal styles, perspectives, and modalities. The creative
process involves not just accessing and combining
knowledge, experiences, and ideas, but also inspiration,
translation, and re-interpretation (Cropley, 1999; Feldhusen,
1995, 2002; Munford & Gustafson, 1988; Sternberg &
Lubart, 1995). Components of a creative work may
originate from oneself, others with whom one has
communicated directly or indirectly by way of others, or
even multiple individuals through the course of history who
each put their own spin on it. Inspiration may come from a
work in same domain as the work it inspires (as when one
poem inspires an idea for another poem). Alternatively, an
idea may first be expressed by one individual in one
domain, and subsequently translated by someone else into
another domain (as when a piece of music gets re-cast in
another musical genre, or even inspires a poem). With the
advent of new technologies and social media, the distinction
between social interaction and individual creative
expression becomes increasingly blurred. For example, as
one moves from face-to-face communication, to avatarmediated communication, to music inspired by and intended
for someone else, to background music to accompany the
activities of a particular cartoon character, to music
composed with no obvious inspirational source, it is
difficult to draw the line between social interaction and
individual self-expression, and cross-modal perception.
The goal of this research was to test the hypothesis that it
is possible to recognize the source of inspiration for a
creative work when that source of inspiration comes from a
different medium. There are several phenomena that suggest
that a creative work need not be in the same domain as the
inspirational source for the work.

Related Phenomena
We now review phenomena that point to cross-domain
interpretation of ideas as a source of the character of
creative works: synesthesia, ekphrastic expression, and
cross-domain style.
Synesthesia Individuals referred to as synesthetes
naturally and spontaneously translate stimuli into another
sensory domain. For example, they may see particular
letters or numbers in particular colors. Ramachandran
(2003) proposed that synesthesia occurs as a result of hyperconnectivity in the brain due to partial collapse of the barrier
between sensory domains. Artists, poets, and novelists, are

3251

more likely than average to be synesthetes, which suggests
that synesthetically driven re-interpretation of inputs from
one modality to another can play a role in these creative
domains (Ramachandran, 2003).
Ekphrastic Expression There is a tradition in the arts of
interpreting art from one medium (e.g., oil paint) into
another (e.g., watercolor) and thereby coming to know its
underlying essence. This practice is referred to as ekphrastic
expression. The idea behind ekphrastic expression is that an
artist may have a more direct impact on an audience by
translating art from one medium into another medium
because this involves capturing, and thereby becoming
intimate with, its underlying form or essence. Ekphrasis
may be related to the late nineteenth Century practice of
associating particular kinds of music with particular colors.
There is anecdotal evidence that music of this time
frequently served as a direct inspiration for paintings, and
musical terminology was used as titles for paintings.
Ekphrastic expression is not just a phenomenon of the past.
Modern day film composers attempt to compose music that
conveys the emotional tone of the events portrayed in the
film, thereby heightening the viewer’s experience of these
events. Thus film scoring can be seen as a form of
ekphrasis. The application of ekphrastic methods in the arts
supports the idea that creative individuals extract patterns of
information from the constraints of the domains in which
they were originally expressed and transform them into
other domains.
Cross-Media Style Another reason to suspect that the
character of creative works arises through cross-domain reinterpretations of ideas is the widespread phenomenon of
cross-media style. This refers to artistic style that is
demonstrated by works of art in more than one medium. For
example, the term rococo is applied to a style of painting,
sculpture, literature, and music of the 18th Century. Works
in a given style are thought to derive from abstract
archetypal forms or potentialities that make the artistic mind
want to explore different arrangements or manifestations
(Burke, 1957).
Cross-modal Perception The phenomenon of crossmedia style provides evidence that creative works in
different media may be similar in terms of psychophysical,
collative, and ecological properties (Hasenfus, 1978).
Aesthetic perceptions stimulated by creative works may
generate emotional, cognitive, behavioral, and/or
physiological responses that are amenable to re-expression
in another form. This may arise in part due to regularities
with respect to the choice of elements (i.e., colors, shapes,
words) and/or how they are used (e.g., in an orderly or
chaotic manner) (Berlyne, 1971). Studies indicate that there
are non-arbitrary mapping between properties of vision and
sound (Griscom & Palmer, 2012; Mark 1975, Melara, 1989;
Melara, & Marks, 1990; Melara & O’Brien, 1987; Palmer,
Langlois, Tsang, Schloss, & Levitin, 2011; Ward et al.
2006). For example, the processing of some visual features,
such as spatial frequency and lightness, can be affected by
auditory features such as pitch and timbre (Mark, 1987).

In the study that perhaps comes closest in spirit to this
one, composers were asked to write music inspired by four
simple line-drawn shapes: a square, a lightning bold, a curvy
shape, and a jagged shape (Willmann, 1944). Music inspired
by the same shape was more similar than music inspired by
another shape with respect to tempo, melodic pattern, mood,
and other characteristics, and listeners could match above
chance the music to the shape that inspired it. However, the
music could not be said to be reinterpretations of creative
works, for the impoverished nature of the stimuli
undoubtedly limited the scope for creative expression. The
study reported here is the inverse of Willmann’s; it
investigates not music inspired by art but art inspired by
music. Moreover, the goal was to go beyond simple crossmodal mappings to convey in another domain the rich
emotionality of genuinely creative works.

Methods
This study examined whether people were able to correctly
recognize which works of art were inspired by which pieces
of music. The study was divided into two phases. In the first
phase, expert artists created four paintings, each of which
was the artist’s interpretation of one of four different pieces
of instrumental music. In the second phase, naïve
participants attempted to determine which piece of music
was used as the source of inspiration for each artwork.

Phase One
Participants Two local expert artists, each with
approximately 25 years of experience in the field of
painting, were recruited for this study. They each received
50$ for their participation.
Musical Stimuli Four pieces of piano music from
commercially produced sound track CDs with no vocal tract
and no other instrumentation were used as stimuli to inspire
art. They were selected from a pool of 45 pieces chosen as
exemplary of different musical styles: baroque classical,
romantic, jazz, and contemporary. Each of these original 45
pieces of music was cropped to three minutes duration, and
then rated by three raters on 64 descriptive adjectives on
five point Likert scales. The adjectives were derived from
previous research on the collative properties of stimulus
patterns, specifically, measures of affective reactions to
artwork (Berlyne, 1974), and the affective circumplex
(Russel, 1980; Watson & Tellegen, 1985). The raters had no
previous musical training.
Factor analysis and multidimensional scaling were used to
compute the basic dimensions of aesthetic experience in the
ratings, and to reveal how the 45 pieces of music were
dispersed in the dimensional spaces. The Euclidean
distances between the pieces of music across the spaces
were used to select four pieces of music from different
regions that were clearly dissimilar from each other. The
four selected pieces of music were:
(1) ‘Love is a Mystery’ by Ludovico Einaudi
(2) Number 29 B Flat Major’, by Ludwig van Beethoven
(3) ‘Circus Gallop’ by Marc-André Hamelin

3252

(4) ‘All of Me’ by Jon Schmidt
Creation of Artworks Each of the two artists created one
painting for each of the four pieces of piano music, for a
total of 8 paintings. On days that paintings were to be
created, each artist was provided with a single piece of
music and asked to reinterpret it as a painting, i.e., to paint
what the music would look like if it were a painting. They
were instructed to paint while listening to the music, and
encouraged to listen to it as many times as they wished
while they painted. They were allowed to use whatever
painting supplies they thought could most effectively
express the music (e.g., watercolors, oils, and acrylics were
all acceptable). They were instructed to complete their
paintings in one sitting without interruption. They were
instructed to take up to a maximum of 120 minutes to listen
to the music and complete the painting. The paintings were
created in the artists’ personal studios. In order to limit the
influence of the previous pieces of music on the new
painting, the artists were instructed not to re-listen to the
piece of music after the painting was finished, and there was
a gap of four days between each painting session.
Representative examples of the music-inspired paintings
obtained in Phase One of the study are provided in Figures
1, 2 and 3. These paintings constituted the stimuli that were
used in Phase Two. Figures 1 and 2, painted by the same
artist in response to different pieces of music, provide the
reader with a qualitative sense of the extent to which an
artist’s personal style comes through in different paintings.

Figure 2. A painting generated by first artist as an
interpretation of the piece ‘All of Me’ by Jon Schmidt.
By comparing figures 2 and 3, painted by different artists
in response to the same piece of music, the reader can obtain
a qualitative sense of how a common musical source of
inspiration manifests in different paintings.

Figure 3. A painting generated by the second artist as an
interpretation of the piece ‘All of Me’ by Jon Schmidt.
Figure 1. A painting generated by first of the artists as an
interpretation of the piece Number 29 B Flat Major’, by
Ludwig van Beethoven.

Phase Two
In the second phase of the study we tested whether it was
possible to recognize which pieces of music were
interpreted as which paintings.
Participants The participants were two groups of
undergraduates enrolled in psychology courses at the

3253

University of British Columbia, consisting of 107 and 89
students respectively, for a total of 196 students. They
received partial course credit for their participation.
Analytic Methods Two statistics, H and Hu, were
computed to assess the accuracies of the participants’
paintings-to-music matches. H is the simple hit rate, or the
proportion of correct guesses. Hu comes from signal
detection theory (Wagner, 1993). It corrects for chance
guessing and for response bias, such as the tendency to use
particular response categories more or less than other
response categories. For each set of paintings (i.e., for
paintings by artist one and artist two), two hit rate statistics
were computed for each participant. One-sample t-tests and
a data randomization procedure (Manly, 2007) were then
used to assess the statistical significance of the mean H and
Hu values. The tests indicated whether the mean H and Hu
values were significantly different from the H and Hu values
that would have been obtained had participants provided
random guesses.
Procedure and Materials This part of the study was set
up online. There were two sets of the study, one for each
artist. In each set, there were the four pieces of music and
the four paintings created in phase one by each artist. Each
painting was displayed on a web page. Next to each painting
were links to the four pieces of music. Two groups of
participants consisting of 89 and 107 students were asked to
look at the painting and to listen to the four pieces of music
respectively. They were asked to identify which piece of
music inspired each painting.

Results
The results are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Mean hit rates, t-test values, and r effect size for
identification of paintings inspired by pieces of music. All
hit rates and t values were statistically significant.
Mean
Hit Rate

Chance
Hit Rate

Artist One
Hit Rate (H)

.35

.24

4.0 (88)

r
Effect
Size
.39

Artist One
Unbiased
Hit Rate
(Hu)

.36

.24

4.0 (88)

.40

Artist Two
Hit Rate (H)

.44

.25

6.3(106)

.52

Artist Two
Unbiased
Hit Rate
(Hu)

.46

.25

6.3(106)

.52

t(df)

For the first artist, the mean hit rates were H = .35 and Hu =
.36. The mean hit rates that would have been obtained on
the basis of random guesses for these questions were .25
and .25, respectively. Both hit rates are statistically
significant according to both conventional and data
randomization t-tests (t(88) = 4.0, t(88) = 4.0, p < .001), and
the r effect sizes were large, .39 and .40. For the second
artist, the mean hit rates were high, H = .44 and Hu = .46,
statistically significant according to both conventional and
data randomization t-tests (t(106) = 6.3, t(106) = 6.3, p <
.001), and the effect sizes were large, r = .52 and r = .52.
Thus participants identified at above-chance levels which
paintings were inspired by which pieces of music for both
artist one and artist two.

Discussion
There is a longstanding debate concerning the extent to
which the semantic complexity of artistic works is amenable
to scientific methods (Becker, 1982). We tested the
hypothesis that the core idea behind a creative work is
recognizable when it is translated from one domain to
another. To our knowledge, the only other previous study to
test this hypothesis (Willmann, 1944) used highly artificial
stimuli that most would not consider creative works in and
of themselves. The hypothesis was supported by our finding
that when pieces of music were re-interpreted as paintings,
naïve participants were able to guess significantly above
chance which piece of music inspired which painting.
Although the medium of expression is different, something
of its essence remains sufficiently intact for an observer to
detect a resemblance between the new work and the source
that inspired it. The results are consistent with a number of
phenomena familiar to artists, mentioned in the
Introduction, namely synesthesia, ekphrastic expression,
cross-media style, and cross-modal perception.
The research reported on here may be a step toward
distinguishing between domain-specific and domain-general
aspects of creative works. We suggest that at their core,
creative ideas may be much less domain-dependent than
they are generally assumed to be. Our results support the
view that the uniqueness of a creative work derives at least
in part from, not just the personal style of the creator, but
from encounters with works in domains that differ from the
domain of the creative output, or even different kinds of
experiences altogether. In other words, it is possible for the
domain-specific aspects to be stripped away such that the
creative work exists in an abstracted state of potentiality at
which point they are amenable to re-expression in another
form. A creative idea may exist in form that is freed of the
constraints of a particular domain, and that the creator’s job
may be in part to, to simply allow that domain-independent
entity to take a particular form, using domain-specific
expertise and the tools of his or her trade. Over time they
may become more fully actualized, and well-defined, as
they are considered from different perspectives in
accordance with the constraints of the domain in which they
are expressed.

3254

The capacity for cross-domain translation of creative
ideas supports the hypothesis that an individual’s creative
outputs are expressions of a particular underlying uniquely
structured self-organizing internal model of the world, or
worldview. Our creative abilities may be a reflection of the
tendency of a worldview to transform in such a way as to
find connections, reduce dissonance, and achieve a more
stable structure (Gabora & Merrifield, 2012). This view of
creativity is consistent with previous research showing that
midway through a creative process, an idea may exist in a
‘half-baked’ state of potentiality, in which one or more
elements are ill-defined (Gabora, 2005, Gabora & Saab,
2011). When a work is translated from one domain (e.g.,
music) into another (e.g., painting), the two works may be
recognizably related because the process by which the
worldview assimilates or comes to terms with the works is
at a structural level deeply analogous.
Although that idea that at least some creative tasks
involve the abstraction and re-expression of ‘raw’
potentialities or forms seems obvious to many artists we
have spoken with, it stands in contrast with most academic
theories of creativity. Creativity is typically portrayed as a
process of searching and selecting amongst candidate ideas
that exist in discrete, well-defined states. This can be traced
back to early views arising in the artificial intelligence
community, wherein creativity was thought to proceed by
heuristically guided search through a space of possible
solutions (Newell, Shaw & Simon, 1957; Newell & Simon,
1972; Simon, 1973, 1986) or possible problem
representations (e.g., Kaplan & Simon, 1990, Ohlsson,
1992). The view that creativity proceeds through a process
of search and selection is also assumed in more
contemporary theories, such as the theory that creativity is a
Darwinian process; i.e., new ideas are obtained by
generating variations more or less at random and selecting
the best (e.g., Campbell, 1965; Simonton 1999a,b, 2005).
Our results bring up the question of what it was about the
paintings that made it possible to trace them to the artworks
that had inspired them. We are currently investigating to
what extent people assign similar experience variable
ratings and similarity ratings to paintings and the music that
inspired them and whether these ratings correspond even
when participants cannot identify which piece of music
inspired the painting. A possible clue to the mechanisms
underlying cross-domain interpretation of creative ideas
comes from research by Feedberg and Gallese (2007) on
perceiving action in artwork. They propose that art
observers implicitly imitate the creative actions undertaken
by the artist in the making of the work. In our study it is
possible that observers were not just perceiving action in art
but were also able to match qualities of the art with qualities
such as the rhythm and tempo of the music that inspired it.
The phenomenon of action perception in paintings could
also at least partially account for the ability to recognize the
essence of ideas interpreted across domains. In order to
recognize the inspiration of an artwork or a cross-media
style, expertise in a domain might stimulate the action

system while the observer imagines how the artwork was
created. Thus, future research will also investigate the role
of expertise in the recognition of a connection between
works in different domains. We hypothesis that expertise in
a domain might increase the activation of the action system
while the observer imagines how the artwork got created,
thereby enhancing the capacity for recognition of crossdomain re-interpretation in a task such as this.
The effect of inspirational source on creative output may
be weaker than the effect of personal style reported earlier
(Gabora, 2010; Gabora, O’Connor & Ranjan, 2012), given
that paintings by different artists inspired by the same piece
of music could be quite different, as seen by comparing
Figures 2 and 3. This could however reflect individual
differences with respect to which elements of the source had
sufficient personal relevance to serve as departure points for
the artists’ own creative works. This interpretation is
consistent with the finding that when pictures were used as
stimuli for poetry, poets focused on particular portions of
the pictures to serve as the basis for their poems, and
different poets focused on different portions (Patrick, 1935).
We are currently investigating how these two factors
interact, i.e., whether artists’ individual styles influence the
ease of identifying which music inspired their paintings.
Our aim is not to partition out how much creative works
owe their distinctive character to their creators and how
much they owe to other sources. We suspect that such a
partitioning is not possible, that in the most successful
creative works there is a fusion of the two, and that the
ability to fuse ones’ personal style with the inspirational
source for a work plays a role in artistic genius. Though
commonly portrayed as introverted and withdrawn, the
creative genius may, through the assimilation and
generation of creative artifacts, be deeply immersed in a
form of social interaction that connects all of humanity to
the deepest and most influential thinkers our world has
known. We suggest that the extent to which the arts feed on
the cross-domain adaptation and reinterpretation of ideas
has been underappreciated, and that it may in fact play a
pivotal role in the evolution of human culture.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for funding to the second author from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada and the Concerted Research Program of the Flemish
Government of Belgium. We thank Jon Corbett for
assistance with this research.

References
Becker, H. (1982). Art worlds. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Berlyne, D. E. (1971). Aesthetics and psychobiology. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Berlyne, D. E. (1974). Studies in the new experimental
aesthetics: Steps towards an objective psychology of
aesthetic appreciation. London: Halstead Press.

3255

Boden, M. A. (2010). Personal Signatures in art. In M.A.
Boden (Ed), Creativity and Art: The three roads to
surprise. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brown, P. (2008). From systems art to artificial life: Early
generative art at the Slade School of Fine Arts. In C.
Gere, P. Brown, N. Lambert, & C, Mason (Eds.) White
heat and cold logic: British computer arts 1960-1980, an
historical and critical analysis. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Burke, K. (1957). Counter-statement. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Cropley, A. J. (1999). Creativity and cognition: producing
effective novelty. Roeper Riview, 21(4), 253-265.
Cytowic, R. E. (1995). Synesthesia: Phenomenology and
neuropsychology, a review of current knowledge.
PSYCHE: Interdisciplinary Journal of Research on
Consciousness, 2(10) http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v2/
psyche-2-10-cytowic.html
Flach, R., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2004). Recognizing
one's own clapping: The role of temporal cues in selfrecognition. Psychological Research, 11, 147-156.
Gabora, L. (2005). Creative thought as a non-Darwinian
evolutionary process. Journal of Creative Behavior,
39(4), 262-283.
Gabora, L. (2010). Recognizability of creative style within
and across domains: Preliminary studies. Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2350-2355). August 11-14, Portland, OR.
Gabora, L. & Merrifield, M. (2012). Dynamical
disequilibrium, transformation, and the evolution and
development of sustainable worldviews. In (F. Orsucci &
N. Sala, Eds.) Complexity science, living systems, and
reflexing onterfaces: New models and perspectives (pp.
69-77). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Gabora, L., O’Connor, B., & Ranjan, A. (2012). The
recognizability of individual creative styles within and
across domains. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and
the Arts, 6(4), 351-360.
Gabora, L., & Saab, A. (2011). Creative interference and
states of potentiality in analogy problem solving.
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 3506-3511). July 20-23, Boston MA.
Griscom, W. S., & Palmer, S. E. (2012). The color of
musical sounds: Color associates of harmony and timbre
in non-synesthetes. Journal of Vision 12(9), 74.
Hasenfus, N. (1978). Cross-media style: A psychological
approach. Poetics, 7, 207-216.
Kaufman, J. C., & Baer, J. (2004). Hawking’s Haiku,
Madonna’s Math: why it’s hard to be creative in every
room of the house. In R. J. Sternberg, E. L. Grigorenko &
J. L. Singer (Eds.), Creativity: From potential to
realization (pp. 3–19). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Manly, B. F. J. (2007). Randomization, bootstrap and
Monte Carlo methods in biology (3rd ed.). Boca Raton,
FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC.Mark, L.E. (1975). On
colored-hearing synesthesia: cross-modal translations of
sensory dimensions. Psychological Bulletin, 82, 303-331

Mark, L. E. (1987). On cross-modal similarity: auditoryvisual interactions in speeded discrimination. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 13, 384-394
Melara, R. D. (1989). Dimensional interaction between
color and pitch. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 15, 69-79.
Melara, R. D., & Marks, L. E. (1990). Perceptual primacy of
dimensions: Support for a model of dimensional
interaction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 16, 398–414.
Melara, R. D., & O’Brien, T. P. (1987). Interaction between
synesthetically corresponding dimensions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 116, 323–336.
Munford, M. D., & Gustafson, S. B. (1988). Creativity
syndrome: Intergration, application, and innovation,
Psychological Bulletin, 103, 27-43.
Newell, A., Shaw, C. & Simon, H. (1957). The process of
creative thinking. In H. E. Gruber, G. Terrell & M.
Wertheimer (Eds.) Contemporary approaches to creative
thinking (pp. 153-189). New York: Pergamon.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. (1972). Human problem solving.
Edgewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Palmer, S. E., Langlois, T., Tsang, T., Schloss, K. B., &
Levitin, D., J. (2011). Color, music, and emotion. Journal
of Vision, 11(11).
Patrick, C. (1935). Creative thought in poets. Archives of
Psychology, 178, 1-74.
Prinz, W. (1997). Perception and action planning. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 9, 129-154.
Ramachandran, V. S. (2003). The emerging mind. London:
BBC/Profile Books.
Repp, B. H., & Knoblich, G. (2004). Perceiving action
identity: How pianists recognise their own performances.
Psychological Science, 15, 604-609.
Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1161- 1178.
Simon, H. A. (1973). Does scientific discovery have a
logic? Philosophy of Science, 40, 471-480.
Simon, H. A. (1986). Understanding the processes of
science: The psychology of scientific discovery. In T.
Gamelius (Ed.), Progress in science and its social
conditions. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1999). Creativity as blind variation and
selective retention: Is the creative process Darwinian?
Psychological Inquiry, 10, 309-328.
Sternberg, R.J., & Lubart, T. (1995). Defying the crowd.
New York: Free Press.
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. (1985). Towards a consensual
structure of mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 219-235.
Wagner, H. L. (1993). On measuring performance in
category judgment studies of nonverbal behavior. Journal
of Nonverbal Behavior, 14, 387-406.
Zilczer, J. (1987). Color music: Synaesthesia and
nineteenth-century sources for abstract art. Artibus et
Historiae, 8, 101-126.

3256

