UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Simple Advantage in Categorical Generalization of Chinese Characters

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kr06657

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Thai, Khanh-Phuong
Son, Ji

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Simple Advantage in Categorical Generalization of Chinese Characters
Khanh-Phuong Thai (kpthai@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, 405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Ji Y. Son (json2@calstatela.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5151 State University Drive
Los Angeles, CA 90032 USA

Abstract
Research in relational learning suggests that simple training
instances may lead to better generalization than complex training
instances. We examined whether this “simple advantage” extends
to category learning in adults with simplified and traditional (more
complex) Chinese writing scripts. In Experiment 1, participants
learned Chinese characters and their English translations,
performed a memorization test, and were asked to generalize their
learning to the corresponding characters written in the other script.
In Experiment 2, we removed the training phase and modified the
tests to examine transfer based purely on perceptual similarities
between simplified and traditional characters. We found the simple
advantage in both experiments. Training with simplified characters
produced better generalization than training with traditional
characters, both when generalization relied on recognition memory
and on pure perceptual similarities. This finding advances our
understanding of how features of a learning opportunity interact
with domain-general learning mechanisms to prepare the mind for
transfer.

categorization; generalization;
memory; learning; similarity; features
Keywords:

transfer;

Introduction
We can remember all kinds of details about our experiences
in the world but our visual systems have the capacity to
ignore all kinds of details as well. Categorization relies on
dual processes: attending to similarities while
simultaneously ignoring differences. Efficient generalization
minimizes the necessary experience with learning instances
(e.g., number of learning instances needed or time spent
learning) and maximizes appropriate generalization.
Simple instances have been shown to engender rapid
learning with selective attention to the right information for
the task. Novices briefly trained with simple line drawings
of diagnostic features were able to classify chicks with the
accuracy of expert chicken sexers (Biederman & Shiffrar,
1987). Young children who were taught category labels with
simple objects were more successful at generalizing to novel
category members than when they were shown more
complex learning objects (Son, Smith, & Goldstone, 2008).
We refer to this asymmetry of transfer from simple versus
complex training instances as the simple advantage.
Most of the research demonstrating the simple advantage
have examined learning and transfer of relational concepts
in mathematics (Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2008;

Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005; McNeil, Uttal,
Jarvin, & Sternberg, 2009) and science (Goldstone &
Sakamoto, 2003; Goldstone & Son, 2005). In these
relational domains, in order to generalize learning to a new
situation, one must pay more attention to structural
information rather than superficial details that may differ
across instances. Simple learning instances can facilitate
such structural extraction by limiting the extraneous details
and guiding attention to the right features.
Little is known, however, about whether this simple
advantage can also support category generalization,
particularly in adults. Although young children are better
able to generalize category labels by learning from
simplified exemplars (Son, Smith, & Goldstone, 2008), one
might argue that simple learning instances do not benefit
adults who are already experts in category learning (relative
to infants).
The other side of the argument suggests that the
mechanisms underlying infant and adult categorization
might not differ significantly (Gureckis & Love, 2004). For
example, research has shown that categorization behavior in
infants and adults agree on the basic level (Horton &
Markman, 1980), that infants tend to extract the same
prototypes and make the same kind of inferences from
category knowledge that adults do (Mervis & Crisafi, 1980;
Baldwin, Markman, & Melartin, 1993). One exciting
possibility is that infants and adults have the same basic
categorization generalization “hardware” and only differ in
their level of knowledge of the domain. This has been
argued for in the analogy literature (e.g., Kotovsky &
Gentner, 1996). To explore this possibility, we train and test
English-speaking adults in a novel domain that contains
complex and simple corresponding forms: Chinese character
scripts.
For a number of political and historical reasons, the
traditional Chinese writing system was simplified in 1949.
The simplified characters have approximately 22.5% fewer
strokes than the more complex traditional script (Gao &
Kao, 2002). Several different simplification processes were
employed; some based on Chinese history and meaning
while
others
were
straightforward
perceptual
simplifications. As a result, many characters and their
components (recurring groups of strokes that make up the
characters) took on quite different look (Harbaugh, 2003).
Whether these differences between scripts affect the

3527

learnability of characters is the subject of ongoing debate
amongst researchers who study Chinese language
acquisition (see Chen & Yuen, 1991; McBride-Chang et al.,
2005; Seybolt & Chiang, 1979). However, there has been
little research to examine these differences partially due to
complicated issues of aesthetics, history, politics, and
tradition. This endeavor, primarily motivated by issues in
cognition and learning, may shed light on this debate.
For the purpose of examining the simple advantage in
categorization, these rich sets of naturally occurring simple
and complex corresponding entities provides an ideally
suited domain. As non-Chinese readers lack prior
associations with these stimuli, differences in generalization
between the scripts may be attributable to differences in the
stimuli.

Purpose of Current Work
Two studies examined the simple advantage in adults’
category generalization with simplified and complex
Chinese characters. Does learning with simplified instances
lead to greater category generalization than training with
complex forms? Secondly, does this simple advantage occur
even with minimal prior exposure to simplified forms?

Experiment 1
Participants were asked to study flashcards with a Chinese
character on one side and an English definition on the other
side. After each set, memorization was measured with a
match-to-sample task in which students were briefly shown
the English definition and had to pick out the matching
character out of four answer choices. After the memory test,
generalization was measured by the same matching task,
except that participants had to match the definitions with
characters of the unlearned script. In the Traditional-first
condition, participants studied Traditional characters and
their English definitions. The Traditional-first memory test
involved Traditional characters while the generalization test
replaced those choices with corresponding Simplified
characters. In the Simple-first condition, participants studied
and had a memory test with Simplified characters, but their
generalization test had Traditional versions of the learned
characters. If simplified learning instances promote
generalization, then participants would show better
generalization in the Simple-first than in the Traditional-first
condition.

Materials and Procedures Although there are historical or
semantic reasons behind some types of simplification, the
subset of characters chosen for this study are perceptually
simplified forms of their traditional counterparts. In each
pair of characters, up to two components (stroke groups
called radicals) of the Traditional characters were omitted to
produce their simplified version. Thus, Simplified
characters had fewer strokes as well as fewer components.
The Simplified characters used had 3-13 strokes per
character (average 7.23 strokes), and their Traditional
version had 8-22 strokes per character (average 14.06
strokes). There were 4 sets of 12 unique character pairs but
each participant only studied two of these sets in either the
Simplified or Traditional script. The number of omitted
strokes, the number of omitted components, the location of
the omitted components within each character, and the
usage frequency were balanced across the character sets.
In the training phase, each participant received a
randomly assigned set of 12 flashcards of either Traditional
or Simplified characters according to their assigned
condition. Each character was printed in black 36 pt SimSun
(宋体) font and the English words were printed in black
with 24 pt Calibri font. Participants were told to study the
Chinese-English pairs, and that they would be tested on
them later. They were not given a time limit for studying
and most finished within 15 minutes.
Once participants handed in the flashcards, they were
administered the memory and generalization tests on a
computer using E-Prime 2.0 (Psychology Software Tools,
Inc., Sharpsburg, PA, USA). For both tests, there were 12
trials, one for each of the 12 characters in the training set. A
trial began with a fixation cross lasting for 0.5 seconds,
followed by an English word for 2 seconds, then 4 Chinese
characters. The distractor characters were randomly chosen
from the set of trained characters. The inter-trial interval
was 1 second. The order of the trials was random across
participants. No feedback was provided after each trial, but
average accuracy and response time were given at the end of
each task. Figure 1 shows a sample trial and procedure.

Method
Participants and Design 14 undergraduates (7 females and
7 males) participated for course credit. All reported to
having no prior experience with Chinese characters. In this
within-subject experiment, half of the participants
experienced the Traditional-first condition (learning,
memory test, generalization test) before the Simple-first
condition while the other half experienced the two
conditions in the reverse order.

Figure 1: (a) Exact match test procedure and
(b) Generalization test procedure of the Simple-first
condition in Experiment 1.
In the memory test, participants chose from Chinese
characters identical to those in their training set. The
generalization task was set up identically to the

3528

memorization task, except that the answer choices in this
task were characters written in the unlearned script. Before
the generalization trials, these instructions appeared, “There
are two types of scripts in the Chinese written language,
Traditional and Simplified. You have just studied characters
written in one of these two scripts, and now we would like
to see how well you can recognize the same characters
written in the other script.”
Participants were given a 5-minute break before they were
given another set of 12 flashcards with characters written in
the other script. The entire procedure was repeated for the
second set of characters.

Results and Discussion
Proportion correct and average response time data for
correct responses are presented in Figures 2 and 3 (see left
panels).

Figure 2: Accuracy data from the memorization and
generalization tests in Experiment 1 (left panel) and from
the exact match and generalization tests in Experiment 2
(right panel). (Error bars: ± 1 SE)

Preliminary analyses There were no significant differences
among the four sets of characters (ps > .10) and no effect of
condition order (ps > .10), so accuracies and response times
for each condition were collapsed across those variables.
Memorization and Transfer Results We conducted two 2
x 2 (condition x test type) repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) for accuracy and reaction time.
Accuracy. There was a main effect of test. Performance on
memory test (M = .99, SD = .03) was better than
generalization (M = .86, SD = .10), F(1,12) = 26.89, p <
0.001, η2 = .69. There was a main effect of condition,
F(1,12) = 8.98, p <.05, η2 = .43, and a significant
interaction, F(1,12) = 9.04, p < .05, η2 = .43. Post-hoc t-tests
confirmed that although the two conditions exhibited similar
memory performance, the Simple-first condition generalized
more accurately than the Traditional-first condition.
Participants in both Traditional-first (M = .99, SD = .03)
and Simple-first (M = .98, SD = .04) conditions successfully
learned the word pairs and recognized them equally well,
t(12) = 1.00, p = .34. Generalization accuracy was
significantly higher in the Simple-first condition (M = .91,
SD = .06) than in the Traditional-first condition (M = .80,
SD = .14), t(12) = 3.045, p < .025, with Bonferroni
correction. As predicted, participants who initially learned
Simplified characters generalized their learning to the
transfer script better than those who learned Traditional
characters.
Response Times for Correct Trials (given in seconds per
trial). Participants were faster on the memorization trials (M
= 2.71, SD = .92) than generalization (M = 5.54, SD = 2.15),
F(1,12) = 46.25, p = .00, η2 = .79. Those in the Simple-first
condition (M = 3.87, SD = 1.40) were generally faster than
those in Traditional-first condition (M = 4.38, SD = 1.67),
F(1,12) = 5.24, p < .05, η2 = .30. Thus, when participants
were trained with Simplified script, they tended to make

Figure 3: Response time data of accurate responses from
the memorization and generalization tests in Experiment 1
(left panel) and from the exact match and generalization
tests in Experiment 2 (right panel). ((Error bars: ± 1 SE)
more correct matches on both tests and did so faster than
those who were trained with Traditional script. There was
no significant interaction between condition and test type,
F(1,12) = 1.69, p = .22.
In summary, when trained with Simplified characters,
participants were both faster and more accurate than when
trained with Traditional characters. More importantly, even
though Simplified and Traditional characters were
remembered equally well, Simplified training exemplars led
to better generalization than Traditional ones. However, the
simple advantage may be dependent on the amount of
exposure to the learning instance. In Experiment 2, we ask
whether training with Simplified characters is more efficient
than training with Traditional characters even without
extended training experience.

3529

Experiment 2
To extend the findings of Experiment 1, we removed the
training phase and modified the memorization and
generalization tests to examine matches based purely on
perceptual similarity. If simplicity promotes transfer by
containing only the relevant perceptual features, then the
simple advantage should persist even when generalization
relies only on perceptual similarities between simplified and
traditional characters.

Method
Participants and Design 23 undergraduates (10 males, 13
females) who reported having no knowledge of Chinese
characters participated for course credit. Experiment 2 was
also a within-subject design so order was counterbalanced
across participants. Twelve were randomly assigned to
participate in the Traditional-first condition before the
Simple-first condition, and the other 11 participated in the
Simple-first condition before the Traditional-first condition.
Materials and Procedures The stimuli and procedures
were nearly identical to Experiment 1. The key difference in
Experiment 2 was the lack of a training phase thus
participants never connected any of the characters to
English meanings. Each trial began with a fixation cross,
followed by a Chinese character for 2 seconds, and 4 answer
choices. In exact match trials, participants matched
characters to identical characters. On the generalization task,
participants were shown a character in one script and had to
choose the match among characters written in the other
script. A sample trial and procedure are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: (a) Exact match test procedure and (b)
Generalization test procedure of the Traditional-first
condition in Experiment 2.

Results
Preliminary analyses Like Experiment 1, there was no
effect of character set nor condition order (ps > .10) so the
data were collapsed across those variables.
Exact match and generalization test results Average
proportion correct and average response time results are
presented in Figures 2 and 3 (right panels). Again, we

conducted two 2 x 2 (condition x test type) repeatedmeasures analysis of variance (ANOVA) for accuracy and
reaction time.
Accuracy. Results were consistent with findings from
Experiment 1. There was a main effect of test such that
participants made significantly more correct responses on
the exact matching task (M = .97, SD = .05) than on the
generalization task (M = .68, SD = .14), F(1,22) = 129.72, p
< .001, η2 = .86. There was also a main effect of condition,
F(1,22) = 33.42, p < .001, η2 = .60, and a significant
interaction, F(1,22) = 12.33, p < .01, η2 = .36. Post-hoc
analyses confirmed that this difference was driven by the
differential effect of the sample script on generalization.
Follow-up pairwise t-tests showed no significant difference
between the Simplified or Traditional exact match-tosample task, t(22) = 1.32, p = .20. However, the Simple-first
condition produced significantly better generalization
performance (M = .79, SD = .14) than the Traditional-first
condition (M = .57, SD = .18), t(22) = 4.83, p < .001, with
Bonferroni correction. Again, as in Experiment 1, training
with Simplified characters promoted greater generalization
to Traditional characters than vice versa.
Response Times for Correct Trials (given in seconds per
trial). There was a main effect of test type, F(1,22) = 59.46,
p < .001, η2 = .73, such that participants were faster in the
Simple-first condition than in the Traditional-first condition.
There was a significant interaction, F(1,22) = 5.70, p < .05,
η2 = .21, that suggested that although the Simple-first
condition was faster than the Traditional-first condition in
the exact-matching task, RTs in the generalization task were
similar. Bonferroni-corrected pairwise t-tests confirmed a
significant difference in RTs for the exact matching task for
accurate responses between the Simple-first and Traditionalfirst condition, t(22) = 3.91, p < .01, and showed no
significant difference conditions on generalization, t(22) =
1.05, p = .21.
While there was no difference in accuracy on the exact
matching trials, Traditional characters required more time
per correct response than Simplified characters (1.55
seconds vs. 1.32 seconds). This result is interesting in light
of classic experiments and theories of similarity.
Similar to Podgorny and Garner’s (1979) classic work
that demonstrated participants judge the similarity of two Ss
on a screen faster than two Ws, we also find that some
Chinese characters are self-identified faster than others.
Tversky’s feature-based contrast model of similarity (1977)
suggests that complex objects that share a greater number of
overlapping features are more self-similar than simple
objects. Traditional characters contain more strokes so one
might assume that they should be more self-similar and
should result in shorter RTs in our exact match task.
However, it is important to keep in mind that the distractors
in the field were also complex. These complex characters
may be more similar to each other thus forcing participants
to spend more time to distinguish the target among them.

3530

General Discussion and Conclusion
We examined the simple advantage for generalization
between simple and complex Chinese scripts. In Experiment
1, participants studied the characters and their English
translations before attempting to generalize their learning to
the same characters of the unlearned script. In Experiment 2,
participants had only brief controlled exposure to the
characters before undergoing the generalization test. In both
experiments, there was a generalization advantage when the
initially shown exemplar was simple.
Contrasting the results of these studies, generalization
performance in Experiment 1 was more accurate yet slower
than Experiment 2. This pattern is reasonable given the
differences in the tasks across experiments. Those in
Experiment 1 had to recall the characters from memory
when given their English definitions whereas those in
Experiment 2 saw exemplar characters immediately before
making their choice. Taking more time to recall the trained
characters may have helped participants in Experiment 1
generalize more accurately. A longer reaction time is
probably less effective when generalization was more purely
perceptual.
In the following sub-sections, we will discuss the
theoretical and educational implications of these findings.

Theoretical Implications
These findings are consistent with results of past research
on generalization by shape with young children (e.g., Son et
al., 2008): simple instances promote better category
generalization. Why are these instances advantageous for
transfer? Simple training instances may allow for efficient
encoding of the right initial features and/or retrieval of
useful representations. Learning from complex characters
may be detrimental just by having additional non-diagnostic
features that are not present in novel transfer cases.
Furthermore, complex instances may generally require
greater attentional resources to learn and use.
Adults seem to face similar difficulties in categorization
learning as children - that potentially useful and distracting
features may not be psychologically separable at the time of
learning (Schyns & Rodet, 1997). Being exposed to a
simplified version first may have enabled our adult learners
to recognize the complex character as containing the simple
character along with other new features. Initial learning with
a complex stimulus does not provide a decomposed
perceptual vocabulary and thus the learner might miss the
shared components between the complex and simple
stimuli.
Additionally, this work raises more issues regarding the
relationship between similarity, recognition memory, and
category generalization. If recognition memory or category
generalization is taken as a measure of similarity, this set of
results provides further evidence for the asymmetry of
similarity. There is an accuracy and/or RT asymmetry
between the initially viewed exemplar and the potential
matches such that performance is aided by an initially
simple exemplar. Furthermore, this work raises the

possibility that similarity judgments based on immediately
seen features may operate differently than when based on
features retrieved from exemplars in memory.

Practical Implications
If the end goal of education is generalization, the simple
advantage appears to have broad implications. Even though
generalization would likely occur with enough time and
resources devoted to training with many complex, detailed
instances (e.g., Kellman, Massey & Son, 2010), the present
research suggests that simple training instances may be able
to foster generalization more efficiently. Although previous
research has directly examined the simple advantage with
math and science domains, this research suggests that
simple learning instances might also be useful in learning
categories in general.
More directly, these results bear on the cognitive role of
scripts in Chinese reading. Broadly speaking, there are no
measurable differences in reading or spelling between the
two scripts (Chan & Wang, 2003). A few studies suggest
that learning to read with simplified characters is more
related to visual skills than learning to read traditional
characters (Chen & Yuen, 1991; McBride-Chang et al.,
2005). Young children learning to read in mainland China
(using simplified script) were more likely to base similarity
judgments of characters based on visual characteristics than
children from Hong Kong (primarily taught with traditional
script) (Chen & Yuen, 1991). Although further research is
necessary to determine whether learning a few characters in
a lab setting is similar to learning hundreds of characters to
gain literacy, our findings suggest that there might be a
benefit of starting with simplified characters. Particularly if
the goal is to read both scripts, learning the simplified script
may be more helpful for learning the traditional script than
the reverse.
Simplified characters contain fewer but more diagnostic
components (radicals) so it may be advantageous to treat
these recurring radicals as basic orthographic units. Perhaps
an emphasis on explicitly learning these units early on may
foster better generalization to full blown characters.
Research on Chinese literacy (e.g., Tsai & Nunes, 2003)
shows that expert readers are generally quite sensitive to
these components. Whether such pedagogical practice
supports future learning of new Chinese characters is a
question for future research.
However, the relevance of these findings for Chinese
literacy is limited in two significant ways. First, the
characters used in these studies were only simplified via the
component omission process. Future research should
incorporate character sets created through other
simplification methods such as replacing a complex
component (e.g., four dashes) with a simpler one (e.g., a
line) to draw broader conclusions about the simple
advantage for Chinese reading. Second, reading is more
than merely identifying or recognizing characters.
Traditional characters include cues to pronunciation and
meaning that have been removed in simplified characters.

3531

These cues may be equally or even more important to full
fledged reading than ease of recognition.

Conclusions
The simple advantage seems to be stable across a variety
of tasks and domains, from categorization and object
recognition to more complex forms of formal learning. This
suggests that this effect stems from domain-general learning
mechanisms that bridge or incorporate both perceptual and
conceptual learning. In some sense, all learning situations
are ill-constrained because a novice does not know which
information is relevant or irrelevant. Simplicity supports
learning by getting at the heart of this problem: the few
features that are presented are all relevant.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of Phil Kellman,
Linda Smith, Robert Goldstone, James Stigler, Everett
Mettler, Trinh Tran, Xiaoya Qiu, members of the UCLA
Human Perception Lab and the UCLA Teaching and
Learning Lab. This research was funded by the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education (Grant
R305B080016) to UCLA. The opinions expressed are those
of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or
the U.S. Department of Education.

References
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E., & Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infants’ ability to draw inferences about nonobvious
object properties: Evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64, 711-728.
Biederman, I., & Shiffrar, M. (1987). Sexing day-old
chicks: A case study and expert systems analysis of a
difficult perceptual learning task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 640645.
Chan, L., & Wang, L. (2003). Linguistic awareness in
learning to read Chinese: A comparative study of Beijing
and Hong Kong children. In C. McBride-Chang & H.-C.
Chen (Eds.), Reading development in Chinese children
(pp. 91–106). Westport, CT: Praeger Press.
Chen, M. J., & Yuen, J. C.-K. (1991). Effects of pinyin and
script type on verbal pro- cessing: Comparisons of China,
Taiwan, and Hong Kong experience. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 14, 429-448.
Gao, D.-G., & Kao, H. S. R. (2002). Psycho-geometric
analysis of commonly used Chinese characters. In H. S.
R. Kao, C.-K. Leong, & D.-G. Gao (Eds.), Cognitive
neuroscience studies of the Chinese language (pp. 195–
206). Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Goldstone, R.L., & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46, 414-466.
Goldstone, R.L., & Son, J.Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 69114.

Gureckis, T. M. & Love, B. C. (2004). Common
mechanisms in infant and adult category learning.
Infancy, 5(2), 173-198.
Harbaugh, R. (2003). Chinese characters and culture.
Retrieved from http://www. zhongwen. com.
Horton, M. & Markman, E. (1980). Developmental
differences in the acquisition of basic and superordinate
categories. Child Development, 51, 708-719.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008).
The advantage of abstract examples in learning math.
Science, 320, 454–455.
Kellman, P.J., Massey, C.M & Son, J. (2010). Perceptual
learning modules in mathematics: Enhancing students'
pattern recognition, structure extraction, and fluency.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(2), 285-305.
Kotovsky, L. & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
McBride-Chang, C., Chow, B.W.Y., Zhong, Y., Burgess, S.,
& Hayward, W. G. (2005). Chinese character acquisition
and visual skills in two Chinese scripts. Reading and
Writing, 28, 99-128.
McNeil, N. M., Uttal, D. H., Jarvin, L., & Sternberg, R. J.
(2008). Should you show me the money? Concrete
objects both hurt and help performance on mathematics
problems. Learning and Instruction, 19, 171–184
Mervis, C. & Crisafi, M. (1980). Acquisition of basic object
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 496-522.
Podgorny, P., & Garner, W. (1979). Reaction time as a
measure of inter- and intraobject visual similarity: Letters
of the alphabet. Perception & Psychophysics, 26, 37-52.
Schyns, P.G., & Rodet, L. (1997). Categorization creates
functional features. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 681-696.
Seybolt, P. J., & Chiang, G.K.-K. (1979). Introduction. In P.
J. Seybolt & G. K.-K. Chiang (Eds.), Language reform in
China: Documents and Commentary (pp. 1–10). White
Plains, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Shu, H., Chen, X., Anderson, R.C., Wu, N., & Yue, X.
(2003). Properties of School Chinese: Implications for
Learning to Read. Child Development, 74, 27–47.
Sloutsky, V.M., Kaminski, J.A., & Heckler, A.F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Son, J. Y., Smith, L. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2008).
Simplicity and generalization: Short-cutting abstraction in
children's object categorizations. Cognition, 108, 626638.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving:
Effects on learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257–285.
Tsai, K.-C., & Nunes, T. (2003). The role of character
schema in learning novel Chinese characters. In C.
McBride-Chang & H.-C. Chen (Eds.), Reading
development in Chinese children (pp. l09–125). Westport,
CT: Praeger Press.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84 (4), 327–352.

3532

