UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of “Trust dynamics”: Perspective taking during collaborative problem solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0mt37994

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Hayashi, Yugo

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of

Trust dynamics : Perspective taking during collaborative problem
solving
Yugo Hayashi (hayashi.yugo.gp@u.tsukuba.ac.jp)
Faculty of Library, Information and Media Science, University of Tsukuba
1-2, Kasuga, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8550, Japan
Abstract

these studies, perspective taking promotes the facilitation of
conceptual change for gaining a deeper understanding. However, in such activities, we have to consider the effects of conflicts that occur during interactions. Conflicts occur due to
disagreements among group members concerning ideas and
opinions about the task being performed (Jehn, Greer, Levine,
& Szulanski, 2008). Overcoming such conflicts not only is
important for establishing common ground but also can provide an opportunity for new discoveries. On the basis of these
studies, we investigated the effects of a type of social dynamic
that is expected to facilitate an exocentric perspective for
overcoming group conflict.

We investigated the influence of reflections on self/others’ trust
within group-based problem solving. We assessed the role of
trust dynamics on perspective-taking activities within conflictive groups, extending the experimental framework used by
Hayashi (2012) and including conversational agents for controlling participants’ interactions related to trust dynamics and
perspective taking behavior. Results showed that (1) reflections of self/other trust in conflictive groups may influence
trust towards other members, and (2) reflections of trust by
members with conflicting perspectives may facilitate trust and
perspective taking. This suggests that the level of trust dynamics facilitates trust and can function to manifest perspective taking within cooperative groups.
Keywords: Trust dynamics; perspective taking; collaboration;
group dynamics.

Influence of trust dynamics in groups

Introduction
Conflict is inevitable in human interactions, even within ingroup activities. We investigated the mediating factor of
group dynamics on perspective-taking activity within
conflictual situations, focusing on how social cognitive factors, such as reflections of trust dynamics, could facilitate the interaction process. Multiple conversational agents
were used to control for group members’ interactions, such as
perspective-taking and social dynamics.

Perspective taking and conflicts in groups
Perspective taking is an essential activity for social interaction. It perspective taking requires higher-level cognition and
is rife with unintended errors and difficulties (Keysar, Barr,
Balin, & Brauner, 2000; Hayashi & Miwa, 2009). Perspective taking plays an important role in establishing common
ground between adult speakers. Keysar et al. (2000) points
out that this activity includes complicated cognitive operations, and people tend to have egocentric biases that hinder
such activities. Hayashi, Miwa, and Morita (2006) showed
that an individual’s egocentric biases constrains perspectivetaking activities during a cooperative task.
Within cooperative group activities (e.g., scientific research groups), perspective taking also plays an important
role in discovering new solutions and knowledge. For example, Dunbar (1995) and colleagues investigated the use
of inductive reasoning within a scientific research group and
proposed the concept of distributed reasoning, where group
members achieve their goals by taking charge of different
types of inferences. Other studies have also investigated the
nature of learners collaboratively working on complex problems while focusing on explaining such activities, role sharing, and reflective interactions (Okada & Simon, 1997). In

Organizational and social network studies have shown that
the perception of trust in other member(s) within the group
is important for facilitating group performance (Kramer,
1999; Castellano, Fortunato, & Loreto, 2009). Within-group
perspective taking is an interactive social process that could
be mediated by the level of trust and respect within that group.
Unfortunately, few studies have investigated how the perception of such dynamics affects cognitive processes during cooperative group activities.
Here, we briefly review what we mean by trust and
reframe the term for our study. Mayer and Davis (1995) conceptually defines trust as a willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the expectation that the other will perform a particular action important
to the truster. Yamagishi and Ymagishi (1994) propose that
trust is based on profit and loss to the individual. To reach
a solution to the problem, cognitive operations move from
the initial unsolved state to the goal state. In group-based
problem-solving activities, partners play important roles in
providing information to members, and members use that information on the basis of how valuable it is in attaining the
goal. The level of belief, such as the trust towards group
members, is very important during collaborative group activities. Thus, we define trust as a belief that the perspective
of that person will lead toward a good problem solving outcome.
Trust has several benefits for organizations and their members. When the level of trust is increased, a group is expected
to experience superior group processes (e.g., higher levels of
cooperation) and higher performance, and vice versa (Dirks,
1999). Parks, Henagar, and Scamahorn (1996) examined how
low- and high-trust individuals respond to messages of intent from other participants in a social dilemma task. They

2500

found that low-trusters reacted to a competitive message by
decreasing cooperation but were unaffected by a cooperative
message. In contrast, high-trusters reacted to the cooperative
message by increasing cooperation but were unaffected by
the competitive message. In another study, the authors investigated the effects of trust on decision makers’ responses to
fear during social dilemmas (Dirks & Ferrin, 2001). They
found that high-trusters cooperated more than low-trusters
when fear was present but cooperated at the same rate when
fear was absent. Klimoski and Karol (1976) investigated the
dynamics of interpersonal trust during group creative problem solving with members placed into high-trust, low-trust,
or control (no trust) conditions. The high-trust and control
groups outperformed the low-trust group on each of 3 tasks
based on the number of ideas each group generated.
In sum, shared trust among members enhances individuals’
willingness to engage in various forms of spontaneous sociability, thereby facilitating task performance. However, most
past studies have only focused on the direct effect of trust on
task performance. We focused on the cognitive process of
how reflection of the trust dynamics influences perspectivetaking activities. Figure 1 shows our research framework.
Members on the left (with high trust) end up with an exocentric perspective, while members on the right (with low trust)
end up with an egocentric perspective.
Trust towards others with

Distrust towards others

diﬀerent perspectives

with diﬀerent

I support A

+
I think A
B may
be good

I think B

+
Coﬂict

+
I support B

+
+

Facilitating exocentric behavior

I support A

+
I think A

I think B

ー
Coﬂict

+
I support B

ー
ー
Facilitating egocentric behavior

Figure 1: Research frame work.

Goal and hypotheses of the current study
The present study investigated the impact of social dynamics on perspective taking activities within conflictive groups.
By extending an experimental methodology from Hayashi
(2012), we investigated the following two hypotheses.
H1 Reflections of self/other trust in a conflictive group may
influence trust towards other members.
H2 Reflections of trust by members with conflicting perspectives may facilitate trust during the perspective-taking process.

Method
The rule discovery task: Bistable objects
For the main task, the participants’ goals were to count a series of objects presented on a computer display and discover
its sequential rule by cooperating with other participants.
Materials for the objects were several sets of random patterns
containing several figures on a 6 × 6 grid (colored black or
white; see Figure 2). In each set, a pattern consisting of combined square blocks was shown against the background of either black or white colors. The background color was controlled to derive, through a Gestalt effect, the change in the
problem-solver’s perspective (Koffka, 1935).

8

Partner A
(Six white objects)

(Six white objects)

10

1 Partner B
(Four black objects)

7
6

2
5

Participants Screen

9

4

3

Partner C
(Four black objects)

Figure 2: Experimental stimuli used in the study.
Each set consisted of several objects (or patterns) in
black or white, each of which consisted of a single block or
multiple blocks. As shown in Figure 2, one of the paired objects has a total of 10 components (4 black and 6 white).
When a participant focuses on white components inside a
black background, the white components become the figure,
and the six components pop out.
In the present study, a group of four participants collaboratively worked on the problem-solving task through computer terminals connected via a local network. All members exchanged text-based messages to discuss their opinions
as to the number of objects and the sequence of the target
rule. As shown in Figure 2, four participants saw the objects with either a black background (white perspective) or
a white background (black perspective). Two members saw
a black and two saw a white background, and each member counted the number objects that were popping out.
For each trial/objects, a square outer-box was shown on the
display for one second, which was followed by a stimulus
picture presented inside the box frame. Participants were required to send one message per trial to the other members as
part of a secondary task (explained in the following section).
Participants were told that they had to count the number of objects inside this box frame. The number of white components
and black components was controlled, and the total number of
components presented to the participants varied between six
and twelve. The sequential pattern (Target rule) of the sums
of black components and white components was repeatedly
presented during each trial (i.e. 6, 8, 10, 12 or 6, 8, 10, 12; see

2501

Agent 1 (Partner A)

Figure 3). In the initial stage of the task, the local black/white
numbers were controlled to be the same. Experiments from
a past study showed that participants are fixated to the figure
perspective, and participants try to search for the target rule
based on his/her perspective (Hayashi et al., 2006; Hayashi
& Miwa, 2009; Hayashi, 2012) . On trial 9, we controlled
the trials for differentiation in responses so that participants
would report different numbers. Through this manipulation,
participants experience conflict.

Agent 2 (Partner B)

Server

Trial 9

White
(Par cipant &
PartnerA)

3

4

5

Black
(Partners B & C)

3

4

5

Sum of
Black &
white

6

8

10

6 ...
6

...

12 ...

... 2
...

4

6

5

4

4

4

7

... 6

8

10

12

Client(Parcipant)

Agent 3 (Partner C)

Figure 4: Communication platform.

Conﬂict stage

Figure 3: Example sequence of the objects.
Previous studies show that even though participants confront this conflictual stage, they are biased to their own object/perspective and behave egocentrically (Hayashi et al.,
2006). To discover the rule for this task, the participant has
to look at the different colored objects and integrate the other
two members’ perspectives. In the present study, one human
participant and three conversational agents acted as human
partners. Participants were informed that they would conduct
the task with real humans and were told not to chat about anything else related to the task. Two agents were programmed
to export messages based on a different perspective (object).

Group members’ behaviors: Conversational agents
In the present study, we set up a text-based chat communication platform by using one server and three clients, including one chat engine and three conversational agents(Figure
4). The system was similar to one used by Hayashi (2012)
and developed by Java. On the Server side, a broadcast
mechanism was used to distribute all the messages simultaneously. When messages were sent to the Server, they were
re-distributed to all Clients and/or Agents.
The conversational computer agents were designed by a
typical rule-based system. Based on pre-defined rules, the
system can respond to sentences that were inputted by the
participants (Figure 4). All three agents were implemented
by the rule shown below. All agents autonomously responded
to each other’s text messages as independent interlocutors.
The conversation agent extracts keywords from the sentences that were distributed by the participant and other
agents. The most frequent keywords that are used during this
task are related to the (1) number of objects, (2) colors of objects, and (3) rules about the sequence. The agent contains
a temporary working memory storage to represent the current status of the input messages from the (1) keywords of
the participant, (2) keywords from the agents, and (3) objects

that were presented on the screen. A rule base, in an ifthen format, defined all responses from the agents. When
the agent detects keywords of (a) numbers, (b) colors, and (c)
the hypothesis, working memory is updated. Then, a patternmatching strategy is used for binding the rules. In the present
study, the agents were programmed to respond based on the
numbers or colors of the objects that were set for its perspective (Agent A responded based on the black objects, Agent
B and C responded based on white objects). The following
shows the summarized version of the basic rules utilized in
the study:
< Rules >
Trials < 8
(agent A, B,C)
− > numbers(white ob jects)
Trail > 8
(agent A)
IF : ”color(any)” − > colors(white)
ELSE IF : ”rules” − > rules
ELSE − > numbers(white)
(agent B,C)
IF : ”color(white)”AND ”agentBorC” NOTcolor”
− > numbers(black)AND color(black)
ELSE IF : ”rules” − > rules
ELSE − > numbers(black)
For example, outputs of numbers (black) and colors (black)
could be, Oh, I think there are 6 black objects, So you see
3? I see 3 of them in black, etc. The server will distribute
the messages to each agent in a randomized order with a delay
for appropriate turn takings.

Trust dynamics diagram interface
On each trial, participants were required to work on a secondary task, which was to evaluate and receive results of
self/others’ evaluations of trust. This was done to provide
reflections regarding trust dynamics of the group members.

2502

programmed to select distrust 100% of the time. On trials 7
to 11, all agents were programed to generate trust with 80%
variability. After the 12th trial, members with the same perspective (C − > B, B − > C, A − > participant) were programmed to generate trust 100% of the time. Other’s evaluations were weighted to gradually select distrust until the
17th trial (see Figure 6). This was done to manipulate a situation where members evaluated others negatively after the
conflict occurred during the main task. In the trust condition,
responses were weighted to recover gradually from the 18th
trial. However, in the distrust condition, there were no adjustments made. The no-trust condition was the baseline condition, and there was not a trust dynamics diagram provided to
the participant.
conﬂict
Degree of trust

Participants were asked to evaluate each member based on
the belief that his/her information will lead to a good outcome for the group. Figure 5 shows an example of the trust
dynamics network diagram interface. The participants’ representation (node) was located in the center, and the other
members (partners A, B, and C) were located above and below. There were four nodes and 12 links for evaluating each
member. Each arrow addresses the evaluation towards a particular member. A + indicates that the participant evaluated him/her as trustworthy, and a - mark means that the
participant evaluated the member as untrustworthy. Within
the interface, there were three arrows pointing from the participant to Partners A, B, and C. Participants were required
to select trust (+) or distrust (-) by using a pull down selection box. Prior to the experiment, all participants completed
a training session in order to become familiar with the trust
dynamics network diagram interface. During the experiment,
participants were required to evaluate other members (A, B,
and C) during each trial. All members’ (agents’) outputs were
controlled to simulate a pattern of trust dynamics due to each
experimental condition.

Trust condition
conﬂict

Partner B
Degree of trust

Partner A

Self

Distrust condition

Partner C
Evaluate each member based on the belief that his/her
information will lead to good outcome for the group.

Figure 6: Results of the agent simulation on trust dynamics.

rate

Dependent variables
Figure 5: Trust dynamics network diagram interface.

Procedure
Seventy-five undergraduate students from a humanities
course participated in the experiment (trust condition, n =
27; distrust condition, n = 26; no-trust condition, n = 22).
The experiment took place in a room with 12 laptop computers. Participants performed 32 trials (average time = 35
minutes). After the task, participants worked on a writing
test. In the trust condition, when a conflict occurred on the
9th trial (see Figure 3), the partners/agents were controlled to
gradually generate trust towards the members with conflicting perspectives. Conversely, in the distrust condition, there
were no such adjustments, and partners/agents kept generating distrust towards members with different perspectives.
Figure 6 shows the simulation of the trust dynamics during
the experiment. For trials 1 to 6, all agents’ evaluations were

We had two main dependent variables of interest. First, we
analyzed the degree of trust towards other members during
the following four task stages: (1) Initial Stage (trials 1 to
8), (2) Conflict Stage 1 (trials 9 to 16), (3) Conflict Stage 2
(trials 17 to 24), and (4) Conflict Stage 3 (trials 25 to 32).
Evaluations of Participants (agents) A, B, and C were collected based on these stages and coded as follows: (1) trust
as 1 point and (2) distrust as -1 point. At each stage, the average score was calculated for each participant and used as a
representative value. We then calculated the average of each
partner within each trial stage. Next, we analyzed participants’ dialog data during the task. This was done to evaluate
participants’ change in perspective. If the conversation data
included a description that referred to the background color,
it was counted as a change in perspective. If a participant’s
data did not include such information, it was counted as no
perspective change.

2503

Results
Evaluations of trust towards other members
Figure 7 shows the trust dynamics results in the trust and distrust conditions. The vertical axis represents the average ratio
of trust, and the horizontal axis represents the experimental
trials.
partner B

partner C

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4

partner B

partner C

Perspective Taking Process

0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

-0.6

-0.8

-0.8
-1.0

partner A

trial 1 to 8

trial 9 to 16

trial 17 to 24 trial 25 to 32

Trust condition

-1.0

trial 1 to 8

trial 9 to 16

trial 17 to 24 trial 25 to 32

Distrust condition

Figure 7: Results of the evaluations of the trust to partners.
First, we analyzed the trust condition. We performed a 4
× 3 within-subjects factorial ANOVA with the four evaluation trial-times (Initial Stage vs. Conflict Stage 1 vs. Conflict
Stage 2 vs. Conflict Stage 3) and the three partners (Partner (agent) A vs. Partner (agent) B vs. Partner (agent) C)
as independent variables. There was a significant interaction
between the two factors (F (6,156) = 3.0, p < .01). We conducted further analyses to deconstruct this interaction.
First, a simple main effect analysis was conducted on each
trial time. In the Initial Stage (trials 1 to 8), Conflict Stage 2
(trials 17 to 24), and Conflict Stage 3 (trials 25 to 32) there
were no differences between conditions (F (2,208) = 0.063,
p = .94), (F (2,208) = 2.014, p = .14, (F (2,208) =1.142, p
= .32)). However, in Conflict Stage 1 (trials 9 to 16), there
were significant differences between conditions (F (2,202) =
8.316, p < .01). Multiple comparisons using Ryan’s method
were conducted for Conflict Stage 1. Results indicated that
the average score of partner A was higher than partners B and
C respectively (p < .01; p < .01). There were no differences
between partners B and C (p = .75). Next, we examined the
distrust condition. We performed the same factorial ANOVA
as in the trust condition. There was a significant interaction
between the two factors (F (6,150) = 10.110, p < .01). Again,
we conducted further analyses to deconstruct this interaction.
A simple main effect analysis was conducted on each trial
time. In the Initial Stage (trials 1 to 8), there were no differences between conditions (F (2,200) = 0.018, p =.98). However, there were significant differences in Conflict Stage 1,
Conflict Stage 2, and Conflict Stage 3 (F(2,200) = 20.355,
p < .01, F (2,200) = 14.559, p < .01, F(2,200) = 21.615,
p < .01). We conducted multiple comparisons, again, using
Ryan’s method. For Conflict Stage 1, results indicated that
the average score of partner A was higher than that of partners B and C, respectively (p < .01; p < .01). There were no

Figure 8 shows the results of the dialogue process of changing perspectives. The vertical axis represents the ratio of perspective change, and the horizontal axis represents the experimental condition. The numerals shown on the cylindrical
bars indicate the number of participants in each condition. A
chi-square analysis was conducted to check the difference in
the number of problem solvers who integrated perspectives
during the task. Results indicated that there were significant
differences among the conditions (χ2 (2) = 6.132, p < .05).
Next, a multiple comparison was conducted on the two conditions using Fisher’s exact test. There were significant differences between the trust condition and the distrust condition
and between the trust condition and the no trust condition,
respectively (p < .01, p < .01). Conversely, there were no
differences between the distrust and the no trust condition (p
< .10). This suggests that a group that interacted with trustbased dynamics were taking into consideration the perspectives of others more frequently than a group that did not.
1.0
Ratio of perspective taking

partner A

Degree of trust

Degree of trust

1.0

differences between partners B and C (p = .74). For Conflict
Stage 2, results indicated that the average score of partner A
was higher than that of partners B and C, respectively (p <
.01; p < .01). There were no differences between partners B
and C (p = .26). Finally, for Conflict Stage 3, results indicated that the average score of partner A was higher than that
of partners B and C, respectively (p < .01; p < .01). There
were no differences between partners B and C (p = .53).

0.8

14

0.6

21

17

No perspective change

0.4
0.2
0.0

Perspective change

13
5
Trust

Distrust

condition

condition

5
No trust
condition

Figure 8: Results of the perspective taking performance.

Discussion and Conclusions
We investigated the influence of social cognitive factors,
such as trust dynamics during perspective taking activities,
in group based problem solving. We investigated how reflections of self/others’ trust can facilitate the level of trust toward
others and, thus, motivate perspective. Results from the trust
dynamics paradigm show that participants felt distrust toward
others during the initial stage of the interactions. However,
participants gradually constructed trust towards others over
time. As the interaction proceeds, trust became stronger.
However, when participants perceived members with conflictive perspectives, trust dropped compared to those without
a conflicting perspective. This indicates that trust was de-

2504

pendent on whether conflicting information provided by the
members was present. Regarding reflective feedback from
other members, we found different types of evaluations of
trust towards other members (participant − > A, B, C). When
participants received a recovery of trust from members with
conflictive perspectives (partner B & C), trust recovered to the
same level of trust that was present with the member (partner
A) who did not have a conflictive perspective. This shows
that reciprocal behavior might have occurred through the interaction process. It is interesting that even if participants
experienced conflict from other members, if trust is later presented, he/she will generate feelings of trust. Conversely, if
participants do not receive such reflective trust (distrust condition), trust never recovers. These results support H1 and
indicate that reflective feedback was influential in building
trust towards other members. These results may differ from
other types of reflective feedback, such as when you know
that others can see everyone’s evaluations. This type of feedback might have hindered our results. Furthermore, we found
that certain reflections of trust feedback could influence the
perspective-taking process. Participants in the trust conditions communicated with others based on conflicting perspectives more so than those in the distrust condition. This supports H2. These results suggest that the level of trust dynamics facilitates trust and can function to manifest perspectivetaking activities within cooperative groups.
The present study provides new implications for cognitive
studies on perspective taking during group communication.
Specifically, our results capture a trust dynamics factor that
could gradually influence the process of trust and exocentric perspectives towards conflictual members. As described
earlier, a few studies have investigated the nature of trust
in groups and trust’s influence on task performance. Some
studies investigated the nature of perspective taking in risky
dilemma situations. One study Evans and Krueger (2011) observed that in high-risk situations, people heuristically chose
distrust; trust increases when costs decrease and benefits increase. However the present study focused on a cooperative
situation; our results help elucidate how trust is mediated by
problem solving interactions. Some studies (e.g., Klimoski
and Karol (1976) ) have investigated the nature of trust on
creative problem solving. Unfortunately, there are not many
investigations assessing what kinds of trust dynamics are effective in the cognitive process of such activities.
Our present results can contribute to future studies modeling cognitive systems for supporting collaborative activities
in groups. Reflections of trust dynamics, and the positive
level of trust, are effective in facilitating higher trust towards
others, as well as enhanced perspective taking. This model
potentially can be used in collaborative learning activities,
such as computer-based learning activities with large groups
where perspective taking plays an important role. These trust
dynamic mechanisms during collaborative learning can motivate learners to work on tasks/materials and be cognizant of
the useful contributions of other members.

References
Castellano, C., Fortunato, S., & Loreto, V. (2009). Statistical
physics of social dynamics. Reviews of mordern physics,
81(2), 591-646.
Dirks, K. (1999). The effects of interpersonal trust on work
group performance. Journal of applied psychology, 84,
445-474.
Dirks, K., & Ferrin, D. (2001). The role of trust in organizational settings. Organization Science, 12(4), 450-467.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In J. R. Sternberg &
E. J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (p. 365-395).
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.
Evans, A., & Krueger, J. (2011). Elements of trust: Risk and
perspective-taking. Journal of ecperimental Social Psychology.
Hayashi, Y. (2012). The effect of ”maverick”:a study of group
dynamics on breakthrough in collaborative problem solving. In Proceedings of the 34th annual conference of the
cognitive science society (p. 444-449).
Hayashi, Y., & Miwa, K. (2009). Prior experience and communication media in establishing common ground during
collaboration. In Proceedings of the 31th annual conference of the cognitive science society (p. 526-531).
Hayashi, Y., Miwa, K., & Morita, J. (2006). A laboratory
study on distributed problem solving by taking different
perspectives. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference
of the cognitive science society (p. 333-338).
Jehn, K., Greer, L., Levine, S., & Szulanski, G. (2008). The
effects of conflict types, dimensions, and emergent states
on group outcomes. Group decisions and negotiations, 17,
465-495.
Keysar, B., Barr, J. D., Balin, A. J., & Brauner, S. J.
(2000). Taking perspective in conversation: The role of
mutual knowledge in comprehension. Psychological Science, 11(1), 32-38.
Klimoski, J. R., & Karol, L. B. (1976). The impact of trust
on creative problem solving groups. journal of applied psychology, 61(5), 630-633.
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of gestalt psychology. London,
UK: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Kramer, R. (1999). Trust and distrust in organizations. Annual review of psychology, 50, 569-598.
Mayer, R., C, & Davis, J., H. (1995). An integrative model
of organizational trust. Academy of management review,
20(3), 709-734.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a
scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 109-146.
Parks, D., Henagar, F., & Scamahorn, D. (1996). Trust and
reactions to messages of intent in social dilemmas. Journal
of conflict resolution, 40(1), 134-151.
Yamagishi, T., & Ymagishi, M. (1994). Trust and commitment in the united states and japan. Motivation and Emotion, 18(2), 129-166.

2505

