UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Ambivalence of Expert Categorizers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7ns2j5qb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Marsh, Jessecae
Rothman, Naomi

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Ambivalence of Expert Categorizers
Jessecae K. Marsh (jem311@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Naomi B. Rothman (nbr211@lehigh.edu)
Department of Management, 621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA
Abstract

categorization for a bird, or a doctor who is torn between
two possible diagnoses for a patient. In short, how do we
react to these experts who we have turned to for help when
they express difficulty in making a categorization decision?
Furthermore, are there differences in our reactions,
depending on the type of difficulty experts are expressing?
We delineate three different possible states a person making
a categorization decision could experience: knowing the
correct answer (certainty), not being clear at all as to what
the correct answer is (uncertainty), and having narrowed the
correct answer down but feeling tension and conflict as to
which answer is the correct choice (ambivalence). In our
study, we are specifically interested in this state of
ambivalence. In the following we describe how people may
react to ambivalent experts and then contrast this with
possible reactions to uncertain experts.
How do we react to an expert who expresses being
ambivalent about a categorization decision in her domain of
expertise? One possibility is that ambivalence in experts is
not perceived as problematic, but instead as a sign of
effective decision-making. Seeing an expert express being
torn over the correct categorization may verify our initial
deference; this is a complex decision that is beyond our
ability. Furthermore, expressions of ambivalence are often
taken as a positive sign of more deliberative, and flexible
thinking (Rothman, 2011). In addition, experiencing
ambivalence is related to more creative (Fong, 2006) and
more accurate (Rees, Rothman, Lehavy, & Sanchez Burks,
2013) final decision-making. As such, an expert categorizer
who is torn between placing something in one of two
categories may be seen as a creative, deep thinker and
valued for her expertise.
We believe it is much more likely that people react
negatively to ambivalent experts. People largely act as if
categories in the world exist with clear, delineable
boundaries. That is, something is not partially a bird, or part
of the bird and cat category. This belief in clear categorical
boundaries has been linked to essentialism, or belief that a
category has a causal essence that underlies the category,
creates the features of that category, and must be possessed
to be a member of that category (Gelman, 2003). Previous
work has claimed that it is exactly this belief that categories
possess essences that allows us to be willing to defer to
experts in making a categorization decision; people are
believed to defer to experts because they believe experts
have the correct knowledge to recognize and identify the

We explored people’s reactions to expert categorizers who
expressed difficulty in making a categorization decision.
Specifically, we compared people’s impressions of expert
health professionals who either expressed certainty,
uncertainty, or ambivalence about a categorization decision in
the form of a diagnosis. We found that ambivalence resulted
in the most negative impressions of these experts, including
lower ratings of competence and decisiveness (Experiment 1).
Impressions of ambivalence did not improve when the
complexity of the decision was explicitly manipulated
(Experiment 2). Implications for categorization are discussed.
Keywords:
expert;
ambivalence.

categorization;

decision-making;

Introduction
People view the world as existing in clear, definable
categories (Gelman, 2003). For example, when attempting
to identify a bird sitting in our yard, we take as granted that
there are clear delineations between different species of
birds and that with enough knowledge a given bird can be
neatly categorized into its appropriate category
(Diesendruck & Gelman, 1999; Estes, 2003). Believing the
natural world is organized and divided in this way suggests
that there are right answers to categorizing things that are
accessible given enough knowledge. The people we turn to
that possess this knowledge we call experts. Laypeople
perceive that for different domains in the world, experts
exist and possess knowledge specific to that domain
(Wilson & Keil, 1998). People defer to these experts when
information or a decision is needed (Braisby, 2001, 2003;
Danovitch & Keil, 2004; Danovitch & Keil, 2007;
VanderBorght & Jaswal, 2009). This deference has been
described as a division of cognitive labor that allows a given
person to be able to interact with elements of the world she
does not understand because of the belief that there are
experts that exist that do understand those elements (for a
discussion see Wilson & Keil, 1998).
Experts play an obviously important role in allowing
people to survive in the modern world. Given the
importance of experts, what happens when an expert
expresses difficulty in making a categorization decision?
For example, imagine a mechanic who can not decide if a
car is malfunctioning because of a transmission problem or
because of an exhaust problem, or a bird authority who
cannot decide which of two species is the correct

984

causal essences that underlie category membership (Braisby,
2001; 2003). Now imagine this expert who is supposed to
be able to recognize the essence underlying categorization
being torn as to which of two categories something belongs.
Because of the implications of essentialism, category
membership should be all-or-none, with the item to be
categorized only being in one of the two possible
categories.1 Also, if anyone should be able to identify that
causal essence, it should be this expert. In this way, an
expert expressing ambivalence may elicit negative reactions
because ambivalence does not mesh well with our beliefs
about essences and the ability of experts to identify those
essences. For these reasons, we predict that experts
expressing ambivalence in making a categorization decision
should be viewed negatively.
An interesting alternative to ambivalence in
categorization decision-making is uncertainty. Previous
literature on decision-making has distinguished uncertainty
and ambivalence as two separate emotional and decisional
states. Uncertainty is a state of not knowing the correct
answer to a problem, whereas ambivalence reflects a state of
being torn between two possible alternatives (Rothman,
2011). Said another way, a decision maker may be uncertain
because not enough information is known to make a
decision or because the person does not have enough
expertise to know the correct answer. However, a decision
maker who is ambivalent appears to have all of the
information needed to make a decision but is torn between
two possibilities. In our paradigm using expert decision
makers, we predict that an uncertain expert may look like
someone who just needs more information before a decision
is possible. However, an ambivalent expert will seem to
have all or at least more of the needed information since she
is actively considering two possibilities. This should result
in the ambivalent expert looking relatively more unable to
make correct decisions. If this holds, we would expect that
ambivalent experts could be viewed more negatively than
uncertain experts.
In the following two experiments, we investigate how
people view expert categorizers making a categorization
decision. To ensure participants’ familiarity with the type of
expert categorizer and the decision domain, we presented
participants with descriptions of a health professional
making a difficult diagnostic decision. Interacting with this
type of expert categorizer should be easy for participants to
think about. We described the professional as deciding
between two possible diagnoses and displaying one of three
levels of categorization certainty: certain of the correct
diagnosis, completely uncertain as to which of two

diagnoses is correct, or torn and conflicted as to which of
two diagnoses was correct. We then measured participants’
impressions of these expert categorizers.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we manipulated the levels of
categorization certainty of an expert decision-maker and
then measured people’s perceptions of the quality of that
decision-maker. If ambivalence is inherently unsettling for
the reasons discussed above, participants should view
ambivalent experts as lower quality and more indecisive
than certain or even uncertain experts. However, if
ambivalence is taken as a sign of the expert being
thoughtful, then perceptions of these experts should be more
favorable.

Methods
Participants Sixty participants recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk participated for payment. Participation
was restricted to Mechanical Turk workers in the United
States.
Materials and Procedure Participants read a description of
a hypothetical patient who was seeking advice from a health
care professional for an ongoing health problem.
Participants read that the patient was given a series of tests,
the results of which suggested two potential diagnoses,
labeled A and B. Participants were randomly assigned to
read one of three statements that described the health
professional as being certain the patient had diagnosis A and
not B (Certain condition; n = 20), uncertain as to whether
diagnosis A or B was correct (Uncertain condition; n=18),
or torn as to whether diagnosis A or B was correct
(Ambivalent condition; n = 22). We used the torn descriptor
for the ambivalent condition because it conveys how the
subjective state of ambivalence is likely to be expressed (see
Rothman, 2011 for a more detailed discussion of this point).
Participants were randomly assigned either to read that the
person was seeking help from a physician and the diagnosis
was one of two infections (n = 27) or was seeking help from
a mental health clinician and the diagnosis was one of two
mood disorders (n = 33). After reading the health interaction
description, participants completed a series of different
ratings that asked them to rate the provider on different
dimensions or rate how a patient would react to the
provider. We were specifically interested in three issues:
how indecisive and how competent the provider from the
previous exchange was seen to be, as well as how positively
or negatively participants reacted to the provider.
Indecisiveness was measured by asking participants to rate
to what extent the physician possessed a series of
personality traits, in which were embedded the following 8
traits related to indecision: Confused, Unsure, Uncertain,
Indecisive, Hesitant, Not Definite, Faltering, and Wavering.
Mean ratings across these 8 measures were used as a
measure of indecisiveness. To measure competence, we
asked participants to rate their agreement with a series of

1

This is assuming categorization at the same level in a
categorization hierarchy and within the same domain. Presumably,
any given object can belong to multiple categories along a
subordinate to superordinate spectrum (e.g., robin, bird, animal)
and can be categorized in different ways depending on the
intention of the categorizer (e.g., parakeet versus pet animal). We
are discussing here categorization decisions that are equated across
these dimensions (e.g., robin versus blue jay).

985

statements assessing how likely they thought the physician
would be to engage in a series of behaviors related to being
well informed (mean of three statements: attend professional
conferences, be aware of current research, be asked for an
opinion by other professionals) and be seen as a quality
practitioner (mean of three statements: be a high quality
expert, make accurate diagnoses, create accurate treatment
plans). We also measured participants’ predictions of how a
patient would react to the given expert through ratings of
how likely the patient would be to recommend that others
defer to this expert (mean of three statements: refer a friend
to the health care professional, provide a strongly positive
rating on a referral website, take his/her children to see this
health care professional) and how likely the expert would be
to be sued by a patient (assessed through a single question).
These ratings were intermixed with other ratings of the
professional that were unrelated to the measures we discuss
here. All ratings were made on seven-point agreement scales
with the exact anchor points of the scales varying by task
(e.g., Not at all likely to Extremely likely).
Participants also made ratings related to behaviors of the
patient, but we do not present those results here and these
measures are not discussed further. The order of rating tasks
was randomized for each participant.

Similar results obtained with perceptions of the expert’s
quality. Expert’s perceived quality differed significantly by
condition, F(2, 57) = 5.39, p = .007. Planned contrasts found
that Uncertain and Certain experts were seen as equal in
quality, p = .37. As predicted, the Ambivalent expert was
judged as significantly lower quality (M = 3.89, SD = 1.24)
than the Certain physician (M = 4.77, SD = 1.34; t(57) =
2.29, p = .026) or the Uncertain physician (M = 5.13, SD =
1.10; t(57) = 3.15, p = .003).
Reactions to the Expert Participants’ perceptions of
whether the patient would refer the expert differed
significantly by condition, F(2, 57) = 12.17, p < .001.
Planned contrasts demonstrated that the Ambivalent expert
was judged as significantly less likely to be referred (M =
2.73, SD = 1.11) than the Certain expert (M = 4.47, SD =
1.32; t(57) = 4.74, p < .001). The Ambivalent expert was
also perceived less likely to be referred than the Uncertain
expert (M = 4.02, SD = 1.13; t(57) = 3.42, p = .001).
Predicted referrals did not differ for the Uncertain and
Certain experts, p = .25.
Participants’ ratings of the likelihood the expert would be
sued differed significantly by condition, F(2, 57) = 7.54, p =
.001. Planned contrasts demonstrated that the Ambivalent
expert was judged as significantly more likely to be sued (M
= 4.86, SD = 1.52) than the Certain expert (M = 3.15, SD =
1.46; t(57) = 3.77, p < .001). The Ambivalent expert was
judged as more likely to be sued than the Uncertain expert
(M = 3.67, SD = 1.41; t(57) = 2.56, p = .013). Likelihood to
be sued did not differ for Certain and Uncertain experts, p =
.28.

Results
There were no significant differences between the mental
and medical health professionals on any of our measures, ps
> .12. As such, we collapsed across that manipulation. For
all of the following analyses, we conducted one-way
ANOVAs with categorization certainty (Ambivalent,
Certain, Uncertain) as a between-subjects variable.

Discussion

Decision Indecisiveness We first assessed perceptions of
the expert’s indecisiveness. We compared the mean ratings
for participants in the ambivalent condition to ratings in the
certain and uncertain conditions. Participants’ perceptions of
the expert’s indecision differed significantly by condition,
F(2, 57) = 14.43, p < .001. Planned contrasts demonstrated
that the Ambivalent physician was judged as significantly
more indecisive (M = 4.45, SD = 1.31) than the Certain
physician (M = 2.47, SD = 0.94; t(57) = 5.36, p < .001).
Interestingly, the Ambivalent expert was also perceived as
significantly more indecisive than the Uncertain physician
(M = 3.62, SD = 1.30; t(57) = 2.19, p = .033). Not
surprisingly, the Uncertain physician was perceived as more
indecisive than the Certain physician, t(57) = 2.95, p = .004.

Our results show that ambivalent experts are perceived
uniformly more negatively than certain and uncertain
experts. If this negative impression was just in reaction to
the expert being anything but completely certain in his/her
decision making, then we would expect to see uncertain
experts being viewed more in line with ambivalent experts.
Our findings instead support that uncertainty does not
produce the same negative reactions as ambivalence. In fact
uncertain experts were viewed as positively as certain
experts, except for not surprisingly being viewed as more
indecisive. One explanation for this finding is that
uncertainty is interpreted as a case in which more
information is simply needed before a decision can be made,
rather than a sign of ineptitude. Conversely, ambivalence
may be interpreted as a case in which all of the information
is available, but the expert is simply inept. It is a question
for future research as to whether these interpretations are
what are driving our demonstrated results.
Given previous research on the benefits of ambivalence to
the decision-making process (e.g., Fong, 2006; Rees et al.,
2013), it may seem surprising that ambivalence is viewed so
negatively. As we discussed earlier, laypeople may assume
that categories exist and can be identified as long as the
person has enough expertise. As such, experts should be

Expert Competence Participants’ perceptions of the
expert’s level of being informed differed significantly by
condition, F(2, 57) = 6.19, p = .004. Planned contrasts
demonstrated that the Uncertain and Certain experts were
seen as equally informed, p = .43. However, the Ambivalent
expert was judged as significantly less well informed (M =
4.14, SD = 1.29) than the Certain expert (M = 5.33, SD =
0.97; t(57) = 3.37, p = .001), or Uncertain expert (M = 5.04,
SD = 1.15; t(57) = 2.46, p = .017).

986

able to do this task easily. However, when experts express
ambivalence (even more so than uncertainty), it appears
from our results that such an expression conveys the
expert’s inability to make a decision. It seems possible,
however, that such negative responses to ambivalent experts
may be alleviated when the decision is described as
complex. That is, because ambivalence is a typical reaction
to complexity (e.g., Larsen, McGraw, & Cacioppo, 2001;
Tiedens & Fong, 2002), expressed ambivalence may be
more palatable to observers when observers are told that the
decision/diagnosis is complex rather than simple. This may
obtain because complexity provides a causal explanation for
any ambivalence that is experienced (i.e., this is a complex
case and it therefore makes sense it is hard to distinguish
between two alternatives). This explanation may in turn
make the decision-maker seem more justified for expressing
the state of ambivalence (see Ahn, Novick, & Kim, 2003).
The same may hold true for expressions of uncertainty.
However, this complexity could actually negatively
influence impressions of certain experts because it may be
difficult to understand how an expert is so certain even
when the problem is complex. To investigate this
possibility, we manipulated the stated complexity of the
decision task in Experiment 2.
In Experiment 1 we ended the description of the health
care interaction before a final diagnosis was provided. We
did this because we were interested in how the expression of
ambivalence is interpreted as it is first encountered,
regardless of what decision the expert finally comes to.
However, an alternative explanation for our results is that
the certain provider was viewed more favorably than the
ambivalent provider because the certain provider was
perceived to have actually suggested a diagnosis whereas
the ambivalent provider had not.2 In Experiment 2 we
accounted for this issue by adding – across all conditions -the delivery of an actual diagnostic decision at the end of the
health care interaction. It is possible that providing a
diagnosis may make all decision states seem equally
unproblematic; people may not care how an expert decisionmaker arrives at a decision once the decision is final. If this
is true, perceptions of ambivalent experts may be equated to
certain and uncertain experts. However, if people are
focused on the process by which the decision maker arrives
at a decision, then providing an actual diagnosis may not
matter for the effects of certainty.

describing a categorization decision as complex changes
how ambivalence is perceived. As such, in the following
analyses we will compare the effects of complexity within
each certainty manipulation to see if it differentially
influences impressions of each expressed decision state.

Methods
Participants Ninety-two United States based participants
recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk participated for
payment.
Materials and Procedure The same basic materials and
procedure was used as in Experiment 1 with the following
exceptions. Because no differences were found between
medical and mental health experts in Experiment 1, we used
only medical experts. In addition, we manipulated the
complexity of the decision: half of the participants received
information that the diagnostic decision was complex in
nature (Complex condition; n = 47). The remaining
participants did not receive this additional information
(Control condition). Finally, all participants read that the
physician made a decision of one diagnosis at the end.
After reading the description, participants went on to
make the same ratings as in Experiment 1 related to their
perceptions of the health care provider and the patient’s
follow up behaviors. To measure participants’ conceptions
of how long people spend in different certainty states during
decision-making, we asked the following: “Think about the
amount of time between learning about a problem and
announcing a decision related to that problem. What percent
of the time do people typically experience the following
states in that time period?”. Participants made ratings for
three states: certain, uncertain, and torn and conflicted. For
each state, participants dragged a slider bar to indicate the
percentage time spent in that state, with percentages for all
three states adding to 100. Participants made these ratings
once with the above prompt and then again while thinking
of a complex decision. Finally, participants completed a
series of post-test measures that asked them to indicate if
they were a health care professional, how difficult they
believed medical issue diagnosis to be, the level of expertise
required to practice for several different types of medical
professionals, an assessment of their desire to have final
decisions (i.e., the Need for Closure scale), and their
political leanings. For space purposes, we do not report the
findings of the time spent deciding measure or the post-test
measures.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 expands from the basic design of Experiment
1 by equating all conditions on the delivery of a final
diagnosis. We used the same manipulations as in
Experiment 1 but added that all providers came to the same
final diagnosis at the end of the interaction. We also
manipulated the described complexity of the decision in
Experiment 2, such that we would be able to assess if

Results and Discussion
For the following analyses, we conducted 3 (Categorization
Certainty: Ambivalent, Certain, Uncertain) x 2 (Complexity:
complex vs. control) between-subjects ANOVAS with
simple effects analyses within each certainty level
comparing the complexity conditions. Bonferroni
corrections were used in all of these analyses. In all
ANOVAs, there was a significant main effect of
Categorization Certainty, suggesting that adding the actual

2

It should be noted that this explanation does not account for
differences between the ambivalent and uncertain conditions.

987

diagnosis did not equate impressions of experts across the
certainty manipulation. Importantly, in all ANOVAs we
found a significant interaction between Categorization
Certainty and Complexity. For simplicity sake, we focus on
these interactions and present only the follow up simple
effects analyses. Figure 1 depicts these analyses.
We first analyzed whether describing a decision process
as complex altered perceptions of experts expressing
uncertainty. Impressions of Uncertain experts were more
positive when the decision was described as complex
relative to the control condition: They were seen as
marginally less indecisive (M = 4.07control, SD = 1.54 vs. M
= 3.33, SD = 1.10; p = .098), more informed (M =3.31control,
SD = 1.05 vs. M = 4.73, SD = 1.50; p = .002), and higher

quality (M = 2.16control, SD = 0.94 vs. M = 4.20, SD = 1.45; p
< .001). Predicted patient reactions to Uncertain experts
were more positive in the complex condition in that patients
were seen as more likely to refer them to friends (M =
2.67control, SD = 1.35 vs. M = 4.16, SD = 1.23; p = .002) and
less likely to sue (M = 5.67control, SD = 1.35 vs. M = 4.13,
SD = 1.89; p = .008).
This effect of complexity was reversed in Certain experts.
Certain experts were seen in the Complex condition as more
indecisive (M = 2.28control, SD = 0.99 vs. M = 3.19, SD =
1.35; p = .042), marginally less informed (M = 5.53control, SD
= 0.96 vs. M = 4.80, SD = 1.02; p = .095), and marginally
lower quality (M = 5.13control, SD = 0.098 vs. M = 4.31, SD
= 0.96; p = .058). Predicted patient reactions to Certain
experts were less positive in the complex condition in that
patients were seen as less likely to refer the expert to friends
(M = 4.93control, SD = 1.18 vs. M = 3.89, SD = 1.15; p =
.028), and more likely to sue (M = 3.27control, SD = 1.33 vs.
M = 4.53, SD = 1.77; p = .028).
Interestingly, complexity of decisions did not alter
impressions of Ambivalent experts, with no significant
differences obtaining when the diagnosis was described as
complex versus not. Ambivalent experts were seen as just as
indecisive (M = 3.87control, SD = 1.25 vs. M = 4.42, SD =
1.00; p = .20), just as informed (M = 4.16control, SD = 1.36
vs. M = 4.43, SD = 1.15; p = .51), and of equal quality (M =
3.27control, SD = 1.44 vs. M = 3.57, SD = 1.15; p = .46).
Predicted patient reactions did not differ across levels of
complexity for likelihood to refer the expert (M = 4.04control,
SD = 1.37 vs. M = 3.57, SD = 1.35; p = .29) or likelihood to
sue (M = 4.80control, SD = 1.66 vs. M = 5.29, SD = 1.16; p =
.36).

General Discussion
Relying on experts to aid in specialized decisions is a core
feature of modern human reasoning. As such, it is vitally
important to understand how people think about experts and
their decision-making process. We have presented one of
the first explorations of impressions of ambivalent experts
by investigating how people perceive ambivalent versus
certain and uncertain experts within the health domain. In
two experiments, we present converging evidence that
expressed ambivalence is particularly costly for experts
(Experiment 1) and this cost holds regardless of the
complexity of the task and the determination of a final
categorization decision (Experiment 2). These results
suggest that when an expert expresses ambivalence about a
categorization decision in his or her area of expertise,
observers react negatively to this expert regardless of the
complexity of the task and whether a decision is eventually
made.
Why do people react so negatively to ambivalence in
experts? Thinking about our specific examples, the health
care experts in our experiments were ambivalent as to how
to classify patients into one of two categories. As discussed
earlier, the idea that an expert may have difficulty
categorizing something in their area of expertise may go

Figure 1: Mean ratings across certainty conditions.
* indicates p<.05, ** indicates p<.01, *** indicates
p<.001, † indicates .05 < p < .1. Error bars represent
standard error.

988

against our fundamental assumptions of how categories
function in the world. If an expert expresses ambivalence in
categorizing something within their domain, this may
challenge the belief that categories are clearly defined and
can be recognized with enough knowledge. In this sense,
people may feel uncomfortable with ambivalent experts
because they undermine assumptions about the nature of
categories in the world that fall from essentialism.
If the negative reaction to ambivalent experts stems from
implications of essentialism, then this would imply that
ambivalent experts should be more acceptable for categories
where essences are not inferred. Medical and mental health
categories are seen as possessing causal essences that define
the features of the category and are necessarily possessed by
members of the category (Ahn, Flanagan, Marsh, &
Sanislow, 2006; Cooper & Marsh, in preparation). If we use
a domain that was inherently less essentialized, or not
essentialized at all (e.g., artifacts, nominal kinds) we may
see a shift in perceptions of experts’ decision-making
process. For example, if we interacted with an expert who
could not categorize a man-made object, we may be more
accepting of this expert’s ambivalence precisely because
there is not a defining causal feature by which to organize
the object.
A tension has formed: ambivalence improves decisionmaking (Rees et al., 2013) but is perceived negatively by
laypeople when expressed by an expert. This sets up the
possible recommendation of telling experts to balance
different ideas and be open to feeling ambivalent during
decision-making, but under no circumstances express this
ambivalence to others. This clearly seems like a less than
ideal recommendation given that many experts are expressly
charged with communicating their decision-making process
to laypeople (e.g., the shared-decision making model of
medicine). Further research is needed to understand how
experts can convey ambivalence and not upset the laypeople
they are tasked to help, as well as to understand for whom
(e.g., what types of patients) ambivalence may be more or
less palatable.

Braisby, N. (2003). Deference and essentialism in the
categorization of chemical kinds. In R. Alterman & D.
Kirsch (Eds.), Proceedings of the 25th Annual Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Cooper, J. A., & Marsh, J. K. (in preparation). Medical
Experts’ Essentialist Beliefs for Mental and Medical
Disorder Categories.
Danovitch, J. H., & Keil, F. C. (2004). Should you ask a
fisherman or a biologist?: Developmental shifts in ways
of clustering knowledge. Child Development, 75, 918931. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00714.x
Danovitch, J. H., & Keil, F. C. (2007). Choosing between
hearts and minds: Children's understanding of moral
advisors. Cognitive Development, 22, 110-123. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2006.07.001
Diesendruck, G., & Gelman, S. A. (1999). Domain
differences in absolute judgments of category
membership: Evidence for an essentialist account of
categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 6, 338346.
Estes, Z. (2003). Domain differences in the structure of
artifactual and natural categories. Memory and Cognition,
31, 199-214.
Fong, C. T. (2006). The effects of emotional ambivalence
on creativity. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 10161030. doi: 10.5465/amj.2006.22798182
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York, NY US:
Oxford University Press.
Larsen, J., McGraw, A., & Cacioppo, J. (2001). Can people
feel happy and sad at the same time? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 684–696.
Rees, L., Rothman, N. B., Lehavy, R., & Sanchez-Burkes, J.
(2013). The ambivalent mind can be a wise mind:
Emotional ambivalence increases judgment accuracy.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 360-367.
Rothman, N. B. (2011). Steering sheep: How expressed
emotional
ambivalence
elicits
dominance
in
interdependent decision-making contexts, Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 116, 66-82.
Fong, C. T., & Tiedens, L. Z. (2002). Dueling experiences
and dual ambivalences: Emotional and motivational
ambivalence of women in high status positions.
Motivation
and
Emotion,
26,
105-121.
doi:
10.1023/a:1015198209285
VanderBorght, M., & Jaswal, V. K. (2009). Who knows
best? Preschoolers sometimes prefer child informants
over adult informants. Infant and Child Development, 18,
61-71. doi: 10.1002/icd.591
Wilson, R. A., & Keil, F. C. (1998). The shadow and
shallows of explanation. Minds & Machines, 8, 137-159.

Acknowledgments
This project was funded by Lehigh University research
funds.

References
Ahn, W., Flanagan, E. H., Marsh, J. K., & Sanislow, C.
(2006). Beliefs about essences and the reality of mental
disorders. Psychological Science, 17, 759-766.
Ahn, W. K., Novick, L. R., & Kim, N. S. (2003).
Understanding behavior makes it more normal.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 746-752.
Braisby, N. (2001). Deference in categorisation: Evidence
for essentialism? In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

989

