UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Non-Linguistic Patterns on Linguistic Biases

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vd1778n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Finley, Sara

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Non-Linguistic Patterns on Linguistic Biases
Sara Finley (sara.finley@waldorf.edu)
Department of Psychology, Waldorf College
Forest City, IA, 50436, USA

Abstract
The present study explores the effects of non-linguistic
experiences on biases for linguistic judgments, specifically
consonant deletion patterns. When two adjacent consonants
come into contact as a result of morphological
concatenation, many languages will delete the first
consonant (e.g., /bepdok/ becomes /bedok/). Speakers of
these languages (as well as English speakers) prefer deletion
of the first consonant to the second consonant because the
first consonant is perceptually weaker, making it more prone
to misrepresentations and modifications. Following
exposure to a non-linguistic analogue of consonant deletion
in which the second consonant was deleted instead of the
first, participants no longer preferred deletion of the first
consonant in the metalinguistic judgment task. These results
suggest that exposure to non-linguistic materials can interact
with linguistic judgments.
Keywords: statistical learning, phonotactics, learning biases,
analogy.

Introduction
One of the major questions in the cognitive science of
language is how linguistic and non-linguistic experiences
interact to build a productive system of language. For
example, children learning language benefit from increased
cognitive and social skills in their language capacities, but
increased language capacities also help to scaffold cognitive
and social growth (Dessalegen & Landau, 2008). Because
language interacts with social, cultural and cognitive aspects
of human functioning, it is important to understand how
language influences non-linguistic cognition, in addition to
how non-linguistic cognition influences language.
The discussions concerning linguistic and non-linguistic
interaction have often turned to the question of linguistic
relativity, the idea that the specific language one speaks has
an effect on how the speaker perceives and interacts with
the world (Whorf, 1956). In addition, there is a question of
how linguistic knowledge can aid in higher level cognition
(Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, 2003).
The question of how language and thought interact can be
addressed not only as whether language affects thought, but
also whether non-linguistic information can have an effect
on language. While language is a direct way to express
one’s thoughts, there may be other, more subtle ways in
which non-linguistic experience can affect language. These
subtle effects could be used to understand the ways in which
linguistic knowledge is specific to language (domain

specific) and general to other cognitive processes (domain
general). In domain specific views, language is believed to
be a key component that to human cognition. The
mechanisms that underlie language are separate from other
species, and (in the most extreme theories) show no
interaction with non-linguistic cognitive functions (Berent,
2012; Pinker & Jackendoff, 2009). In this view, nonlinguistic cognition should have no influence on linguistic
judgments. In a domain general view of language,
foundations for the human language capacity arise through
social and cultural transmission. The key to linguistic
knowledge is an interaction between the need to
communicate and the existence of high-level cognitive
capacities such as abstract pattern learning and memory
(Chater & Christiansen, 2010). Under this view, nonlinguistic patterns should have a strong influence on
linguistic constructs.
One of the strong pieces of evidence for a domain specific
approach to language is the idea that there are biases for
specific linguistic structures that have no non-linguistic
analogues (Berent, Steriade, Lennertz, & Vaknin, 2007;
Culbertson, Smolensky, & Legendre, 2012; Finley, 2012;
Finley & Badecker, 2008). For example, Finley (2012)
found that adult native English speaker show a bias for
phonological patterns based on vowel height. Since vowel
height is a linguistic construct, it is hard to imagine how
such a bias could be influenced by non-linguistic factors.
Other evidence suggests that linguistic patterns may be
stored as domain-general rules. Studies of statistical
learning for speech segmentation showed similar results to
linguistic and non-linguistic materials (Aslin, Saffran, &
Newport, 1997; Saffran, Pollak, Seibel, & Shkolnik, 2007).
In addition, Finley and Christiansen (2011) showed that
adult learners can generalize a novel reduplication pattern to
from non-linguistic materials to linguistic judgments.
In addition, robust use of analogy in both linguistic and
non-linguistic learning tasks (Gentner, 2010) opens the
possibility that learners will be able to form connections
between non-linguistic patterns and linguistic patterns.
The evidence for both domain general and domain
specific learning mechanisms suggests that grammatical
principles have many influences. The goal of the present
study is to provide experimental evidence that manipulation
of nonlinguistic patterns can affect linguistic biases.
Specifically, we focus on consonant deletion, a phonological
pattern whereby a consonant will delete in the presence of
two adjacent consonants.

Biases in Consonant Deletions
Consonant deletion is a phonological pattern in which one
of two adjacent consonants delete (e.g., /depkot/ becomes

2291

/dekot/). In these consonant deletion patterns, there appears
to be a cross-linguistic preference to delete the first
consonant (Steriade, 2001; Wilson, 2001). In Diola Fogny,
when two consonants combine as a result of morphological
concatenation, the first consonant deletes (e.g., /let+ku+jaw/
 [lekujaw] ‘they won’t go’) (Sapir, 1975; Wilson, 2000,
2001). Wilson (2001) argues that the second consonant is in
a perceptually stronger position (onset), while the first
consonant is in a perceptually weaker position (coda). If a
rule requires deletion of a consonant, speakers will choose
to delete the weaker one. A perceptually weak consonant is
more likely to be misheard or not heard at all, meaning that
over time (diachronically), that consonant may be
categorically deleted from the lexical item (Steriade, 2001,
2009).
Finley (2011b) provided evidence that the preference for
C1 deletion over C2 deletion is synchronic and present in
speakers of English (a language that does not have regular
consonant cluster deletion). In this experiment, monolingual
English speaking participants were given a two-alternative
forced choice test in which participants chose between two
triads. In one triad, the first consonant was deleted (e.g.,
/bep, dok, bedok/). In another triad, the second consonant
was deleted (e.g., /bep, dok, bepok/). Participants were more
likely to choose the triads where the first consonant deleted
(based on the criteria to choose which triad was more likely
to belong to a ‘real’ language). This result suggests that
participants prefer to delete the perceptually weak pattern,
despite no exposure to this pattern in the native language.

Sources of Linguistic Biases
While it is agreed that linguistic biases are prevalent, the
sources of such biases are not agreed upon. One possibility
is that linguistic biases are derived from pre-existing
linguistic knowledge or experience. This knowledge could
be innate (Berent, et al., 2007), or inferred indirectly
through the course of exposure to other patterns in the
language. It is also possible that a bias for a particular
linguistic pattern may have roots in domain general
cognition (Chater & Christiansen, 2010). For example,
cross-linguistic preferences to avoid changes to the first
syllable of a word may result from domain general
mechanisms (Beckman, 1998). The first and last items in a
list are the most likely to be remembered (referred to as
primacy and recency), suggesting that the first and last parts
of a word will also be easiest to remember. If beginnings of
the words are easier to remember, speakers may avoid
altering that part of the word.
One issue with discerning whether non-linguistic cues can
influence linguistic biases is that the linguistic and nonlinguistic cues often interact, and the direction of interaction
is often unclear. For example, initial syllables may be more
likely to be remembered because they are less likely to be
altered (and thus have fewer alternative forms to consider).
In addition, other linguistic cues such as stress, prominence
and volume may play also play in phonological processes,

and these different factors may vary across different
languages.
The goal of the present study is to determine whether a
non-linguistic analogue of a linguistic pattern can alter a
linguistic bias. If the non-linguistic cue can remove (or even
reverse) the linguistic bias, it suggests that non-linguistic
cues do affect how speakers perceive and interpret language.
It is important to note that if a non-linguistic cue can affect a
linguistic bias, it in no way implies that all linguistic biases
have a non-linguistic basis. However, if a linguistic bias can
be influenced by a non-linguistic cue, it opens the
possibility that domain general influences affect at least
some of the linguistic tendencies found cross-linguistically.
The present experiment makes use of the known linguistic
bias in adult English speakers for deletion of C1 in a C1-C2
consonant cluster (Finley, 2011). The present experiment
asks whether exposure to a non-linguistic analogue of C2
consonant deletion (as opposed to the preferred C1 deletion)
can reduce or reverse the bias for C1 deletion in learners.

Methods
The present study used an artificial language that contained
a non-linguistic analogue of a deletion pattern. In Finley
(2011a, 2011b), consonant deletion was induced via triads
in which two CVC (consonant-vowel-consonant) items were
combined to form a CVCVC word (e.g., /bek dof bedof/).
We created a non-linguistic analogue using sequences of
shapes with various patterns. An analogue for perceptual
dis-preference for two consonants in a row was created
using visual aesthetics. In the present experiment we treated
every consonant as a long rectangle with various patterns,
and every vowel as a circle filled with various patterns. The
fill patterns were used to create differences between the
various circles and rectangles, while maintaining a strong
sense of continuity between the shape and size of the circles.

Participants
All participants were adult native English speakers.
Eighteen participants were recruited from Elmhurst College
and the surrounding community. Each participant was given
a $10 gift card for participating. Twelve participants were
recruited from the University of Rochester community and
paid $10 cash for their participation. Twelve control
participants were recruited from the University of Rochester
community were paid $5 cash for their participation. Some
participants may have previously participated in an artificial
grammar learning experiment, but no participant had been
exposed to the stimuli or patterns used in the present
experiment. The data for two additional participants could
not be used due to malfunctions in the experimental
program.

Design
The experiment was designed to test the ability of adult
learners to extend a novel non-linguistic analogue of
consonant deletion to a linguistic version of the same task.
English speakers have been shown to prefer deletion of the

2292

first consonant of a CC consonant cluster, complying with
the general cross-linguistic tendencies (Finley, 2011b;
Wilson, 2001). Importantly, the preference shown in
English speakers appears without any prior exposure to the
pattern. In these previous studies, participants were exposed
to triads of shapes presented in the center of the screen for
1000ms. Participants were told that they would see one of
two shapes followed by the combination of the first two
shapes (participants were given a practice trial in which all
squares and circles were identical, and given a chance to ask
questions if necessary).
The patterns of the circles and squares were made in exact
analogy to a precious consonant deletion experiment in
which two CVC words were combined to form a CVCV
word (e.g., /bek/ + /dok/  /bedok/) (Finley, 2011a, 2011b).
The visual analogue treated every segment as a separate
shape. For example, /a/ was a circle with black ‘confetti’
squares, and /k/ was a rectangle filled in with a diagonal
brick pattern. Creating stimuli in this manner helped to keep
the stimuli as analogous to an experiment that used
linguistic materials. It also allowed non-linguistic materials
to be balanced similarly to linguistic materials. Examples of
the training stimuli can be found in Table 1.
Table 1: Examples of Training Stimuli.
Set 1
Set 2
Combined Form

consonant deletion shown in previous studies. The stimuli
were nearly identical to those used in previous studies of
consonant deletion (Finley, 2011a, 2011b). Participants
were told to select which of the following sets of three
sounds was most likely to be from a real language. The
sound items were presented in the same manner as the Old
and New test items, choosing between deletion of the first
consonant (C1) or the second consonant (C2) of a consonant
cluster. Each item in the two-alternative forced-choice task
was a tirad: CVC1, C2VC, CVCVC. Participants were told
that they would be hearing two sets of three non-words
where the third word was a combination of the first two
(given /tooth+brush = toothbrush/ as an example), and their
job was to select which set of three non-words they
preferred.
Table 2: Example Old and New Test Items
Set 1
Set 2
Combined Form
Old
Second
Deleted
(Correct)
First
Deleted
(Incorrect)
New
Second
Deleted
(Correct)

Training consisted of 24 triads repeated five times each in a
random order. Immediately following exposure, participants
were given a two-alternative forced choice test in two parts.
The first part tested knowledge of the non-linguistic pattern,
with examples found in Table 2. The second part tested
biases towards C1 deletion in a linguistic consonant deletion
pattern, with examples in Table 3.
Old Items The first type of test item specifically tested the
learner’s ability to recognize which of the rectangles was
deleted in the exposure items. A participant could respond
correctly to these items by remembering the specific items
in the exposure set.
New Items The second type of test item used novel shape
items. A participant could respond correctly to these items if
they extend the pattern seen during exposure to novel items.
Sound Items The third type of test item was designed to
assess whether participants who were exposed to the visual
deletion pattern would show the same bias towards first-

First
Deleted
(Incorrect)
All stimuli were designed so that the final consonant of
the first CVC word was different from the first consonant of
the second CVC word. For example, [pik ket] was not a
possible pair of words in the experiment because it would be
impossible to tell which consonant was deleted. Consonants
were drawn from the set [p, t, k, b, d, g, s, f, z, v, m, n], and
vowels were drawn from the set [a, i, e, o, u] Examples of
Sound Items can be found in Table 3.
The Sound stimuli were recorded by an adult female
native speaker of English in a sound attenuated booth at
12,000 Hz. Stress was placed on the first syllable using
standard English pronunciation, with the exception that no
vowels were reduced, meaning though all syllables
contained partial stress (as English reduces unstressed
syllables). All stimuli items were normalized for intensity
(set at 70dB) using Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2005).
There were 12 Old Items, 12 New Items and 30 Sound
Items (however, a glitch in a group of participants caused

2293

several participants to hear a random set of 20 of the 30
sound items). The Old and New test items were presented
together in a random order, before the Sound Items. The
items in each test condition were balanced such that half of
the items showed deletion of the first consonant/rectangle
first, while the other half of the items showed deletion of the
second consonant/rectangle first.

t(26)=1.15, p=0.26. Because the experiment was concerned
with whether exposure to the non-linguistic deletion pattern
would change the bias towards C1 deletion in the consonant
test, we compared the responses to the Sound Test Items
between the Control and the Experimental Condition. There
was a significant difference, t(37) = 2.45, p = 0.019.
Figure 1: Overall Results: Means and Standard Errors.

Table 3: Sound Item Examples.
CVC 1 CVC 2
Second Deleted
(Non-Linguistic Bias)

div

nup

Combined
Form
divup

First Deleted
(Linguistic Bias)

div

nup

dinup

Second Deleted
(Non-Linguistic Bias)

kaf

gez

kafez

First Deleted
(Linguistic Bias)

kaf

gez

kagez

All phases of the experiment were run in Psyscope X
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). Participants
were given both written and verbal instructions. The entire
experiment took approximately 20 minutes.
Results
Proportion of Set2/C2 deletion responses for all three
different test items are given in Figure 1, with numerical
values for means and standard deviations in Table 4.
Table 4: Means (and Standard Deviations).
Condition
Old
New Sounds
Control
0.53
0.47 0.37
(0.10) (0.11) (0.11)
Experimental
(Old Items
Above Chance)

0.78
(0.11)

0.78
(0.18)

0.63
(0.26)

Experimental
(Old Items
Below Chance)

0.46
(0.059)

0.47
(0.14)

0.44
(0.21)

One possibility for the failure to find a significant difference
between the Sound test items and chance (in the one-sample
t-test) was that some participants failed to learn the nonlinguistic pattern or remember the items heard in training.
One cannot expect the non-linguistic pattern to have any
effect on the linguistic pattern without learning the pattern
(or at least recognizing the items heard in training). For this
reason, we divided participants in the Experimental
Condition into two groups: those that scored above 50% in
the Old Items, and those that scored 50% (chance) or below
in the Old Items. Of the 27 participants in the Control
Condition, 17 scored above chance in the Old Items, and 10
scored at or below chance. These are presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Results with Participants in Experimental
Condition: Separated by Response Rate: Means and
Standard Errors

We compared the results for the experimental condition to
the Control condition by a 2x3 mixed design ANOVA. We
found a significant effect of Training (F(1, 37) = 10.89, p =
0.002), a significant effect of Test (F(2, 74) = 7.13, p =
0.001), and no interaction, F<1.
In order to test whether the bias existed in the Controls,
and whether the bias was reversed in the Experimental
condition, we compared the responses to 50% chance via
one-sample t-tests. The results were significant for the
Control condition t(11)=4.33, p=0.0012 (in that the Control
condition was significantly below chance), but the results
were not significant for the Experimental Condition,

The participants who scored at or below chance for Old
Items showed results very similar the Control Condition.
When compared to the Control Condition via ANOVA, we
found no effect of Training (F<1), a marginal effect of Test
(F(1, 40) = 3.00, p = 0.061) and no interaction (F(1, 40) =
1.64, p = 0.21). When the Sounds Test items were

2294

compared to 50% chance via one-sample t-tests, there was a
marginally significant effect, t(16)=2.04, p=0.0585. Of the
17 participants who scored above chance for Old Items,
three participants scored below 40% C2 deletion in the
Sound Items. For this minority of participants, exposure to
the non-linguistic pattern did not affect the bias. However,
the majority of the 17 participants showed C2 deletion at a
rate greater than that of the mean of the Control condition.

Discussion
The results of the present study demonstrate that linguistic
biases can be reduced or altered due to exposure to nonlinguistic material. These results have important
implications for cognitive science. First, it suggests that
biases found for linguistic patterns are malleable. Different
experiences can prime the listener to expect different types
of linguistic stimuli, and therefore diminish a pre-existing
bias. This means that an innate bias for a particular
linguistic structure could be overridden if provided with
exposure to the right kinds of data. This may help to create a
theory of linguistic biases that can account for the fact that
there are exceptions to almost every posited linguistic
universal (Evans & Levinson, 2009).
Second, the results support a theory in which linguistic
and non-linguistic data interact. In understanding the
domain specificity of language, one must understand what
aspects of language interact with non-linguistic cognition, as
well as the mechanisms that control this interaction. The
results of the present study provide an insight into this
question. In the present study, the non-linguistic deletion
pattern had a direct analogue to the consonant deletion
pattern. This direct analogy allowed participants in the
Experimental Condition to interpret the linguistic material
differently than participants in the Control condition.
A proposed analysis of the influence of linguistic
experiences, non-linguistic experience, and linguistic biases
on linguistic biases is presented in Figure 3.
Figure 3: The interactive of linguistic experiences, nonlinguistic experiences and linguistic biases on linguistic
judgments.

Linguistic judgments are affected by our linguistic
experiences; native English speakers are able to make
judgments about English due to their exposure to English.
Linguistic judgments are also affected by biases that are
independent of language exposure, such as the bias for C1
deletion over C2 deletion found in the control condition.

The Experimental condition demonstrated that nonlinguistic experiences can affect linguistic judgments. The
non-linguistic experience pushed the participants away from
a bias towards C1 deletion. The mechanism proposed in
Figure 3 also allows for interaction between linguistic and
non-linguistic experiences, as well as an integration between
linguistic biases and linguistic experiences. Non-linguistic
experiences affect the type of language you are exposed to,
and linguistic biases affect the likelihood that you will learn
and be exposed to certain types of linguistic materials
(Finley, 2012).
The diagram in Figure 3 also allows for individual
differences in when non-linguistic experiences will affect
linguistic judgments. When non-linguistic experiences and
linguistic biases are in conflict (as in the present
experiment), biases may trump non-linguistic experiences
for some individuals. A small majority of participants in the
Experimental condition showed a bias for C1 deletion,
despite learning the non-linguistic pattern. This suggests
that analogy from non-linguistic to linguistic patterns do not
occur for everyone.
Third, the present experiment demonstrates that language
and thought interact, and that the direction of interaction can
go from non-linguistic patterns to linguistic patterns. The
question of language and thought need not extend only to
whether language affects thought, but whether nonlinguistic patterns can affect how language is perceived
language. The present experiment demonstrates that our
non-linguistic experiences can affect how we perceive
language.
One question that remains for future research is to
understand when non-linguistic patterns may affect
linguistic judgments in real-world situations. The present
experiment made an arbitrary analogy between consonant
deletion and shape deletion. Such direct analogies are rarely
found in the real world. Given that patterns in language tend
to be abstract and arbitrary, it is difficult to find a nonlinguistic pattern that can be directly linked to language.
One possibility may lie within the cognitive and linguistic
development of infants and young children. As children
learn patterns in their behavior and the behavior of others,
they may use those patterns to help learn linguistic patterns.
Conversely, children may use their ability to learn patterns
to help learn both non-linguistic cognitive skills, as well as
linguistic skills. For example, Dessalegen and Landau
(2008) demonstrated that children can use labels to solve
otherwise difficult non-linguistic tasks. In addition, the
robust use of analogy in learning (Gentner, 2010), suggests
that learners are capable of analogy from linguistic to nonlinguistic material and vice versa. Future research will work
to formalize when and how this analogy occurs.
The results of the present experiment provide further
evidence for interaction between linguistic and nonlinguistic patterns. Human learners have a remarkable
ability to use analogy to extend a pattern from a nonlinguistic domain to a linguistic domain. Despite the fact
that English speakers (as well as speakers of several other

2295

languages) show a bias towards C1 deletion, this bias was
reduced after exposure to a pattern in which the nonlinguistic analogue of C2 was deleted (as opposed to an
analogue of C1).

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Patricia Reeder, Elissa
Newport, Emily Kasman, Morgan Smith, Elizabeth
Wiemers and Elizabeth Jennings, members of the AslinNewport Lab. In addition, we would like to thank the
Elmhurst College Psychology Department, the University of
Rochester Brain and Cognitive Science Department,
particularly the participants at Elmhurst College. The author
assumes all responsibility for any errors. Funding was
provided by a grant from Elmhurst College, NIH grant
DC00167 to E. Newport, HD37082 to R. Aslin & E.
Newport, and NIH training grant T32DC000035.

References
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. (1997).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by
8-month-old infants. Psychological Science, 9,
321-324.
Beckman, J. N. (1998). Positional faithfulness. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, UMass Amherst.
Berent, I. (2012). The phonological mind. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Berent, I., Steriade, D., Lennertz, T., & Vaknin, V. (2007).
What we know about what we have never heard:
Evidence from perceptual illusions. Cognition,
104(3), 591-630.
Boersma, P., & Weenink. (2005). Praat: Doing phonetics by
computer.
Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2010). Language
acquisition meets language evolution. Cognitive
Science, 34, 1131-1157.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive
environment
for
designing
psychology
experiments. Behavioral Research Methods,
Instruments and Computers, 25, 257-271.
Culbertson, J., Smolensky, P., & Legendre, G. (2012).
Learning biases predict a word order universal.
Cognition, 122, 306-329.
Dessalegen, B., & Landau, B. (2008). More than meets the
eye: The role of language in binding and
maintaining feature conjunctions. Psychological
Science, 19(2), 189-195.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance
for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences,
32(5),
429-492.
doi:
10.1017/S0140525X0999094X
Finley, S. (2011a). Generalization to novel consonants in
artificial grammar learning. In L. Carlson, C.
Hölscher & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Cognitive Science Society Annual

Meeting (pp. 3268-3273). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Finley, S. (2011b). Perecptual biases in consonant deletion.
Proceedings of the XVII Proceedings of the
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences
(ICPhS XVII).
Finley, S. (2012). Typological asymmetries in round vowel
harmony: Support from artificial grammar
learning. Language and Cognitive Processes,
27(10), 1550-1562.
Finley, S., & Badecker, W. (2008). Analytic biases for
vowel harmony languages. WCCFL, 27, 168-176.
Finley, S., & Christiansen, M. H. (2011). Multimodal
transfer of repetition patterns in artificial grammar
learning. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher & T. Shipley
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 330-335).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science,
34, 752-775.
Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow. (2003). Whither Whorf. In
D. Gentner & Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in
mind: Advances in the study of language and
thought (pp. 3-14). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pinker, S., & Jackendoff, R. (2009). The components of
language: What’s specific to language, and what’s
specific to humans? In M. H. Christiansen, C.
Collins & S. Edelman (Eds.), Language Universals
(pp. 126-151). New York: Oxford University Press.
Saffran, J. R., Pollak, S. D., Seibel, R. L., & Shkolnik, A.
(2007). Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule learning
is not specific to language. Cognition, 105(3), 669680. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2006.11.004
Sapir, J. D. (1975). Big and thin: two Diola-Fogny metalinguistic terms. Language in Society, 4, 1-15.
Steriade, D. (2001). Directional asymmetries in place
assimilation: A perceptual account. In E. Hume &
K. Johnson (Eds.), The Role of Speech Perception
in Phonology (pp. 219-250). London: Academic
Press.
Steriade, D. (2009). The Phonology of perceptibility effects:
the P-map and its consequences for constraint
organization. In K. Hanson & S. Inkelas (Eds.),
The Nature of the Word: Studies in Honor of Paul
Kiparsky (pp. 151-180). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought and reality.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wilson, C. (2000). Targeted constraints: An approach to
contextual neutralization in Optimality Theory.
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
Wilson, C. (2001). Consonant cluster neutralisation and
targeted constraints. Phonology, 18, 147-197.

2296

