UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The case of cognitive ecology for cognitive processes in everyday life situations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7hx772bw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Kristiansson, Mattias

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The case of cognitive ecology for cognitive processes in everyday life situations
Mattias Kristiansson
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University
SE-58183 Linköping, Sweden

Abstract
Cognitive ecology is a term that has been used in
environments that are more tightly coupled and purposespecific than environments of everyday life. In this paper I
consider cases from a cognitive ethnography of older adults.
These cases show the analytical use of understanding the
diachronic and synchronic cognitive ecology in which
cognitive processes of everyday life occur. Specifically I
discuss how the social and physical ecology and changes in
these can shape goals, the use of cognitive artifacts and the
use of other cognitive resources in agent environments that
are not as purpose created and not as tightly coupled as
environments of previous studies in this field.
Keywords: Cognitive ecology; distributed cognition;
everyday life; older adults

Introduction
This paper elaborates on the notion of a cognitive ecology
applied to the domain of older adults coping with cognitive
problems and situations in everyday life. Examples from a
cognitive ethnography of older adults will be analyzed. The
reason for doing this is to shed some light on what a
cognitive ecology can be in a social and physical
environment that is not as tightly coupled or information
dense as the cases where the concept of cognitive ecology
have been used previously. By focusing on older adults I
hope to understand how circumstances in everyday life can
constrain, shape and alter the use of certain cognitive
strategies that assist and therefore become important for the
understanding of the cognitive process. This analysis will
have a specific focus on ecology, as contrasted to the idea
that the agent actively shapes the cognitive process. I
believe this is important because it allows us to understand
the role of the active agent more firmly in an environment
that often is not as tightly structured, with a specific goal or
purpose as a navigational bridge (Hutchins, 1995) or an
early modern theatre (Tribble, 2011). First I turn to the
concept of cognitive ecology and then I briefly turn to the
tension between the idea that individuals contribute to the
cognitive process and the idea that cognitive process are
shaped by the circumstances. Finally several aspects of
cognitive ecologies through the light of examples from the
conducted cognitive ethnography are discussed.

Cognitive ecology
The understanding of cognition in relationship to
environmental factors has now been a prominent
undertaking in cognitive science for a while. The term
“cognitive ecology” is now occasionally used to describe

the study of cognition in context, emphasizing the general
notion that cognition is something taking place and
developing in an ecology that constrains, alters and forms
cognitive processes (Hutchins, 2010a; Tribble & Sutton,
2011; Tribble, 2011). Tribble (2011, p.151) held that the
idea of distributed cognition and the approach of cognitive
ecology are basically the same. I will not here assess this
statement, but in this paper I view it as a continuum between
what can be seen as a distributed cognitive process and what
formed, constrained, or altered this process. In this paper I
want to focus on the latter aspect. “Cognitive ecology” has
mostly been used in the field of animal cognition where the
focus is on how the ecology shapes intracranial cognitive
process (Dukas & Ratcliffe, 2009). In this paper I use the
term cognitive ecology to explain something that also
shapes processes that incorporates both intracranial and
extracranial resources.
Hutchins (2010a) notes that cognitive ecology both can
be viewed from a synchronic perspective (that is functional
relationships in the present), and a diachronic perspective
(that is cognition as development of cognitive ecologies).
Much of the research into this field has focused on what
goes on in the present without saying much about the
developmental aspect of the cognitive process or mediated
action (Sutton, Harris, Keil, & Barnier, 2010; Wertsch,
1998). This difference is important because what can
constrain the use of resources is not always found in the
present, “on the spot” (Hutchins, 2010b). We live and are
shaped by cultural practices that to some extent determine
the ways we “do things”. Clark (2008) also emphasizes the
understanding of interaction between different systems and
specifically the continuous reciprocal causation between
these systems. A key foundation for these related principles
is the understanding of how the processes of constraining,
altering and forming cognitive processes occur. For
instance, why does someone use a particular artifact in a
certain way? The answer can be found outside the individual
and the specifics of the artifact.
Cognitive ecology suggests a unit of analysis that focuses
on “units defined in terms of dynamic patterns of correlation
across elements” (Hutchins, 2010a, p.705). What the correct
unit of analysis should be to explain cognitive phenomenon
is therefore not given before we have some understanding of
the synchronic and diachronic ecology of where the
phenomenon takes place.
Tribble (2011) used an ecological approach when she
studied and historically analyzed theatre practices in the
English renaissance theatre. The objective for her analysis
was to explain the impressive performance of individuals

2778

performing up to six different plays in a week with irregular
and limited practicing time. One explanation of such a fact
could easily be that these people had amazing memory
abilities. But she proposed a larger dynamical model of this
memory performance where it is important to understand
the ecological differences that exist between theatre
practices today and theatre practice back then. Back then
“much preparation was individual, facilitated by the
individual parts containing only the character’s lines and his
cues.” (p.14). Much of this success was also facilitated by
the ecological niche of the physical and social environment,
where for instance parts were written to suit less
experienced actors.
In her analysis she introduces the term “cognitive thrift”,
which is a principle that suggests that in a highly cognitively
demanding environment, such as the theatre in this era,
“every incentive would have been to minimize any
additional cognitive burdens” (Tribble, 2011, p.32). In her
conclusion she notes that cognitive ecologies “place more or
less weight in internal mechanisms, on central control, or on
particular forms of cognitive artifacts and social systems”
(p.153). It can be argued that doing comparative studies of
cognitive ecologies allow cognitive scientists to understand
the relative contribution of different parts of a system to
uphold reasonable performance.
In the case of healthy older adults coping with everyday
life, it is not as easy to say that this is a highly cognitively
demanding environment. Older adults cope well with
everyday life in comparison with their performance in labsettings, and one suggested explanation of this is that older
adults seldom need to perform at their cognitive maximum
in their normal life (Salthouse, 2012). How something as a
cognitive ecology works in a setting where performance in a
specific way is not often as demanding is to my knowledge
rather unexplored. A term such as “cognitive thrift” might
not apply in this context. This is because when we talk
about cognitive ecology and distributed cognition we often
do so in the domain of so called cognitively rich
environments where a slight change in the ecology can
profoundly shape the process and the performance.
The question that follows is what a cognitively rich
environment is? In the case of early modern theatre or on a
navigational bridge it can be interpreted as a measure of
how much information that flow across various media,
which directly relates to the problem at hand. How densely
does the information flow across the various (tightly
coupled) media to solve problems in everyday life is for me
still an open question. Neither can we easily say that the
environments and processes that take place within these
environments of everyday life are task specific since these
environments often have multiple purposes. How a
cognitive ecology can form, constrain and alter cognitive
processes and to some extent predict (according to some
measure) successful performance in the lives of older adults
would not necessarily be based on the same principles as in
the highly demanding environments.

The ecology as opposed to the active individual
As noted above, one point made by Tribble (2011) is that
even though memory demands were high in the early
modern theatre practices, much of this taxing work was not
solely placed on individual cognitive abilities. Much of this
pressure was left to various aspects of the overall physical
and social system of the theatre in work. The tension
between the idea of an active individual and a shaping
society or environment has been around for some time in
various scientific fields (Wertsch, 1998). In cognitive
science many have argued that too much emphasis has been
put on the individual, placing to many cognitive abilities
simply inside the skull as default (c.f. Hutchins, 1995).
Wertsch (1998) argues that this is a question without an
obvious answer since answers to this question are often not
based on empirical grounds. In this paper I use one side of
this dichotomy, the circumstances that shape, as an
analytical tool to understand important aspects of the
process.
Wertsch (1998), by adopting the “pentad” proposed by
Burke (1969), uses a further elaborate analytical tool in his
focus on mediated action as the unit of analysis. The pentad
consists of act, scene, agent, agency, purpose, or in
Wertsch:s words “What? Where? Who? How? and Why?”
(p.13). The point is not that these are true reflections of
reality; it is rather that they are tools for the interpretation of
reality. Focusing on mediated action can be understood as
emphasizing certain parts of the pentad and de-emphasizing
other parts. The scene is for instance not included much in
an analysis of mediated actions (Wertsch, 1998). But on the
other hand Wertsch argues that focusing on mediated action
allows us to be in the middle of an individual and
collective/distributed perspective. The agent and her
mediational tools (see cognitive tools) are irreducible to
each other in terms of the action. In my examples below I
will use the idea of a scene as something that realizes and in
a true sense constrains and alters the cognitive process in
certain directions and therefore also sometimes alters the
mediated action. The scene is here part of the cognitive
ecology that Tribble uses in her analysis.
Wertsch (1998) also focuses on the fact that mediational
tools have often been developed for other purposes than the
reasons they are used for in the present. Therefore he
emphasizes investigation of both consumption of
mediational means and production of mediational means.
Regarding the production of mediational tools he notes that
tools are often borrowed from other sociocultural contexts
and that the processes of what he calls a spin-off of actions
with certain mediational tools are not always developed
from a clear purpose of an inventor.
Even if we in this description find the notion of an agent
that borrows and produce mediational tools, the idea of the
pentad suggests that we can analyze what is not physically
part of the agent and the tool and say something about how
the agent and her mediational tools became orchestrated in
an action or in a distributed cognitive process.

2779

The role of the individual can theoretically be pictured as
a continuum from a top-down driven agent to a bottomdriven agent to factors that stand outside the role of the
agent but still support the cognitive process. Clark (2006)
talks about ecological control as something we do when we
do not micromanage every point in the process but still
search for opportunities. When we do not micromanage the
process, much of what constrain the process is outside the
individual’s scope of control. Certain processes have been
developed to suit certain ecologies. To illustrate this I now
turn to cases from a conducted cognitive ethnography of
elderly people.

Ethnography of everyday life
Previous research in cognitive aging suggests that older
adults actually do have an active role in their compensatory
practices for declining memory abilities (c. f. Frias, Dixon,
& Bäckman, 2003). Through self-reports older adults often
report that they adopt external memory aids and cooperation
with social others (c. f. Cavanaugh, Grady, & Perlmutter,
1983; Frias et al., 2003). With such premises, even though
they are based on self-reports, it is worth asking to what
extent such a wide unit of analysis as cognitive ecology is
applicable and at all important in these kinds of less
problem-centered environments.
The material referred to below was collected as part of a
cognitive ethnography during the summer of 2010. The
scenery of this is in the home healthcare system where I
worked as a healthcare assistant. Within this context I
conducted interviews outside the role as an assistant, and
observation in the role as an assistant. Most of the
participants had normal cognitive functioning for their age
and some had diagnosed memory declines. The specifics for
each case are provided with the examples (but for more
information see Dahlbäck, Kristiansson, and Stjernberg,
2013).
The following sections are categorized according to
conclusions I can draw from the specific examples
presented, together with the overall material collected in
relationship to earlier theorizing in cognitive ecology
(Hutchins, 2010a; Tribble, 2011) and earlier presented ideas
of Wertsch (1998).
First I consider the general case that environmental
factors together can enact certain cognitive processes.
Second I relate cognitive ecologies of everyday life in
relationship to the use of cognitive artifacts. Third I discuss
the social nature of everyday life and how these social
circumstances form cognitive processes. Fourth I note that
the ecology can form the goal of cognitive processes and
last I discuss how we can understand diachronic processes
by understanding how ecologies shape cognitive processes.

Environmental factors enact the nature of cognitive
processes
A is 91 years old with a normal cognitive decline for his
age. He has problems with hearing and particularly seeing.

(All examples in this paper are verbatim translations from
Swedish from my original field notes.)
“He tells me that he goes to the grocery store almost
every day: “there is always something you need and there is
also a seating arrangement where there is always someone
you know from previous work places”. […] When I ask him
if he writes shopping lists he says that he doesn’t and that
he remembers everything in his head. He pictures how he
usually goes through the important places in his home
before he goes to the store, checking whether something is
missing.” (Excerpt from A)
His troubles with seeing were apparent at other times
during this interview. The case notes how processes of
remembering can be (a) constrained, in this case by his
seeing impairment, (b) altered, by the fact that he lives
rather close by the grocery store and (c) motivated by the
fact that going to the store (almost) every day also has a
social incentive. If his cognitive ecology would have been
different in terms of social network, physical surrounding
and limitations, his processes of remembering could have
been distributed differently.
A is also aided by his routine of going through the usual
places in his home where things often are missing. By doing
this he provides himself with a mental anchor for
remembering what was missing at the particular places at
home. Partly because he more likely can recall what he
found missing, but also because certain places constrain
what he can possibly need. In a sense he has invented the
method of loci himself. This together with the fact that he
goes to the store almost every day makes his process of
purchasing groceries a resilient one (c. f. Hollnagel, Woods,
& Leveson, 2006). His strategy works rather well in this
specific ecology.
Doing ethnography in the context of the home healthcare
services creates a special kind of cognitive ecology. This is
because the ethnographer is in many cases part of the
cognitive process. Since distributed cognition emphasizes
the social aspect of cognition being participatory shapes the
phenomenon that we try to investigate. Consider the next
entry.
“A large part to achieve the smoothest possible
performance is to know by heart what routines apply to
what person. Of course there is a general routine of logging
into the system, saying hi etc. […] But to do it as smoothly
as possible you need to know what the home environment
looks like and the viewpoint of this service from the
perspective of the person. Where should the socks hang?
Where is the medicine locker? How do you prepare a
sandwich in the correct way? (Excerpt from B)
This case is also a about the order of doing things. The
smoothest possible performance is about coordinating work
and to together remember what to do where, in what order,
when. “She didn’t recognize me because it was the first time
I was there. She started pointing at the medicine locker and
asked if I had the keys. […] When I told her that I had the
keys she rose and walked to the other room, apparently to

2780

let me take off the socks before taking the medicine”.
(Excerpt from B)
Notice how the information of me having the keys
initiates a more complex routine where the medicine is not
the first goal of the routine. Even if this entry is also about
how the work environment taxes the cognitive processes of
the worker it also highlights an interesting cognitive ecology
where it is important that all actors have a somewhat similar
picture of how the activity should develop. If this shared
picture is not the case this is indeed a cognitively
demanding situation for both parts. But here the ecology of
the home healthcare services provides with some structure
regarding the predetermined goals of the assistance that the
assistant know and can use to adapt to the circumstances of
the visit. The receiver also adapts and initiates question, but
overall the situation in the case above is cognitively taxing
since the ecology is not as when the more experienced
workers arrive.
In the case of B (as perhaps opposed to A) the practice
between a home healthcare assistant and the healthcare
receiver is a rather predefined practice with certain goals,
which have been established over several iterations of the
service across several assistants. The receiver has adopted a
general routine that works in the ecology of this service, a
kind of a “cognitive thrift”. The routinized coordinated
practice is in this sense more equal to how the cognitive
ecology is shaping the cognitive processes on a navigational
bridge or in a theatre.

How the cognitive ecology can shape the roles of
artifacts
The case of C below shows something similar to the case
of the home healthcare setting above, but this case also
shows how the role of a cognitive artifact, in this case a
shopping list, are given an unspecified or a degraded role
when used in a new cognitive ecology. This entry is from
the first time she receives shopping assistance due to a
physical problem.
“C uses a shopping list for the shopping session. She
makes it clear that it is important for her that she
remembers paracetamol as she has none at home and is in
some pain. She constantly consults the shopping list to
remind herself where to go. In the end, we cannot find
paracetamol. I am not used to this supermarket, so I am of
no help. She stops and asks a worker, who tells her that it is
to be found after the check-out. She wants me to remind her
if she forgets. After the check-out she has indeed forgotten,
so I remind her.” (Excerpt from C)
From the perspective of Wertsch (1998) the mediated
remembering through this shopping list has been
transformed to a mediated remembering both through the
shopping list and a social other. Using the perspective of a
cognitive ecology makes it possible to predict that we need
to view this activity from different units of analysis.
Information is propagated mostly between the subject and
her shopping list and also between the subject and her
assistant; but also to a lesser degree between the assistant

and C:s shopping list. The idea that artifacts exist with a
functional relationship to their ecology has also been noted
by Garbis (2002) that studied a tightly coupled cooperative
process management setting. Remember that the task
described above as defined through the home healthcare
service was not about remembering things, it was about the
physical challenge grocery shopping entails. But
nevertheless the activity provides a certain kind of cognitive
ecology that provides certain kinds of resources, that in this
case inevitably creates a kind of process.
It is possible to view this process from two perspectives.
One is that the individual must be active in this process,
choosing resources and utilizing the resources sufficiently to
perform reasonable good. The other, as noted, is to
emphasize the circumstances that give rise to the role and
utilization of resources.
“D has memory problems and cannot always remember
whether the home healthcare personnel have been on their
visit to her, so she keeps the used time and day-specific
plastic medicine envelope on her kitchen table after it has
been used as a way of helping her to assure herself that they
have been there that day. For this visit, she comes running
after me as I am about to throw away the plastic envelope in
the bin.” (Excerpt from D)
The case is that this envelope has information so that it
works as memory trace of previous activities. In this case it
is worth noting, despite her memory problems, the active
role of D to achieve good performance (Dahlbäck et al.,
2013). She takes a cognitive artifact developed for one
purpose and uses it in a different context for a different
purpose (compare Wertsch, 1998).
But again this is also in a relationship to the cognitive
ecology and how it realizes the use of an artifact in an
efficient way. The experienced and the inexperienced home
healthcare worker create different cognitive ecologies taxing
mental resources of parts of the system differently. Under
normal circumstances this cognitive system is a rather stable
one. On the other hand part of the normal cognitive ecology
is that there are different agents in operation creating a
normal variation in the system. Another thing about the
ecology in this case that is worth noting is that she comes
running when she hears me throwing away the plastic
envelope. She lives in a relatively small apartment and can
therefore not be too far away from the action taking place.
In this case she hears a sound from the bin that usually is
not there. The artifacts in the cases of C and D have certain
existences due to ecological factors.

The social happenstance
I have already talked about the understanding of the
cognitive process in the home healthcare services as a
special kind of ethnography since the ethnographer is
literally part of the cognitive process. In cases when people
have a pronounced cognitive decline, that idea is not very
strange since they are in the home healthcare system for that
reason. But most of the time (at least in this specific unit)
people are not in the home healthcare system because of

2781

cognitive problems, but for a variety of physical problems.
The point is that much of what in specific situations has
formed the cognitive process is not always part of the
cognitive process, but can be considered part of the
cognitive ecology.
Consider the case of E, who each morning calls a few of
her sisters to simply update the status of their lives. The fact
that this happens each day tells us that they are rather good
at keeping track of each other. The routine gives an arena
for distributed processes of remembering. The fact that they
are calling each other each morning and having a social
environment that allows for such communication is part of
their cognitive ecology. This is a kind of cognitive arena
since it likely shapes the nature of the communication,
which in turn shapes the distributed processes as they arise.
In a similar way we could view the case of C. In an
interview with A I asked him in relation to his seeing
problems what happens when they re-arrange in the grocery
store, whereupon he quickly answers that “there is always
someone that you can ask about the location of things”. In
the future detailed studies of situations where the social
arena works as a resource can be of importance if we want
to understand how individuals utilize this arena sufficiently.

to the grocery shopping, perfect recall. The point here,
similar to what Tribble (2011) noted, is that the social and
cultural environment to some extent determines what “the
smoothest possible performance” is. This is also an example
of how the understanding of the mediated action gives
insight to the nature of the purpose of the action (Wertsch,
1998).
Consider once again the case of A. What would happen if
A would have a longer way to the grocery store? An
apparent consequence would be that A:s physical limitations
would be strained and therefore he may decide to not go to
the store at all. But imagine that he still would manage
despite the larger physical demand, and perhaps decide to
walk there every second day. Would not his cognitive
processes be composed in a different way? It would at least
change what the smoothest possible performance would be.
If one had a long road to the grocery store one would not as
likely want to forget to buy something. Further, if the goal
of the activity changes, the process will likely also change.
Perhaps his loci-inspired remembering would be backed up
with a shopping list despite his problems with seeing. This
is of course an imagined world, but not an unlikely world.

Cues of a diachronic process
The smoothest possible performance
Part of understanding the ecology of cognitive
phenomenon is to understand what a reasonable
performance is for the particular subject or group. In the
English Renaissance theatre it was the “smoothest possible
performance” and not necessarily perfect recall (Tribble,
2011). In the case of A above it is possible that the
smoothest possible performance is not to perfectly recall all
the groceries needed each day. For A, depending on the
importance of the grocery, forgetting to buy something one
day includes a new possibility to remember to purchase it
the next day. A process-oriented view on memory deemphasizes the product of what to remember. To understand
how humans remember we need to look on the process of
remembering (c. f. Dixon, 1999). One important aspect of
this is that this is from the perspective of the scientist
conducting her research. The product from the subjective
perspective in real-life settings can in a very true sense be
the most important aspect. Consider the case of E.
“E has an appointment at the podiatrist. She has a note
from the podiatrist which she has posted on her fridge. She
has turned the note around and written the date again,
though bigger this time. She has also noted this in her
calendar, located on the kitchen table. This calendar is
always located on the kitchen table. For some unknown
reason, the dates have gotten mixed up, and the wrong date
has been transferred to her calendar.” (Excerpt from E)
This is an interesting example since it shows the usage of
different external sources for the same information. We can
note that remembering appointments can be considered a
highly important task to perform perfectly on since it is
maneuvered with so many different resources. The
smoothest possible performance is in this case, as in contrast

As previously mentioned, an understudied part of
cognitive ecologies is the diachronic perspective; that is
how cognitive processes develop over time. The discussion
of B shows how the study of the ecology can give insight
into how cognitive processes develop. If one aspect of the
ecology changes the process may also do so. Consider the
next case of E:
“E demonstrates how to clean spoons discoloured by tea
with the help of baking powder. E stands by the sink while
the daughter and I are sitting by the kitchen table. […] The
daughter notices that A uses the wet spoon in the powder
container: “you can’t do that, it will ferment”. E answers
quickly, and suggests that it will not ferment and will not be
used for baking: “yes I can, because it is old baking
powder”. When E returns the container to the cupboard, the
daughter remarks that she shouldn’t place it next to the
active baking powder. E rebels against her daughter’s
suggestion and places it next to the active container. She
stops for a moment and lifts it a couple of times and says
that she will anyway pay attention to and remember by the
weight that it is the right one. The daughter remarks that at
some point the containers will be of the same weight and
they will be indistinguishable. E adds that anyway she
always tests if the powder is active before baking.”
We can view this from the perspective of cultural
practice. E has learned to clean spoons in this way and (at
least she claims) incorporated that knowledge into another
activity, baking. She does not need an external memory aid
to find the correct active baking powder. She instead
remembers the practice of testing the powder, which appears
to work instead of the daughter’s suggested strategy.
Understanding the practices of a group can predict
development of cognitive strategies over time. Certain

2782

ecologies of practices shape certain needs to develop certain
kinds of cognitive processes. In the case of E a cognitive
process is used that can resist the process of cognitive aging
rather efficiently.
Previously I have also discussed examples where we can
predict that changes in cognitive ecologies such as suddenly
being part of the home healthcare system constrain and alter
the cognitive processes. Changing the social circumstances
in general such as giving more structure or expectation of
certain activities changes the cognitive processes involved,
such as the use of an artifact for some purpose. The case of
D previously is likely the clearest example of this, where the
role of the envelope as an artifact is given two functions to
serve different components of the activity. Understanding
changes and ecological factors in people’s lives can help us
understand the diachronic aspect of cognitive processes and
possibly also predict cognitive performance in new
ecologies.

Concluding remarks
Still there is a need to understand what the differences are
between kinds of ecologies and what principles are at work
in the shaping processes of cognitive processes in everyday
life. It is still rather unexplored how distributed cognitive
processes work in a less clear purpose-driven environment,
in a less information dense environment, that are guided by
a more or less clear socially structured environment, and
that are more or less demanding for individuals. The
importance of having a cognitive process adapted to the
cognitive ecology can be different between these
environments. It can be that the role of the individual is far
more important in everyday life situations, and that the role
of the ecology is more subtle in these environments since it
is an ecology that do not shape, alter or constrain the
cognitive process as much as other ecologies.
I have used the case of older adults to show that cognitive
ecology is a useful term to understand cognitive processes in
everyday life. But I do not believe that the points made
throughout the second half of the paper are specific to older
adults. Older adults are an interesting group for many
reasons. One is that they have been investigated quite
thoroughly in lab-settings and that we know that the
prediction of lab-performance to the settings of their
everyday life is low. Cognitive ecology is one way to
understand this. But we all live in an everyday life where
the social network and the length to the grocery store to
some extent shape our cognitive processes. This paper
shows that the ecology can shape how much effort we put
into our cognitive processes, how we distribute them and
how we create routines for them in everyday life
environments.

Acknowledgements
I thank Nils Dahlbäck, Fredrik Stjernberg and two
anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback on a previous
version of this paper.

References
Burke, K. (1969). A grammar of motives. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Cavanaugh, J. C., Grady, J. G., & Perlmutter, M. (1983).
Forgetting and use of memory aids in 20 to 70 year
olds everyday life. International Journal of Aging and
Human Development, 17(2), 113–122.
Clark, A. (2006). Soft selves and ecological control. In D.
Spurrett, D. Ross, H. Kincaid, & L. Stephens (Eds.),
Distributed Cognition and the Will (pp. 101–122).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: embodiment, action,
and cognitive extension. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Dahlbäck, N., Kristiansson, M., & Stjernberg, F. (2013).
Distributed remembering through active structuring of
activities and environments. Review of Philosophy
and Psychology, 4(1), 153-165.
Dixon, R. A. (1999). Exploring cognition in interactive
situations: the aging of N + 1 minds. In T. M. Hess &
F. Blanchard-Fields (Eds.), Social Cognition and
Aging (pp. 267–290). San Diego and London:
Academic Press.
Dukas, R., & Ratcliffe, J. M. (2009). Cognitive Ecology II.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Frias, C. M. De, Dixon, R. A., & Bäckman, L. (2003). Use
of memory compensation strategies is related to
psychosocial and health indicators. The journals of
gerontology. Series B, Psychological sciences and
social sciences, 58(1), 12–22.
Garbis, C. (2002). The Cognitive Use of Artifacts in
Cooperative Process Management: Rescue
Management and Underground Line Control.
Linköping Studies in Arts and Science.
Hollnagel, E., Woods, D. D., & Leveson, N. (2006).
Resilience Engineering: Concepts and Precepts.
Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Pub Co.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (2010a). Cognitive ecology. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 2(4), 705–715.
Hutchins, E. (2010b). Enculturating the supersized mind.
Philosophical Studies, 152(3), 437–446.
Salthouse, T. (2012). Consequences of age-related cognitive
declines. Annual review of psychology, 63, 201–26.
Sutton, J., Harris, C. B., Keil, P. G., & Barnier, A. J. (2010).
The psychology of memory, extended cognition, and
socially distributed remembering. Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Sciences, 9(4), 521–560.
Tribble, E. B. (2011). Cognition in the Globe: Attention and
Memory in Shakespeare’s Theatre. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Tribble, E. B., & Sutton, J. (2011). Cognitive ecology as a
framework for shakespearean studies. Shakespeare
Studies, 39, 94–104.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind As Action. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

2783

