UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Shape in Semantic Memory Organization of Objects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34r5004t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Van Weelden, Lisanne
Schilperoord, Joost
Stewarts, Marc
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Shape in Semantic Memory Organization of Objects
Lisanne van Weelden (L.vanWeelden@uvt.nl)
Joost Schilperoord (J.Schilperoord@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (M.G.J.Swerts@uvt.nl)
Tilburg centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University,
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Diane Pecher (Pecher@fsw.eur.nl)
Department of Psychology, Erasmus University,
PO box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Abstract
Visual information contributes fundamentally to the process
of object categorization. The present study investigated
whether the degree of activation of visual information in this
process is dependent on the situational relevance of this
information. We used the Proactive Interference (PI)
paradigm. In two experiments, we manipulated the
information by which objects could be retrieved from
memory: by both semantic and shape information or by shape
information only. The pattern of PI-release showed that if
objects could be stored and retrieved both by semantic and
shape information, then shape information was overruled by
semantic information. If, however, semantic information
could not be (satisfactorily) used to store and retrieve objects,
then objects were stored in memory in terms of their shape.
Keywords: Object shape; proactive interference; memory;
categorization.

Introduction
If we observe a cat-like creature in the zoo, even if it is a
type that we have never seen before, we may classify that
animal as belonging to the same category as lions, tigers and
pumas. Presumably, the reason for doing this is that the
observed animal shares some observable properties with
those of the other cat-like animals that we remember having
seen before. Object categorization is hence a fundamental
process in constructing and using our memory, as it helps to
organize our knowledge and relate (novel) objects to other
objects in order to assign meaning to them.
This process of object categorization is driven by mental
representation. When we encounter an object, we create a
mental representation based on sensory and semantic
information. In order to categorize the object, the mental
representation is compared to a mental prototype that
represents category members (Rosch & Mervis, 1975) or to
other category exemplars in memory (Nosofsky, 1986). The
representations are compared on both sensory and semantic
information, however the relative weighting of these two
types of information varies across concepts and semantic
categories (Humphreys & Forde, 2001; Warrington &
McCarthy, 1987). For example, the shape of an animal or
the color of a fruit might be more important to assign the

object to the correct category than the shape or color of a
kettle. In the present study, we investigate the role of
sensory features in the categorization of visual objects. We
focus on the visual sensory feature shape and investigate
whether the relative weighting of shape and semantic
information affects the organization of semantic memory.
Barsalou (1999) proposed that sensory information plays
a critical role in cognition. According to his Perceptual
Symbols theory, perception, action, and cognition share
processing mechanisms. He views mental representation as
a process of sensory-motor simulation. Central in his theory
are perceptual symbols by which a mental representation is
defined. A mental representation is constructed of a
combination of several perceptual symbols for different
components of the concept. This perceptual symbol
formation process does not only concern the concept’s
visual features (e.g., its color, shape, and orientation), but
operates as well on other sensory modalities such as
audition, haptics, olfaction, and gustation. As such,
perceptual symbols are learned through actual experiences
with concepts. Modality-specific sensory-motor systems
capture such experiences and hierarchical association areas
integrate experiences from different modalities. Hence,
these association networks represent knowledge of the
concept that can be recruited for cognitive processing via
the process of simulation (i.e., mental representation).
Evidence supporting the PS theory is provided by work
that shows that visual sensory information is indeed
activated during language comprehension (e.g., Huettig &
Hartsuiker, 2008; Pecher, Van Dantzig, Zwaan, &
Zeelenberg, 2009; Pecher, Zeelenberg, & Raaijmakers,
1998; Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001; Van Dantzig, Pecher,
Zeelenberg, & Barsalou, 2008; Van Weelden, Schilperoord,
& Maes, in press; Zwaan, Stanfield, & Yaxley, 2002). For
example, Huettig and Hartsuiker (2008) showed that naming
a category exemplar (e.g., musical instrument – saxophone)
elicited eye movements to a picture of a semantically
unrelated object that was similar in shape (e.g., ladle). This
activation of visual sensory information is context related.
Zwaan, Stanfield, and Yaxley (2002) showed, for example,
that context can affect the particular shape of the object that

3639

is represented. In their experiment, participants were
presented with sentences like ‘The ranger saw the eagle in
the sky’ or ‘The ranger saw the eagle in its nest,’ which
were followed by a line drawing of the object described in
the sentence, in this case an eagle with outstretched wings
or an eagle with folded wings. Participants recognized the
picture faster if the implied shape of the object in the
sentence matched the shape of the object in the picture. In
the same line, Van Weelden, Schilperoord, and Maes (in
press) showed that sentence structure (which can define the
relation between multiple objects) influences the shape of
the represented object(s) as well. In their experiment,
participants were presented with sentences that invited to
compare two objects like ‘A spinning top is like a
ballerina,’ which were followed by two line drawings of the
objects described in the sentence. The two drawings either
had a similar or dissimilar shape. Participants recognized
the pictures faster if they were similarly shaped. Hence, a
sentence structure that invites to (conceptually) compare
two objects affects the shape of their mental representation.
While language has been shown to elicit perceptual
representations, there is also work that shows that the
opposite occurs as well, that is, that semantic information is
activated during visual object perception. Boucart and
Humphreys (1997) suggest that as a result of the strong
interplay between sensory and semantic information, people
cannot even attend selectively to the global shape of an
object without automatically processing its semantic
properties. Caramazza, Hillis, Rapp, and Romani (1990) try
to explain this interaction with their Organized Unitary
Content Hypothesis (OUCH). Their theory is based on the
idea that, contrary to a word for a particular concept, the
object itself tends not to have an arbitrary relationship to its
meaning. Some visual sensory features are directly related
to the semantic properties of the object that specify its
function (cf. Gibson's affordance theory; 1977, 1979). These
features are therefore perceptually salient. As such, shape is
very frequently a salient perceptual feature.
Accordingly, visual sensory information contributes
fundamentally to the process of object identification and
categorization. In the present study, we propose that the
degree of activation of visual information in the process of
object categorization might depend on the situational
relevance of this information (Chaigneau, Barsalou, &
Samani, 2009; Pecher et al., 1998). We define this
situational relevance as the result of the visual and semantic
relations between the objects. For example, we might
predict that when we have to look for an overarching
category for a number of presented objects, visual features,
such as shape, might play a bigger role if objects belong to
different semantic categories as compared to when they
stem from the same semantic category. Therefore, in the
present study, we investigate whether shape information is
encoded differently in our semantic memory for objects
from similar and dissimilar semantic categories.

One way to investigate how visual information is
encoded, and hence whether the objects are organized in
semantic memory by means of their shape, is by looking at
the process of retrieval of this particular information. The
encoding and retrieval of the encoded information are
interdependent; a retrieval cue will be effective if and only
if the information in the cue was generated at encoding
(Blaxton, 1989; Morris, Bransford, & Franks, 1977; Tulving
& Thomson, 1973). Hence, by examining whether the shape
of objects is used as a retrieval cue when trying to retrieve
objects from memory, we can determine whether shape
information was encoded in the semantic memory.
To do so, we use the Proactive Interference (PI) paradigm
(Wickens, 1970). Proactive interference occurs when
previously encountered information interferes with the
memorial access of more recently encountered information.
The standard procedure to test this interference is to present
a triad of items from the same semantic category and,
subsequently, have the participant perform a 25-s rehearsalpreventing task, such as a backward counting task. Then,
participants recall the triad. This procedure is repeated for
four trials. The idea is that because the items are members
of the same semantic category, the meaning of the items is
being encoded and so is the meaning of the non-presented
category under which they subsume. The PI paradigm
results in decreasing performance on the recall task as more
triads from the same semantic category are presented.
Because participants use the same category cue to recall the
items, increasing interference arises. If, however, the
semantic category shifts on the fourth (i.e., the critical) trial,
the category cue will change as well. Therefore, the
discriminability and accessibility of the items will increase,
resulting in an increased performance on the recall task.
This mechanism is called release from interference.
In previous studies, the PI paradigm has been used to
investigate the magnitude of the semantic distance between
exemplars from different semantic categories (i.e., shift
from fruits to vegetables as compared to shifts from fruits to
professions), phonemic categories (i.e., shift from words
with ‘air’ sound to ‘eye’ sound), and sensory features (i.e.,
shift from ‘round’ words to ‘white’ words) (Wickens,
Dalezman, & Eggemeier, 1976; Zinober, Cermak, Cermak,
& Dickerson, 1975). The main conclusion drawn from these
studies is that the degree of release from interference is
inversely related to the number of common characteristics.
That is, a shift between categories with a high overlap in
characteristics (i.e., from fruits to vegetables) obtains a
lower release from interference as compared to a shift
between categories with no overlapping characteristics (i.e.,
from fruits to professions).
Marques’ (2000) study showed release from interference
as a result of a shift from nonliving to living things.
Interestingly, Marques tested this living/nonliving
distinction for both words and pictures of the objects. The
visual stimuli yielded the same types of interference effects

3640

as verbal stimuli. Accordingly, this study shows that the PI
paradigm can also be used to investigate which retrieval
cues people use to recall visual objects from their memory
and, hence, which information was encoded when the visual
objects were processed.
The present study employs the PI paradigm with the
visual manipulation of object shape. We refer to shape as
the outline of the picture of a particular object, rather than
its inherent shape. We predict that if depictions of objects
are encoded in such a way as to include information about
the shape of the objects, then objects with a particular shape
should form a different category than objects with another
shape. Therefore, interference should build up as objects
with similar shapes are presented on successive trials, and a
release from interference should occur with a shift of shape.
Yet the relative weighting of shape information might differ
as a result of the situational relevance of this information. In
two experiments, we manipulate the semantic and shape
similarity between the objects and, thereby, the situational
relevance of shape. In Experiment 1, we combine a shift of
shape with a semantic shift. For this type of shift, we expect
that a semantic category cue will be sufficient to recall the
objects from the critical trial. So, for this situation, the role
of shape might be inferior. In Experiment 2, we will only
manipulate a shift of shape, keeping the semantic category
similar throughout the experiment. For this situation, we
expect shape to be a distinguishing factor and to be used as
a retrieval cue.

Experiment 1
This first experiment evaluated the role of shape in the PIrelease situation with both a shape and semantic categorical
shift. The semantic shift comprised a shift between two
natural categories, fruits and flowers. We used this type of
shift because living things are primarily differentiated on the
basis of perceptual features (Humphreys & Forde, 2001;
Warrington & McCarthy, 1987). That is, most types of
natural objects have a high perceptual overlap, and therefore
small perceptual differences are highly informative. Hence,
it can be expected that visual information will have a
relatively high weighting as compared to other types of
information in the representation of living things.
Both the participants in the Shift and No-Shift condition
received three fruits triads followed by a flower triad. In the
No-Shift condition, the shape of the fruits and flowers did
not change throughout the experiment. The objects either
were round in shape or were shaped irregularly. In the Shift
condition, however, the shape of the objects changed on the
critical trial. The critical trial established a shift from
irregularly shaped objects to round shaped objects or vice
versa.
For both the Shift and No-Shift condition, we predicted
release from interference to occur as the change from fruits
to flowers reduces or eliminates interference. However,

there may be gradual differences in the amount of release,
both as a result of the shape shift itself and the type of shape
shift. We expected the release to be most prominent for the
Shift condition as there is an additional shift of shape.
Considering the type of shape shift, we predicted the release
to be stronger when triads changed from round shaped
objects to irregularly shaped objects than the other way
around. If pictures of objects are encoded in such a way as
to include information about the shape of the objects, then
the buildup of interference is stronger for round objects,
which might result in a stronger release effect.
For the No-Shift condition, we predicted the release from
interference to be hampered when the triads of the four trials
consist of round objects. Although there was a semantic
change from fruits to flowers, the objects remained
perceptually similar. As a result, the previously seen objects
may continue to interfere with the objects presented on the
critical trail. When the triads of the four trials consist of
irregularly shaped objects, however, this interference effect
may be more moderate as the objects are not perceptually
similar. The semantic shift would then be sufficient to
eliminate such interference effects.

Method
Participants Eighty Tilburg University undergraduates (57
women) participated for course credit. The mean age was 21
years, ranging from 18 to 34.
Materials1 The stimulus pictures consisted of 18 pictures of
fruits (9 round shapes and 9 irregular shapes) and 6 pictures
of flowers (3 round shape and 3 irregular shapes). The
pictures were arranged in triads (6 for fruits and 2 for
flowers). In arranging these triads, we controlled for various
factors. For the fruits triads, we controlled for typicality. In
a typicality pretest, ten participants (who did not participate
in the future PI experiment) were asked to sort the pictures
of the objects from most typical member of the category
‘fruits’ to the least typical member of this category. Based
on this taxonomy, every fruits triad was assigned a low,
medium, and high typical member of the category. In
addition, every fruits and flowers triad consisted of three
differently colored objects. We kept the visual complexity
similar across triads in terms of mean JPEG file sizes
(Chikhman et al., 2012; Donderi, 2006).
Design The experiment had a 2 x 2 x 4
Condition (levels: Shift and No-Shift) and
(levels: Round shape and Irregular shape)
subjects factors and Trial (levels: 1, 2, 3, and
subjects factor.

1

design, with
Triad Shape
as between4) as within-

See dcilab.uvt.nl/LisanneVanWeelden/materials.pdf for the
materials of Experiment 1 and 2.

3641

Procedure The participants were informed that the purpose
of the experiment was to test their ability on both backward
counting and their memory of triads of objects. During each
trial, participants first saw a fixation cross in the center of
the screen for 2 s. Subsequently, the objects of one triad
were presented one-by-one for 2 s each (with no interstimulus interval). Participants were instructed to identify
the objects silently, to remember them, and also to
remember the order of the objects. They were told that they
had to recall the objects in the right order afterwards. A
three-digit number was then presented in the middle of the
screen for 25 s during which the participant had to count
backwards by threes out loud. Participants were instructed
to count backwards as fast as possible while still being
accurate. After 25 s the question ‘Which three objects did
you see?’ appeared, signaling the beginning of the 12 s
recall period. Participants typed the names of the three
objects. After 12 s the question was replaced with “Time’s
up” to indicate the end of the recall period. Participants
pressed a button to continue to the next trial. The next trial
started again with the fixation cross. Participants trained on
both the counting backward and memory task with a four
trial training block.

Condition, F < 1, and Triad Shape, F < 1, nor an interaction
between the two, F(1, 76) = 1.98, p = .16. Thus, the
semantic shift did result in release from interference, but
there were no (gradual) differences in release as a result of
the shift in shape on the fourth trial.
For PI-buildup, the analysis showed a main effect of
Trial, F(2, 228) = 9.31, p < .001, η2p = .08. Participants
recalled fewer items as the number of trials increased. Post
hoc analyses showed that the decrease from trial 1 to trial 2
was significant, p < .05. The decrease from trial 2 to trial 3
did not reach significance, p = .22. There was no effect of
Condition, F < 1, nor an effect of Triad Shape, F < 1. The
analysis did not reveal any two- or three-way interactions
between the factors.

Results and discussion
For each participant, the mean recall score was computed
for each trial. Following the procedure of Wickens,
Dalezman, & Eggemeier (1976), one point was given for
each object recalled correctly and one extra point was
assigned when the three objects were recalled in the correct
order. So, for each trial, there was a maximum of 4 points.
The mean scores per Condition and Trial are presented in
Figure 1.
PI-buildup and PI-release effects were analyzed
independently. The PI-buildup analysis was performed on
the first three trials. The PI-release analyses were performed
on (1) the third and fourth trial and (2) on the fourth trial
separately. For all three analyses an ANOVA was
conducted with Condition (levels: Shift and No-Shift) and
Triad Shape (levels: Round shape and Irregular shape) as
between-subjects factors. For the PI-buildup analysis the
latter factor concerned the Shape of the first three triads,
whereas for the PI-release analyses this regarded the Shape
of the fourth triad. The PI-buildup analysis also involved the
within-subjects factor Trial (levels: 1, 2, and 3).
For PI-release, the analysis on the third and fourth trial
revealed a main effect of Trial, F(1, 152) = 31.19, p < .001,
η2p = .17. The mean recall score was higher on the fourth
trial (M=3.55, SD=.95) than on the third trial (M=2.53,
SD=1.31). Participants recalled more items after the
semantic shift. There was no effect of Condition, F < 1, or
Triad Shape, F < 1, and there were no two- or three-way
interactions between the factors, F < 1. The analysis on the
fourth trial alone revealed neither a main effect of

Figure 1: Mean recall scores on each trial for the Shift and
No-Shift condition in Experiment 1.
These results show that shape information was overruled
by semantic information. Only semantic information was
used as retrieval cue, as indicated by the build-up of
interference during the first three trials and the release from
interference when the semantic category changed. The
change in shape did not affect performance. We expected
that the role of shape becomes more prominent if a semantic
retrieval cue is not sufficient to recall the objects of the
critical trial. This possibility was explored in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
This second experiment evaluated the role of shape in the
PI-release situation without a semantic categorical shift.
Participants in both the Shift and No-Shift condition
received four fruits triads. Identical to Experiment 1, the
shape of the fruits was similar throughout the four trials in
the No-Shift condition, in the sense that the objects either
had a round shape or were shaped irregularly. In the Shift
condition, the shape of the objects changed on the critical
trial. The change concerned a shift from irregularly shaped
objects to round shaped objects or vice versa.

3642

For the Shift condition, we predicted release from
interference to occur as a result of the shape shift. Again, we
expected the release to be more prominent when triads
changed from round shaped objects to irregularly shaped
objects than when they shifted in the opposite direction. For
the No-Shift condition, we predicted that the buildup of
interference would continue throughout the four trials. The
decrease in performance was expected to be the strongest
for the round shaped objects as compared to the irregularly
shaped objects.

2, p < .01, and from trial 2 to trial 3, p < .001, was
significant. There was no effect of Condition, F < 1, nor an
effect of Triad Shape, F < 1. The analysis did not reveal any
two- or three-way interactions between the factors.

Method
Participants Eighty Tilburg University undergraduates (57
women) participated for course credit. The mean age was 22
years, ranging from 18 to 33.
Materials The triads of the first three trials were the same
as in Experiment 1. The experimental materials for these
triads consisted of consisted of 18 pictures of fruits (9 round
shapes and 9 irregular shapes). For the present experiment,
the triads of the fourth trial consisted of 6 pictures of fruits
(3 round shapes and 3 irregular shapes). In arranging these
triads, we controlled again for typicality, color, and visual
complexity.
Design and procedure The design and procedure were the
same as in Experiment 1.

Figure 2: Mean recall scores on each trial for the Shift and
No-Shift condition in Experiment 2.
These results show that if semantic information is
insufficient to recall the objects of the critical trial, shape
comes into play. The fact that shape is used as a retrieval
cue to recall objects from memory suggests that the objects
are assigned to a subordinate shape category within the
semantic category of ‘fruits’.

Results and discussion
For each participant, the mean recall score was computed
for each trial. As in Experiment 1, there was a maximum of
4 points. The mean scores per Condition and Trial are
presented in Figure 2.
PI-buildup and PI-release effects were analyzed
independently in the same manner as Experiment 1. For PIrelease, the analysis on the third and fourth trial revealed a
trend of an effect of Condition, F(1, 152) = 2.76, p = .09.
The analysis also showed a trend of an interaction between
Condition and Trial, F(1, 152) = 2.89, p = .09. There was no
main effect of Triad Shape, F < 1, or Trial, F < 1, nor any
other two- or three-way interactions. The analysis on the
fourth trial alone revealed a main effect of Condition, F(1,
76) = 5.70, p < .05, η2p = .07. The mean recall score was
higher for the Shift condition (M=2.58, SD=1.30) than for
the No-Shift condition (M=1.92, SD=1.05). Participants
recalled more items after the shape shift. There was no main
effect of Triad Shape, F < 1, nor an interaction between
Condition and Triad Shape, F(1, 76) = 2.21, p = .14. So, the
shape shift resulted in release from interference, causing an
increase of the recall scores on the fourth trial.
For PI-buildup, the analysis showed a main effect of
Trial, F(2, 228) = 18.40, p < .001, η2p = .14. Post hoc
analyses showed that both the decrease from trial 1 to trial

General discussion
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the
role of shape in semantic memory organization of visual
objects. We predicted that if depictions of objects are
encoded in such a way as to include information about the
shape of the objects, then objects with a particular shape
should form a different category than objects with another
shape. We also predicted that the degree of activation of
shape information might depend on the situational relevance
of this information. Therefore, in two experiments, we
investigated semantic memory organization in two different
situations using the PI paradigm. We created these different
situations by manipulating the objects’ shape and semantic
nature. The results of the present study suggest that
semantic memory organization of objects is indeed
dependent on the interaction between semantic and shape
information.
Experiment 1 showed that if objects can be categorized
both on semantic and shape information, then shape
information is overruled by semantic information. Namely,
as indicated by the release from interference as a result of
the semantic category change, semantic information was
used as retrieval cue, which was not affected by the shift in
shape. Hence, it seems that object categorization is largely

3643

driven by semantic features, as those features received
higher activation than perceptual features.
Experiment 2 showed however that shape does play an
important role in object categorization, that is, if semantic
information is not a distinguishing factor and therefore does
not receive high activation. In this experiment a situation
was created in which the semantic information remained
unchanged, whereas the shape of the objects did change.
The release from interference as a result of the shift in shape
showed that object shape was indeed used as retrieval cue.
So, in this situation, objects are categorized based on their
shape.
To summarize, object categorization is driven by semantic
information to a large extent, yet if semantic information
cannot be (satisfactorily) used to store and retrieve objects,
then shape comes into play.

Acknowledgments
This research is part of the project “Visual Metaphor: A
Psycholinguistic Perspective,” which is funded by an “Open
Competition” grant from the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO).

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Blaxton, T. A. (1989). Investigating dissociations among
memory measures: Support for a transfer-appropriate
processing framework. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 15, 657668.
Boucart, M., & Humphreys, G. W. (1997). Integration of
physical and semantic information in object processing.
Perception, 26, 1197-1209.
Caramazza, A., Hillis, A. E., Rapp, B. C., & Romani, C.
(1990). The multiple semantics hypothesis: Multiple
confusions? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 7, 161-189.
Chaigneau, S. E., Barsalou, L. W., & Samani, M. (2009).
Situational
information
contributes
to
object
categorization and inference. Acta Psychologica, 130,
81-94.
Chikhman, V., Bondarko, V., Danilova, M., Goluzina, A., &
Shelepin, Y. (2012). Complexity of images:
Experimental and computational estimates compared.
Perception, 41, 631-647.
Donderi, D. C. (2006). Visual complexity: A review.
Psychological Bulletin, 132(1), 73-97.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw
& J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing:
Toward an Ecological Psychology. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Huettig, F., & Hartsuiker, R. J. (2008). When you name the
pizza you look at the coin and the bread: Eye

movements reveal semantic activation during word
production. Memory & Cognition, 36, 341-360.
Humphreys, G. W., & Forde, E. M. E. (2001). Hierarchies,
similarity, and interactivity in object recognition:
"Category-specific"
neuropsychological
deficits.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 453-509.
Marques, J. F. (2000). The "living things" impairment and
the nature of semantic memory organisation: An
experimental study using PI-release and semantic cues.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 17, 683-707.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977).
Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16, 519-533.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
indentification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Pecher, D., Van Dantzig, S., Zwaan, R. A., & Zeelenberg,
R. (2009). Language comprehenders retain implied
shape and orientation of objects. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 62, 1108-1114.
Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (1998).
Does pizza prime coin? Perceptual priming in lexical
decision and pronunciation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 38, 401-418.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on
picture recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153-156.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding
specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
Van Dantzig, S., Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Barsalou, L.
W. (2008). Perceptual processing affects conceptual
processing. Cognitive Science, 32, 579 - 590.
Van Weelden, L., Schilperoord, J., & Maes, A. (in press).
Evidence for the role of shape in mental representations
of similes. Cognitive Science.
Warrington, E. K., & McCarthy, R. A. (1987). Categories of
knowledge: Further fractionations and an attempted
integration. Brain, 110, 1273-1296.
Wickens, D. D. (1970). Encoding categories of words: An
empirical approach to meaning. Psychological Review,
77 , 1-15.
Wickens, D. D., Dalezman, R. E., & Eggemeier, F. T.
(1976). Multiple encoding of word attributes in memory.
Memory & Cognition, 4, 307-310.
Zinober, J. W., Cermak, L. S., Cermak, S. A., & Dickerson,
D. J. (1975). A developmental study of categorical
organisation in short-term memory. Developmental
Psychology, 11, 398-399.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanfield, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002).
Language comprehenders mentally represent the shapes
of objects. Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

3644

