UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The facilitatory role of sound symbolism in infant word learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zt40388

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Miyazaki, Michiko
Hidaka, Shohei
Imai, Mutsumi
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The facilitatory role of sound symbolism in infant word learning
Michiko Miyazaki1 (myzk@lab.tamagawa.ac.jp), Shohei Hidaka2 (shhidaka@jaist.ac.jp),
Mutsumi Imai3 (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp), H. Henny Yeung4 (henny.yeung@parisdescartes.fr),
Katerina Kantartzis5 (k.f.kantartzis@bham.ac.uk), Hiroyuki Okada1 (h.okada@eng.tamagawa.ac.jp),
Sotaro Kita5 (S.Kita@bham.ac.uk)
1

Brain Science Institute, Tamagawa University, JAPAN,
School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, JAPAN
3
Department of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University, JAPAN
4
Université Paris Descartes, & CNRS (Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, UMR 8158), FRANCE
5
School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, UK
2

Abstract
Sound symbolism or the nonarbitrary link between language
sound and meaning are commonly found across many
languages of the world. A well-known example is the
association between rounded vs. angular shapes and labels
(i.e., the Bouba-kiki effect by Köhler, 1929/1947). Previous
research has shown that sound symbolic words play
facilitative role for preschool children’s novel verb learning
(Imai, Kita, Nagumo & Okada, 2008; Kantartiz, Imai & Kita,
2011), helping children identify what aspects of motion
events should be mapped to verbs. In this research, we
explore whether sound symbolism may facilitate language
learning in human infants who have just begun to learn word
meanings. Sound symbolism may be a useful cue particularly
at the earliest stages of word learning, because this cue seems
to be available without needing prior word learning
experience (Gogate & Hollich, 2010). Using a habituation
paradigm and a Bayesian model-based analysis, we
demonstrated that 14-month-old infants could detect Köhlertype (1947) shape-sound symbolism, and could use this
sensitivity in their effort to establish the word-referent
association.
Keywords: Sound symbolism; Word learning; Iconicity of
language; Origin of language; Multisensory mapping;
Bayesian analysis

Introduction
Traditional linguistics has long assumed that links
between a word’s form and meaning are arbitrary (de
Saussure, 1916/1983). However, words whose forms are
motivated by their meanings (i.e., sound symbolic words)
are commonly found across many languages of the world.
For example, bump and thump sound like what they mean:
an event with an abrupt end (e.g., Firth, 1935). Several
languages even have large grammatically defined lexical
classes of sound symbolic words (i.e., "ideophones,"
"expressives," or "mimetics") (Voeltz & Kilian-Hatz, 2001;
Kita, 1997). A well-known example of sound symbolism is
the association between rounded vs. angular shapes and
labels (Köhler, 1929/1947; see also Ramachandran &
Hubbard, 2001). Given a forced choice, adults and children
from different languages (e.g., German, English, and
Swahili) much prefer to label rounded objects bouba (or
maluma) and angular objects kiki (or takete) (e.g., Davis,
1961; Holland & Wertheimer, 1964).

Recently, evidence for sensitivity to sound symbolism in
young infants is emerging (Penã, Mehler, & Nespor, 2011;
Ozturk, Krehm, & Vouloumanos, 2012). Ozturk et al.
(2012) demonstrated that even 4-month-olds are sensitive to
the bouba-kiki sound-shape mappings.
An interesting question is whether sensitivity to sound
symbolism is useful for language development. Previous
research has shown that sound symbolic words play
facilitative role for preschool children’s novel word learning,
helping children identify what aspects of the world should
be mapped to verbs (Quine, 1969, Markman, 1989). For
example, Maurer et al. (2006) demonstrated that 2.5-yearold children are likely to match rounded sounding labels
with simple, rounded objects and jagged sounding labels
with pointy objects (Mondloch & Maurer, 2004; Maurer,
Pathman, & Mondloch, 2006). In addition, sound
symbolism also helps 3-year-olds infer meanings of novel
verbs, which are generally more difficult than object names
(Imai et al., 2008; Kantartzis, Imai, & Kita, 2011). Thus,
sound symbolism is a good candidate for mappings from
word forms to referents in the early stages of development.
However, it is not clear whether such sensitivity to sound
symbolism in young infants is used for word learning at the
initial stage of language development.
Before toddlerhood, it is unknown how the youngest word
learners can “break into” the process of mapping words to
their referents. For infants just starting to learn words, the
induction problem is much harder (Hollich, et al., 2007;
Spiegel & Halberda, 2011), and these infants likely rely
more on perceptual regularities, due to limited memory and
information processing abilities (Gogate & Hollich, 2010).
In fact, infants between 10- and 17-months of age find it
much more difficult to utilize word-learning strategies used
by older infants to infer novel word meanings (Woodward
& Hoyne, 1999). At this age, infants may use more
perceptual strategies to map words, which can often lead
them to the wrong referent (e.g., Hollich et al., 2007).
As with toddlers, however, sound symbolic words may be
easier to learn, and these early links may help to scaffold
mappings from word forms to referents in the early stages of
development. In the present study, we examine whether
sound symbolic links can provide early word-referent cues.
Specifically, we asked if 14 month-old infants could utilize
senseitivity to Köhler-type (1947) shape-sound symbolism

3080

to establish association between a word and a referent object.
Here we chose infants at 14 months of age, who are just old
enough to learn new words in laboratory tasks, but are at an
age when learning is still very fragile, especially when
trying to process the precise phonological forms of words
(Stager & Werker, 1997).
We hypothesized that 14-month-olds detect sound-shape
correspondence, and that this ability helps these infants
make mappings from word forms to their referents.
Specifically, we taught Japanese-learning infants two word
labels, and then tested whether they encoded these labels in
a preferential looking procedure. Half the infants were
taught two sound symbolic labels (as rated by adults); half
were taught the mismatching labels. We predicted that those
in the sound symbolically matching condition would learn
labels more easily than those in the mismatching condition.
This report features a Bayesian model-based data analysis.
Infants looking behavior—particularly in a preferential
looking paradigm, in which infants must compare two
objects to make a decision—is very complex: It often shifts
dynamically instead of staying stable during a trial. Also,
because of the dynamic nature of looking, it is difficult to
determine the most appropriate time window prior to the
analysis. Furthermore, infants’ looking time is “noisy”,
affected largely by looking profiles inherent in individual
infants (e.g., a preference to look at a certain location on the
monitor, a preference to look at a particular object, the
likelihood to shift eye-gaze, etc.). Ignoring these
idiosyncratic looking biases can weaken statistical power.
Despite this problem, researchers have traditionally used
ANOVA to examine the effect, where infants’ looking time
is averaged over a pre-set time window and individualbased looking biases are treated as experimental noise. In
this research, we employed a Bayesian approach to analyze
the data, which offers a new method of data analysis that is
more adaptive to complex and dynamic nature of infants’
looking behavior (see the Bayesian Data Analysis section
for more details).

Method
Participants
Participants were thirty-four full term, monolingual
Japanese 14-month-olds (M = 14;16, range 13;27-15;9, 22
males). Infants were randomly assigned to either the match
or mismatch condition. An additional 11 infants were
excluded from data analyses due to experimental error (n =
1), or fussiness during the experiment (n = 10).

Apparatus
A black cloth curtain surrounded a 21-inch display where
visual stimuli appeared, and a digital video camera was
hidden below the screen, relaying video of the infant to the
control area. Video was also recorded (29.97 fps) for offline
coding of looking.

Stimulus materials
Target stimuli consisted of a round versus a spiky shape, as
well as audio recordings of two novel words, kipi and moma
(Figure 1). Stimuli were constructed on the basis of a pilot
study, where we first chose consonants (m, l, n, p, k), and
vowels (a, o, i) that are related to smooth and jagged shapes
according to previous research on sound symbolism (Köhler,
1929/1947; Maurer, et al., 2006; Westbury, 2005). Moma
and kipi were selected because our adults frequently chose
these as the best match to the smooth/round and
spiky/jagged shapes, respectively, and both were nonwords
in Japanese. The two shapes were colored to make them
more interesting to infants. Colors were chosen not to affect
the shape sound symbolism.
During a habituation phase, infants were presented with
two pairs of audio-visual stimuli: in the match condition,
kipi – spiky, object and moma - round object; in the
mismatch condition, kipi - round object, moma - spiky
object. Infants were presented with filler stimuli, consisting
of colored drawings of a ball, a banana, a car, and a picture
book, paired with audio recordings of the corresponding
word in Japanese. These items were chosen based on
normative data from the Japanese MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventory (J-MCDI) (Ogura
& Watamaki, 2004). A female Japanese speaker recorded
the target and filler words, along with all other speech used
in the experiment, in an infant-directed speech register.

Procedure
Infants were tested individually in a quiet room on their
parent's lap, positioned 60 cm from the display. Pretest,
habituation, and test phases were presented, each of which
contained several trials separated by a short attention-getting
movie. Parents were instructed to keep their eyes closed,
and also asked to complete the J-MCDI.
Pretest phase Here we presented 4 familiarization and 2
referential trials in random order. Familiarization trials
showed side-by-side displays of either filler or target objects.
Each trial lasted 8 seconds and was accompanied by, "Mite!
Mite!" (Look! Look!). Two referential trials were included
to enhance infants' understanding of the referential nature of
the labels (Fennell & Waxman, 2010), and here a single
familiar object slowly moved (either up and down, or right
and left) on the display, accompanied by the corresponding
label in isolation and then in a carrier sentence (e.g.,
"Kuruma! Kuruma-wo mite!" [Car! Look at the car!]).
Habituation phase The habituation phase consisted of a
pseudo-randomly ordered series of trials such that each
word-object pairing appeared twice in every block of four
trials. In each trial, a single target object moved slowly from
right to left in order to maintain infants’ attention (Werker et
al., 1998), while one of the target words was paired with it
(Figure 1). Trials lasted a maximum of 16 seconds and were
accompanied by 13 tokens of a target word, each spoken
with a different intonation pattern. The habituation criterion
was set to a maximum of 24 trials, or a decrease of 65% in
looking to the longest previous block of 4 trials (Stager &

3081

Match

Habituation
(maximam 24
trials)

Kipi

Moma

Kipi

Moma
Target (4 trials)

Mismatch

Filler (4 trials)

Test (8 trials)

Ball… Which is the Ball? Kipi… Which is the Kipi?

Figure 1: Design and Stimuli
Werker, 1997; Yoshida, Fennell, Swingley, & Werker,
2009).
Test phase The test phase consisted of four filler and four
target trials that contained two objects side-by-side,
counterbalanced for side over the testing phase. Two filler
trials were always shown first, providing infants the
opportunity to see familiar objects in the test procedure. The
third and fourth trials were target trials, and the remaining
four trials alternated between filler (F) and target (T) trials.
All trials lasted 8 seconds, and began with a 3000 ms silent
baseline period to measure visual preferences for the objects,
followed by a phrase asking infants to look at the correct
object (i.e., "X! X wa docchi?" [X! Which is the X?], where
X stands for a filler or target word).

Coding
Two blind coders classified each video frame as a look to
the right, to the left, an ambiguous look, or no look. Fifteen
percent of the all samples were coded twice to obtain intercoder reliability. The inter-coder reliability was high, κ
= .826.

Bayesian data analysis
Data were analyzed using a Bayesian approach. In analyzing
infants’ looking behavior, it is customarily assumed that it
takes a certain time for infants to process auditory stimuli
and/or move their eyes to fixate the target stimulus (e.g.,
Swingley & Aslin, 2002). Considering the lag due to
auditory and visual processing, a pre-determined time
window is set, and infants’ looking is averaged throughout
this window. The group means are then compared using a
linear model (typically a t-test or ANOVA). However, as
mentioned earlier, the assumptions in traditional linear
models often pose limitations for analyzing infants’
complex looking behavior. First, infants’ looking to the
target often shifts dynamically instead of staying stable
during the time course, and hence polynomial functions
appear to fit better than a linear function. Second, because

infants’ looking behavior may be affected by the nature of
the stimuli and experimental settings, it is difficult to
determine the most appropriate time window prior to the
analysis. Third, although substantial individual difference is
expected in infants’ looking profiles (e.g., a preference to
look at a certain location on the monitor, a preference to
look at a particular object, the likelihood to shift eye-gaze,
etc.), these response biases are simply treated as
experimental noise, which weakens statistical power to
detect the experimental effect of interest.
In the current analysis—to rectify these limitations in
traditional linear models—we performed a Bayesian modelbased analysis based on Yurovsky, Hidaka, and Wu, 2012.
In a Bayesian framework, a hypothetical relationship among
a set of experimental factors (e.g., training effects),
subsidiary factors (e.g., object-specific bias) and potential
patterns of behaviors (e.g., looking time) are expressed as a
statistical model with a set of parameters which is estimated
through model fitting to a given dataset. In the present
analysis, there are two major sets of parameters. The first set
includes preference parameters for factors that could
potentially affect the looking of a particular AOI at a given
moment: individual infants’ location preference, object
preference, preference to look at the trained object,
preference to look at the object that was sound symbolically
matching to the label. The second set consisted of group
parameters, which classify participants in such a way that
within-group similarity in infants’ response patterns and
across-group differences are simultaneously maximized.

Results
Looking data from each of the critical video frames were
classified as a look to the left AOI, to the right AOI, or to a
‘no-look’ AOI. We analyzed infants’ looking times (as
frame-by-frame counts) as a function of five factors: a
location-specific preference, an object-specific preference, a
“correct” (trained) object preference, a sound symbolism
preference, and the interaction between training and the
sound symbolic match. The location-specific preference is
defined as a bias to look toward the left or right AOI,
relative to the preference for the no-look AOI for each
infant independent of the match/mismatch condition. The
object preference is a bias to look toward a particular object
compared to the no-look AOI (with some other objects).
The correct object preference is a preference to look at the
object with which the label was associated during the
habituation phase. The sound symbolism preference is a
tendency to look at the sound symbolically matching object
(to the label heard in the trial) after the onset of the speech
(i.e., the preference for the spiky object after the onset of
speech “kipi,” or the preference for the round object after
“moma”). Through the process of model fitting, we
estimated a set of parameters for all of the five factors above,
but we focus only on the three experiment-relevant factors,
i.e., training, sound-symbolic match, and training-soundsymbolism interaction factors here.

3082

We first analyzed the effect of the training and that of
sound symbolism separately against the baseline preference,
to see whether training and/or sound symbolism alone
affected infants’ looking behavior after the speech onset.
For this purpose, we performed a series of models using
(Bayesian) hypothesis testing. In Bayesian hypothesis
testing, each model specifies a probability of a hypothesis to
reproduce the current looking dataset. We tested a
contribution of a particular factor, by evaluating the
goodness of fit for two models—one with the target factor
and one without—by a Bayes factor (Jeffreys, 1961; See
also Wagenmakers et al. (2010) for a review in
psychological studies). “The Bayes factor (BF) X of Model
A to B given a dataset” indicates that the odds ratio for
Model A to reproduce the dataset is X times higher than that
for Model B to do so under even prior probability for each
model1. In the present study, we considered a Bayes factor
larger than 30 (or equivalently log-Bayes factor larger than
3.4) to be strong evidence in support for the Model A over
Model B, based on Jeffreys’ (1961) criterion.
Six models were evaluated as shown in Table 1. The first
three models—P1-full, P2-full, and P3-full models--were
full models in which all of the three experimental factors
were included. These three models assumed different levels
of complexity in their functions of looking probability. The
first order polynomial function was assumed for the P1-full
model, and the second- and third-order polynomial
functions were assumed for the P2-full and P3-full models,
respectively. We then compared the three models to
determine the optimal level of complexity of the function in
the model. The analysis on the Bayes factors indicates that
the middle degree of complexity (P2-full) is strongly
favored over both the relatively simple (P2-full to P1-full:
27.5) and complex model (P2-full to P3-full: 247.4). We
therefore employed the P2-full model as the baseline model,
against which each of the subset models was compared.
To evaluate the effect of the three experimental factors,
we calculated the Bayes factors for the three additional
models in Table 1, i.e., P2-NoInt., P2-NoSS, and P2-NoTr
against the P2-full baseline model (see Table 1 for results
and the abbreviations). The analysis of the Bayes factors
suggests that the P2-full model was strongly favored over
the P2-NoInt (109.6), P2-NoSS (119.6), and the P2-NoTr
(92.5). These results indicate that all effects of sound
symbolism, training and the interaction between training
and sound symbolism significantly contributed to the model
fit.
This suggest that infants tended to look at the trained
object regardless of whether this object was sound
symbolically matching or not. Furthermore, sound
symbolism affected infants’ looking, regardless of whether
infants were trained on a sound symbolically matching
object.
1
According to Jeffreys (1961), BF from 3 to 10 (log-BF from
1.1 to 2.3) indicates “substantial” evidence, BF from 10 to 30 (logBF from 2.3 to 3.4) indicates “strong” one, and BF from 30 (logBF greater than 3.4) indicates “very strong” one.

Table 1: Summary of the hypotheses testing on the six
models.
Models

Results

Models

#P

Tr

SS

TS

Ply

#G

log-BF

P2-full*

10

Y

Y

Y

2

7

0

P1-full

7

Y

Y

Y

1

7

27.5

P3-full

13

Y

Y

Y

3

6

247.4

P2-NoInt.

8

Y

Y

-

2

7

109.6

P2-NoSS.

8

Y

-

Y

2

7

119.6

P2-NoTr.

8

-

Y

Y

2

8

92.5

The abbreviations are as follows: #P: the number of
parameters for each cluster, Tr, SS, and TS: whether
the model contains preference parameters for trained
object, sound symbolism match object, and the
interaction between them (“Y” if the model has), Ply:
the order of polynomial functions of the looking time
courses , #G: the estimated number of groups of
infants, Log-BF: the log-Bayes factor of the P2-full
model reproducing the data relative to the compared
model. Pn-full: a full-factored model with the n-th
order polynomial functions, P2-NoInt: a model
without interaction between training and sound
symbolic match, P2-NoSS: a model without the
effects of sound-symbolic match, P2-NoTr: a model
without the effects of training, *: the best model.

Discussion
The present study aimed to clarify the facilitating role of
sound symbolism in novel word learning in 14-month-old
infants. Although the infants at this age sometimes show
difficulty for matching words to their correct referents due
to their limited cognitive ability, 14-month-olds could
utilize sound-symbolic correspondences between speech
sounds and object in this study. By Bayesian analysis, the
effects of sound symbolism, training, and the interaction
between sound symbolism and training all significantly
contributed to the infants’ looking behavior.
The current Bayesian data analysis shed light on the issue
of how the youngest word learners break into the incredibly
difficult process of mapping words to their references. One
of the great advantages of Bayesian analysis is that it could
wash out the critical experimental effects when traditional
averaged analysis are treated as “noise,” can be considered.
By classifying participants with similar looking patterns into
clusters and estimating group parameters, fine-grained
response characteristics for a particular subgroup of infants.
The fact that significant contribution of factors sound
symbolism, training, and the interaction between sound
symbolism and training revealed in early word leaning stage
may provide an important clue for solving the difficulty for
mapping word to their referents. Sound symbolism may

3083

allow infants to anchor speech to meaning, which in turn
helps them obtain "referential insight"--- the insight that
language sounds are symbols that represent concepts
(Gogate & Hollich, 2010). Once infants get into soundsymbolically based systems relating surface structure to
meaning, they may be able to use this early knowledge to
bootstrap themselves to more abstract meanings, needing
direct perceptual anchors less and less, perhaps reflecting
similar trajectories in language evolution (Kita, Kantartzis,
& Imai, 2010).

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Janet Werker for insightful
discussion and advice in designing the experiment. Mamiko
Arata, Noburo Saji and Junko Kanero all contributed to the
creation and selection of stimuli. Asako Isawa, Kaoru
Takata and Satomi Kanbara contributed to the video coding.
This research was supported by MEXT KAKENHI
(#15300088, #22243043, #23120003) for Imai, Okada, and
(#23300099) for Hidaka, MEXT GCOE program to
Tamagawa University, and Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council's Research Development
Fellowship [BB/G023069/1] to Kita.

References
Davis, R. (1961). The fitness of names to drawings. A crosscultural study in Tanganyika. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 52, 259-268.
de Saussure, F. (1916/1983). Course in general linguistics
(R. Harris, Trans.). La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Fennell, C. T., & Waxman, S. R. (2010). What paradox?
Referential cues allow for infant use of phonetic detail in
word learning. Child development, 81(5), 1376-1383.
Firth, J. R. (1935). The technique of semantics.
Transactions of the Philological Society, 36-72.
Gogate, L. J., & Hollich, G. (2010). Invariance detection
within an interactive system: a perceptual gateway to
language development. Psychological review,117(2), 496516.
Holland, M. K., & Wertheimer, M. (1964). Some
physiognomic aspects of naming, or maluma and takete
revisited. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 19(1), 111-117.
Hollich, G., Golinkoff, R. M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2007).
Young children associate novel words with complex
objects rather than salient parts. Dev Psychol,43(5), 10511061.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition,
109(1), 54-65.
Jeffreys, H. (1961). The Theory of Probability (3rd ed.).
Oxford.
Köhler, W. (1929/1947). Gestalt psychology: An
introduction to new concepts in modern psychology. New
York: Liveright Publishing Corporation.
Kantartzis, K., Imai, M., & Kita, S. (2011). Japanese SoundSymbolism Facilitates Word Learning in EnglishSpeaking Children. Cognitive Science, 35, 575-586.

Kita, S. (1997). Two-dimensional semantic analysis of
Japanese mimetics. Linguistics, 35, 379-415.
Kita, S., Kantartzis, K., & Imai, M. (2010). Children learn
sound symbolic words better: Evolutionary vestige of
sound symbolic protolanguage. Paper presented at the
The evolution of language: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference (EVOLANG8), 206-213.
Singapore: World Scientific.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: sound-shape correspondences in toddlers
and adults. Developmental science, 9(3), 316-322.
Mondloch, C. J., & Maurer, D. (2004). Do small white balls
squeak? Pitch-object correspondences in young children.
Cognitive, affective & behavioral neuroscience, 4(2),
133-136.
Ogura, T., & Watamaki, T. (2004). MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventories: User's Guide
and Technical Manual. Kyoto: Kyoto International Social
Welfare Exchange Centre.
Ozturk, O., Krehm, M. & Vouloumanos, A. (2013). Sound
symbolism in infancy: evidence for sound–shape crossmodal correspondences in 4-month-olds. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 114, 173-186.
Pena, M., Mehler, J., & Nespor, M. (2011). The role of
audiovisual processing in early conceptual development.
Psychological science, 22(11), 1419-1421.
Quine, W. V. (1960). Word and Object: The MIT Press.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hubbard, E. M. (2001).
Psychophysical investigations into the neural basis of
synaesthesia. Proc Biol Sci, 268(1470), 979-983.
Spiegel, C., & Halberda, J. (2011). Rapid fast-mapping
abilities in 2-year-olds. Journal of experimental child
psychology, 109(1), 132-140.
Stager, C. L., & Werker, J. F. (1997). Infants listen for more
phonetic detail in speech perception than in word-learning
tasks. Nature, 388(6640), 381-382.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Lexical neighborhoods
and the word-form representations of 14-month-olds.
Psychological science, 13(5), 480-484.
Voeltz, F. K. E., & Kilian-Hatz, C. (Eds.). (2001).
Ideophones. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Wagenmakers, E-J., Lodewyckx, T., Kuriyal, H., &
Grasman, R. (2010). Bayesian hypothesis testing for
psychologists: A tutorial on the Savage-Dickey method.,
Cognitive Psychology, 60, 158-189.
Werker, J. F., Cohen, L. B., Lloyd, V. L., Casasola, M., &
Stager, C. L. (1998). Acquisition of word-object
associations by 14-month-old infants. Dev Psychol, 34(6),
1289-1309.
Westbury, C. (2005). Implicit sound symbolism in lexical
access: evidence from an interference task. Brain and
language, 93(1), 10-19.

3084

Woodward, A. L., & Hoyne, K. L. (1999). Infants' learning
about words and sounds in relation to objects. Child
development, 70(1), 65-77.
Yoshida, K. A., Fennell, C. T., Swingley, D., & Werker, J. F.
(2009). Fourteen-month-old infants learn similarsounding words. Developmental science, 12(3), 412-418.
Yurovsky D, Hidaka S, & Wu R (2012) Quantitative
Linking Hypotheses for Infant Eye Movements. PLoS
ONE 7(10).

3085

