UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Rich Who Have the Humility of the Poor: Effects of Culture and Power on Altruism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3nv857xm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Salehi, Niloufar
Dehghani, Morteza

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Rich Who Have the Humility of the Poor:
Effects of Culture and Power on Altruism
Niloufar Salehi (nsalehi@ce.sharif.edu)
Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of Technology,
Azadi Ave., Tehran, Iran

Morteza Dehghani (morteza@ict.usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California,
1205 Waterfront Dr., Playa Vista, CA 90094-2536, USA
relying on WEIRD populations (Henrich, Heine &
Norenzayan, 2010). It has been widely discussed that many
models and theories of decision-making are based on
cultural assumptions and may not be universally applicable
(e.g. Dastmalchian, Javidan & Alam, 2001; Jones, 2010;
Henrich, et al., 2010; Hofstede, 1980). Arnett (2008) argues
that the majority of psychological research focuses on
American subjects, thus, neglecting 95% of the world’s
population, a majority of whom live in vastly different
societies. Further, limiting psychological models to small
populations not only restricts the range that predictor
variables can take, but also affectively limits discovery of
other variables not yet included in the model (Weber &
Hsee, 2000).
In this study, we explore how power is associated with
altruistic and sympathetic behavior among Iranians.
Specifically, we aim to understand how legitimate as
opposed to illegitimate feeling of power may affect
prosocial decision-making. In other words, not only when,
but also why do “the rich have the humility of the poor”?

Abstract
In this paper we investigate the effect of power on prosocial
decision-making. While previous research has thoroughly
investigated this relation in Western cultures, we focus our
research on the role of power in an understudied MiddleEastern culture. Existing literature suggest an inverse
relationship between feeling of power and prosocial behavior,
where generally people in high levels of power tend to act less
sympathetically in their decisions and demonstrate declined
levels of perspective taking towards others. Our findings
demonstrate that, unlike their Western counterparts, Iranian
participants show significantly higher levels of altruism when
in a high-power situation perceived as legitimate. On the
other hand, under illegitimate power conditions, participants
primed
with
high-power
act
significantly
less
compassionately in comparison to their low-power
counterparts. We believe these findings have great impact in
studying social hierarchies and behavior in cross-cultural
settings.
Keywords: altruism; power prime; social hierarchy; decisionmaking; cross-cultural differences

Introduction

Theories of Power

The beloved of the Almighty are the rich who
have the humility of the poor, and the poor
who have the magnanimity of the rich.
-Saadi, 13th century Persian poet
Persian literature comprises a rich collection of myths,
stories, and poems praising altruism and courtesy, especially
among the powerful. Iranian children are encultured with
stories, in which great kings and leaders are portrayed as
generous, altruistic individuals. Such cultural products,
created over generations, store and transmit cultural
wisdom, and affect different aspects of people’s judgment
and decision-making (Weber, Hsee & Sokolowska, 1998).
Although the Iranian society has undergone a vast amount
of societal change over the past decades, aspects of deeper
cultural behavior have been transmitted through such
cultural products, as tangible and public representations of
the Iranian culture (Javidan & Dastmalchian, 2003).
Several lines of research associate power with selfinterested behavior; linking it to lack of perspective taking
(Galinsky, Magee, Inesi & Gruenfeld, 2006), egoism
(Batson, 1991) and moral reasoning (Lammers, Stapel &
Galinsky, 2010), among others. However, we argue that
many of these findings are based on Western cultures,

In the study of social relationships, power is often referred
to as the fundamental concept and basic force of behavior
(Fiske, 1993; Kemper, 1991). Power is also closely related
to the structures of personality (Wiggins & Broughton,
1985). Thus, a wide range of research has focused on
understanding how power influences various aspects of
cognition, such as stereotyping (Fiske, 1993), social
decision making (Gruenfeld, 1995), and perspective taking
(Galinsky et al., 2006).
It has been widely argued that feeling of power results in
displaying self-centered attitudes towards others, causing
declined levels of perspective taking (Galinsky et al, 2006)
and altruism (Batson, 1991). For example, in a recent study,
Galinsky et al. (2006) asked participants under a high- or
low-power experimental prime to draw an E on their
foreheads – a procedure created by Hass (1984) to measure
visual perspective taking of others. One way to draw the E
is to consider one’s own perspective, resulting in a
backwards E illegible to other viewers. The other way is to
consider others’ perspective and draw an E backwards to
oneself. They report that high-power participants were
almost three times more likely to draw a self-oriented E than
their low-power counterparts. Power is also linked to moral

3354

hypocrisy, a situation of imposing firm moral standards on
others, while practicing more tolerant moral standards
oneself (Lammers, Stapel & Galinsky, 2010).
The Power-Approach theory (Keltner, Gruenfeld &
Anderson, 2003) suggests that power increases goal-directed
behavior without conscious awareness of its effects. This
increase results in the powerful having a higher tendency to
act and approach (Anderson & Berdahl, 2002; Galinsky,
Gruenfeld & Magee, 2003). Correspondingly, in the context
of decision-making and negotiations, the powerful are
known to display higher aspirations (Pinkley, 1995),
demand more and concede less (De Dreu, 1995), and often
end up with the larger share of the pie in negotiations
(Giebels, De Dreu & Van de Vliert, 2000). On the other
hand, powerlessness has been reported to activate the
behavioral inhibition system (Carver & White, 1994).
Further studies have shown that the link between power
and goal-directed behavior is not always such
straightforward. In fact, illegitimacy of the power involved
may break this link (Lammers, Galinsky, Gordijn & Otten,
2008a). Investigating the role of legitimacy of power,
Lammers et al. (2008a) assigned participants to one of four
cells in a 2 (powerless, powerful) × 2 (legitimate,
illegitimate) between-participant design. Participants were
primed using an essay task developed by Galinsky et al.
(2003), where they were randomly assigned to one of four
tasks and asked to recall and write about a situation of highor low-power under legitimate or illegitimate conditions.
Participants were then asked to fill out a questioner
assessing their behavioral activation/inhibition.
The authors report that under legitimate power conditions,
the powerful had higher levels of behavioral activation than
did the powerless. That is, under legitimate conditions, “the
powerful act while the powerless follow” (Lammers et al.,
2008b). However, these trends were reversed in illegitimate
power conditions: among participants whose sense of power
was illegitimate, low-power led to higher behavioral
activation than high-power. In other words, it has been
argued that power hierarchies, known to be based on mutual
cooperation (Arendt, 1970), may switch to force and
resistance when power is perceived as illegitimate (Lenski,
1966; Mills, 2000). Therefore, when studying the behavioral
effects of power, legitimacy of the power must be
considered. As previously mentioned, we argue that most of
the studies on power have been conducted in Western
cultures and the results may not generalize to all cultures.

Power Distance in Iran
To shed light on the relation between power and culture, we
rely on two of Hofstede’s (1983) cultural dimensions
directly related to pro-social behavior: Power Distance and
Individualism.
In every society, there are strong forces that maintain and
extend existing inequalities. The Power Distance Index
measures the extent to which members of society accept
these inequalities and allow them to grow (Hofstede, 1983).
Hofstede argues that the power distance is supported by the

social environment, culture, and both high and low power
members of the society (Hofstede, 2001). Iranians score
high on the Power Distance Index (Hofstede, 2001),
meaning that people tend to accept a hierarchical order and
respect power inequalities.
The Individualism index is a cultural dimension that
determines the relation between an individual and other
members of society. In countries that score high on the
individualistic scale members are expected to look after
themselves, whereas in more collectivist countries, members
consider themselves as members of a group and work
towards fulfilling goals of the group (Hofstede, 1983). A
low score in the Individualism index defines Iran as a
collectivistic society indicating that people often consider
themselves committed to a group, be that their family,
friends, or extended relationships. In such a society loyalty
to the group is principal and often overrides other social
guidelines (Hofstede, 1983).
Another study by Dastmalchian et al. (2001) shows
similar results about power and individualism in the Iranian
society. This study was conducted as part of the GLOBE
project concerning leadership attributions and cultural
factors (House, Javidan & Dorfman, 2001). Cultural
dimensions of this study are extensions to those defined by
Hofstede (1980). Societal collectivism is defined as “the
degree to which organizational and societal institutional
practices encourage and reward collective distribution of
resources and collective action”. Accordingly, in-group
collectivism refers to “the degree to which individuals
express pride, loyalty, and cohesiveness in their
organizations or families” (House et al., 2001). Power
distance is measured similar to Hofstede’s definition.
Results show that Iranians tend to have relatively high levels
of power distance (14th out of 61 countries examined) and
in-group collectivism (3rd out of 61), whereas fairly low
levels (13th lowest country) of societal collectivism
(Dastmalchian, et al., 2001).
Both studies share a common theme; the Iranian society is
reported to have high levels of power distance and
collectivism; in other words, a society of strongly accepted
social hierarchies where high levels of collectivism are
reported when members consider others as in-groups, but
show highly individualistic behaviors when others are
considered out of their “group”. Javidan and Dastmalchian
(2003) relate this to the structure of families in Iran, where
the father has nearly total power in the family and children
are taught from an early age to respect and obey those in
position of authority such as their teachers. Due to the
strength of families and group structures, behavior is
determined by whether others are considered part of the ingroup or not.

Experiment
In this experiment, we investigate the extent to which power
affects altruistic behavior among Iranians. Previous studies
in Western cultures have shown that the powerful demand
more and display more act and approach than the powerless,

3355

when power was primed to be legitimate. Whereas, when
illegitimate power conditions were experienced, the
powerless displayed even more approach than the powerful
(Lammers, et al., 2008a). We investigate the interplay
between the feeling of low or high power and the perception
of legitimacy of that power among Iranian participants in
the Dictator’s game (Bolton, Katok & Zwick, 1998)
described below. Before we discuss the Dictator’s game, we
layout our three main hypothesis.
In our experiment, participants were asked to recall an
experience where they were in a low- or high-power
position; the legitimacy of the power involved was left for
participants to decide. Through this we achieved a number
of goals: before and during the priming stage participants
were unaware of the means of the study and that legitimacy
was a factor of the study, thus causing less biased responses.
Further, by allowing participants to choose the situation
they write about, we were able to measure the frequency of
each class of responses. Therefore, we manipulated power
status and left the legitimacy to be chosen and decided about
by the participant. Accordingly, we study how Iranian
participants self-assess the legitimacy of their power. Some
scholars have linked power to moral hypocrisy, a situation
where one imposes stricter moral standards to others than
oneself (Lammers, et al., 2010). On the same track we
believe that more people in the high-power prime will selfevaluate their actions as legitimate, than their low power
counterparts.
H1: Participants under the high-power prime will have a
higher tendency to self-evaluate their power as legitimate.
In collectivist societies, for those who are considered
members of the in-group, very high levels of support,
altruism and consideration are shown (Hofstede, 1983). This
relation especially holds between older and younger
members of the group, mainly due to the fact that older
members are associated higher levels of power and authority
(Javidan, et al., 2003). Accordingly, while high-power
members, are highly respected and obeyed, they provide
support and caring for others. Javidan and Dastmalchian
(2003) also report a high level of desire for generosity and
compassion among Iranian managers, a desire that they
believe is rooted in the strong culture of family/group
collectivism as well as Islamic principles. A view that the
powerful should treat subordinates kindly (as their brothers
and sisters) is also highly valued in Islamic teachings
(Latifi, 1997). The difference between power-classes are
exaggerated by the high power distance level in the Iranian
society.
On the other hand, Lammers et al. (2008a) demonstrate
that conceptualization of power determines its psychological
consequences and provides insight into the tendency to
approach. Relying on these facts, we hypothesize that,
unlike their Western counterparts, when Iranian participants
evaluate the power involved in their power prime as
legitimate, they will show high levels of generosity and

support towards other participants as they feel a sense of
obligation to provide support to the powerless.
H2: Under legitimate power conditions, high-power
participants will demand less and show higher levels of
altruism compared to low-power participants, as opposed to
in illegitimate power conditions.
Parallel to the above reasoning, we predict that low-power
subjects will expect to receive support and consideration
from (high-power) others when their sense of power is
perceived as legitimate.
H3: Low-power participants who view the power involved
in their situation as legitimate will demand more than lowpower participants viewing the power as illegitimate.
This pattern is consistent, but opposite of the reported
findings by Lammers, et al., (2008) who show an inverse
relation between power and approach when power is
perceived as illegitimate. We hypothesize that among
Iranian participants, legitimate high power will result in
higher concessions than legitimate low power, and the
reverse will be resulted for illegitimate power conditions.

Method
Participants. Fifty-two undergraduate students at Sharif
University of Technology (24 female, mean age= 21.1)
participated in this study. Each participant was ran in a
separate session. In return for their participation, they
received 4000 Tomans and chance to enter a raffle (play the
Dictator’s game, explained below).
Design. The study employed a 2 × 2 between subject
design. The first factor was the power prime (high-power or
low-power). The second factor was perceived legitimacy of
power (legitimate or illegitimate). The dependent variable
was the amount of money taken by the participant in the
Dictator’s game.

Procedure
Priming Stage. Participants were given a high- or a lowpower experiential prime, proven to reliably manipulate the
sense of power (Galinsky et al., 2003). Participants were
unaware of the aim of the experiment and were told that
their essays will be used in a natural language processing
project. Those assigned to the high-power condition were
instructed to recall a personal incident in which they had
power over other individuals, they were asked to write a
short essay (in Persian) explaining both the incident and
how they felt at that moment. Participants assigned to the
low-power condition were similarly instructed to write
about a personal incident in which someone else had power
over them. A short definition of power was included in the
instructions as having the ability to control and influence
someone else or being in a position to evaluate them
(Galinsky, et al., 2006). After writing the essay, both groups

3356

were asked to evaluate the degree of the legitimacy of the
power in the situation they had written about. Specifically,
they were asked whether they believed that they were
entitled to that powerful or powerless position both lawfully
and morally. After completing the power-priming task, the
experimenter thanked participants and they were paid 4,000
Tomans. After this stage participants were asked to
participate in a raffle as part of the compensation. The raffle
was an altered version of the Dictator’s game.
The Dictator’s Game. The Dictator’s game (Bolton et al.,
1998) is a commonly used game for evaluating levels of
altruism and prosocial behavior. In the standard form of the
dictator’s game, one player (the dictator) is asked to share a
fixed amount of money between himself and another
participant (the receiver), while both players remain
anonymous. According to economic models of decisionmaking, rational players are expected to maximize their
personal benefit. Thus, the dictator should take all the
money, leaving nothing for the receiver. Many studies,
however, have shown that dictators give between 20%-30%
of the money to the unknown receiver (e.g. Camerer, 2011).
For this experiment, we developed a variation of the
Dictator’s game. As previously mentioned, in the standard
form of the game, the dictator is asked to share a fixed
amount of money between himself and the receiver. Due to
the design of our experiment, we needed all participants to
perform the role of the dictator. Hence, participants were
instructed to take as much of the money as they want,
leaving the rest for future unknown participants.
Specifically, in our experiment, subjects were told that they
had a chance to participate in a raffle. Each participant was
then presented with 5 envelopes that were shuffled in front
of her. While the participant did not know how much money
was in the envelopes, each contained 10,000 Tomans, in
1,000 Toman bills. Participants were then asked to choose
an envelope and take as much money as they want from it.
They were told, however, that the same envelopes were to
be used for future (unknown) participants; thus, any amount
of money they leave in the envelope will be offered to future
subjects who choose that same envelope in the raffle.
Participants were given complete privacy to take as much of
the money as they want. After each session, participants
were paid and briefed about the experiment. Then, the
envelope chosen by the participant was marked with the
participant’s ID and put aside. The money taken from the
envelopes were used as the main dependent variable in our
experiment.

Results
Perceived Legitimacy of Power
During the power priming task participants were only
instructed to write an assay about a high- or a low-power
situation. In this stage nothing was mentioned about the
legitimacy of the power involved. After finishing the essay
participants were asked to evaluate the power involved in
their situation as legitimate or illegitimate. Our findings

show that the state of power had a great impact on this
evaluation.
As shown in Figure 1 and consistent with H1, we found
that 78% of participants (22/28) under a high power prime
evaluated their power as legitimate, compared to 33% of
participants (8/24) under a low power prime. The difference
between these conditions were significant 2(1, N = 52) =
9.061, p = .003. In other words, 67% of participants
reported a sense of injustice when asked to recall a situation
of low-power.

Figure 1: Self-evaluation of legitimacy among participants.
Altruism
The level of altruism among participants was calculated by
the amount of money left in the raffle envelope during the
Dictator’s game. This is the amount of money that
participants decided to leave for future participants. We
measured the amount of money taken from the envelope as
a numerical indicator of selfishness. In seven cases this
number was negative, indicating that participants had left
some of the earlier reward money (4,000 Tomans) as well as
the money already in the envelope for the next person (note
that participants viewed the Dictator’s game as part of the
compensation). Figure 2 displays the average amount of
money taken by participants.
Using the amount of money taken as a dependent variable
in a 2 × 2 ANOVA, with power (low/high) as the first factor
and legitimacy (legitimate/illegitimate) as the second,
revealed a significant interaction between power and
perceived legitimacy of power F(1, 48) = 7.652, p = .008.
Under power conditions perceived as legitimate, highpower participants took significantly less money in the
Dictator’s game (M = 2.63, SD = 0.91), than low-power
participants (M = 6.25, SD = 1.22) t(28) = 2.14, p = .042.
Thus, supporting H2, our results demonstrate high levels of
altruism among the legitimate powerful and naturally higher

3357

demands from the legitimate powerless, who expect to be
supported.
When power was perceived as illegitimate, there was
significant difference in the amount of money taken by the
high-power (M = 5, SD = 1.36) as opposed to the low-power
(M = 2, SD = 0.81) participants t(20) = 1.91, p = .071. Thus,
supporting the second part of H2, the illegitimate powerful
display declined levels of altruism and more approach,
whereas the illegitimate powerless demand less.
Also, there was a significant difference between lowpower legitimate and low-power illegitimate conditions
t(22) = 2.950, p = 0.007, with participants in low-power
legitimate conditions taking significantly more money than
those in the low-power illegitimate condition. This result
supports H3.

Figure 2: Average money taken in the Dictator’s game.

Discussion
Overall, our results show significantly different patterns
than those in similar studies performed among Western
participants. Iranian participants relating a situation of highpower, most often found their power to be legitimate. Some
participants even used expressions such as “even though
others might think what I did wasn’t just, I still believe I did
what was right”. Our results show a consistent pattern,
suggesting people often find a way to justify their actions
when they stand in a high-power position. Such a claim
confirms previous studies showing higher levels of moral
hypocrisy among high-power individuals (Lammers, et al.,
2010). On the other hand, as previously discussed, most
participants under a low-power prime reported the power
involved as illegitimate. For example, essays written by this
class of participants included expressions such as "He had
no right to do that" or "their actions were purely selfish
even though they had the legal right". In this case our
findings contradict prior studies on Western cultures
claiming: “decreased power, results in people being less

critical on others and more critical on the self” (Lammers et
al., 2010). In other words, low-power situations tend to
make Iranian individuals highly critical on the holder of
power, often resulting in the powerful being perceived as
illegitimate.
One possible explanation for our results, relying on
previously proposed features of collectivism amongst
Iranians, is that when participants evaluate the power
involved in their power prime as legitimate, they are
naturally considering others as their in-group. In these
circumstances, due to their high levels of collectivism, they
become more altruistic. However, when under an
illegitimate power prime, others are spontaneously
considered as out-groups. In other words, inside the group,
and where power is perceived as legitimate, the powerless
are supported and show higher levels of approach and
demand. On the other hand, when power is distributed
illegitimately, others are viewed as outside the social group,
the powerless fail to demand, and fall into an oppressed
state similar to social inhibition described by Carver and
White (1994). Our results show that in this case, legitimacy
has such an effect that people experiencing a state of
illegitimate low-power demand less than 1/3 of people in a
similar low-power situation but who feel legitimacy in the
state. In our future experiments, we plan to explore the
interplay between power and in-group/out-group behavior.
Shedding light on the origins of the relation between
altruism and high-power behavior among Iranians, begs a
deeper discussion of religious and cultural settings. A view
that the powerful should treat subordinates kindly (as their
brothers and sisters) is highly valued in Islamic teachings
(Latifi, 1997). Moreover, some studies suggest that Iranians
commonly view their superiors in the same light as their
older siblings or parents, describing the relationship
between an employee and supervisor close to that of family
members; therefore, managers are often expected to show
support, generosity and compassion towards subordinates
(Latifi, 1997; Tayeb, 1997; Javidan, et al. 2003). A high
score on the power distance index further enhances this
effect as social hierarchies are mutually accepted and
practiced from an early age. Thus, their properties become
deep aspects of social behavior.
One must take into account that the question of whether
generosity is a pure act or has underlying selfish motives
remains an open question. For example, various studies
argue that some of the giving is due to the fact that the
dictator does not want to seem selfish to the anonymous
receivers (Dana, Cain, & Dawes, 2006). In this study, we
have not addressed this question; rather, we consider how
altruistic behaviors are practiced in the society regardless of
fundamental motives. We plan to address such issues in
future studies.

References
Anderson, C., & Berdahl, J. L. (2002). The experience of
power: examining the effects of power on approach and

3358

inhibition tendencies. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 83(6), 1362.
Arendt, H. (1970). On violence (Vol. 17). Mariner Books.
Arnett, J. J. (2008). The neglected 95%: why American
psychology needs to become less American. American
Psychologist, 63(7), 602.
Batson, C. D. (1991). The altruism question: Toward a
social-psychological
answer.
Lawrence
Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Bolton, G. E., Katok, E., & Zwick, R. (1998). Dictator game
giving:
Rules
of
fairness
versus
acts
of
kindness. International Journal of Game Theory, 27(2),
269-299.
Camerer, C. F. (2011). Behavioral game theory:
Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton University
Press.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition,
behavioral activation, and affective responses to
impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS
Scales. Journal
of
personality
and
social
psychology, 67(2), 319.
Dana, J., Cain, D. M., & Dawes, R. M. (2006). What you
don’t know won’t hurt me: Costly (but quiet) exit in
dictator games. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 100(2), 193-201.
Dastmalchian, A., Javidan, M., & Alam, K. (2001).
Effective leadership and culture in Iran: An empirical
study. Applied Psychology, 50(4), 532-558.
De Dreu, C. K. (1995). Coercive power and concession
making in bilateral negotiation. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 39(4), 646-670.
Fiske, S. T. (1993). Controlling other people: The impact of
power on stereotyping. American psychologist, 48(6),
621.
Galinsky, A. D., Magee, J. C., Inesi, M. E., & Gruenfeld, D.
H.
(2006).
Power
and
perspectives
not
taken. Psychological Science, 17(12), 1068-1074.
Galinsky, A.D., Gruenfeld, D.H, & Magee, J.C. (2003).
From power to action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 453–466.
Giebels, E., De Dreu, C. K., & Van de Vliert, E. (2000).
Interdependence in negotiation: Effects of exit options
and social motive on distributive and integrative
negotiation. European
Journal
of
Social
Psychology, 30(2), 255-272.
Gruenfeld, D. H. (1995). Status, ideology, and integrative
complexity on the US Supreme Court: Rethinking the
politics of political decision making. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 68(1), 5.
Hass, R. G. (1984). Perspective taking and self-awareness:
Drawing an E on your forehead. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 46(4), 788.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). Most
people are not WEIRD. Nature, 466(7302), 29-29.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Motivation, leadership, and
organization:
Do
American
theories
apply
abroad. Organizational dynamics, 9(1), 42-63.

Hofstede, G. (1983). The cultural relativity of organizational
practices and theories. Journal of international business
studies, 14(2), 75-89.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture's consequences: Comparing
values, behaviors, institutions and organizations across
nations. Sage Publications, Incorporated.
House, R., Javidan, M., & Dorfman, P. (2001). Project
GLOBE: an introduction. Applied Psychology, 50(4),
489-505.
Javidan, M., & Dastmalchian, A. (2003). Culture and
leadership in Iran: The land of individual achievers,
strong family ties, and powerful elite. The Academy of
Management Executive, 17(4), 127-142.
Jones, D. (2010). A WEIRD view of human nature skews
psychologists' studies. Science, 328(5986), 1627-1627.
Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Anderson, C. (2003).
Power,
approach,
and
inhibition. Psychological
review, 110(2), 265.
Kemper, T. D. (1991). Predicting emotions from social
relations. Social Psychology Quarterly, 330-342.
Lammers, J., Galinsky, A. D., Gordijn, E. H., & Otten, S.
(2008a). Illegitimacy moderates the effects of power on
approach. Psychological Science, 19(6), 558-564.
Lammers, J., Galinsky, A. D., Gordijn, E. H., & Otten, S.
(2008b). Power and cooperation; the importance of
legitimacy. Unpublished manuscript, Tilburg University,
Tilburg, The Netherlands.
Lammers, J., Stapel, D. A., & Galinsky, A. D. (2010).
Power increases hypocrisy moralizing in reasoning,
immorality in behavior. Psychological Science, 21(5),
737-744.
Latifi, F. (1997). Management learning in national
context. Unpublished PhD thesis, Henley Management
College.
Lenski, G. E. (1966). Power and privilege: A theory of
social stratification. UNC Press Books.
Mills, C. W. (2000). The power elite. Oxford University
Press, USA.
Pinkley, R. L. (1995). Impact of knowledge regarding
alternatives to settlement in dyadic negotiations: Whose
knowledge
counts?. Journal
of
Applied
Psychology, 80(3), 403.
Tayeb, M. (1997). Islamic revival in Asia and human
resource management. Employee Relations, 19(4), 352364.
Weber, E., Hsee, C., & Sokolowska, J. (1998). What
folklore tells us about risk and risk taking: Cross-cultural
comparisons of American, German, and Chinese
proverbs. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 75(2), 170-186.
Weber, E., & Hsee, C. (2000). Culture and individual
judgment
and
decision
making. Applied
Psychology, 49(1), 32-61.
Wiggins, J. S., & Broughton, R. (1985). The interpersonal
circle: A structural model for the integration of
personality research. Perspectives in personality, 1, 1-47.

3359

