UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The empirical investigation of semantics: Between abstract-symbolic and embodiedsimulative models of meaning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70k492t5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Werning, Markus
Cosentino, Erica

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The empirical investigation of
semantics: Between abstract-symbolic
and embodied-simulative models of
meaning

some form of embodiment (Meteyard et al., 2012; Vigliocco
et al., 2011). However, due to the specialization of
competences, the circulation of these results among scholars
in different arenas has not always been easy. This
symposium will provide an opportunity to bring together
philosophers, linguists, psychologists and neuroscientists
joined by a common interest in the application of
experimental methods to the analysis of the nature of
meaning.
Given the interdisciplinary nature of the symposium, we
would like to stress that the speakers are not only
specialized in the field of semantics, but that they are also
able to work at the crossroad between several disciplines.
The symposium organizers share a background in
philosophy with an active interest in neurolinguistics, at
both a theoretical and an experimental level (Ferretti et al.,
2013; Werning, 2012).

Markus Werning (markus.werning@rub.de)
Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum
44780 Bochum, Germany

Erica Cosentino (ericacosentino@libero.it)
Department of Philosophy, University of Calabria
87036 Rende (CS), Italy

Keywords: embodiment; abstract symbol theories, EEG,
emulative semantics

Speakers and abstracts

Introduction

Erica Cosentino

Classical theories of meaning in the field of linguistics and
psycholinguistics assume that meaning arises from the
combination of symbols for which a substring or other partwhole relation is defined. According to this perspective,
symbols are abstract, amodal (i.e., neither perceptual, nor
motoric) and only contingently related to entities in the
external world.
For a long time, a convincing case for classical models
has been the absence of alternatives. However, more
recently, several theories subsumed under the notions of
“embodied” or “grounded” theories have challenged the
fundamental assumptions of classical models (e.g.,
Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 2010; Pecher & Zwaan, 2005).
From the point of view of embodied theories, cognition is
grounded in modal representations which simulate actual
objects, properties and situations. Such a claim carries
theoretical, empirical and methodological repercussions that
also change the way linguistic processes are conceived of
(Ferretti et al., 2013; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998). The goal
of the symposium is to explore which repercussions these
issues have on the nature of linguistic meaning and its
neural and cognitive realization or representation.
A main motivation for the symposium is that, in spite of
the relevance of the issue, to this day the relationship
between classical and embodied models of meaning is still
not clear. More to the point, it is not clear whether classical
and embodied models describe different aspects of meaning
(and are then compatible) or whether they are mutually
exclusive explanations of the same phenomena. As the
nature and representation of meaning is a topic of increasing
cross-disciplinary interest, the symposium aims to
encourage an in-depth discussion among scholars interested
in the problem, providing a cross-disciplinary forum of
dialogue.
A further motivation for the symposium is that
researchers in many specialized fields of cognitive sciences
have been providing results which seem to support at least

Classical theories of meaning are two-step models,
according to which contextual information is considered
only after establishing phrase or sentence local meaning. In
this perspective, local semantics cannot initially be
overruled by the wider context. In this study we tested this
prediction analyzing the effect of discourse context on
affordances. Two-steps models predict that a verb-object
violation, as in “She uses the funnel to hang her coat” will
always be considered inappropriate, regardless of the wider
discourse. In the current study we found that when this
anomalous combination is embedded in a neutral context it
elicits a typical N400, indicating that the subject is
experiencing interpretative problems. However, when
preceded by a supportive context, the very same sentence
becomes perfectly acceptable, as reflected by the absence of
an N400 effect. This finding challenges the classical
approach to meaning suggesting that affordances are
immediately integrated in the construction of meaning and
that contextual information is immediately taken into
account.

Lars Kuchinke
The embodied-simulative view proposes that linguistic
meaning is grounded in memory traces in modality-specific
brain regions as distributed neural representations of
previously experienced internal and external states. This
view also subsumes emotional information linked to words,
and recent empirical evidence from emotional word
recognition supports this assumption. Electrocortical
findings point to a very early locus of these emotional
effects preceding or at least altering the onset of lexical
access. These effects are modulated by emotional valence,
leading back to the 'semantic cohesiveness' hypothesis that
proposes differences in the amount of semantic associations
of valenced words. We recently proposed an associative
read-out model based on co-occurence statistics that

111

correctly predicts higher recognition rates for words with a
greater amount of associations to other stimuli. Based on
this model, we show that effects of positive words can be
explained by their semantic cohesion, whereas negative
words explain variance beyond their associations.

describe an integrative view. I will do this by discussing
recent research from my lab.

Symposium program committee
Prof. Dr. Markus Werning
Dr. Erica Cosentino

Gabriella Vigliocco

References
Theories of semantic representation ought to account for
how we use this information, how we learn it and how it
breaks down after brain damage. I will set the stage locating
existing theories along a continuum from disembodied to
fully embodied and presenting evidence from behavioural,
imaging and patients’ studies that limit the viable theories to
those that incorporate some degree of embodiment but also
include information from other sources such as language. I
will then give a bird eyes overview of one such theories that
we have developed in the past few years in which all
concepts (concrete and abstract) are grounded in our sensory
motor and affective experience but also statistical
information from language contributes to the learning and
representing meaning.

Barsalou,
L.W.
(1999).
Perceptual
symbol
systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Ferretti F., Adornetti I., Cosentino E., Marini A. (2013).
Keeping the route and speaking coherently: the hidden
link between spatial navigation and discourse processing,
Journal of Neurolinguistics, 26(2), 327-334.
Glenberg, A. M. (2010). Embodiment as a unifying
perspective for psychology. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1, 586-596
Meteyard, L., Cuadrado, S.R., Bahrami, B., Vigliocco, G.
(2012). Coming of age: a review of embodiment and the
neuroscience of semantics. Cortex, 48 (7), 788-804.
Pecher, D., Zwaan R (eds.) (2005). Grounding Cognition:
The Role of Perception and Action in Memory, Language,
and Thought. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P., Druks, J., Barber, H., Cappa,
S.F. (2011). Nouns and verbs in the brain: a review of
behavioural, electrophysiological, neuropsychological and
imaging studies. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
35(3), 407-426.
Werning, M. (2012). Non-symbolic Compositional
Representation and Its Neuronal Foundation: Towards an
Emulative Semantics. In Werning, M., Hinzen, W., &
Machery, M. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of
Compositionality. Oxford University Press, Oxford (pp.
633-654).
Zwaan, R. A. and G. A. Radvansky (1998). Situation
models in language comprehension and memory.
Psychological Bulletin, 123, 162-185.

Markus Werning
In the first part of the talk, the central tenets of Emulative
Semantics will be outlined. In the second part an EEG-based
case study on the understanding of linguistic emotion
contexts will be presented. (1) Emulative Semantics
(Werning, 2012) is a naturalist theory of meaning. It claims
that linguistic meaning consists in patterns of neuroemulations. Unlike rival naturalist theories of meaning,
Emulative Semantics is a non-symbolic, but still
compositional theory of meaning. Neuro-emulations are
abstractly described dynamical states of the brain’s sensorymotor regions that are partially isomorphic to modeltheoretical structures. Emulative Semantics thus inherits
many formal features of model-theoretical semantics, which
has been very successful as a formal account of meaning.
(2) One prediction of Emulative Semantics is that the
understanding of linguistic contexts about emotional
scenarios should involve the emulation of emotions. Since
the emulation of emotions is also thought to be a basis for
the human capacity of empathy, Emulative Semantics
predicts a correlation between empathy with emotions and
the comprehension of linguistic emotion contexts. In a
recent ERP study we could in fact show that, in linguistic
emotion contexts, the N400 effect, which indicates
violations of semantic expectations, depends on empathy as
measured by the Multifaceted Empathy Test.

Rolf A. Zwaan
Language comprehension involves the construction of
mental representations. This seems an uncontroversial
statement in most of cognitive science. Much research has
focused on the nature of these representations: are they textbased or situational (or both) are they abstract or grounded
in perception and action? My goal here is to propose and

112

