UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Contextual Repetition During Fast Mapping on Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fh9t54t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Axelsson, Emma
Horst, Jessica

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Contextual Repetition During Fast Mapping on Word Learning
Emma L. Axelsson (e.axelsson@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychiatry, ICAMHS Research, Mental Health Centre Level 1, Locked Bag 7103
Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool BC NSW 1871 AUSTRALIA

Jessica S. Horst (jessica@sussex.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Pevensey 1 Building
Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9QH, UK
Abstract
Recent research suggests that children’s ability to learn words
via fast mapping is strongly related to the attentional demands
of the task. Here we explore whether lowering the attentional
demands during the initial fast mapping task facilitates word
learning. Three-year-old children completed fast mapping and
test trials using a touch screen computer. For half of the
children, the non-targets (competitors) repeated across trials
and for other children there was no repetition. All children
received the same word learning test trials. Only children who
had received repeating competitors (lower attentional
demands) during the initial fast mapping task demonstrated
word learning. Thus, these data suggest that children’s ability
to learn novel names is strongly influenced by the competition
and attentional demands of the initial fast mapping context.
Keywords: fast mapping; word learning; competition;
attentional demands.

Does Fast Mapping Enable Word Learning?
Learning to comprehend the vast number of words that
children are bombarded with daily is a daunting task.
Arguably, it is equally daunting for researchers to explain
the mechanisms responsible for children’s developing
ability to understand what a speaker is referring to when
uttering a new word, but also children’s ability to remember
the link between the word and referent for later encounters.
Without direct instruction, children effectively determine
the referent for a novel word on their own—particularly
when the referent is presented in the context of known
objects. Typically referred to as fast mapping (Carey, 1978),
children appear to determine the referent via process-ofelimination (Halberda, 2003). That is, children use their
prior knowledge (i.e., known vocabulary) to rule out the
objects they have already linked to a name. Instead, they
select a novel object as the likely referent of a novel name.
Biases to novelty appear to be key in fast mapping. Recent
research further indicates that even in the context of other
nameless, novel objects, children will select the most novel
object as a referent for a novel name (Horst, Samuelson,
Kucker, & McMurray, 2011; Mather & Plunkett, 2012).
However, fast mapping is not word learning per se, but
rather an initial step in the word learning process (Carey,
1978; Horst & Samuelson, 2008). Fast mapping appears to
be relatively easy for children, yet retention of the nameobject mappings is more difficult. For example, Horst and
Samuelson (2008) presented 24-month-old children with

referent selection (i.e., fast mapping) trials with one novel
object and two known objects. Only 5 minutes later, they
tested children’s retention for the same novel name-object
associations by presenting the targets among other novel
targets that had been encountered during the initial referent
selection trials and foils that had been seen during a
preferential looking task. Children had little difficulty
selecting the correct referents on the initial referent selection
trials. However, children performed at chance levels on the
retention trials, suggesting that the initial name-object
mappings did not lead to robust representations in long-term
memory. Other studies have found similar difficulties in
long-term retention of name-object mappings despite
demonstrations of minimal difficulty disambiguating novel
from known objects (e.g., Bion, Borovsky & Fernald, 2013;
Gureen, Horne & Erjavec, 2012).
Note, other studies do suggest minimal exposure to a
novel word and object may lead to long-term retention of
the association, but these have typically involved only
naming a single novel object (e.g., Woodward et al., 1994).
It remains unclear, therefore, whether children’s selection of
the target on the delayed test trials are really in response to
the specific phonetic content of the new word or because
that word was the only new word introduced during
training, rendering it unique among the available
alternatives (Dollaghan, 1985; Schafer & Plunkett, 1998).

Task Demands
Taken together, these studies suggest that children are adept
at forming the initial associations between novel referents
and their names, however, children’s ability to retain these
mappings may suffer when task demands are high. For
example, in a recent study exploring the effect of the
number of known competitors present during the initial fast
mapping task on subsequent word learning, 2-year-old
children were only able to retain novel name-object
associations when task demands were relatively low (Horst,
Scott & Pollard, 2010). Specifically, children were only able
to retain words when they had seen few known competitors
across fast mapping trials (eight) but not when they had seen
more competitors across trials (12 or 15)—although the
number of targets was the same for all groups.
Clearly then, the non-target competitors play an important
role in word learning via fast mapping. Horst and
Samuelson (2008) found that children could only retain the
novel name-object associations when ostensive naming was

1792

provided after each fast mapping trial. That is, when the
experimenter picked up a novel object, pointed to it and
restated its name. Importantly, the experimenter physically
moved the target away from the known competitors. For
another group of children, naming was also provided after
each trial, however, targets were not moved away from the
competitors. These children did not learn the name-object
associations. The authors argue that ostensive naming helps
children focus on the target while simultaneously drawing
their attention away from the competitors.
A follow-up study explicitly tested this explanation of
ostensive naming by illuminating targets from below (a light
flashed inside the tray the objects were on) and by covering
competitors with semi-opaque boxes (Axelsson, Churchley
& Horst, 2012). Children who received this form of
ostensive naming learned the name-object associations. The
authors argue that ostensive naming helped children better
encode the name-object association as their attention to the
target object was sustained. Children who only received
ostensive naming in the form of pointing (without moving
the target away from the competitors) did not demonstrate
significant word learning.
In both of these examples, the initial fast mapping task
was made easier by decreasing the attentional demands.
Specifically, the experimenter helped guide the child’s
attention away from the competitors, which facilitated
processing of the targets.
Similarly, increasing attentional demands can also have a
detrimental effect on subsequent word learning. Wilkinson,
and colleagues (2003) presented one group of children with
fast mapping trials with one novel object and three known
competitors. Another group received fast mapping trials
where each successive trial included not only a novel object
and two known competitors, but also the novel object from
the previous trial. Children who faced such increased
attentional demands were less successful on subsequent fast
mapping trials. Because children typically prefer novelty
(Horst et al., 2011; Mather & Plunkett, 2012), the presence
of another novel object likely decreased attention to the
target.

Contextual Repetition
Similar effects of the reduction of attentional demands
during word learning tasks have been demonstrated in other
contexts (for a review, see Horst, 2013). In an investigation
of word learning via shared storybook reading, Horst,
Parsons and Bryan (2011) found that 3-year-old children
who were read the same storybooks repeatedly (three times)
successfully retained novel words from the books when
tested one week later. In contrast, children who were read
three different stories performed at chance levels when
tested on the same novel words one week later. Importantly,
children in both groups were exposed to the same number of
novel words the same number of times. The critical
difference was that the first group encountered the words in
the same context repeatedly whereas the second group
encountered them in different contexts. The authors

concluded that children who encountered words in repeated
contexts were at an advantage because they had less
information to process, facilitating long-term retention of
the name-object associations. The question that remains
unanswered, then, is whether the same mechanism is at play
in other contexts.

The Current Study
The aim of the current study is to examine the effect of
contextual repetition during fast mapping on subsequent
word learning. To examine the effects of the learning
context, children either saw novel objects with the same or
different known competitors across trials. Specifically,
children either encountered the novel object in the same
context (with the same competitors) across all three trials
with that given target or encountered the novel object in
different contexts (with different competitors) across trials.
Thus, the attentional demands of the task were either
relatively low (repeated contexts) or relatively high
(different contexts). Therefore, the degree of attentional
demand was expected to differ across the four groups during
the fast mapping trials. As in the storybook studies (e.g.,
Horst et al., 2011), those presented with repeated contexts
(competitors) during novel target referent selection trials
were predicted to perform better at test. As attentional
demands are presumably high during referent selection of
novel objects, the repetition of competitors may aid in longterm learning of name-object mappings.

Method
Participants
Forty-eight typically developing, monolingual, Englishspeaking children aged 36 months (M age 36 months, 13
days, SD = 73.79 days; range 33 months, 0 days – 41
months, 30 days; 24 girls) participated. Children were from
predominantly white, middle class homes recruited from
southern England. Data from 1 additional child were
excluded because she consistently touched the screen before
waiting to hear the instructions. Parents were reimbursed for
travel expenses and children received a small gift.

Stimuli
Digital photographs of known (familiar) and novel objects
served as the target stimuli. Specifically, six known objects
(ball, cup, train, cow, frog, elephant) and three novel objects
(the end of a foam arrow/zorch, a y-shaped rubber dog
toy/gaz and a clacker/sprock) served as target stimuli on the
referent selection trials. The known objects were chosen
because they are highly familiar to 3-year-old children. The
novel objects were chosen because they are unfamiliar to
most 3-year-old children and they do not know names for
these objects. Additional photographs of three aliens, a bed
and a dresser were used during the experiment. A female,
native British English speaker narrated the procedure for the
child (henceforth the narrator).

1793

Procedure and Design
During the experiment, children were seated on their
parents’ laps at a table in front of a Dell computer with a
touchscreen monitor. The keyboard and mouse were out of
the children’s reach. Stimuli were presented using ePrime
2.0. Children were asked if they would like to play a
computer game. During the experiment, the experimenter
stood behind the child to ensure the child remained on task,
to answer questions and to minimize parental interference.
Introduction and Warm-up Trials The first screen
depicted a red alien who the narrator introduced as Modo.
The recorded script was carefully written so that no
pronouns were used: thus each child could decide if Modo
was male or female. The next screen depicted a bed, a
dresser and small versions of each of the known and novel
objects that would later be used on the referent selection
trials. The narrator explained that Modo was very messy and
asked if the child would “help tidy up Modo’s room.”
Three warm-up trials immediately followed. These trials
served to introduce the child to the task and to help the child
feel comfortable touching the computer screen. On each trial
the child was presented with three additional known objects
and asked to select an object by the narrator, e.g., “Can you
find the spoon? Touch the spoon.” If the child had not yet
touched the screen after 1000ms, the recording repeated and
continued to loop with 1000ms in between requests for up to
30 seconds, or until the child touched the screen. After the
child touched a picture, a blank, white screen appeared to
give the experimenter a moment to praise the child. The
same objects were presented on each warm-up trial, but
object positions (left, middle, right) were counterbalanced
across trials so that each object appeared once in each
position. Thus, the child was asked for a different object in a
different position on each warm-up trial and could practice
touching an object at each possible position.
Referent Selection Trials Referent selection trials
immediately followed the warm-up trials and followed the
same procedure except that children did not receive
feedback after these trials. On each referent selection trial
the child was presented with two known objects (e.g.,
elephant, cup) and one novel object (e.g., clacker) and asked
to choose either a known or novel object, e.g., “Can you
find the sprock? Touch the sprock.” Children were
presented with 18 referent selection trials including 9 known

name and 9 novel name referent selection trials, of which
there were 3 trials for each novel name (e.g., 3 sprock
trials). Which objects children saw on these trials varied
across conditions depending on whether or not the same
competitors were repeated across trials (see Table 1).
For half of the children the same competitors were
repeated across all trials for a given novel name. For
example, each time they were asked for the sprock (clacker),
it was displayed with the elephant and the cup. For the other
children, different competitors were displayed on each trial
for a given novel name. For example, the first sprock trial
may have included the elephant and cup, the second sprock
trial the train and frog and the third sprock trial the cow and
ball. Object animacy was also counterbalanced across trials.
Likewise, for half of the children, the same competitors
were repeated across all trials with the same known name.
For example, each time they were asked for the elephant, it
was displayed with the cup and sprock (clacker). For the
other children, different competitors were displayed on each
known name referent selection trial. For example, the first
elephant trial may have included the cup and sprock, the
second elephant trial the ball and zorch, and the elephant
was also a competitor along with the gaz on a train trial.
Importantly, all children saw the same six known objects
and three novel objects across referent selection trials an
equal number of times. However, for this to evenly occur
some targets (e.g., elephant) were also competitors in the
non-repeat conditions.
This resulted in a 2x2 design with four conditions:
competitors repeat across all trials (i.e., both trial types),
competitors repeat across novel trials (but not known trials),
competitors repeat across known trials (but not novel trials)
and competitors do not repeat on any trials. One can also
consider the four conditions of the current study on a
continuum of attentional demands from low (competitors
repeat across all trials) to intermediate (competitors repeat
across novel trials or competitors repeat across known trials)
to high (competitors never repeat).
Children were asked for each of the novel targets once
during trials 1-6, once during trials 7-12 and once during
trials 13-18. Each novel target appeared once in each
position (left, middle, right) when it was a target and once in
each position when it was a competitor during the known
name trials. The same objects were never presented on two
consecutive trials and no more than two trials of either type
(i.e., known or novel targets) were presented sequentially.

Table 1: Example targets and competitors (comp.) for the Repeat Across All Trials and the No Repeat Conditions.
Trial
1
7
14
4
10
17

Repeat Across All Trials
Target
Comp. 1
Sprock
Elephant
Sprock
Elephant
Sprock
Elephant
Elephant
Cup
Elephant
Cup
Elephant
Cup

Comp. 2
Cup
Cup
Cup
Sprock
Sprock
Sprock

Trial
1
8
11
5
13
18

1794

No Repeat Across Trials
Target
Comp. 1
Sprock
Elephant
Sprock
Train
Sprock
Cow
Elephant
Frog
Elephant
Ball
Train
Elephant

Comp. 2
Cup
Frog
Ball
Sprock
Zorch
Gaz

Word Learning Trials After the final referent selection
trial, the screen showed the bed, dresser and the small
stimuli pictures from before but displayed in neat rows and
the narrator told the child the room was now tidy. The next
screen showed Modo with another alien who was blue. The
narrator explained that Modo’s friend ZeeBee had come
over to play and asked if the child could help Modo share
toys with ZeeBee. Then, the word learning test trials were
presented again following the same procedure. Importantly,
the word learning trials were the same for all conditions. On
each trial all three novel objects were displayed and the
child was asked to choose an object. Children were asked to
choose each target once (for a total of 3 trials). Each novel
object appeared once in each position (left, middle, right).
At the end the narrator told the child “It’s fun to share toys!”

Similarly, on the novel name referent selection trials,
children chose the target object significantly more than
would be expected by chance (.33) in the repeat across all
trials condition (t(11) = 6.30, p <.001, d = 1.82), in the
repeat across novel trials condition (t(11) = 6.96, p <.001, d
= 2.02), in the repeat across known trials condition (t(11) =
18.35, p <.001, d = 5.23) and the no repeat condition (t(11)
= 11.08, p <.001, d = 3.18), all ps two-tailed. Children’s
proportions of target choices on the novel name referent
selection trials were submitted to an ANOVA with competitors repeat across novel trials (yes, no) and competitors
repeat across known trials (yes, no) as between-subjects
factors. The ANOVA yielded no significant effects. Thus,
contextual repetition during referent selection did not
influence children’s ability to select novel objects either.

Word Learning Trials

Results
As can be seen clearly in Figure 1, children in all four
conditions performed very well during the initial referent
selection task. On the known name referent selection trials,
children chose the target object significantly more than
would be expected by chance (.33) in the repeat across all
trials condition (t(11) = 19.34, p <.001, d = 5.53), in the
repeat across novel trials condition (t(11) = 14.45, p <.001,
d = 4.12), in the repeat across known trials condition (t(11)
= 44.78, p <.001, d = 12.78) and the no repeat condition
(t(11) = 29.40, p <.001, d = 8.40), all ps two-tailed.
Children’s proportions of target choices on the known name
referent selection trials were submitted to an ANOVA with
competitors repeat across novel trials (yes, no) and competitors repeat across known trials (yes, no) as betweensubjects factors. The ANOVA yielded no significant effects,
indicating that contextual repetition during referent selection
did not influence children’s ability to select known objects.

In contrast, contextual repetition during referent selection
did influence children’s learning of previously fast-mapped
novel names. As can be seen in Figure 2, children in the
repeat across all trials and repeat across novel trials
conditions identified referents of novel names at rates
significantly greater than expected by chance (.33), both
t(11) = 3.87, p <.01, d = 1.12. However, in contrast, children
in the repeat across known trials and the no repeat
conditions performed at chance levels, t(11) = 1.50, ns, and
t(11) = 1.20, ns, respectively. Thus, repeating the same
competitors across multiple novel name referent selection
trials did influence children’s ability to learn novel words.
To best understand the individual contributions of
repeating the competitors on both novel and known name
referent selection trials, children’s proportion of target
choices on the word learning trials was submitted to an
ANOVA with competitors repeat across novel trials (yes,
no) and competitors repeat across known trials (yes, no) as
between-subjects factors.

Figure 1. Children’s proportion correct during the referent
selection trials. Dotted line indicates chance (.33), error bars
indicate 1 standard error from the mean. *** p < .001.

Figure 2. Children’s proportion correct during the word
learning test trials. Dotted line indicates chance (.33), error
bars indicate 1 standard error from the mean. ** p < .01.

Referent Selection Trials

1795

The ANOVA yielded a main effect of repeat across
novel trials, F(1,44) = 6.99 p = .01, ηp2 = .14. Children in
the conditions where competitors repeated across novel
trials learned more words (M = .65, SD = .29) than children
in the conditions in which competitors did not repeat across
novel name referent selection trials (M = .44, SD = .27). No
other significant effects were found. These findings clearly
demonstrate that repetition of competitors during novel
name referent selection influences later word learning.

Reaction Times
Finally, we wanted to assess how the attentional demands of
the task influenced children’s performance throughout the
experiment. To this end, we examined children’s reaction
times (RTs) on all correct trials over the course of the
experiment. RTs were submitted to an ANOVA with
competitors repeat across novel trials (yes, no) and
competitors repeat across known trials (yes, no) as betweensubjects factors and encounter (first, second, third, fourth) as
a repeated-measure (the fourth encounters were the word
learning trials). The ANOVA yielded a significant main
effect of encounter, F(2.57,94.96) = 10.39, p = <.001, ηp2 =
.22. Overall, children became faster over the four
encounters. There was also a significant encounter by
competitors repeat across novel trials interaction,
F(2.57,94.96) = 3.63, p = .02, ηp2 = .09 (see Figure 3).

Further analyses revealed a significant linear trend for this
interaction, F(1,37) = 6.88, p = .01, ηp2 = .16. Specifically,
in the conditions where the competitors did not repeat across
novel trials RTs decreased from the first to the fourth
encounter. In contrast, in the conditions where the
competitors did repeat across novel trials RTs became faster
during referent selection (first three encounters) but slowed
down again on the word learning test (forth encounter).
RTs to the fourth encounter (i.e., word learning test trial)
were then compared. In the conditions where the competitors did repeat across novel trials, children were marginally
slower on the word learning test trials (M = 5408.09ms, SD
= 3870.36ms) than children in the other conditions (M =
3909.67ms, SD = 1100.29ms), t(25.91) = 1.79, p = .084,
two-tailed, d = 0.60. This difference in RTs is interesting
because it suggests that children in the different groups were
processing the names and objects differently. Children in
the conditions with high task demands (competitors did not
repeat across novel name referent selection trials) may have
been simply guessing on these trials—hence the quick RTs.
In contrast, children in the conditions with low task
demands (competitors repeated across novel name trials)
may have been committed to the task and searching for the
correct referent—hence the slower RTs. Overall, these data
demonstrate that lowering the attentional demands through
repeating contexts (competitors) facilitated word learning
and influenced processing as measured by reaction times.

Discussion

Figure 3. Children’s reaction times across encounters to the
novel targets including during the initial fast mapping trials
(First, Second, Third encounters) and the word learning test
(Fourth encounter).

Word learning is typically a gradual process as children
experience the statistical regularity of the co-occurance of a
name and object across repeated encounters (Smith & Yu,
2008). Repeated encounters also facilitate retention for
novel name-object associations (e.g., Gurteen et al., 2012).
In everyday life, children may be exposed to some names
and objects multiple times in the same context (e.g., a
rubber duck in the bathtub). When a new word and its
referent are repeatedly encountered in the same context, the
non-targets may become increasingly redundant and
predictable, freeing up attentional resources for processing
the target referent (for a review and discussion of how this
relates to research using storybooks, see Horst, 2013).
The current study investigated the effect of contextual
repetition in referent selection trials on word learning. The
results demonstrate that children presented with contextual
repetition (i.e., the same competitors across multiple novel
name referent selection trials) were significantly better at
learning the target words than children who did not receive
contextual repetition. Repeating competitors across trials
appears to facilitate the initial encoding of the novel targets,
enabling robust learning of the name-object associations.
Children may have also associated the targets with the
context of the non-targets (e.g., sprocks occur with
elephants and cups), as they likely do with real-life objects
(e.g., rubber ducks occur with bathtubs). One could argue
that this gave targets on the contextual repetition trials a
“figure-ground advantage,” however, this is an unlikely

1796

explanation as the objects were all presented on a plain
white background as in previous studies (e.g., Schafer,
2005), rather than as part of a real scene.
We also found a difference in reaction times between
conditions in which the competitors repeated across novel
trials and conditions in which the competitors did not repeat.
Although all children responded faster across successive
encounters with the novel target, the children who saw the
same competitors across novel name trials slowed down on
the word learning trials when the novel target was presented
with the other novel objects. This group may have been
meaningfully considering among the possible test
alternatives while those who saw different competitors may
have been responding randomly at test, resulting in speedier
responses. Although all children received the same number
of exposures to the target items, only those for whom the
context repeated across exposures demonstrated significant
word learning.
Other studies, however, indicate that variability across
learning encounters may facilitate learning. (e.g., Thiessen,
2011). An important consideration, however, is what is
varying and what is remaining constant (i.e., repeating).
Previous studies have typically found an advantage for
variability at the target-level across encounters. Here, we
demonstrate an advantage for reducing variability at the
non-target-level (i.e., the competitors). Future research is
needed to investigate when and how variability and
reduction of attentional demands work together to facilitate
robust word learning over both short- and long-term
timescales. Clearly, however, for word learning via fast
mapping, reducing the attentional demands of the initial
referent selection task facilitates subsequent word learning.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by ESRC grant number RES-00022-4451 to J.H. We would like to thank Ruth Pearce for
assistance in data collection and Emilly J. Scott for serving
as our narrator and help with ePrime. We also thank the
members of the WORD Lab for their help in recruiting and
scheduling participants and the parents and children who
participated.

References
Axelsson, E. L., Churchley, K., & Horst, J. S. (2012). The
right thing at the right time: Why ostensive naming
facilitates word learning. Frontiers in Developmental
Psychology, 3(88), 1-8.
Bion, R. A. H., Borovsky, A., & Fernald, A. (2013). Fast
mapping, slow learning: Disambiguation of novel wordobject mappings in relation to vocabulary learning at 18,
24, and 30 months. Cognition, 126(1), 39-53.
Carey, S. (1978). The child as word learner. In Halle, J.
Bresnan & A. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic Theory and
Psychological Reality (pp. 264-293). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Dollaghan, C. (1985). Child meets word: Fast mapping in
preschool children. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 28(3), 449-454.
Gurteen, P. M., Horne, P. J., & Erjavec, M. (2011). Rapid
word learning in 13- and 17-month-olds in a naturalistic
two-word procedure: Looking versus reaching measures.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 109, 201-217.
Halberda, J. (2003). The development of a word-learning
strategy. Cognition, 87(1), B23-B34.
Horst, J. S. (2013). Context and Repetition in Word
Learning. Frontiers in Developmental Psychology, 4
(149), 1-11.
Horst, J. S., Parsons, K. L., & Bryan, N. M. (2011). Get the
story straight: contextual repetition promotes word
learning from storybooks. Frontiers in Developmental
Psychology, 2, 1-11.
Horst, J. & Samuelson, L. (2008). Fast mapping but poor
retention by 24-month-old infants. Infancy, 13, 128-157.
Horst, J. S., Samuelson, L. K., Kucker, S. C., & McMurray,
B. (2011). What’s new? Children prefer novelty in
referent selection. Cognition, 118, 234–244.
Horst, J. S., Scott, E. J., & Pollard, J. A. (2010). The role of
competition in word learning via referent selection.
Developmental Science, 13, 706-713.
Mather, E., & Plunkett, K. (2009). Learning words over
time: The role of stimulus repetition in mutual
exclusivity. Infancy, 14(1), 60–76.
Mather, E., & Plunkett, K. (2012). The role of novelty in
early word learning. Cognitive Science, 36, 1157-1177.
Schafer, G. (2005). Infants Can Learn Decontextualized
Words Before Their First Birthday. Child Develeopment,
76, 87-96.
Schafer, G., & Plunkett, K. (1998). Rapid word learning by
fifteen-month-olds under tightly controlled conditions.
Child Development, 69(2), 309-320.
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Thiessen, E. D. (2011). When variabilty matters more than
meaning: the effect of lexical forms on use of phonemic
contrasts. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1448-1458.
Wilkinson, K. M., Ross, E., & Diamond, A. (2003). Fast
mapping of multiple words: Insights into when "the
information provided" does and does not equal "the
information
perceived".
Applied
Developmental
Psychology, 24, 739-762.
Woodward, A. L., Markman, E. M., & Fitzsimmons, C. M.
(1994). Rapid word learning in 13- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 30(4), 553-566.

1797

