UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Path Less Taken: When Working Memory Capacity Constrains Insight

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4448m88r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Van Stockum, Charles
DeCaro, Marci

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Path Less Taken: When Working Memory Capacity Constrains Insight
Charles Van Stockum (charles.vanstockum@louisville.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA

Marci S. DeCaro (marci.decaro@louisville.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA

Abstract

Working Memory Capacity

Higher working memory capacity (WMC) supports
performance on a wide variety of complex cognitive and
academic activities (Barret, Tugade, & Engle, 2004).
However, a growing body of research demonstrates that
higher WMC can have disadvantages—leading individuals to
employ complex performance strategies that are less optimal
for a given task (cf. DeCaro & Beilock, 2010). We examine
this possibility in the domain of insight problem solving.
Participants (N=84) completed Matchstick Arithmetic
problems thought to either rely on controlled search and
retrieval processes (non-insight problems) or diverging from
known mathematical constraints (insight problems).
Consistent with a large body of research on WMC, higher
WMC was associated with higher non-insight problem
accuracy. However, higher WMC led to significantly worse
insight problem-solving. Although higher WMC supports
complex problem-solving strategies, relying on these may
lead individuals to miss associatively-driven solutions that are
important for insight.
Keywords: Working memory capacity; attention; insight;
problem solving.

Introduction
A great deal of work has demonstrated that higher working
memory capacity (WMC) is advantageous to an array of
complex cognitive and academic activities, such as
reasoning, comprehension, and problem-solving (see
Barrett, Tugade, & Engle, 2004, for a review). Indeed,
WMC—the ability to hold and manipulate information in a
temporary active state—has been said to be “so central to
human cognition that it is hard to find activities where it is
not involved” (Ericsson & Delaney, 1999, p. 259).
However, a growing body of research demonstrates that
higher WMC can have disadvantages—leading individuals
to employ complex performance strategies that are less
optimal for a given task (see DeCaro & Beilock, 2010, for a
review). In the current work, we examine the possibility that
higher WMC can hinder creative thinking in the form of
insight problem-solving. Specifically, we examine the
hypothesis that those who have the ability to implement
complex problem-solving strategies may be more likely to
miss associatively-driven solutions that are important for
insight.

WMC supports the ability to suppress distractors and guide
attention toward relevant information in goal-directed tasks
(McCabe, Roediger, McDaniel, Balota, & Hambrick, 2010).
The predictive power of WMC as a construct stems from
this domain-general capacity for attentional control, and
individual differences in WMC emerge primarily when that
capacity is challenged (Engle, 2002). So-called “executive
attention” is accomplished via controlled processing, which
is important in novel or interference-rich situations and
when goals come in conflict with prepotent responses
(Unsworth & Engle, 2007).
A large body of research has been built around the wellestablished differences in performance outcomes of
individuals who fall toward either extreme of the WMC
scale. Kane and Engle (2000) found that individuals with
lower WMC demonstrated a greater vulnerability to
proactive interference, and were more likely to lose track of
task goals than their higher WMC counterparts (Unsworth
& Engle, 2007). Additionally, studies have found that
individuals with lower WMC display higher rates of
attentional capture (Conway, Cowan, & Bunting, 2001;
Kane, Bleckley, Conway, & Engle, 2001), and have greater
difficulty discriminating relevant and irrelevant information
(Unsworth & Engle, 2007).
It is no surprise that the ability of higher WMC
individuals to control attention leads to greater ability to
implement more difficult, multi-step problem-solving
strategies (Engle, 2002). Indeed, the ability to execute
complex strategies may lead individuals to select strategies
in line with their ability—even if the task does not call for a
controlled processing approach. Beilock and DeCaro (2007)
explored this idea by examining the strategy selection of
higher and lower WMC individuals completing Luchins’
(1946) water jug task. This task requires individuals to use
three depicted water jugs with varying capacities (e.g., Jug
A=23, Jug B=96, and Jug C=3) to fill a “goal” jug with a
certain capacity (e.g., 67). For example, one might fill Jug
B, then pour that amount into Jug A, and then pour the
remaining amount into Jug C twice (i.e., B-A-2C).
Participants were explicitly instructed to mentally derive the
answers (i.e., without the use of paper), and use the simplest
strategy possible. The first few problems were solve-able
using a single complex formula (B-A-2C). The final few
problems could also be solved using this formula (e.g., Jug

3633

A=34, Jug B=72, Jug C=4; Goal=30). However, a much
simpler strategy could also be applied (e.g., A-C). On these
final problems, individuals with higher WMC were more
likely to employ the complex algorithmic strategy (i.e., BA-2C), even though more efficient strategies were available.
Individuals with lower WMC were instead quicker to
abandon an algorithmic approach and adopt a lessdemanding shortcut strategy relying on a more diffuse focus
of attention.
These findings demonstrate that individuals higher in
WMC may tend to use more complex strategies even when
simpler ones are more efficient for a given task. Such
overreliance on complex strategies can harm performance
on some tasks (e.g., Gaissmaier, Schooler, & Rieskamp,
2006; Wolford, Newman, Miller, & Wig, 2004). For
example, when associative responses guide well-learned
skill execution, as with proceduralized tasks, controlled
attention can disrupt performance (DeCaro, Thomas, &
Beilock, 2008). Additionally, various situational and taskspecific factors such as performance pressure (Beilock &
DeCaro, 2007; DeCaro, Thomas, Albert, & Beilock, 2011)
and expertise (Ericsson & Delaney, 1999; Wiley, 1998)
have been shown to moderate the role of controlled
processing in learning and performance situations. A better
understanding of when and why less WMC can prove
advantageous is necessary to fully grasp the limitations of
this pervasive system of cognitive constraint.

Insight Problem-Solving
An area in which this question is being explored with great
interest is research in insight problem-solving. The link
between WMC and insight is not well understood, and there
has been much debate over how best to facilitate the type of
creative thinking insight problem-solving requires. One
approach looks at the role of attention in problem-solving.
Insight problems require the use of strategies that diverge
from obvious approaches, and are supported by a more
diffuse focus of attention (Ansburg & Hill, 2003). Noninsight problems, conversely, are best solved by following a
progressive series of analytic steps, which requires
controlled processing and relies on WMC. According to
Representational Change Theory (Ohlsson, 1992), insight
problems generally trigger an inadequate mental
representation of the problem situation and solution criteria.
Explicit search processes reinforce this faulty
representation, and are unlikely to lead to the correct
solution path. Instead, unsuccessful solution attempts often
result in impasse, a state characterized by an apparent dearth
of viable problem operators. It is only through a reappraisal
of the initial representation that the correct solution path
becomes accessible to the solver, often in a sudden and
transparent manner (Kounios et al., 2006; Kounios &
Beeman, 2009; but see also Ash, Cushen, & Wiley, 2009).
Much of the research on insight problem-solving has
focused on questions surrounding the phenomenon of
impasse, specifically why impasse occurs and how it is
overcome (Ohlsson, 1992; Jones, 2003). One explanation is

that the problem solver unwittingly imposes unnecessary
and/or misguided constraints on the problem space
(Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider, & Rhenius, 1999).
Additionally, preoccupation with more familiar problem
operators (i.e., ones that have worked in the past) can make
it difficult to access more novel operators that are critical for
insight (Knoblich, Ohlsson, & Raney, 2001). To the extent
that one continues to implement strategies based on these
constraints, one will fail to reach an insight solution (Wiley,
1998).

Working Memory and Insight Problem-Solving
Because of their reliance on associatively-driven problemsolving solutions, insight problem-solving may be less
benefited by the use of complex, algorithmic problemsolving strategies. Indeed, the use of such strategies can
actually hinder the ability to derive a solution (Schooler,
Ohlsson, & Brooks, 1996; Wiley & Jarosz, 2012). Studies
have shown that WMC is related to the ability to solve
novel problems and adapt to new situations (Barrett et al.,
2004). However, if individuals higher in WMC have a
tendency to rely on a more controlled attentional focus and
inhibit peripheral information, they may also neglect
potentially relevant information held outside of the
perceived problem space (cf. Ansburg & Hill, 2003). Thus,
counter-intuitively, one might expect higher WMC
individuals to perform worse on insight problem-solving
tasks.
Support for this idea comes from a range of studies
demonstrating that less focused (i.e., more diffuse) attention
benefits insight problem-solving, whereas applying more
controlled attention hinders the ability to derive insight
solutions. For example, moderate alcohol intoxication both
reduces WMC and improves insight problem-solving
(Jarosz, Colflesh, & Wiley, 2012); solving insight problems
at one’s non-optimal time of day improves performance
(Wieth & Zacks, 2011); and patients with frontal lobe
impairment demonstrate better insight-problem accuracy
(Reverberi, Toraldo, D'Agostini, & Skrap, 2005). In
contrast, verbalizing the problem steps during solving
decreases
insight
performance,
possibly
by
“overshadowing” insight processes (Schooler et al., 1996).

Current Study
The current study examines the role of individual
differences in WMC in solving both non-insight and insight
problems, using the Matchstick Arithmetic task (Knoblich et
al., 1999). Matchstick Arithmetic problems are false
arithmetic statements written using matchsticks. The
matchsticks represent Roman numerals, arithmetic
operators, and equal signs. Each matchstick problem is
composed of three roman numerals separated by two
arithmetic signs, and has a unique solution consisting of a
single move.
Participants were given three types of matchstick
arithmetic problems, shown in Figure 1. Standard type (ST)
matchstick problems are solved by moving a matchstick

3634

representing a value of 1 from its position in a given roman
numeral to a different position in the same or a different
numeral on either side of the equal sign. The “I” matchstick
is considered a “loose chunk” because it can be removed
without invalidating the remaining figure and is easily
appended to many others (Knoblich et al., 1999). The
simple manipulation of loose chunks in ST problems is
consistent with prior knowledge that reordering values in an
equation leads to success (Öllinger, Jones, & Knoblich,
2008). ST problems do not involve impasse (Knoblich et al.,
2001), or restructuring (Öllinger et al., 2008), considered
defining features of insight problems (Ohlsson, 1992).
Consistent with Öllinger et al. (2008), we refer to ST
problems as non-insight problems.
Constraint relaxation (CR) matchstick problems require
transforming the initial false statement (e.g., III + III = III)
into a correct, but tautological, statement by changing the
plus sign into an equal sign (III = III = III). Solving CR
problems is thought to be achieved by relaxing the
constraint that correct arithmetic statements cannot contain
more than one equal sign. These are commonly considered
insight problems (Knoblich et al., 1999).
Finally, chunk decomposition (CD) problems require the
solver to decompose a “tight chunk” in order to identify the
decisive move. A tight chunk was defined as a single roman
numerical figure composed of two matchsticks that together
form a meaningful unit (e.g., V, X). For example, when
participants see the incorrect arithmetic statement IV = III +
VI, they must transpose the V into an X by sliding one
matchstick to find the solution IX = III + VI. CD problems
are typically considered insight problems. However,
findings from these problems do not always correspond to
the findings from CR problems, making it difficult to
determine if these problems are of the same nature
(Knoblich et al., 1999; Knoblich et al., 2001; Öllinger et al.,
2008). Thus, although we explored performance on CD
problems, we were unable to derive clear hypotheses about
the relationship between performance on these problems and
WMC.

Standard Type (ST)

Constraint Relaxation (CR)

Chunk Decomposition (CD)

Figure 1. Example Matchstick Arithmetic Problems

We predicted that higher WMC would be associated with
increased non-insight (ST) problem-solving accuracy.
However, we predicted the opposite pattern for insight (CR)
problems, that higher WMC would lead to lower insight
problem-solving accuracy. Such findings would be
consistent with a growing body of research demonstrating
that more working memory capacity can lead to controlled
problem-solving approaches that overshadow more optimal
associatively-driven solution paths (Wiley & Jarosz, 2012).

Method
Participants
Participants were 84 undergraduate students enrolled in
psychology classes (63 female; age M = 21, SD = 4.6; range
18-46 years). An additional 3 people were excluded from
the study because they had been exposed to matchstick
arithmetic problems before. One person was excluded for
errors on more than 20 percent of the sentence task of the
aRspan (Conway et al., 2005). Participants received course
credit for participation.

Materials
Problem-solving task Participants completed Matchstick
Arithmetic problems (Knoblich et al., 1999), consisting of
false arithmetic statements written with Roman numerals (I,
II, III, etc.), arithmetic operators (+, −), and equal signs
depicted as matchsticks (see Figure 1). Problems were
completed on paper. Participants were instructed to
transform the initial false arithmetic statement into a true
arithmetic statement while adhering to the following rules:
(a) only one matchstick can be moved, (b) no matchstick
can be discarded, (c) upright sticks and slanted sticks are not
interchangeable, and (d) the result must be a correct
arithmetic statement. Each matchstick problem was
composed of three roman numerals separated by two
arithmetic signs, and had a unique solution consisting of a
single move. Participants were given eight matchstick
arithmetic problems divided across two problem sets
containing four problems each. Problems sets were divided
into two categories (non-insight; insight) based on the move
required for solution: the non-insight problem set consisted
of four ST problems, and the insight problem set consisted
of 2 CR problems and 2 CD problems. Problem sets were
administered in counterbalanced order.
Working memory measure Working memory capacity was
measured using the Automated Reading Span task (aRspan;
Unsworth, Heitz, Schrock, & Engle, 2005; Redick et al.,
2012). In the aRspan, an attention-demanding processing
task is interleaved between items presented for serial recall.
Participants are shown a sentence and instructed to judge
whether it makes sense or not; then they are shown a letter.
After a sequence of sentence-letter strings ranging from 3-7
in length, participants are asked to recall the letters in order.
All participants complete a total of 15 sequences of

3635

sentence-letter strings, including 3 of each length, presented
in random order. ARspan scores range from 0-75, with
higher scores denoting greater levels of attentional control
(Unsworth & Engle, 2007). The task takes 15-20 minutes to
complete.

Procedure
After providing informed consent, participants completed
the experimental tasks individually. Participants were first
introduced to the problem-solving task, and were given a
maximum of 10 minutes to solve each of two sets of
problems (i.e., 20 minutes total). After completing both
problem sets, participants were given a questionnaire asking
about previous experience with the matchstick task.
Participants then completed the aRspan on a computer.
Finally, participants completed a demographic questionnaire
and were debriefed.

an ANCOVA, in order to treat WMC as a continuous
variable. Problem type (insight versus non-insight) was
included as a within-subjects factor. WMC and a WMC ×
problem type interaction term were included in the model as
covariates.
A significant main effect of problem type was found, F(1,
82) = 297.39, p < .001, ηp2 = .78. There was no main effect
of WMC, F < 1. The interaction between problem type and
WMC was significant, F(1, 82) = 5.65, p = .02, ηp2 = .06.
In order to examine the nature of this interaction, followup analyses were conducted using simple regression. As
shown in Figure 2, higher WMC was associated with
generally better non-insight problem-solving accuracy,
although this relationship did not reach significance (B =
.016, SE = .011, p = .153). In contrast, higher WMC was
associated with significantly lower CR insight problemsolving accuracy (B = -.013, SE = .006, p = .041).

Results

Discussion

Preliminary analyses revealed that accuracy on CD
problems (M = .69, SD = .41) was positively correlated with
accuracy on both non-insight (M = .68, SD = .30), r = .32, p
= .003, and CR type insight problems (M = .13, SD = .34), r
= .25, p = .021. Because the CD problems did not appear
discriminatory of either insight or non-insight problem
types, they were excluded from further analyses. Accuracy
on CR type insight problems was not correlated with
accuracy on non-insight problems, r = .06, p = .566,
consistent with previous studies using matchstick arithmetic
(Knoblich et al., 1999).

The current results support the prediction that less
attentional control is better for insight problem-solving.
Using the Matchstick Arithmetic task, we found that higher
WMC was associated with somewhat better non-insight
problem-solving but significantly worse insight problemsolving. The latter finding is counterintuitive in light of a
great deal of literature demonstrating that more attentional
control contributes to better performance on a range of
higher-order cognitive tasks (c.f., Conway et al., 2005).
These findings are, however, consistent with a growing
body of research finding that lower WMC is advantageous
on tasks relying on more associative or procedural processes
(DeCaro & Beilock, 2010).
Although a diffuse focus of attention is important for
creative problem-solving processes such as insight (Jarosz
& Wiley, 2012), the relationship between WMC and insight
has been inconsistent across studies. For example, Ash and
Wiley (2006) found that WMC predicted performance on
insight problems when the problems required an extended
initial search phase. WMC was not related to performance
on insight problems in which the search phase was shorter,
presumably leading to impasse and restructuring more
quickly (see also Fleck, 2008). These findings lend support
to the spontaneous restructuring account of insight, which
proposes that a necessary change in an initial problem
representation is achieved through automatic processes and
therefore does not depend on WMC. This finding converges
with other evidence demonstrating that associative and
divergent thinking rely on automatic processes that occur
outside conscious awareness (Dijksterhuis & Meurs, 2006).
Spontaneous accounts of insight do not, however,
preclude the argument that attentional control may disrupt
those processes that are important for restructuring.
Associative processes are better for creative problemsolving but, critically, are supported by decreased latentinhibition (Carson, Peterson, & Higgins, 2003). The abilities
that facilitate performance on non-insight problems and are
supported by controlled processing may therefore be

Figure 2. Non-insight and insight problem-solving accuracy
as a function of working memory capacity. Low and high
working memory points are plotted at ±1SD below and
above the mean.
We evaluated whether the effect of insight and noninsight problem-solving accuracy depends on WMC using

3636

inappropriate for solving insight problems, and may harm
performance. Too much focus can unnecessarily constrain
the problem space, limiting the field of viable operators for
solution and hindering the ability to achieve insight.
Additionally, an overreliance on complex strategies may
contribute to persistence within a faulty problem
representation.
Some have proposed alternate routes by which creative
solutions are achieved: one that is flexible, associative, and
is characterized by lower levels of cognitive control, and
another that is persistent, deliberate, and supported by a
more focused analytic approach (De Dreu, Nijstad, Baas,
Wolsink, & Roskes, 2012). Which pathway is more readily
accessible may depend on interactions between individual
difference and task-specific factors. Research in strategy
selection suggests that differences in WMC may be an
important factor in determining which path an individual is
likely to take (e.g., Beilock & DeCaro, 2007; Gaissmeier et
al., 2006). The current results suggest that higher WMC
leads individuals to select a more focused analytic approach
to insight problem-solving. However, future research is
needed to examine the actual problem-solving strategies
used by individuals of varying WMC.
Future research should also consider additional factors
that may impact success at insight problem-solving,
including boundaries to the current results. For example, if it
is possible to achieve insight through methodical analytic
persistence, then individuals with higher WMC could
eventually attain insight—they would just require more time
in order to exhaust and reject more obvious solution paths
before identifying the correct one. Another factor likely to
moderate strategy selection is goal transparency. Insight
problems are ambiguous by design, and the challenge of
these problems often hinges on this occlusion of decisive
task objectives. If individuals with higher WMC know to
consider everything as potentially relevant, they may be less
likely to filter out important parts of the problem (e.g.,
Colflesh & Conway, 2007; Conway, Cowan, & Bunting,
2001).
Although we demonstrate that higher WMC can lead to
lower insight, certain situational factors may therefore
improve the ability of higher-capacity individuals to select
more appropriate problem-solving strategies. By
considering the interaction between individual differences
and situational factors on the focus of attention, we may be
better able to predict when insightful thinking will be best
supported.

References
Ansburg, P. I., & Hill, K. (2003). Creative and analytic
thinkers differ in their use of attentional resources.
Personality and Individual Differences, 34, 1141–1152.
Ash, I. K., Cushen, P. J., & Wiley, J. (2009). Obstacles in
investigating the role of restructuring in insightful
problem solving. The Journal of Problem Solving, 2,
7−42.

Ash, I. K., & Wiley, J. (2006). The nature of restructuring in
insight: An individual differences approach. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 13, 66–73.
Barrett, L., Tugade, M. M., & Engle, R. W. (2004).
Individual differences in working memory capacity and
dual-process theories of the mind. Psychological Bulletin,
130, 553–573.
Beilock, S. L., & DeCaro, M. S. (2007). From poor
performance to success under stress: Working memory,
strategy selection, and mathematical problem solving
under pressure. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 983–998.
Colflesh, G. J. H., & Conway, A. R. A. (2007). Individual
differences in working memory capacity and divided
attention in dichotic listening. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 14, 699-703.
Conway, A. R. A., Cowan, N., & Bunting, M. F. (2001).
The cocktail party phenomenon revisited: The importance
of working memory capacity. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 331–335.
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick,
D. Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working
memory span tasks: A methodological review and user’s
guide. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 769–786.
DeCaro, M. S., & Beilock, S. L. (2010). The benefits and
perils of attentional control. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & B.
Bruya (Eds.), Effortless attention: A new perspective in
the cognitive science of attention and action (pp. 51–73).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
DeCaro, M. S., Thomas, R. D., Albert, N. B., Beilock, S. L.
(2011). Choking under pressure: Multiple routes to skill
failure. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
140, 390–406.
DeCaro, M. S., Thomas, R. D., & Beilock, S. L. (2008).
Individual differences in category learning: Sometimes
less working memory capacity is better than more.
Cognition, 107, 284–294.
De Dreu C, Nijstad B, Baas M, Wolsink I, Roskes M.
(2012). Working memory benefits creative insight,
musical improvisation, and original ideation through
maintained task-focused attention. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 38, 656–669.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Meurs, T. (2006). Where creativity
resides: The generative power of unconscious thought.
Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 135–146.
Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as
executive attention. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 11, 19–23.
Ericsson, K. A., & Delaney, P. F. (1999). Long-term
working memory as an alternative to capacity models of
working memory in everyday skilled performance. In A.
Miyake, & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory:
Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control
(pp. 257–297). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Fleck, J. I. (2008). Working memory demands in insight
versus analytic problem solving. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 1-38.

3637

Gaissmaier, W., Schooler, L. J., & Rieskamp, J. (2006).
Simple predictions fueled by capacity limitations: When
are they successful? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 32, 966–982.
Jarosz, A. F., Colflesh, G. J. H., & Wiley, J. (2012).
Uncorking the muse: Alcohol intoxication facilitates
creative problem solving. Consciousness and Cognition,
21, 487–493.
Jones, G. (2003). Testing two cognitive theories of insight.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29, 1017–1027.
Kane, M. J., Bleckley, M. K., Conway, A. R. A., & Engle,
R. W. (2001). A controlled-attention view of workingmemory capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 169–183.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2000). Working memory
capacity, proactive interference, and divided attention:
Limits on long-term memory retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 333–358.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25,
1534–1555.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. E. (2001). An eye
movement study of insight problem solving. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 1000–1009.
Kounios, J., & Beeman, M. (2009). The Aha! moment: The
cognitive neuroscience of insight. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 18, 210-216.
Kounios, J., Frymiare, J. L., Bowden, E. M., Fleck, J. I.,
Subramaniam, K., Parrish, T. B., & Jung-Beeman, M. J.
(2006). The prepared mind: Neural activity prior to
problem presentation predicts subsequent solution by
sudden insight. Psychological Science, 17, 882–890.
McCabe, D. P., Roediger, III, H. L., McDaniel, M. A.,
Balota, D. A., & Hambrick, D. Z. (2010). The relationship
between working memory capacity and executive
functioning: Evidence for a common executive attention
construct. Neuropsychology, 24, 222–243.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information processing explanations of
insight and related phenomenon. In M. Keane & K.
Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the psychology of thinking
(pp. 1–44). London: Harvester-Wheatsheaf.
Öllinger, M., Jones, G., & Knoblich, G. (2008).
Investigating the effect of mental set on insight problem
solving. Experimental Psychology, 55, 269–282.
Redick, T. S., Broadway, J. M., Meier, M. E., Kuriakose, P.
S., Unsworth, N., Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2012).
Measuring working memory capacity with automated
complex span tasks. European Journal of Psychological
Assessment, 28, 164–171.
Reverberi, C., Toraldo, A., D’Agostini S., & Skrap, M.
(2005). Better without (lateral) frontal cortex? Insight
problems solved by frontal patients. Brain, 128, 2882–
2890.

Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993).
Thoughts beyond words: When language overshadows
insight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
122, 166–183.
Unsworth, N., & Engle, R.W. (2007). The nature of
individual differences in working memory capacity:
Active maintenance in primary memory and controlled
search from secondary memory. Psychological Review,
114, 104–132.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W.
(2005). An automated version of the operation span task.
Behavior Research Methods, 37, 498–505.
Wieth, M. B., & Zacks, R. T. (2011). Time of day effects on
problem solving: When the non-optimal is optimal.
Thinking & Reasoning, 17, 387–401.
Wiley, J. (1998). Expertise as mental set: The effects of
domain knowledge in creative problem solving. Memory
& Cognition, 26, 716–730.
Wiley, J., & Jarosz, A. (2012). How working memory
capacity affects problem solving. Psychology of Learning
and Motivation, 56, 185–227.
Wolford, G., Newman, S. E., Miller, M. B., & Wig, G. S.
(2004). Searching for patterns in random sequences.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 221–
228.

3638

