UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Power of Words in the Brain: Systematic Sound-Meaning Associations in Novel and
Existing Words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/83d7d6gt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Postma-Nilsenova, Marie
Kaland, Constantijn
Oversteegen, Leonoor

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Power of Words in the Brain: Systematic Sound-Meaning Associations
in Novel and Existing Words
Marie Postma-Nilsenová (m.nilsenova@tilburguniversity.edu)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences,
Tilburg University, P.O. Box 9013, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Constantijn Kaland (c.c.l.kaland@tilburguniversity.edu)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences,
Tilburg University, P.O. Box 9013, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Leonoor Oversteegen (e.oversteegen@tilburguniversity.edu)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences,
Tilburg University, P.O. Box 9013, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract
In a series of experiments conducted with Dutch native speakers,
we explored systematic size/power sound-symbolic associations in
novel and existing words. In Experiment 1 (N = 64), participants
associated vowel-intrinsic fundamental frequency with size/power,
disregarding the modality of stimuli presentation (spoken, written),
but depending on the lexical status of the stimulus (more strongly
for novel then for existing words). In Experiment 2 (N = 56), we
explored the idea that the order of vowels in a word affects soundsymbolic associations, as pitch contours emerge from a sequence
of vowel-intrinsic fundamental frequencies. Participants perceived
stimuli with 'rising' combinations of front-back vowels as less
powerful than stimuli with ‘falling’ combinations. This finding
indicates that even in non-tonal languages, sound symbolism is not
bound to a single segment (phoneme). We compared the effect to
the perception of tones in a tonal language, which we explored in
Experiment 3 with Mandarin native speakers (N = 96) judging the
perception of power in monosyllabic novel brand names with four
different tones (rising, falling, level and fall-rise). In Experiment 4
(N = 146), we examined the effect of vowel-intrinsic intensity,
which has previously remained un-noted. The results showed that
like fundamental frequency, also intrinsic intensity influences
size/power-symbolic associations.
Keywords:
Sound
Symbolism;
Cross-modal
Correspondence; Form-Meaning Arbitrariness; Frequency
Code; Intrinsic Intensity; Intrinsic Fundamental Frequency.

Introduction
A series of relatively recent experiments has shaken one of
the most fundamental postulates about human language,
namely the arbitrariness assumption regarding the relation
between the sound structure of a word and its meaning.
Originating with de Saussure, it has long been presumed
that the number of pictorial, imitative, or onomatopoetic
words in any language is very small (Hockett, 1958; de
Saussure, 1916/1959). However, in violation of de
Saussure’s arbitrariness assumption, many studies confirm
that both existing words and non-words in different
languages evoke connotations based on their sound structure
(Klink, 2000, 2001, 2003; Yorkston & Menon, 2004;
Lowrey & Shrum, 2007; Shrum et al., 2012; Kovic et al.,

2010; Coulter & Coulter, 2010; Aveyard, 2012; Parise &
Spence, 2012; Spence, 2011; Baxter & Lowrey, 2011). The
sound-meaning link appears to facilitate both L1 and L2
learning (Nygaard et al., 2009; Imai et al., 2008) by helping
to solve the “cross-modal correspondence problem” (which
stimuli to link to link together across the senses; Spence,
2011; Bremner et al., 2012) and has been claimed to hold
universally (Ultan, 1978; Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2005).
On the one hand, languages encode crossmodal
relationships by mapping phonemes to specific shapes. For
example, by virtue of the so-called “Bouba-Kiki” effect,
round vowels are typically linked to rounded objects,
whereas high-pitched un-round vowels bring to mind
angularity (Köhler, 1929; Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001;
Westbury, 2005; Bremner et al., 2012). The effect seems to
hold for children as young as 2-2.5 years and concerns both
objects and visual actions (Maurer, Pathman, & Mondloch,
2006; Imai et al., 2008). On the other hand, sound-symbolic
phenomena might give rise to a visual size/power
association (Sapir, 1929). In various languages, words
containing vowels with high intrinsic fundamental
frequency, the acoustic correlate of pitch, (e.g., front vowels
such as /ɪ, i, ɛ/; Lehiste & Peterson, 1961; Whalen & Levitt,
1995) are perceived as referring to lighter, thinner, smaller,
less powerful and more feminine entities/individuals and,
possibly, prickly, sour taste (Crisinel & Spence, 2009) as
opposed to words containing vowels with low intrinsic
fundamental frequency (e.g., back vowels such as /ʊ, o, ɔ/).
A similar effect can be achieved by using different types of
consonants that can influence fundamental frequency either
directly, or by raising the frequency of the accompanying
vowel (cmp. voiceless vs. voiced consonants, fricatives vs.
plosives). The effect has primarily been observed for nonwords (e.g., invented brand names; Klink, 2000, 2001,
2003; Yorkston & Menon, 2004; Lowrey & Shrum, 2007;
Shrum et al., 2012) but appears to hold for existing words as
well, at least in limited domains: In a study in the area of
consumer psychology, Coulter & Coulter (2010) reported
that vowel pitch in numerals can influence the perception of
price discounts in English and Chinese.

1145

The association between pitch and size/power can, for the
most part, be explained by the mechanism of the Frequency
Code (Ohala 1994; Gussenhoven, 2004), a psycholinguistic
principle primarily used to account for interpretational
effects of rising and falling utterance contours in different
languages (Chen, 2004). According to the Frequency Code,
high pitch is linked to smaller immature speakers (with
thinner, smaller vocal folds and shorter vocal tracts
producing higher fundamental frequency) and, hence,
utterances carrying high and/or rising pitch are interpreted
as less dominant, more uncertain, friendlier and questioning.
Presumably, the effects of the Frequency Code can be
translated from the suprasegmental domain (utterance
prosody) to the micro-prosodic, segmental domain, and
affect meaning with the help of motor-imitative mechanisms
associated with speech perception.

Current Study
In our current study, we attempted to explore further the
effect of phonetic segment-intrinsic properties on
interpretation of words and non-words. Surprisingly, past
research of the sound-referent cross-modal mappings mostly
involved written presentation of stimuli. Given that the
Frequency Code is grounded in principles of speech
production, the question arises what role the modality of
presentation plays in the sound-size association. Are sound
symbolic effects stronger if words are presented aurally
rather than visually? Moreover, according to most models of
reading (Coltheart, 2006; Coltheart, 2012), unlike existing
words, pseudo-words and non-words can only be
pronounced with the help of a system that associates visual
segments (i.e., graphemes) with sounds. Are soundsymbolic effects stronger for pseudo-words and non-words
than for existing words? We addressed these two questions
in Experiment 1 conducted with Dutch native speakers.
Existing research in the area of phonetic symbolism
has, so far, disregarded the possibility that not just
individual phonemes, but also their sequences, might create
meaningful associations between phoneme-intrinsic
fundamental frequency and meaning, by virtue of producing
a micro-prosodic contour. For example, in words consisting
of two syllables, a sequence of high-low vowels
(e.g., /CɪCɔ/) produces a “falling contour”, while the
opposite sequence (/CɔCɪ/) produces a “rising contour”. In
accordance with the predictions of the Frequency Code
(Gussenhoven, 2004; Chen, 2004), these two contours
should receive different interpretations (big/powerful and
small/powerless,
respectively).
Do
sound-symbolic
associations vary with different sequencing of high- and
low-pitched phonemes in a word? We explored the issue in
Experiment 2 and compared the outcomes collected for a
non-tonal language (Dutch) with perceptions of lexical tones
in a tonal language (Mandarin Chinese) in Experiment 3.
The last issue raised in the current study concerns the
effect of other segment-intrinsic prosodic features apart
from fundamental frequency, in particular, segment-intrinsic
intensity (Lehiste & Peterson, 1959). As observed in

prosodic studies of interpersonal influence, intensity
(loudness) is positively associated with judgments of
dominance and potency (Scherer, 1974; Aronovitch, 1976;
Buller & Burgoon, 1986). If size/power-symbolic relations
arise by transfer from the suprasegmental to the segmental
domain, we might expect sounds with intrinsically higher
intensity to have an effect comparable to that of low
intrinsic fundamental frequency. To our knowledge, soundsymbolic associations of intrinsic intensity have not been
explored in the past. Given the frequent co-occurrence of
high intrinsic intensity and low intrinsic pitch, it might, in
fact, be the case that at least some of the sound-meaning
associations reported in the literature might be due to
intrinsic intensity, rather than intrinsic fundamental
frequency. Therefore, we also examined the interplay of the
two acoustic features in Experiment 4.
To sum up, in our study, we addressed the following
research questions:
1. Are sound symbolic effects stronger if words are
presented aurally rather than visually? Are they stronger for
pseudo-words than for existing lexemes? (Experiment 1)
2. Do sound-symbolic associations vary with different
sequencing of high- and low-pitched phonemes in a word?
(Experiment 2 and 3)
3. Are sound-symbolic associations affected by segmentintrinsic intensity? (Experiment 4)

Experiment 1
In the first experiment, we addressed the question whether
or not the modality in which stimuli are presented can affect
sound-symbolic
interpretation
of
vowel-intrinsic
fundamental frequency. Given that most studies of crossmodal correspondences make use of non-words and pseudowords, we were also interested to find out if the effect is
weaker (or perhaps absent) for items with denotative
components.
Participants and Design
Sixty-four native speakers of Dutch (32 male; Mage = 25.3,
SD = 10.5) participated in the experiment on a voluntary
basis. The experiment had a 2 x 2 x 2 mixed withinbetween design. The between-participant variable was
Modality in which participants perceived the stimuli
(reading or listening). The participants were randomly
assigned to the reading or listening condition (32 in each).
The within-participant variables were Denotation (stimuli
consisting either of existing words or pseudo-words) and
Vowel-Intrinsic Fundamental Frequency (High or Low). The
dependent variable was Perceived Power/Size.
Material
The stimuli were either pseudowords consisting of phoneme
and syllable combinations that are possible in Dutch but
meaningless (e.g., Boloem, Wabboelan, Piripi and Kenep) or
pseudowords composed of meaningful morphemes (e.g.,
Zondaar, Godenbad, Tinteling or Kietelkit). In total, 160 biand tri-syllabic stimuli were systematically divided into four

1146

variants, resulting in lists of 40 items (20 existing words or
compounds, 20 pseudo-words). For the listening condition,
the stimuli were recorded in a soundproof booth by a native
Dutch female speaker (50y) without any detectable dialect
or speech habits.

taking part on a voluntary basis. The independent variable
was Vowel-Intrinsic Fundamental Frequency (High, Low,
Falling and Rising and the dependent variable was
perceived Power/Size of the stimulus (brand name).

Procedure and Instrumentation
The experiment was cast as a marketing study of brand
names for a generic type of shampoo. In the listening
condition, the stimuli were presented on a Philips Go Gear
MP4 with a headset. In the reading condition, the
participants filled out a pen-and-paper form. Each
experimental session lasted 6-10 minutes. Participants
indicated their perception of the brand names on 4 VAS
scales each 7.5 cm long (male/female, big/small,
dominant/not dominant and unfriendly/friendly). The
Cronbach's alpha coefficient of the four scales was .8 and
the scales were reduced to a single Perceived Power/Size
measure.
Results
A mixed analysis of variance was used to explore the effect
of the independent variables on the Perceived Power/Size.
Stimuli with low intrinsic vowel frequency scored higher on
the Power/Size scale than stimuli with high frequency
vowels, F(1,62) = 326.77, p < .001, ηp2 = .79. The
interaction effect of Denotation and Vowel-Intrinsic
Fundamental Frequency was also significant, F(1,62) =
41.29, p < .001, ηp2 = .40; the interpretation of pseudowords was more sensitive to the intrinsic vowel properties
and their size/power-symbolic associations. Than the
interpretation of existing words. There was no effect of
modality of presentation.
Discussion
The results of the first experiment show that the perception
of pseudowords consisting of both meaningful and
meaningless morphemes is influenced by vowel-intrinsic
fundamental frequency: in accordance with the predictions
of the Frequency Code, front vowels are associated with less
power/smaller size than back vowels. The effect was found
to be independent of the modality in which stimuli were
presented. The effect was stronger for meaningless
pseudowords than for those composed of existing
morphemes, suggesting that the phoneme-to-grapheme route
(Coltheart, 2006; Coltheart, 2012) might play a role.

Experiment 2
In the second experiment, we addressed the question of the
scope of vowel-intrinsic fundamental frequency effects: Are
they bound strictly to the individual phonemes or can they
combine into tones with different sound-symbolic
interpretations, akin to lexical tones in tonal languages?
Participants and Design
The experiment was conducted among 56 participants (25
male, Mage = 35.9, SD = 13.0), all native speakers of Dutch,

Materials
The stimulus list contained 32 meaningless pseudowords, 16
experimental and 16 fillers. The experimental items
consisted of 8 bisyllabic and 8 monosyllabic meaningless
pseudowords with either the sequence front vowel – back
vowel or the opposite, or just a front or a back vowel, with a
systematic variation of voiced and voiceless plosives and
fricatives (see Table 1).
Procedure and Instrumentation
The experiment was cast as a marketing study for a new
product name and presented online via the LimeSurvey
platform. The stimuli were presented in a visual modality
only. Participants evaluated the stimuli on four 7-point
scales (male/female, big/small, thick/thin and heavy/light).
The mean Cronbach's alpha coefficient was .8 and for the
purpose of the statistical analyses, the scales were thus
reduced to a single Power/Size measure.
Table 1: Examples of experimental stimuli.

C-Type
Plosive
Fricative

Voicing
+
+

High

Low

Falling

Rising

Ti
Bi
Vie
Soe

To
Bo
Voe
Sie

Tito
Bibo
Vievoe
Siesoe

Toti
Bobi
Voevie
Soesie

Results
A repeated-measures ANOVA showed a significant effect of
Vowel-Intrinsic Fundamental Frequency on the Perceived
Power/Size of the novel product name, F1(3, 165) = 47.59,
p < .001, ηp2 = .46, F2(3, 31) = 4.23, p < .05, F'min(3, 37)
= 3.88, p < .05. A post-hoc analysis indicated that the frontback (intrinsically falling) sequence was evaluated as more
powerful (M = 4.23, SD = .74, p = .017) than the back-front
(intrinsically rising) sequence (M = 3.92, SD = .68, p < .
001) and monosyllabic front-vowel stimuli (intrinsically
high; M = 3.00, SD = .66, p < .001). The monosyllabic backvowel stimuli (intrinsically low) were perceived as the most
powerful product names (M = 4.33, SD = .66) compared to
the other three types (p < .001).
Discussion
In the second experiment, we tested the interpretation of
vowel-intrinsic F0 in combinations of two syllables, using
the dimensions ‘front-back’ (/ɪ-ɔ/ and /i-u/). The vowel order
had a large significant effect on the perception of
Power/Size. Stimuli with ‘rising’ combinations of front-back
vowels (e.g., /kuki/) were perceived as less powerful than
stimuli with ‘falling’ combinations (e.g., /kiku/); they were

1147

also judged as being less powerful than monosyllabic
stimuli with a high (front) vowel. This finding indicates that
sound symbolism that arises due to vowel-intrinsic
fundamental frequency is not bound to a single phoneme but
may be the result of combining the acoustic values for
sequences of syllables.

was not different from the perception of Tone 3, see Fig. 1.
The writing system used for the presentation of stimuli did
not have a significant effect.

Experiment 3
In the third experiment, we explored sound-symbolic
interpretations of tones in a tonal language (Mandarin
Chinese). In spite of the long tradition of phonetic and
phonological research into tone perception and use in tonal
languages, no experimental studies have laid an explicit link
between the Frequency Code and lexical tones (for a general
overview, see Lapolla, 1994).
Participants and Design
Ninety-six graduate and undergraduate Chinese students (39
male) from a university in Beijing participated in the study,
11 participants were excluded from the analysis due to
incomplete data caused by server problems. The study was
conducted in Mandarin Chinese and had a 2 x 4 design
mixed within-between participant design. The withinparticipant variable was Tone (Tone 1 in high pitch height
(H) - Level, Tone 2 in half-high pitch height (LH) - Rising,
Tone 3 in half-low pitch height (L(H)) – Low-Rising, and
Tone 4 in low pitch-height (HL) - Falling; Gussenhoven,
2004; Wiedenhof, 2004). The between-participant variable
was the writing system (Chinese characters or Pinyin);
participants were randomly divided into one of the two
conditions (45 in the character-written group and 40 in the
Pinyin-written group).

Figure 1: Perception of Chinese lexical tones in novel brand
names.
Discussion
The results of the experiment show that the lexical tones in
Mandarin Chinese are interpreted in a similar way as
segmental and suprasegmental pitch (fundamental
frequency) in non-tonal languages. Along the lines predicted
by the Frequency Code, high (level) and rising tones are
associated with less powerful brand names than falling
tones.

Material
Sixteen non-existent brand names (pseudowords) were
written in matched Chinese characters and in Pinyin with
four different tones (e.g., lū, lú, lǔ and lù). A pretest
conducted with the Pinyin transcriptions showed that
Chinese readers (same population, different group than the
participant group) did not have any meaningful associations
with the stimuli outside of the context of the experiment.
Procedure and Instrumentation
Participants evaluated the visually presented stimuli on a 7point scale using the anchors “not powerful at all” (1) and
“very powerful” (7). The study was conducted online with
help of the Qualtrics platform.
Results
There was a significant main effect of the type of tone on
the average perceived power of brand names, F(1.88,
156.71) = 79.297, p < .001, ηp2 = .49, with degrees of
freedom corrected using Huynh-Feldt estimates of
sphericity. Post-hoc comparisons revealed that the Tone 4
(Falling) was more powerful than the other three Tones.
Tone 2 (Rising) and Tone 3 (Low-Rising) were more
powerful than Tone 1 (Level/High); the perception of Tone 2

Experiment 4
In the fourth experiment, we identified another intrinsic
acoustic property of vowels, namely intensity, as a feature
that might play a role in cross-modal relationships. Given
that the two acoustic values often correlate, it could be that
at least some of the sound-symbolic effects discussed in the
literature are caused by perceptions of intensity. Therefore,
we were interested in a possible interplay of the two
acoustic properties.
Participants and Design
The participants were 146 native Dutch speakers (84 male,
Mage = 40.39, SD = 13.5) who took part in the experiment
on a voluntary basis. The experiment had a 2 x 2 withinparticipant design, with Fundamental Frequency (High,
Low) and Intensity (High, Low) as independent variables
and Perceived Power/Size as the dependent variable.
Material
We used 40 fictitious brand names (pseudowords) as
stimulus material. The brand names were constructed in
accordance with the measurements of intrinsic fundamental
frequency and intrinsic intensity of vowels (Lehiste &
Peterson, 1959; 1961) and within the limits of the Dutch

1148

phonemic inventory in the following way: we selected four
vowels as the most extreme representatives of the two
acoustic dimensions (/u/ ~ [+ Fundamental Frequency, +
Intensity], /i/ ~ [+ Fundamental Frequency, - Intensity], /ɑ/
~ [- Fundamental Frequency, + Intensity] and /ɪ/ ~ [Fundamental Frequency, - Intensity]), see Fig. 2. The four
vowels were systematically combined with both voiced and
voiceless consonants in bi-syllabic non-words (“company
names”), e.g. Manan, Doedoer, Tipit and Liediel.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 4 indicate that sound-size/power
correspondence can arise not just thanks to vowel-intrinsic
fundamental frequencies but also as a result of intrinsic
intensity. Given that the two acoustic values appear to be in
a negative correlation, it was not possible to pry apart their
effects using written stimuli. In a follow-up study, their
contribution could be explored in detail with the help of
artificially synthesized stimuli. Another issue to explore in
the future concerns individual differences in vowel
pronunciation. As noted by Lehiste & Peterson (1959,
1961), different speakers, in fact, vary in their use of the
vowel space. The question thus arises if the sound-symbolic
effects found in various studies are linked to speakers' own
prototypical production targets or based on previous
perceptual experience.

General Discussion and Conclusion
Figure 2: Intrinsic fundamental frequency and intrinsic
intensity of vowels (after Lehiste & Peterson, 1959, 1961).
Procedure and Instrumentation
The material was presented visually via the LimeSurvey
platform as a part of a marketing study conducted on behalf
of a foreign company in the Netherlands. Participants
evaluated possible company names on four 5-point scales:
male/female,
big/small,
dominant/submissive
and
strong/weak. On the basis of the Cronbach's alpha (.9 on
average), the measures were reduced to a single scale.
Results
The results of a repeated measures ANOVA show a
significant effect of Fundamental Frequency, F1(1, 145) =
223.44, p < .001, ηp2 = .61, F2(1, 36) = 73.75, p < .001,
F'min(1, 62) = 55.45, p < .001, and a slightly weaker
significant effect of Intensity, F1(1, 145) = 155.17, p < .001,
ηp2 = .52, F2(1, 36) = 49.47, p < .001, F'min(1, 61) = 37.51,
p < .001, as well as a trend of an interaction effect, F1(1,
145) = 26.66, p < .001, ηp2 = .17, F2(1, 36) = 3.76, p < .
001, F'min(1, 47) = 3.30, p = .08 on the perceived
Power/Size, see Table 2.
Table 2: Mean Perceived Power/Size.
Fundamental
Frequency
High

Low

Intensity

M

SD

High

2.34

.75

Low

2.01

.58

High

3.00

.65

Low

2.43

.60

In our study, we addressed a number of important questions
regarding cross-modal correspondences in the auditory
domain. We conducted a series of experiments under the
assumption that the size/power sound-symbolic relations are
due to intrinsic acoustic properties of phonemes captured by
the psycholinguistic principle of the Frequency Code, rather
than by idiosyncratic mechanisms akin to weak synaesthesia
(see Parise & Spence, 2012, for a discussion). The results of
the experiments indicate that sound symbolic effects are not
necessarily stronger when words are presented aurally rather
than visually, however,
the cross-modal sound-size
correspondences are stronger for pseudo-words than for
existing words. The intrinsic fundamental frequency effects
are not bound to individual phonemes but can combine into
tones with different sound-symbolic interpretations. In a
sense, non-tonal languages thus resemble tonal languages
where different lexical tones appear to be interpreted
differently (at least on pseudo-words). Finally, other
acoustic features apart from fundamental frequency may codetermine the cross-modal sound-based associations: in
particular, intrinsic intensity seems to play a significant role.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Jill Meijer, Milou
Steenvoorden, Xiaohan Wang and Stijn Gimbrère for their
help with collecting experimental data.

References
Aronovitch, C.D. (1976). The voice of personality:
Stereotyped judgments and their relation to voice quality
and sex of speaker. Journal of Social Psychology, 99,
207-220.
Aveyard, M.E. (2012). Some consonants sound curvy:
Effects of sound symbolism on object recognition.
Memory and Cognition, 40, 83-92.

1149

Baxter, S., & Lowrey, T. (2011). Phonetic symbolism and
children's brand name preferences. Journal of Consumer
Marketing, 28, 516-523.
Bremner, A.J., Caparos, S., Davidoff, J., de Fockert, J.,
Linnell, K.J., & Spence, C. (2013). “Bouba” and “Kiki”
in Namibia? A remote culture makes similar shapesound matches, but different shape-taste matches to
Westerners. Cognition, 126, 165-172.
Buller, D.B., & Burgoon, J.K. (1986). The effects of
vocalics and nonverbal sensitivity on compliance: A
replication and extension. Human Communication
Research, 13, 126-144.
Chen, A. (2004). Universal and language-specific
perception of paralinguistic intonational meaning.
Doctoral, dissertation, Radboud University, Nijmegen.
Coltheart, M. (2006). Dual route and connectionist models
of reading: an overview. London Review of Education, 4,
5-17.
Coltheart, M. (2012). Dual-route theories of reading aloud.
In J.S. Adelman (Ed.), Visual word recognition. New
York: Psychology Press.
Coulter, K.S., & Coulter, R.A. (2010). Small sounds, big
deals: phonetic symbolism effects in pricing. Journal of
Consumer Research, 37, 315-328.
Crisinel, A.-S., & Spence, C. (2009). Implicit association
between basic tastes and pitch. Neuroscience Letters,
464, 39-42.
Gussenhoven, C. (2004). The Phonology of Tone and
Intonation. Cambridge University Press.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition,
109, 54-65.
Klink, R.R. (2000). Creating brand names with meaning:
The use of sound symbolism. Marketing Letters, 11, 520.
Klink, R.R. (2001). Creating meaningful brand names: a
study of semantics and sound symbolism. Journal of
Marketing Theory and Practice, 9, 27-34.
Klink, R.R. (2003). Creating meaningful brands: The
relationship between brand name and brand mark.
Marketing Letters, 14, 143-157.
Kovic, V., Plunkett, K., & Westermann, G. (2010). The
shape of words in the brain. Cognition, 114, 19-28.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt Psychology. Liveright: New
York.
Lapolla, R.J. (1994). An experimental investigation into
phonetic symbolism as it relates to Mandarin Chinese. In
L. Hinton, J. Nichols & J.J. Ohala (Eds.), Sound
Symbolism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lehiste, I., & Peterson, G.E. (1959). Vowel amplitude and
phonemic stress in American English. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 31, 428-435.
Lehiste, I., & Peterson, G.E. (1961). Some basic
considerations in the analysis of intonation. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 33, 419-425.

Lowrey, T.M., & Shrum, L.J. (2007). Phonetic symbolism
and brand name preference. Journal of Consumer
Research, 34, 406-414.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. (2006). The
shape of boubas: Sound-shape correspondences in
toddlers and adults. Developmental Science, 9, 316-322.
Nygaard, L.C., Cook, A.E., & Namy, L.L. (2009). Sound to
meaning correspondences facilitate word learning.
Cognition, 112, 181-186.
Ohala, J.J. (1994). The Frequency Code underlies the
sound-symbolic use of voice pitch. In J. Nichols & J.J.
Ohala (Eds.), Sound Symbolism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Parise, C.V., & Spence, C. (2012). Audiovisual crossmodal
correspondences and sound symbolism: a study using
the implicit association test. Experimental Brain
Research, 220, 319-333.
Ramachandran, V.S.,
& Hubbard, E.M. (2001).
Synaesthesia – A window into perception, thought and
language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 3-34.
Ramachandran, V.S., & Hubbard, E.M. (2005). The
emergence of the human mind: Some clues from
synesthesia. In L.C. Robertson & N. Sagiv (Eds.),
Synesthesia: Perspectives from Cognitive Neuroscience.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Saussure, F. (1916/1959). Course in General Linguistics.
New York: Philosophical Library.
Scherer, K.R. (1974). Acoustic concomitants of emotional
dimensions: Judging affect from synthesized tone
sequences. In S. Weitz (Ed.) , Nonverbal
Communication. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shrum, L.J., Lowrey, T.M., Luna, D., Lerman, D., & Liu, M.
(2012). Sound symbolism effects across languages:
Implications for global brand names. International
Journal of Research in Marketing, forthcoming.
Spence, C. (2011). Crossmodal correspondences: A tutorial
review. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 73, 971995.
Ultan, R. (1978). Size-sound symbolism. In J.H. Greenberg
(Ed.), Universals of Human Language, Vol. 2:
Phonology. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Westbury, C. (2005). Implicit sound symbolism in lexical
access: Evidence from an interference task. Brain and
Language, 93, 10-19.
Whalen, D.H., & Levitt, A.G. (1995). The universality of
intrinsic F0 of vowels. Journal of Phonetics, 23, 349366.
Wiedenhof, J. (2004). Grammatica van het Mandarijn.
Amsterdam: Uitgeverij Bulaaq.
Yorkston, E.A., & Menon, G. (2004). A sound idea:
phonetic effects of brand names on consumer judgments.
Journal of Consumer Research, 31, 43-51.

1150

