UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The role of morphology in spelling: Long-term effects of training

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/95k5h164

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kolne, Kendall
Hill, Katherine
Gonnerman, Laura

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The role of morphology in spelling: Long-term effects of training
Kendall L.D. Kolne (kendall.kolne@mail.mcgill.ca)
Katherine Hill (katherine.hill@mail.mcgill.ca)
Laura M. Gonnerman (laura.gonnerman@mcgill.ca)
School of Communication Science and Disorders, McGill University, 1266 Pine Ave W
Montreal, QC, H3G 1A8 CAN

Abstract
We compared the effectiveness of two spelling interventions:
one focused on morphological structure and one emphasizing
word meanings,, on spelling acquisition in French speaking
children in 3rd and 5th grades. The morphology intervention
led to significantly greater improvement in spelling than the
vocabulary intervention, especially for children in grade 5. To
compare the long-term effects of the two interventions, we
tested the children’s spelling ability six-months after the
conclusion of the intervention program. Results show that
both grades maintain an increase in spelling accuracy
compared to their pre-intervention performance. Additionally,
the children in grade 5 who received morphological
instruction retained more spelling knowledge than those who
received the vocabulary instruction. These results suggest that
teaching children about the structure of complex words
supports their spelling ability in the long-term, providing
evidence for the importance of morphological knowledge in
literacy development.
Keywords: morphology; spelling; literacy development;
vocabulary; intervention; French

Introduction
Learning to spell is a critical aspect of literacy development,
yet research has typically focused on the development of
reading skills. Understanding the process of learning to spell
has become particularly important in Quebec, where a
widespread decline in children’s spelling ability has become
apparent (Jalbert, 2007). Contributing to this decline is the
difficult nature of French spelling. French has a one-tomany mapping of sounds-to-orthography, so the same sound
may be written in a number of different ways. Additionally,
silent letters are common in written French, so children
must learn to spell parts of words for which there is no overt
pronunciation to guide them. These features of written
French make learning to spell in this language a complex
task.
Recent evidence suggests that literacy instruction focused
on morphological knowledge, or on the ability to recognize
and process sub-lexical units in language (e.g., recognizing
that the word reheatable is made up of three sub-parts, the
prefix re-, the stem heat, and the suffix -able) may assist
children’s spelling development. In fact, children who have
greater metalinguistic awareness of morphological structure
are better able to spell words correctly (e.g., Deacon, Kirby,
& Casselman-Bell, 2009; Sénéchal, 2000) and teaching
children explicitly about the morphological relationships

between words improves their reading and writing skills
(see Bowers, Kirby, & Deacon, 2010, for a review).
While morphological awareness training may be a
beneficial teaching method for fostering literacy
development, there are a number of important issues to be
resolved to ensure that children receive the most effective
instruction. Firstly, most of this evidence is derived from
studies of English-speaking children, and little is known
about the contribution of morphological skills to writing
ability in French (cf. Sénéchal, 2000; Sénéchal, Basque, &
Leclaire, 2006; Pacton & Deacon, 2008). French has a
richer morphological system than English, so it is likely that
morphology may have an even more influential role in
learning to spell in French. Intervention studies with
French-speaking children are needed to test this hypothesis.
Additionally, children as young as two to three years
demonstrate knowledge of morphology (Berko, 1958; Clark,
1993, Gonnerman, 2007), but it is not clear when this
knowledge begins to influence spelling ability. Some
researchers have argued that morphological knowledge has
an early influence as children begin to develop literacy skills
(e.g., Deacon & Kirby, 2004), while others report that the
influence of morphological knowledge on spelling ability
does not have a large impact until later in development (e.g.,
Carlisle, 1995; Kirby et al., 2012; Singson, Mahony, &
Mann, 2000). To provide the most effective instruction to
children, it is crucial to understand the most appropriate
stage of development to introduce morphological training.
Typically, instruction of morphological structure also
involves discussion of word meaning, because
morphologically related words share similar form and
meaning. Previous studies have yet to investigate the
distinction between morphological and vocabulary
instruction (e.g., St-Pierre & Dubé. 2012), thus the relative
contribution of morphology versus semantics to improving
spelling ability is unknown. To disambiguate the potential
benefit of morphological knowledge from the benefits of
word meaning instruction, it is necessary to isolate the
teaching of morphological structure and compare its effects
on spelling outcomes to that of vocabulary training.
Finally, it is important to find out whether the benefits of
a morphological intervention program can be maintained
across time, and whether the knowledge will transfer to new
words not taught in the intervention. Carlisle (2010)
conducted a review of instructional programs using
morphological awareness training to improve literacy
outcomes, and reported that the majority of these studies fail

2766

to report the long-term maintenance of the effects, or the
transfer of learning to new words. It is critical to evaluate
both the maintenance and transfer of learning to ensure that
a morphological intervention provides children with longlasting abilities beyond the context of the intervention.
We have conducted an intervention study to investigate
the role of morphological training for improving spelling in
Quebec French. In a previous study, we analyzed and
reported the results immediately after the conclusion of the
intervention. The focus of the present study is to examine
the long-term effects of the intervention, as measured at a
follow-up session six months after the conclusion of the
intervention. We compared the long-term effects of
morphological instruction for 3rd graders and 5th graders,
explicitly contrasting its relative contribution to spelling
ability with that of vocabulary instruction. Thus, our
research question is two-fold:
1.

Is there a difference in relative long-term intervention
effectiveness by grade? That is, will a morphology
intervention improve long-term spelling performance
of children in grade 3 versus 5?

2.

Is there a difference in long-term intervention
effectiveness by instruction method? That is, will a
morphology intervention lead to great long-term
spelling
improvement
than
a
vocabulary
intervention?

In the sections that follow, we describe the intervention
that was conducted, as well as the spelling outcomes
following the intervention for children in grades 3 and 5 To
address our research questions, we present data from a sixmonth follow-up test evaluating the long-term effectiveness
of the morphology and vocabulary training for improving
spelling performance.
Overall, we expect that the children will experience some
degree of forgetting, such that their spelling accuracy at the
six-month follow-up will be lower than at post-intervention;
however we expect that the children will retain some of the
spelling knowledge from the intervention, so their spelling
scores at the six-month follow-up will be higher than at the
pre-intervention. Moreover, we predict that the greater
benefit observed for the morphology intervention will be
maintained in the long-term.

The Present Study
We developed an intervention to target the spelling of a set
of morphologically complex words, with emphasis on either
morphology or vocabulary instruction. The present study
aims to assess the long-term outcomes of our spelling
intervention. Six months after the intervention ended, we
went back to the school and administered the same spelling
test to the children who had participated in the intervention.
The children’s performance on this test at the six-month
follow-up will be compared to their performance on the test

as measured before the intervention as well as immediately
after the intervention.

Methods
Participants
Eighty-four children were recruited from one elementary
school in the greater Montreal area and took part in the
intervention. Children from two Grade 3 and two Grade 5
classes within the school participated. The primary language
of instruction in this school is French. 36 children from
Grade 3 participated (23 girls and 13 boys), as well as 48
children from Grade 5 (27 girls and 21 boys).
Children were randomly assigned to one of the two
treatment groups, based on their general spelling abilities
prior to their participation in the intervention study. General
spelling ability was assessed using a modified version of the
Test Ortho3 from the Batterie d’Évaluation du Langage
Écrit et de ses troubles (BELEC) (Mousty, Leybaert,
Alegria, Content, & Morais, 1994). Children in each
intervention group were also matched on language
background (monolingual Francophone, or multilingual),
and gender, with approximately equal ratios of boys to girls
in each treatment group.

The intervention
Children in grade 3 and grade 5 took part in the
intervention. The children were divided into two groups,
one which received instruction explicitly focused on the
morphological structure of the words to be learned
(Morphology group), the other receiving instruction focused
on the meanings of the words (Vocabulary group). For
example, the Morphology group was taught that there are
two parts to the word finlandais, namely the stem finland
and the suffix -ais, while the Vocabulary group was taught
that the word finlandais describes something or someone
that comes from the country, Finland. The children were
taught to spell an identical set of 30 words, with only the
emphasis of instruction differing across intervention groups.
The intervention was given during 10 weekly sessions, each
lasting one hour.
Ten suffixes were taught in the intervention. The suffixes
were relatively frequent and productive in Quebec French,
such that they are preferentially used to form new words.
Three words were chosen containing each of the 10 suffixes,
creating the list of 30 words that were taught in the
intervention. These words were relatively infrequent, so it
would be unlikely that the children in grade 3 or 5 would
already know these words.
The 30 words were distributed across the 10 intervention
sessions, with three words taught per session. In each
session, the children in the Morphology group were taught
the three words with the same suffix. For the Vocabulary
group, words with the same suffix were distributed across
the 10 sessions, such that the words with the same suffix
were never taught in the same session. For example, in the
first session, the Morphology group was taught finlandais,

2767

Materials for assessing intervention effectiveness
We developed a test to determine the effectiveness of the
intervention on children’s spelling ability. This test was
administered before (pre-intervention), immediately after
(post-intervention), and six months after the intervention
concluded (six-month follow-up). We designed this spelling
test to measure specific outcomes from our intervention.
The test assessed the spelling of complex and simple words,
and required children to generalize stems and suffixes
taught in the intervention to new words not taught in the
intervention. The items on the test were either the exact
complex word taught in the intervention (i.e., a taught stem
and a taught suffix), a taught or an untaught stem without a
suffix, or a combination of a taught/untaught stem and
suffix in a complex word (i.e., a taught stem with a new
suffix, or a new stem with a taught suffix).

Procedure
All students took the spelling test in the classroom at the
same time. The instructor read each sentence once,
repeating the missing words as many times as necessary for
all students to fill in the missing word. The instructor was a
female native speaker of Quebec French.

spelling test, from pre- to post-intervention, for grade 3 and
5 students. The results of this analysis revealed that children
in both grades improved their spelling from pre- to postintervention, with children in grade 5 scoring higher overall
than those in grade 3. However, the children in grade 3
showed a greater differential between pre- and postintervention than those in grade 5, indicating that the
children in grade 3 were aided more by the intervention,
irrespective of the type of instruction.
To test whether these differences remained six months
after the intervention, we calculated mean percent correct at
each test time. These mean scores for grades 3 and 5 are
displayed in Figure 1. We entered the whole word accuracy
scores on all of the spelling test items into a 2x3 ANOVA
with the factors Grade (grade 3 or grade 5) and Test Time
(pre-intervention, post-intervention, or six month post) to
assess the long-term effects of the intervention for each
grade. The main effect of Grade was significant, F(1, 64) =
16.98 p < .001, indicating that the children in grade 5 scored
significantly higher than the children in grade 3. The main
effect of Test Time was also significant, F(2,128) = 174.92,
p < .001, as was the interaction of Grade and Test Time,
F(2,128) = 6.73, p = .002, indicating significant differences
between the spelling performance of grade 3 and 5 children
across the three testing sessions.

Mean percent correct

japonais, and camerounais, whereas the Vocabulary group
was taught ogresse, huileux, and galanterie. Thus, each
group was taught the same words, just in different sessions.

Results and Discussion
We assessed the effects of our intervention immediately
following the conclusion of the intervention program,
analyzing the changes in spelling performance from pre- to
post-intervention. Before we report the results of the sixmonth follow up, the pre- to post- test analyses will be
summarized. As the focus of the present study is the longterm spelling outcomes, only statistics including the sixmonth follow-up scores will be reported in this paper.
There were 15 children who participated in the original
intervention who were absent from the six-month follow-up
session. These children were excluded from the following
analyses. Additionally, 3 children were absent from either
the pre- or post-intervention assessment, and these children
were also excluded from the following analyses.
The children’s performance on the spelling test was
scored based on whether the whole words were spelled
correctly, and also whether the stems and suffixes of
complex words were spelled correctly. Accordingly, each
complex word received three scores, one for the whole
word, one for the stem, and one for the suffix. Mean percent
correct scores on the whole words, stems, and suffixes were
calculated for the following analyses.

Question #1: Is there a difference in relative longterm intervention effectiveness by grade?
Pre- to post- intervention summary We compared the
changes in spelling accuracy over all the items on the

80
70
60
50
40
30

Grade 3
Grade 5

Figure 1: Overall mean percent correct on the spelling test,
for grade 3 and grade 5 at pre-intervention, post-intervention
and the six-month follow-up.
Post-intervention to six-month follow-up To specifically
examine the potential differences in the long-term effects of
the intervention for grade 3 and 5 children, a planned
comparison of the whole word accuracy scores for all items,
with the factors Grade (grade 3 or grade 5) and Test Time
(post-intervention or six month post) was conducted. The
results show that the grade 5 children had significantly
higher spelling scores than the grade 3 students from postto six month post-intervention, F(1,64) = 11.55, p < .001.
Collapsing across both grades, scores were significantly
higher at post-intervention than at the six month follow-up,
F(1,64) = 12.01, p < .001, indicating that the children had
forgotten some of the spelling knowledge they gained from
the intervention six months later. Interestingly, the

2768

interaction of Grade and Test Time was not significant, F(1,
64) = .35, p = .55, indicating no difference between grade 3
and grade 5 in the amount of spelling knowledge that was
forgotten. In fact, there was only a small, albeit significant,
decrease in spelling ability six months after the intervention,
approximately 5% in each grade.
Pre-intervention to six-month follow up To ensure that six
months later the children retained much of the spelling
knowledge they originally gained from the intervention, we
conducted a planned comparison of the whole word spelling
accuracy scores of all items, with the factors Grade (grade 3
or grade 5) and Test Time (pre-intervention or six month
post-intervention). Once again there was a significant main
effect of Grade, F(1,64) = 17.57, p < .001, such that the
children in Grade 5 scored higher than those in Grade 3. The
main effect of Test Time was significant, F(1,64) = 193.01,
as was the interaction between Grade and Test Time,
F(1,64) = 10.85, p = .002. These results indicate that
children in both grades maintained their spelling
improvement, scoring higher at the six-month follow-up
than at pre-intervention. Moreover, the children in grade 3
improved more from pre-intervention to the six-month
follow-up than the children in grade 5. Thus, the children
display long-term learning, having retained a large amount
of the spelling knowledge that they gained from the
intervention six months later.

Question #2: Is there a difference in long-term
intervention effectiveness by instruction method?
Pre- to post- intervention summary Given the differences
between grades in intervention effectiveness, we analyzed
pre- to post- intervention differences between the
Morphology and Vocabulary group for each grade

separately. In general, children in both instructional groups
increased from pre- to post- intervention, indicating that
both types of instruction effectively improved children’s
spelling ability for both 3rd and 5th graders. Looking more
closely at the accuracy for stems and suffixes of the test
items, differential effects according to intervention group
emerged, with the Morphology group showing a larger
increase in spelling accuracy than the Vocabulary group.
The results immediately following the intervention
suggest that the instruction focusing on the morphological
structure of words provides an advantage to children over an
intervention that focuses on word meanings. Specifically,
children who have had morphological-based training were
able to generalize the knowledge they gained in the
intervention to be able to correctly spell morphologically
related words that had not been taught directly. While the
Morphology group showed differential improvements over
the Vocabulary group in both grades, the morphological
intervention provided the strongest benefit for children in
grade 5.
To determine whether the advantage of a morphological
intervention over a vocabulary intervention for learning to
spell was maintained after a period of no instruction, we
compared the changes in spelling accuracy of the two
intervention groups from immediately after the intervention
to the six-month follow-up assessment. Additionally, we
compared the long-term effects of the morphology and
vocabulary instruction for 3rd and 5th grade separately, to
determine the developmental stage for which the spelling
intervention is most effective. Each grade was thus
examined separately in the following analyses.. The mean
percent correct on the complex words, stems and suffixes
for both intervention groups are displayed in Table 1 for
Grade 5, and in Table 2 for Grade 3.

Table 1. Grade 5 mean percent correct on complex words, stems and suffixes at post-intervention and six-month follow-up.
Morphology Group
PostSix-month
intervention
follow-up
M
SD
M
SD
Complex
Words
Stems
Suffixes

Mean
Difference

Vocabulary Group
PostSix-month
intervention
follow-up
M
SD
M
SD

Mean
Difference

83.33 17.25

74.31 17.40

-9.02

86.84

15.29

68.42

21.40

-18.42

86.96
91.67

78.99 13.52
88.19 8.27

-7.97
-3.48

80.78
93.42

15.76
6.41

75.06
83.55

16.00
13.54

-5.72
-9.87

9.66
7.11

Table 2. Grade 3 mean percent correct on complex words, stems and suffixes at post-intervention and six-month follow-up.
Morphology Group
PostSix-month
intervention
follow-up
M
SD
M
SD
Complex
Words
Stems
Suffixes

Mean
Difference

Vocabulary Group
PostSix-month
intervention
follow-up
M
SD
M
SD

Mean
Difference

81.25

16.08

63.39 21.63

-17.86

78.33

21.89

65.00 16.50

-13.33

72.98
88.39

15.27
7.70

67.70 13.82
81.70 13.97

-5.28
-6.69

73.91
79.58

18.00
19.11

68.12 19.28
76.67 16.61

-5.79
-2.91

2769

Performance on complex words We first looked at the
long-term changes in whole word spelling accuracy of the
complex words that were taught in the intervention. The
whole word scores for the complex taught words were
entered into a separate ANOVA for each grade, with the
factors Intervention Group (morphology or vocabulary) and
Test Time (post-intervention or six-month postintervention). Looking first at the results for grade 5, the
main effect of Test Time was significant, with children
scoring higher at the post-test session, than the pretest
session, F(1,35) = 21.98, p < .001. The main effect of Group
was not significant, F(1,35) = .05, p = .81, nor was the
interaction of Test Time and Group,, F(1,35) = 2.52, p =
.12. Thus, both groups display some forgetting of how to
spell the complex words that were taught in the intervention,
but this change is not differential based on the intervention
group.
For the 3rd graders, the main effect of Test Time was once
again significant, F(1,27) = 20.68, p < .001, while the main
effect of Group was not significant F(1,27) = , p = .92.
Unlike the pattern observed in the 5th grade, the interaction
of Group and Test Time was not significant, F(1,27) = .44,
p = .51. For children in grade 3, after six months both
groups showed a similar decrease in spelling accuracy for
the complex words taught in the intervention.
.
Performance on stems To assess the long-term effects of
instruction on the spelling of taught stems, mean percent
correct scores for taught stems were entered into an
ANOVA with the factors Test Time (post-intervention or
six-month-post intervention) and Group (morphology or
vocabulary), for each grade separately. The results for the
5th grade children showed a significant main effect of Test
Time, F(1,35) = 12.70, p = .001, but not a significant main
effect of Group, F(1.35) = 1.44, p = .24, nor an interaction
between Test Time and Group F(1,35) = .35, p = .56.
Similarly, in the 3rd grade, the main effect of Test Time
was significant, F(1,27) = 9.68, p = .004, while the main
effect of Group and the interaction of Test Time and Group
were not, F(1,27) = .01, p = .91, F(1,27) = .02, p = .89,
respectively. For both Grade 3 and Grade 5, performance on
the taught stems decreased somewhat for both the
morphology and vocabulary groups, but this small decrease
was the same across both groups. Thus, the initial learning
based on the intervention resulted in approximately 21-31
percent increases in spelling of the stems, and after 6
months, both groups still showed significant improvements
in spelling, only dropping 1 to 6 percent in their scores.
Performance on suffixes We compared the long-term
effects of the two intervention types on the spelling of
suffixes taught in the intervention. For each grade, the mean
percent correct scores for taught suffixes were entered into
separate ANOVAs, with the factors Test Time (postintervention or six-month post-intervention) and Group
(morphology or vocabulary). For grade 5, the main effect of
Test Time was significant, F(1,35) = 18.22, p < .001, while

the main effect of Group was not, F(1,35) = .30,p = .56.
Interestingly, the interaction of Group and Test Time was
significant F(1,35) = 4.08, p = .05, revealing that six months
after the intervention, the morphology group showed greater
retention for the spelling of taught suffixes. This finding
suggests that for children in grade 5, instruction focused on
morphological structure is more beneficial in the long-term
for learning to spell morphologically complex words than
instruction focused on word meaning.
The analysis for grade 3 children showed that the main
effect of Test Time was marginally significant, F(1,27) =
4.00, p = .06, and that the main effect of Group was not,
F(1,27) = 1.86, p = .18. In contrast to Grade 5, the
interaction of Test Time and Grade was not significant for
Grade 3, F(1,27) = .64, p = .43. There is a slight decrease in
the spelling of taught stems at the six-month follow-up for
both intervention groups, and this decrease is not different
by intervention received. Given the differing pattern of
results for performance in the spelling of taught suffixes,
with the 5th graders in the morphology group showing
greater retention, the morphology-based instruction seems to
provide an advantage over a vocabulary-based instruction
for learning to spell at later stages of literacy development.

General Discussion
The present study evaluated the long-term effectiveness of a
morphology-based intervention for elementary school-aged
French-speaking children. The intervention contrasted the
effects of a training program focused on the morphological
structure of words, with one that concentrated only on word
meaning. While other intervention studies have confounded
morphology and vocabulary instruction (see Bowers, Kirby,
& Deacon, 2010, for a review), our study design allowed us
to disambiguate the relative benefits of morphology and
vocabulary instruction for spelling outcomes. Additionally,
by conducting the intervention with children in 3rd and 5th
grade, we could assess the effects of morphological
instruction at different stages of literacy development.
While both interventions led to significant spelling
improvements from pre- to post-intervention, the
Morphology group displayed significantly greater
improvement in their ability to generalize their spelling
knowledge beyond the words that were taught in the
intervention. The differential benefit in favour of the
morphology group was particularly pronounced for the
children in grade 5. Overall, the results suggest that teaching
children about morphological structure successfully
improves spelling accuracy more than instruction based on
word meaning does.
In addition, in the results reported here, we demonstrate
the long term learning effects of the morphology
intervention by re-examining the children after a six-month
delay. We found that for both the morphology and
vocabulary groups, the improvement in spelling accuracy
remains six months later, as the children spell significantly
better at the six-month follow-up than at pre-test. These
effects hold for children in both grades 3 and 5. The

2770

children do display some forgetting at the six-month mark,
with scores significantly decreasing from post-intervention
to six-month follow-up, however, the decreases were very
small (approximately one to six percent) and there were no
differences in the amount of forgetting between grades. This
finding suggests that, regardless of instruction type, children
benefit from our spelling intervention.
Importantly, when examining the differential effects of
instruction type, we found a significant, long-term
advantage for grade 5 children in the Morphology group
over children in the Vocabulary group. At the six-month
follow-up, those who received morphology instruction
showed greater retention of spelling knowledge than those
who received the vocabulary instruction. Our intervention
study and the subsequent follow-up suggest that
morphological training provides sustained improvement to
children’s spelling accuracy in French, greater than
instruction on word meaning, particularly for older
elementary school-aged children.

Conclusion
Findings from our follow-up study provide support for an
advantageous role of morphology instruction for spelling
outcomes in Quebec French. Explicitly teaching children
about the components of complex words helps them to spell
stems and suffixes better, and to generalize their knowledge
beyond the words taught in the intervention. For older
children, these effects are maintained well after instruction
is finished, indicating that morphology instruction would be
a useful tool for dealing with the spelling difficulties
observed in Quebec. While we did not see the same
differential long-term benefit of morphology training in the
younger children, our findings indicate that both types of
intervention were very beneficial in the long-term. As such,
an intervention combing instruction of morphological
structure and vocabulary knowledge may be especially
helpful for these children.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant awarded to the
third author from the Fonds de recherche du Québec Société et culture (FRQSC). We would also like to thank
Eve Bergeron and Rebecca Amzallag for their help with
testing. Finally, a huge debt of gratitude goes to the school
director, teachers, and students for their enthusiastic
participation in the intervention study.

Carlisle, J.F. (2010). Effects of instruction in morphological
awareness on literacy achievement: An integrative
review. Reading Research Quarterly, 45, 464-487.
Carlisle, J.F., & Stone, C.A. (2005). Exploring the role of
morphemes in word reading. Reading Research
Quarterly, 40, 428-449.
Clark (1993). The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Deacon, S.H., & Kirby, J.R. (2004). Morphological
awareness: Just “more phonological”? The
roles
of
morphological and phonological awareness in reading
development. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 223-238.
Gonnerman, L.M. (2007). Children’s recognition of novel
derived words. In H. Caunt-Nulton, S. Kulatiake, & I.
Woo (Eds.). Proceedings of the 31st Annual Boston
University
Jalbert, P (2007). L’épreuve obligatoire d’écriture de la fin
du troisième cycle du primaire en français,
langue
d’enseignement: Comparaison des résultats de 2000 et
2005. Ministère de l’Éducation, du Loisir et du Sport
http://www.mels.gouv.qc.ca/lancement/TablePilotage_Pro
gFormation/Ecriture3eCyclePri mFLE.pdf.
Kirby, J.R., Deacon, S.H., Bowers, P.N., Izenberg, L.,
Wade-Woolley, L., & Parrila, R. (2012). Children’s
morphological awareness and reading ability, Reading
and Writing, 25, 389- 410.
Pacton, S., & Deacon, S. H. (2008). The timing and
mechanisms of children’s use of morphological
information in spelling: A review of evidence from
English and French. Cognitive Development, 23, 339-359.
Sénéchal, M. (2000). Morphological effects in children’s
spelling of French words. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 54, 76-86.
Sénéchal, M., Basque, M.T., & Leclaire, T. (2006).
Morphological knowledge as revealed in children’s
spelling accuracy and reports of spelling strategies.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 95, 231-254.
Singson, M., Mahony, D., & Mann, V. (2000). The relation
between reading ability and morphological
skills:
Evidence from derivational suffixes. Reading and
Writing, 12, 219- 252.
St-Pierre, M-C., & Dubé, J-F. (2012). Morphological
awareness intervention: Does severity play a role in
spelling/reading improvement? Aula Abierta, 40, 15-22.

References
Berko, J. (1958). The child’s learning of English
morphology, Word, 14, 150-177.
Bowers, P.N., Kirby, J.R., & Deacon, S.H. (2010). The
effects of morphological instruction on literacy skills: A
systematic review of the literature. Review of Educational
Research, 80, 144-179.

2771

