UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The invisible hand: Toddlers infer hidden agents when events occur probabilistically

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vc8k8df

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Wu, Yang
Muentener, Paul
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The invisible hand: Toddlers infer hidden agents when events occur probabilistically
Yang Wu (yangwu@mit.edu), Paul Muentener (pmuenten@mit.edu) and Laura E. Schulz
(lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract
This study looked at whether toddlers posit the existence of
unobserved causes when events occur probabilistically. Older
(18-24 months) and younger (12-17 months) children were
introduced to novel events. An experimenter pressed a red
handle and a lollipop emerged from a box; she then pressed a
green handle and a cake emerged. These events were repeated
three times. On the fourth trial, the experimenter switched
either the order or relationship between events. In the
Deterministic condition, the experimenter pressed the green
handle first and the red handle second; in the Probabilistic
condition, the red handle produced the cake and the green
handle produced the lollipop. On the test trial, the
experimenter pressed the red handle and a hand emerged,
holding the lollipop. The older toddlers looked longer at the
hand in the Deterministic than the Probabilistic condition,
suggesting they inferred a hidden cause when the events
occurred probabilistically.
Keywords: causal learning, determinism, toddlers, lookingtime measures.

Introduction
The 19th century mathematician Pierre Simon-LaPlace
speculated that if there were an intellect capable of
analyzing all the forces operating in nature “to it nothing
would be uncertain; the future, like the past, would be as the
present before its eyes.” Twentieth century physics has
made this view untenable; we now know that our universe is
comprised of irreducible uncertainties. Nonetheless, the
idea of indeterminate events boggles the imagination. We
cannot resist explanation even if our world is resistant to it.
However inaccurate, a belief causal determinism may be
advantageous for learning.
A deterministic universe
provides well-specified conditions under which a learner
can infer the existence of hidden variables. If events appear
to occur spontaneously, either an unobserved generative
cause is present or an inhibitory cause is absent; if events
appear to occur stochastically, either an unobserved
inhibitory cause is present or a generative cause is absent.
Is a belief in causal determinism an artifact of
Enlightenment thought or a fundamental feature of human
cognition? Developmental evidence suggests that children
resist both spontaneous and stochastic causation well before
they receive formal science instruction. By the age of five,
preschoolers posit hidden causes to account both for
apparently uncaused events (Bullock, Gelman &
Baillargeon, 1982; Chandler & Lalonde, 1994; Gelman,
Coley, & Gottfried, 1994) and for caused events that occur

some, but not all, of the time (Schulz & Sommerville, 2006;
see also Piaget & Inhelder, 1975).
However, relatively little is known about the origins of
deterministic beliefs earlier in development. The vast
majority of studies looking at indeterminate causation in
infancy have focused only on the specific case of
unexplained motion events (see Gelman & Gottfried, 1996;
Gottfried & Gelman, 2005; Leslie, 1984; Luo &
Baillargeon, 2005; Luo, Kaufman, & Baillargeon, 2009;
Markson & Spelke, 2006; Muentener, Bonawitz, Horowtiz,
& Schulz, 2012; Premack, 1990; Saxe, Tenenbaum, &
Carey, 2005; Saxe, Tzelnic, & Carey, 2007; Spelke,
Philllips, & Woodward, 1995). Thus for instance, if an
inanimate object flies over a wall, infants seem to be less
surprised if a hand is revealed at the origin of the object’s
movement than at the terminus of the movement, suggesting
that infants posit hidden causes when objects appear to
move spontaneously (Saxe et al., 2005; 2007). Recent work
has extended these findings beyond motion events: infants
infer the presence of agents as causes not only when objects
move, but also when they change states spontaneously (i.e.,
when a box breaks apart or plays music; Muentener &
Carey, 2010).
However, infants’ expectation that physical events have
causes may not imply any broader commitment to
determinism. Are toddlers sensitive to stochastic causal
events as well as spontaneous ones? Some suggestive
evidence that toddlers (M = 18 months) resist probabilistic
causation comes from the finding that toddlers imitate
deterministically effective actions more faithfully than they
imitate probabilistically effective ones (Schulz, Hooppell, &
Jenkins, 2008). However, we do not know whether toddlers
actually posit the existence of unobserved causes when
events occur probabilistically. The current study investigates
this question. Given that positing unobserved variables
might be more complex than differential exploration, we
used 18-months as the bottom of our range to test a group of
older toddlers, 18-24 months, and we compared their
performance to younger children, 12-17 months.
We introduced toddlers to novel causal relationships that
were either deterministic (Cause A generated effect A 100%
of the time, and Cause B generated Effect B 100% of the
time) or probabilistic (Cause A generated Effect A 75% of
the time and Effect B 25% of the time; Cause B generated
Effect B 75% of the time and Effect A 25% of the time). We
hypothesized that if toddlers are causal determinists, then
they might infer the existence of an unobserved agent given
probabilistic evidence but would have no reason to expect

3807

an unobserved causal agent given deterministic evidence.
Following the approach used in previous studies (Muentener
& Carey, 2010; Saxe et al., 2005; 2007) we used a human
hand as the candidate causal agent. We predicted that when
the hand is revealed, toddlers would look at it longer in the
Deterministic condition, when no agent is expected, than the
Probabilistic condition, where an unobserved cause might
be inferred.

out of the box. Pilot work established that to an adult
observer, it looked like the handle caused the lollipop to
emerge from the box. She held the lollipop up for 2 seconds

Methods
Participants
Sixty-four toddlers (mean age: 17.2 months; range: 12.0 to
23.5 months) were recruited at a Children’s Museum. We
tested both younger (12-17 months) and older (18-24
months) toddlers. There were 16 toddlers in each condition
(age group × evidence conditions). An additional 23
toddlers were recruited but not included in the final sample
due to: experimenter error (n = 10), fussiness (n = 9), or
parent interference (n = 4). There were equal number of
boys and girls.

Materials
Toddlers were introduced to a purple box (37.6 cm× 29.2
cm. × 20.3 cm.) with two handles (21.6 cm in length). The
left handle was red with black stripes. The right handle was
green with white spots. See Figure 1. The box was placed
in front of a black foam board screen (117.9 cm × 97.8
cm). The experimenter could hide behind the screen and
observe the child through pinholes in the screen. Two
openings in the screen on either side of the box allowed the
experimenter to reach her hands through to manipulate the
handles. The box had an opening in the back and the top so
that the experimenter could conceal her hand in the box and
lift objects out of the box. When a handle was pressed the
experimenter lifted either a lollipop (9.4 cm in diameter) or
a toy cake (7.6 cm in height, 7.6 cm in width) out of the
box. An MVP player was also used: the red handle was
always accompanied by the sound of an ascending scale on
a xylophone; the green handle was always accompanied by
the sound of a descending scale on a xylophone.

Procedure
Toddlers were recruited from a local Children’s Museum
and tested in a private room located on the museum floor.
The child was placed in a high chair approximately 100 cm
in front of the box. The child’s parent sat to the right of the
high chair, out of the child’s direct line of sight.
The experimenter pointed to the box and the two
handles. See Figure 1. Then she went behind the screen.
The experimenter knocked on the center of the box behind
the screen and said, “Hi, [child’s name]! Watch this box!”
She began the Familiarization Trials by putting her hand
out of the left hole and waving at the child. She then
pressed the red handle and, with her other hand concealed in
the box, triggered the ascending scale and lifted the lollipop

Figure 1: Procedure of the experiment.
and then released the red handle and simultaneously
returned the lollipop to the box. She brought her hand back
behind the screen. She then put her hand out of the right
hole and waved at the child. She pressed the green handle
and, with her other hand concealed in the box, triggered the
descending scale and lifted the cake out of the box. She held
the cake up for 2 seconds and then released the green handle
and simultaneously returned the cake to the box. The

3808

Results
We examined the effect of the condition manipulation on
toddlers’ looking time to the test trial separately within each
age group (12-17 months, 18-24 months; see Figure 2). The
12 – 17 month olds, looked equally long at the test trial in
the
Deterministic
and
Probabilistic
conditions
(Deterministic mean: 10.5 s; Probabilistic mean: 9.8 s; t(30)
= .39, p = .698). However, the 18 – 24 month-olds looked
significantly longer at the test trial in the Deterministic
condition than the Probabilistic condition (Deterministic
mean: 13.7 s; Probabilistic mean: 8.2 s; t(30) = 2.51, p =
.018). This is consistent with the possibility that children
had inferred the presence of an unobserved candidate cause
in the Probabilistic condition but not the Deterministic
condition.
Note the Switch Trial and the Test Trial were perceptually
more similar to each other in the Deterministic condition
than the Probabilistic condition. In the Deterministic
condition, the only difference between the last event of the
Switch Trial and the Test Trial was the presence of the
hand; in the Probabilistic condition both the handle pressed
and the hand differed. This suggests that the toddlers in the
Deterministic condition looked longer at the Test Trial not
because it was perceptually more novel but because the

hand was more unexpected in the Deterministic condition
than the Probabilistic condition.

Looking Time (s)

experimenter repeated the familiarization trials a total of
three times.
On the Switch Trial, the experimenter said, “[child’s
name], watch!” In the Deterministic condition, she switched
the order of events, repeating the events in the
Familiarization Trials except that she pressed the green
handle first and the cake popped up; she then pressed the red
handle and the lollipop popped up. In the Probabilistic
condition, the experimenter switched the relationship
between events, repeating the events in the Familiarization
Trials except that when the experimenter pressed the red
handle, the cake popped up; when she pressed the green
handle, the lollipop popped up.
On the Test Trial, the experimenter put her hand out of
the left hole and waved to the child. She then said “Aha!”,
pressed the red handle and lifted her hand holding the
lollipop all the way out of the box so that both her hand and
the lollipop were visible to the child. She remained
stationary in this position until the child looked away from
the stage for at least 2 consecutive seconds. Note that she
ran the familiarization, switch and test trials cohesively
without measuring children’s looking times to each trial.
Most of the children were engaged in the experiment and
kept looking all through it. A coder blind to the conditions
coded the children’s looking times from the beginning of
the “Aha!” sound to the start of the 2-second looking away
off-line from videotape. The blind coding from videotape
corroborated the experimenter’s online judgment in all but
three cases; three children were dropped from the analysis
and replaced due to premature termination of the test trial. A
second coder blind to the conditions coded one third of the
clips. Inter-coder reliability was 95.6%.

18	  
16	  
14	  
12	  
10	  
8	  
6	  
4	  
2	  
0	  

*

12-17 months

Deterministic
Condition
Probabilistic
Condition

18-24 months

Age
Figure 2: Looking times on the deterministic and
probabilistic conditions as a function of age. * p < .02

Discussion
These results suggest that 18-24 month-olds posit
unobserved causes when they observe probabilistic
evidence. Toddlers who saw a stochastic relationship
between causes and effects appeared to be less surprised that
a human hand was involved in the events than toddlers who
saw a deterministic relationship. This is consistent with the
possibility that toddlers are causal determinists.
However, the current results also leave a number of
questions unanswered. Children may assume that artifacts
behave deterministically without extending this assumption
to the physical world more broadly. Artifacts, including the
stimuli used here, may have particularly salient, and
familiar, deterministic causal relationships. We do not know
to what extent toddlers would infer the presence of
unobserved causes to account for naturally occurring
probabilistic events. Additionally, we do not know to what
extent either adults or children extend a belief in causal
determinism beyond the physical world, to psychological
and social events. Future research might investigate the
extent to which children draw inferences consistent with
causal determinism across a broader range of contexts.
Additionally, we do not know why the younger toddlers
in our study failed to distinguish the Deterministic and
Probabilistic conditions. It is possible that 12 – 17 montholds accept that events can happen stochastically.
Alternatively, given that there were only three
Familiarization Trials and a single Switch Trial, the
distinction between the conditions may have been too subtle
for the younger toddlers to detect. Younger toddlers might
have failed to learn the causal relationships initially, or
failed to detect either the order or relational change. Given
more exposure to the target events, even young toddlers and
infants might posit unobserved causes to explain
probabilistic evidence.
Finally, it would be interesting to know what kinds of
unobserved causes children allow as explanations for

3809

probabilistic evidence. Saxe et al. (2005) found that infants
failed to treat one object as a cause of another object’s
motion, although they accepted both a hand and a novel,
handless agent puppet as potential candidate causes (Saxe,
et al., 2007). Similarly Muentener & Carey (2010) found
that infants accepted a hand but not an object as a candidate
cause of another object changing state. Finally, Newman,
Keil, Kuhlmeier, and Wynn (2010) found that infants
expected that agents (balls with eyes) could add order or
structure to a scene but that objects (balls without eyes)
could not. In this study, we only tested toddlers’ inferences
about human agents as candidate causal agents in
probabilistic events; it would be interesting to know whether
toddlers’ inferences about the unobserved causes behind
probabilistic events are limited to agents.
What the current study does establish is that even
toddlers’ causal inferences go well beyond the evidence
they observe. Given sparse data for a novel probabilistic
causal relationship, toddlers inferred the existence of an
unobserved causal agent. To the degree that a belief in
causal determinism shapes the inferences even of one-and-ahalf-year-olds, they are well equipped for exploration and
discovery.

Acknowledgements
Warm thanks to the Boston Children’s Museum and
participating parents and children. Thanks to Anne Kim for
help with data collection and to Rachel Magid for help with
making the stimuli and coding the data. This research was
funded by a National Science Foundation CAREER award
to L.S.

References
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The
development of causal reasoning. In W. J. Friedman
(Ed.), The developmental psychology of time (pp. 209–
254). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Chandler, M. J., & Lalonde, C. E. (1994). Surprising,
miraculous, and magical turns of events. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 12, 83–95.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D., & Gottfried, G. M. (1994).
Essentialist beliefs in children: The acquisition of
concepts and theories. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A.
Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in
cognition and culture. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Gelman, S.A. & Gottfried, G.M. (1996). Children’s Causal
Explanations of Animate and Inanimate Motion. Child
Development 67(5), 1970–1987.
Gottfried, G. M., & Gelman, S. A. (2005). Developing
domain-specific causal-explanatory frameworks: The
role of insides and immanence. Cognitive Development,
205, 137–158.
Leslie, A. M. (1984). Infant perception of a manual pick-up
event. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 2,
19–32.

Luo, Y., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Can a self-propelled box
have a goal? Psychological reasoning in 5-month-old
infants. Psychological Science, 16, 601–608.
Luo, Y., Kaufman, L., & Baillargeon, R. (2009). Young
infants’ reasoning about physical events involving selfand nonself- propelled objects. Cognitive Psychology,
58, 441–486.
Markson, L., & Spelke, E. S. (2006). Infants’ rapid learning
about self-propelled objects. Infancy, 9, 45–71.
Muentener, P., Bonawitz, E., Horowitz, A., & Schulz, L.
(2012). Mind the gap: Investigating toddlers' sensitivity
to contact relations in predictive events. PLoS ONE,
7(4).
Muentener, P., & Carey, S. (2010). Infants’ causal
representations of state change events. Cognitive
Psychology, 61, 63–86.
Newman, G., Keil, F., Kuhlmeier, V., & Wynn, K., (2010).
Sensitivity to Design: Early Understandings of the Link
Between Agents and Order. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107, 17140–17145.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1975). The origin of the idea of
chance in children. New York: Norton.
Premack, D. (1990). Do infants have a theory of selfpropelled objects? Cognition, 36, 1–16.
Saxe, R., Tenenbaum, J., & Carey, S. (2005). Secret agents:
10 and 12-month-olds infer an unseen cause of the
motion of an inanimate object. Psychological Science,
16(12), 995–1001.
Saxe, R., Tzelnic, T., & Carey, S. (2007). Knowing who
dunnit: infants identify the causal agent in an unseen
causal interaction. Developmental Psychology, 43(1),
149–158.
Schulz, L., Hoopel, K., & Jenkins, A. (2008). Judicious
imitation: Young children imitate deterministic actions
exactly, stochastic actions more variably. Child
Development, 79, 395–410.
Schulz, L. E., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism in children's inferences about
unobserved causes. Child Development, 77(2), 427–442.
Spelke, E. S., Phillips, A., & Woodward, A. L. (1995).
Infants’ knowledge of object motion and human action.
In D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack (Eds.),
Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary debate (pp. 44–
78). New York: Clarendon Press/Oxford University
Press.

3810

