UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Problem Space on Reasoning: Solving versus Creating Matrices

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1h01f48c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Jaarsveld, Saskia
Lachmann, Thomas
Van Leeuwen, Cees

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Problem Space on Reasoning: Solving versus Creating Matrices
Saskia Jaarsveld (jaarsvel@rhrk.uni-kl.de)
University of Kaiserslautern, Center for Cognitive Science, Cognitive and Developmental Psychology, Edwin Schrödinger
Strasse, Building 57
D-67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany

Thomas Lachmann (lachmann@rhrk.uni-kl.de)
University of Kaiserslautern, Center for Cognitive Science, Cognitive and Developmental Psychology, Edwin Schrödinger
Strasse, Building 57
D-67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany

Cees van Leeuwen (cees.vanleeuwen@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Catholic University Leuven, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
Creative reasoning in ill-defined problem spaces operates
differently from classical reasoning in well-defined
spaces. To systematically compare the two in an identical
knowledge domain, we applied a classical intelligence
test: the Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM), in
combination with two tests of creativity: the Test for
Creative Thinking - Drawing Production (TCT-DP) and
the newly developed Creative Reasoning Task (CRT), in
which participants are asked to create an SPM-like item,
to two age groups (N1 = 511, 4-12y old; N2 = 205, 6-10y
old). For SPM and CRT the knowledge domain consists
of relationships amongst geometrical components in 3 x 3
matrices. We developed a typology for scoring the
number and complexity of the relationships used in these
matrices. For the SPM, we scored frequencies of
relationships solved and for CRT those created, and
interpreted the scores in terms of differences and
similarities between classical and creative reasoning in
cognitive development.
Keywords: Cognitive development; intelligence; reasoning;
creativity; creative cognition; creative reasoning.

Classical and Creative Reasoning
In creativity, both convergent and divergent thinking are
needed, in order to arrive at a quality formulation (Jaarsveld
& van Leeuwen, 2005). Creative processes often consist of
iteratively generating, testing, and selecting intermediate
productions, ultimately leading to an integral result. We
interpreted this process in terms of the integration of
convergent and divergent operations characteristic of
creative reasoning (Jaarsveld et al., 2010). Here we will
consider the integration of convergent and divergent
operations against the alternative possibility that both are
used as independent, quasi-additive resources.
Convergent operations are typically associated with
classical reasoning. A consequence is that classical and
creative reasoning share processing components. Therefore,

if convergent and divergent operations constitute
independent resources, test results between classical and
creative reasoning will be correlated. Longstanding
investigations of intelligence and creativity test scores
suggested only a moderate relationship (Wallach & Kogan,
1965; Kim, 2005; Silvia, 2008). The strength of the relation,
however, may be a matter of differences between the
knowledge domains of both tests that are unrelated to the
differences between reasoning types per se. To illustrate this
issue, here we compared a classical intelligence test, the
Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM; Raven, 1938/1998),
with two creativity tests, one of which, the Creative
Reasoning Task (CRT; Jaarsveld et al., 2010; Jaarsveld,
Lachmann, & van Leeuwen, 2012), shares the domain of
knowledge with the SPM and the other, the Test for
Creative Thinking - Drawing Production (TCT-DP; Urban
& Jellen, 1995) does not (Jaarsveld et al., 2010; 2012).

Knowledge Domain
In general, classical and creative reasoning tests tend to
operate in different knowledge domains. For instance, the
SPM, which is considered to measure convergent thinking,
operates in the domain of relations among geometrical
components contained in a matrix (Figure 1). By contrast,
the TCT-DP, which is considered to measure divergent
production, operates in the domain of figural associations.
Smilansky (1984) introduced a paradigm which we named
the Single Knowledge Domain Paradigm. Smilansky asked
participants first to solve the SPM and next to create an
SPM-like item in a task which we named the Creative
Reasoning Task (CRT). Hence, between SPM and CRT
cognition operates on the same knowledge domain (Figure
1). Solving a classical reasoning task does not always mean
the problem is understood: often a correct solution is
accompanied by an incorrect line of verbal reasoning or is
obtained without any conceptual understanding (Chi &
VanLehn, 1991; Karmiloff-Smith, 1992; Pine & Messer,
1999). Such distortions are less likely with ill-defined
problems.

2632

42), Grade 3 (M = 8.81, N = 59), Grade 4 (M = 9.80, N =
132), Grade 5 (M = 10.87, N = 91), Grade 6 (M = 11.91, N =
82). In the second study we only had children from
Elementary School ranging from six to ten years old (N2 =
205), 50% girls. Mean age per grade in years: Grade 1 (M =
7.06, N = 51), Grade 2 (M = 8.16, N = 43), Grade 3 (M =
9.07, N = 51), Grade 4 (M = 10.05, N = 60). Age limits
within grades for both studies were not absolute, but the
average age increased with 1 year per grade.
Figure 1: An item of the solving test (SPM) and the empty
response form of the Creative Reasoning Task (CRT).

Problem Space
In the literature, classical and creative reasoning are both
understood as processes operating in abstract problem
spaces (Hayes & Flowers, 1986; Simon, 1973; Kulkarni &
Simon, 1988; Runco, 2007). A problem space contains all
possible states that are accessible from the initial state
through iterative application of transition rules, including
the ones that bring the problem solver from the initial state
to the final solution. Problem spaces in classical reasoning
are well-defined; like in a game of chess, no reinterpretation
of rules is possible. Problem spaces in creative reasoning are
ill-defined, and may allow re-interpretation of rules during
the problem solving process. For instance, in rearranging
your room you uncover implicit requirements that introduce
a set of new transformations and/or eliminate existing ones
(Barsalou, 1992) or, when conflicting constraints arise, you
introduce new trade-offs (Yamamoto, Nakakoji, & Takada,
2000).
In our first study we compared reasoning performances in
well and ill defined problem spaces, those of the SPM and
CRT, respectively (Jaarsveld et al., 2010). For analyzing the
performance on both tasks, we developed a scoring method
based on a typology of the number and complexity of the
relationships in evidence in the 3 x 3 matrices that feature in
these tests. In a second study (Jaarsveld et al., 2012) we
developed for the CRT two sub-scores: Relations, which
reflects convergent production in ill defined problem spaces,
and Components and Specifications, which reflects
divergent production. We compared across grade levels,
firstly, the CRT sub-scores of Relations with scores of the
SPM and the CRT sub-scores of Components and
Specifications with scores on the TCT-DP. Secondly, we
analyzed the complexity in matrices solved in the SPM with
created in the CRT. This analysis would allow us to observe
whether more advanced pupils have a higher developed
ability to process complex information (Halford, 1993).

Method
Participants Children of the first study were from Nursery
and Elementary Schools ranging from four to twelve years
old (N1 = 511), 52% girls Mean age per grade in years:
Younger Nursery school children (M = 4.64, N = 33), Older
Nursery school children (M = 5.68, N = 31), Elementary
school Grade 1 (M = 6.73, N = 41), Grade 2 (M = 7.79, N =

Material The SPM is contained in a booklet, which displays
one incomplete matrix per page, together with a multiple
choice of completion alternatives. Participants had to infer
relations between given components and choose the
completing figure from among the alternatives given below
the matrix (Figure 1). A separate answering sheet is offered,
on which individuals mark the number of the alternative
they consider to be the proper completion. The CRT asks
participants to create an SPM-like item. The instruction was
to make the item as difficult as you possibly can such that it
will be a hard puzzle for others to solve. On an empty form
reflecting the format of the SPM items (Figure 1)
participants had to create components and relations, and to
draw the completing figure in one of the cells in the lower
part of the response form. The TCT-DP asks participants to
complete a drawing on a form containing five simple
components within a frame and a sixth one outside the
frame. The instruction conveyed that one could do nothing
wrong and draw as one liked.
Design and procedure Children first performed the solving
test (50 minutes). Nursery School children and those up to
Grade 3 performed the Coloured Progressive Matrices test
(CPM; Raven, 1956/1976) which is designed to assess the
cognitive abilities of young children. Older children
performed on the SPM. Consecutively, in both studies all
were asked to create a matrix in the CRT (15 minutes).
Finally, the children of the 2nd Study performed the Test of
Creative Thinking (10 min). Nursery school children
performed the tasks individually; group testing was applied
for the classes of the Elementary School.
Analysis The scores of the CPM and SPM equaled the
number of items solved correctly. Scores of the CPM were
converted to SPM scores according to the scale provided by
Raven, Raven, and Court (1998), in order to enable direct
comparisons between grade levels. The score of the TCTDP was a summation of grade points (range 0-6) for each of
the 14 sub-scores: Continuation, Completion, Connections
Made with a Line, Connections Made to Produce a Theme,
Figure-based Boundary Transgression, Figure-independent
Boundary Transgression, Perspective, Humor and
Affectivity, Unconventionality-a: any manipulation of the
material; Unconventionality-b: any surrealistic, fictitious
and/or abstract elements or drawings; Unconventionality-c:
any usage of symbols or signs; Unconventionality-d:
unconventional use of given fragments; Speed: drawings

2633

that are made within a certain time limit and show a score
above a certain value score extra points. The score of the
CRT consisted of the sub-scores Relations and Components
and Specifications. Relations scores the logical complexity
of relations in complete and incomplete matrices. Relations
are typically transformations from one component of the
matrix to another. We identified a total of twelve relations.
Three for the CPM: Four Identical Components;
Continuous Pattern; and Symmetry. One for the SPM:
Indication of Mathematical Operation. Three for the CRT:
Idiosyncratic and Semantic Coherence; Indication of Form,
Texture, Amount or Orientation; and Groups of Three
Components. An additional five for the SPM were taken and
partly modified from Carpenter, Just, and Shell (1990):
Change; Increase and Decrease; Combination; Succession;
and Disappear and Remain. We analyzed the matrices of
CPM, SPM, and CRT for the relations they contained.
Scoring of a relation created in the CRT is done in several
steps. First, we listed the relations that apply to the item and
for each relation marked the components it covered. Next,
for each relation we assigned an index value i = 1, 2, … to
all first appearances of the marked components, starting
from the top-left cell of the item, proceeding from left to
right through each row from top to bottom. Third, passing
through the matrix in the same order as previous, we
accumulate a score, in which the first encounter of a
component is scored with a value identical to its index; each
next time we encounter a component again, we assign the
same score as previously, incremented with 1 when it occurs
in a row different from where it has previously been
encountered, and with another 1 when it occurs in a column
in which it has not previously been encountered. The
resulting score is the sum total of all values assigned to
components of the matrix. The sub-score Components
scores the number of different components and the subscore Specifications scores the occurrence of different
pictorial specifications (textures and line styles) and
transformational specifications (size, orientation, number,
and location). These specifications were scored when they
did not express a relation. The categories Non Figurative
and Figurative indicated matrices which featured
components of a geometrical and a figurative character,
respectively.

Results
First, we present results of interrater reliability of the CRT
for type and complexity of relations. Next, we present the
correlations between test scores reflecting three types of
cognitive processes; one which mainly features convergent
thinking (CPM and SPM), one which mainly features
divergent thinking (TCT-DP), and one in which both types
of thinking play a role (CRT). Thirdly, we present to what
extent Relations in the items created in the CRT reflected
those featured and solved in the CPM and SPM. Finally, we
present results of the increasing complexity of matrices
created, according to number of relations applied within the
matrix.

Interrater reliability Subsets of items of the CRT were
scored independently by different raters and interrater
reliability was calculated with Cohen’s Kappa, К, for type
of relations and with Pearson correlations, r, for the CRT
sub-scores. Results ranged from К = .93 in the first study (n
= 95), to К = .94 in the second study (n = 69), and from r =
.99, p < .01 for sub-score Relations, to r = .91, p < .01 (both
2-tailed) for sub-score Components and Specifications.
Test Scores Results of test scores between SPM and CRT
over all grade levels did not show a significant correlation.
They did show a correlation in some grade levels; in the first
study in Grades 3 and 6, and in the second study in Grade 1.
In the second study, as expected, the CRT sub-score
Relations, which according to our theory represents
convergent thinking, showed a correlation with the SPM (r
= .192, p < .01; partial correlation corrected for TCT-DP: r
= .213, p < .01). The CRT sub-score Components and
Specifications, which according to our theory represents
divergent thinking, showed a correlation with the TCT-DP
(r = .147, p < .05; partial correlation corrected for SPM:
.153, p < .05). Furthermore, scores of SPM and TCT-DP
showed a correlation, r = .225, p < .05, but, as expected
from the assumption that in the CRT the sub-scores
represent different thinking abilities, no correlation was
found between the CRT sub-scores Relations and
Components and Specifications, r = .016, p = .823.
Moreover, as expected, there were no correlations between
Relations and TCT-DP, and between Components and
Specifications and SPM. The latter results hold also for
partial correlation analyses. From this we may infer that
convergent and divergent thinking play a role in the
Creative Reasoning Task and that both can be scored on one
end product.
Relations Featured, Solved, and Created in the CPM
Condition Frequencies of relations solved and created
showed that Young Nursery School children (age in years M
= 4.64) solved three of the four relations presented but
generated a different relation, Relation 1, Idiosyncratic
Coherence. Older Nursery School children (age in years M
= 5.68) preferred an additional relation, Relation 3,
Continuous Pattern. This focus shifts at Grade 1 (age in
years M = 6.73) to Relation 2, Four Identical Components
and at Grade 2 and 3 (age in years M = 7.79 and M = 8.81,
respectively) to Continuous Pattern. The dominance of
Idiosyncratic Coherence, shows that creative reasoning in
the youngest children is dominated by rules that are not
deducible logically and clearly arise from an individual
interpretation.
Relations Featured, Solved, and Created in the SPM
Condition Relation 3, Continuous Pattern is the most
frequently created relation by children of the higher grades
(Grade 4, age in years M = 9.80 to Grade 6, M = 11.91).
Deleting a piece in an overall pattern, whether figurative or
non figurative, may be the first abstract relation that plays a

2634

role in generative problem solving. The results of the chisquare tests for independence over the frequencies of
relations solved and created in both conditions were
significant, p-values smaller than .05 to .001. In the second
study we observed identical results.
Components Results of chi-square tests of Components and
Specifications in CPM and SPM condition followed those
for Relations. Figurative components were generated by
children in both studies although the solving test does not
feature these types of components. In the first study the
percentage of children who applied figurative components
decreased significantly with grade level, rs = -.671, n = 8, p
< .05, one tailed (rs Spearman Rank correlation).
Relations in the SPM and created in the CRT as a
function of school grade Second study: we observed that
only one relation, Combination, showed an increase with
grade in both SPM and CRT. Other relations showed either,
a decrease in SPM in combination with an increase in CRT,
for instance Pattern Completion; an increase in SPM was
observed for the relations Change and Succession; a
decrease in SPM was observed for the relation Increase and
Decrease; a decrease in CRT was observed for the relations
Idiosyncratic Coherence, Four Identical Components, and
Symmetry. (Spearman Rank correlations of frequencies over
grade, p < .05). For both studies we concluded that SPM and
CRT did not show the same trends with grade in the
frequency of occurrence of different relations.
Number of Relations Applied per Item Complexity in the
SPM matrices as measured by number of relations increased
over the series of SPM items, rs = .900, n = 5, p < .05. We
found a corresponding increase in complexity over grade
levels in matrices created in the CRT in the first study, rs =
.964, n = 8, p < .01. Components increasingly show variety
in number, in size and orientation. In the second study
increases in complexity failed to reach significance due to
lack of power, rs = .258, n = 4, p = .371.

Conclusions and Discussion
We compared across grade levels the performance on the
Creative Reasoning Task (CRT), with that on the
Progressive Matrices test (CPM and SPM), and the Test of
Creative Thinking-Drawing Production (TCT-DP). We used
the CRT to measure convergent and divergent thinking,
which we consider to play an integrated role in ill defined
problem spaces. CRT and SPM operated on the same
problem domain; nevertheless, operations used in both tasks
differed as a function of the differences in problem spaces.
Whereas the SPM uses convergent operations, both
divergent and convergent operations are needed for the
CRT. The absence of correlations across school grades,
therefore, implies that in creative processes as tested by the
CRT, convergent and divergent operations do not occur as
additive process components, but play an integrated role
throughout the process (Jaarsveld & van Leeuwen, 2005.

Correspondence In addition to contrasts between the tests,
similarities were observed in development. Across school
grades, we observed increasing complexity in problem
solving and problem creation. In the SPM we observed an
increase over series of items combining several rules. In the
CRT there is a parallel increase in the number of relations
applied per item created. Children in more advanced grades
also used more components, with an increasingly rich
variety of specifications.
Differences Although relations applied in the creating task
often featured in the solving task, almost within all grades
performance on both tasks was uncorrelated; in the CRT
grades were characterized by a preference for specific types
of relations. Another difference between both tasks was the
absence of concordant increases or decreases over age levels
in the application of certain types of relations. Combination
was the only one of 12 relations that showed an increase in
both tasks. Finally, in creating, figurative components were
more persistently preferred, despite the non figurative
character of CPM and SPM items. Participants preferred to
introduce rules and other elements from their individual
episodic/semantic knowledge domains, as opposed to what
they encountered in the problem solving task. This
difference cannot be understood as a discrepancy in
knowledge domain. Creative problem solving, therefore,
does not depend entirely upon classical problem solving
skills.
Cognitive Development Perspectives Even though the
material of the SPM is non figurative, relations created in
the CRT tend to be expressed in figurative mode. SingerFreeman and Goswami (2001) observed that three to four
year old children understand proportional equivalence, even
when the materials (pizza and chocolates) to be matched are
not isomorphic. Young children, therefore, do not solve
analogy problems on the basis of relational similarities but
on the basis of associations (Piaget, Montangero, & Billeter,
1977). Young children in solving CPM items have the
opportunity to learn that matrix components belong together
according to certain relationships. They proceeded in the
CRT to arrange components according to different, selfdefined relationships.
Whereas children were able to solve most relationships, per
grade one type of relation was predominantly applied in the
CRT. Zelazo, Frye, and Rapus (1996) observed that
knowing a rule in the card sorting task does not imply that it
will be used correctly after a new sorting rule has been
introduced. These authors observed a change in the ability
to switch to a new rule between the age of three and five
years old and explained this among others, in terms of the
implicitness of rule representation. It could be that
representations formed in a well-defined problem space are
not understood at a sufficiently explicit level to be carried
over to an ill-defined space.
The observed shifts with grade level in rules preferably
applied in the CRT seem to correspond to Piaget’s

2635

developmental stages. According to Piaget, children
between the ages of four and seven years old are in the
intuitive thought phase, which is a sub-phase of the
preoperational phase. In this phase children develop
Conservation (the awareness that altering the state of a
substance, does not change it's properties) and Centration
(the focusing on one characteristic). In our study these
children applied relationships of the types: Idiosyncratic
Coherence and Four Identical Components. These are
relationships that mostly feature one characteristic.
Piaget considered children between seven and eleven years
old to be in the concrete operational phase. In this phase
children’s ability to think abstractly develops and they learn
to understand the concept of reversibility. In our study these
children predominantly applied variations of the relationship
Continuous Pattern, a relationship which does not require
abstract thinking. Deleting a piece from an overall pattern,
as application of this rule requires, might be the first
abstract operation in this phase.
Although creative productions, therefore, seem to follow
Piagetian stages, two observations need to be made: First,
despite these overall restrictions, children applied more
complex relationships in small frequencies, in the CRT.
Second, the contrast between rules used in solving SPM
items and those applied in the CRT is not a matter of
decalage. Piagetian stages are in evidence in the CRT, but
not in the SPM. They are not reflected in classical problem
solving but in creative reasoning, which characteristically
requires the integration of divergent and convergent
reasoning.
Limitations of the CRT The CRT is still in an early stage
of development. In its current form, there are several issues
that restrict its practical utility. Before the CRT can be
administered the SPM has to be completed. This task serves,
amongst other things, to make participants acquainted with
the particular structure of the matrices problems. Without
this phase we would have needed extensive instructions,
which renders the task more algorithmic and, therefore,
might decrease creative production (Amabile, 1987). To
have a solving task precede a generation task is consistent
with the general observation that nothing is invented from
scratch; creativity implies using old elements in new
contexts and seeing relations that no one saw before
(Barron, 1981; Boden, 1990; Indurkhya, 1992; Torrance,
1987). Familiarity with the relevant domain and experience
with a variety of methods are a prerequisite for generating
solutions (Voss & Post, 1988). For the current study, SPM
data were needed anyway. If one is interested only in CRT
performance, however, future developments of the test
should include a certain number of matrices, specifically
constructed to contain the same relations that feature in the
SPM. These new matrices, then, are expected to provide
participants with an identical solving experience as in the
SPM. Moreover, the current CRT asks participants to
generate one item only. This was done in order to tap
individual abilities at the moment where they had reached

the maximum level of apprehension according to SPM.
However, children may not achieve to their maximum
abilities in this single item. For this reason, we are currently
investigating the effect of including multiple CRT items in
the task.
With the Creative Reasoning Task, we were able to answer
the question whether individuals who have just solved SPM
items in which certain transformations featured, apply these
same transformations when they design a new matrix. We
found that relations featuring in the solving task differed
from those applied in the problem creating task. It was
concluded that creative reasoning, as measured by the CRT,
does not reflect SPM solving ability, and that both cognitive
abilities develop rather independently from each other from
Kindergarten to Secondary school.

References
Amabile, T. M. (1987). The motivation to be creative. In S.
G. Isaksen (Ed.), Frontiers of creativity research: Beyond
the basics (pp. 223-254). Buffalo, NY: Bearly Limited.
Barron, F. (1981). Originality in relation to personality and
intellect. In W. E. Barbe & J. S. Renzulli (Eds.),
Psychology and education of the gifted (pp. 168-178).
New York, NY: Irvington Publications.
Barsalou, L.W. (1992). Cognitive psychology: An overview
for cognitive scientists. Hillsdale, New Jersey: LEA.
Boden, M. A. (1990). The creative mind: Myths and
mechanisms. London: Abacus.
Carpenter, P. A., Just, M. A., & Shell, P. (1990). What one
intelligence test measures: A theoretical account of the
processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices test.
Psychological Review, 97, 404–431.
Chi, M. T. H., & VanLehn, K. A. (1991). The content of
physics self-explanations. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 1, 69–105.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Hayes, J. R., & Flowers, L. S. (1986). Writing research and
the writer. American Psychologist, 41, 1106-1113.
Indurkhya, B. (1992). Metaphor and cognition. London:
Kluwer Academic Press.
Jaarsveld, S., & van Leeuwen, C. (2005). Sketches from a
design process: Creative cognition inferred from
intermediate products. Cognitive Science, 29, 79-101.
Jaarsveld, S., Lachmann, T., Hamel, R., & van Leeuwen, C.
(2010). Solving and creating Raven Progressive Matrices:
Reasoning in well and ill defined problem spaces.
Creativity Research Journal, 22, 304-319.
Jaarsveld, S., Lachmann, T., & van Leeuwen, C. (2012).
Creative reasoning across developmental levels:
Convergence and divergence in problem creation.
Intelligence, 40, 172-188.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond modularity: A
developmental perspective on cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

2636

Kim, K. H. (2005) Can only intelligent people be creative?
Journal of Secondary Gifted Education, 16, 57-66.
Kulkarni, D., & Simon, H. A. (1988). The processes of
scientific discovery: The strategy of experimentation.
Cognitive Science, 12, 139-175.
Piaget, J., Montangero, J., & Billeter, J. (1977). La
formation des correlats. In J. Piaget (Ed.), Recherches sur
l’abstraction reflechissante I (pp. 115 – 129). Paris: Presse
Universitaires de France.
Pine, K., & Messer, D. (1999). What children do and what
children know: Looking beyond success using KarmiloffSmith’s RR frame-work. New Ideas in Psychology, 17,
17–30.
Raven, J. C. (1938/1998). Standard Progressive Matrices,
Sets A, B, C, D & E. Oxford, Great Britain: Oxford
Psychologists Press.
Raven, J. C. (1956/1976). Coloured Progressive Matrices,
Sets A, AB, & C. Oxford, Great Britain: Information Press.
Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1998). Raven
manual: Section 3, Standard Progressive Matrices.
Oxford, Great Britain: Oxford Psychologists Press.
Runco, M. A. (2007). Creativity, theories and themes:
Research, development, and practice. Amsterdam, New
York: Elsevier.
Singer-Freeman, K. E., & Goswami, U. (2001). Does half a
pizza equal half a box of chocolates? Proportional
matching in an analogy task. Cognitive Development, 16,
811–829.
Silvia, P. J. (2008). Creativity and intelligence revisited: A
reanalysis of Wallach and Kogan (1965). Creativity
Research Journal, 20, 34-39.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The structure of ill structured
problems. Artificial Intelligence, 4, 1012-1021.
Smilansky, J. (1984). Problem solving and the quality of
invention: An empirical investigation. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 76, 377–386.
Torrance, E. P. (1987). Teaching for creativity. In S. G.
Isaksen (Ed.), Frontiers of creativity research: Beyond the
basics (pp. 189-215). Buffalo, NY: Bearly.
Urban, K. K., & Jellen, H. G. (1995). Test of Creative
Thinking - Drawing Production. Frankfurt, Germany:
Swets Test Services.
Voss, J. F., & Post, T. A. (1988). On the solving of illstructured problems. In M. T. Chi, R. Glaser, & M. J. Farr
(Eds.), The nature of expertise (pp. 261-286). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Wallach, M. A., & Kogan, N. (1965). Modes of thinking in
young children: A study of the creativity-intelligence
distinction. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Yamamoto, Y., Nakakoji, K., & Takada, S. (2000). Hand on
representations in two dimensional spaces for early stages
of design. Knowledge Based Systems, 13, 357-384.
Zelazo, D. P., Frye, D., & Rapus, T. (1996). An age-related
dissociation between knowing rules and using them.
Cognitive Development, 11, 37-63.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Marisete Welter (University of
Kaiserslautern, Germany) for providing the scores for the
inter rater reliability calculations, and Frits Peters who
wrote the software to compute the frequency profiles and
the software for the permutation method. Many thanks are
also due to the directors, teachers and pupils of the schools
who supported our studies.

2637

