UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Physical Load in Cognitive Process of Estimation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8z72v273

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Abe, Keiga

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Physical Load on the Cognitive Process of Estimation
Keiga Abe (keiga.abe@gmail.com)
Department of Education, 1-1 Takakuwa-Nishi, Yanaizu-cho
Gifu, Japan

Abstract
The purpose of this study was to examine the process of
embodied cognition in distance estimation. According to
recent cognitive science studies, our intelligent behavior that
ranges from perception to inference is not accomplished in
only a closed mental process, but is affected by body and
action. However, previous studies do not clarify whether
these effects were derived from physical load or subjective
heaviness. In order to examine the question, two experiments
were conducted using the “size-weight illusion’’.
Performance on the distance estimation task was not affected
by subjective heaviness but by physical load.
Keywords: embodied
distance estimation

cognition;

size-weight

illusion;

Introduction
We examined the contribution of the physical body on
higher-order cognitive processing. Recently, in cognitive
science, studies have reported that a wide range of
intellectual behavior, from perception to inference, is not
only a closed mental process but is also subject to influences
of the physical body and its actions/motions(Wilson, 2002;
Gibbs, 2005; Proffitt, 2006). Since physical loading is
known to exert effects on mental processes, Narukawa, et al.
(2010) reported changes in gustatory sensation that
accompany the degree of fatigue. Krishna & Morrin (2008)
showed that the sense of hardness of the bottle affected the
evaluation of mineral water. Bhalla & Profitt (1999)
demonstrated experimentally that different estimates are
made of the inclination of a sloped path under the conditions
of carrying a load on the back versus being empty-handed.
In addition, in the study by Ackerman, Nocera & Bargh
(2010), the curriculum vitae of a fictitious person bound to
two types of clipboards that differed in heaviness were
handed to the subjects, who were asked to make evaluations
of the person. The evaluations made by those of the group
handed the heavier clipboard were higher than that of the
group handed the lighter clipboard. The results of these
prior studies suggest that mental processes are influenced by
loading and fatigue of the physical body of the subject.
However, it has not been clarified whether these effects
were due to the amount of actual physical load or due to the
amount of the subjective load. In this study, this issue was
examined using a distance estimation task adopted from a
prior study. If the effects were due to the amount of the
physical load, then physical/non-overt processes, which are
separate from the subjective view of the subject, are

expected exert an effect on the inference. Conversely, if
they are due to the amount of the subjective load, it may be
considered that the subjective view of the subject and overt
processes exert the effects on the inference.
To examine these physical and subjective loads separately,
the “size-weight illusion’’ (Charpentier, 1891) was used in
this study. This illusion occurs when if the weights of two
objects are the same, the larger object is sensed as being
lighter. Utilizing this illusion, distance estimation tasks
under conditions of being subject to different subjective
loads while being subject to the same physical load
(Experiment 1) and distance estimation tasks under
conditions of being subject to different physical loads while
being subject to the same subjective load (Experiment 2)
were conducted to examine the effect of the physical and
subjective amount of the physical load.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, experimental manipulations were
conducted to generate the subjective view that loads with
different weights were being exerted while the same weight
physically was exerted, and distance estimation tasks were
conducted under conditions of a divergence between the
amount of subjective and physical load. This was used to
examine how the perceived load of the weight exerted on
the body is processed.

Method
Subjects Ninety-two college students participated in the
experiment. Of them, 24 were assigned to the 10 L group, in
which the subject held a 5 kg tank with capacity of 10 L as
the number of steps of a stairway was estimated; 33 were
assigned to the 20 L group, in which the subject held a 5 kg
tank with a capacity of 20 L as the estimation was made;
and 35 were assigned to the control group, in which they
made the estimation without holding any weight. A singlefactor between-subjects design was used in this experiment.
Task A revised form of the distance estimation task
published by Bhalla & Profitt (1999) was employed. In the
revised form, a picture of the up-bound steps of the Atago
Shrine (Fig. 1) was presented for 5 s, and the subject was

1692

Figure 2: The values of the weight of the weights used in
Experiment 1

Figure 1. The up-bound steps of the Atago Shrine
instructed to estimate the number of the steps. The picture
was displayed on a 17-in XGA display placed at a height of
160 cm. With regard to the physical loads to be exerted on
the subjects, we prepared a reference weight with 5 kg of
water in a polyethylene tank with a capacity of 5 L, and the
weights for those assigned to the groups other than the
control group (5 kg with a size of 10 L, or 5 kg with a size
of 20 L).
Procedure For each group, the subject was first handed the
reference weight and was told that its weight was 5 kg.
Next, the weight assigned to each group for the distance
estimation task was given, and the task of estimating the
number of steps was performed with subject holding the
reference weight with both hands. The up-bound steps of the
Atago Shrine were present to the subject for 5 s; then the
estimation was given orally while holding the weight. The
subjects were told to respond immediately without thinking
deeply when providing their oral response. Following this,
they were asked to estimate the weight of the tanks.

Results
First, the values of the weight of the tanks used for the
estimation task predicted by the 10 L group and by the 20 L
group are discussed. The value was 5.94kg for the 10 L
group and 4.06kg for the 20 L group. A significant
difference was found between the two groups (t(26) = 2.74,
p < 0.05, r = 0.470, Fig. 2). This result confirmed that a
size-weight illusion effect had occurred for members of the
10 L and 20 L groups. he estimates of the distance of the
steps was 52.79 steps for the 10 L group and 49.88 steps for
the 20 L group.

Figure 3: The estimated distance of the steps in
Experiment 1
A one-way ANOVA revealed a main effect for the weight
factor (F(2,89) = 14.82, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.25, Fig. 3). Multiple
comparisons (Bonferroni's method) revealed significant
differences between the control group and the other two
groups (p < 0.01) but not between the 10 L and the 20 L
groups.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 suggested that a difference in
perceived weight did not affect the estimate of the number
of steps but instead the physical loading affected the
distance estimations. However, the conclusion that the
subjective amount did not affect the estimates, runs contrary
to the finding that no significant difference was observed
between the 10 L and 20 L groups. Therefore, in
Experiment 2, the self-adjustment of the amount of loading
by the subject was performed using the point of subjective
equality(PSE) measurement procedure, and comparisons
were made for cases in which physically different loads
were exerted whereas the subjective load was the
same.

1693

Figure 3: The values of the weight of the tanks used in
Experiment 2

Figure 5: The estimated distance of the steps in
Experiment 2
Task The same distance estimation task was employed as in
Experiment 1. With regard to the physical loads to be
exerted on the subjects, after having the reference stimulus
of a polyethylene tank with a capacity of 5 L containing 5
kg of water presented to them, they were asked to, by
themselves, adjust the amount of physical loading by using
the PSE measurement procedure. In accord with this
procedure, the subjects put water into a polyethylene tank
with a capacity of 20 L for the stimulus weight until they
thought it to be identical in weight as that of the reference
stimulus. The average weight of the stimulus weights set by
the subjects was 6.36 kg, which was more than 1 kg heavier
than the reference weight (Fig. 3). The subjects were not
informed that the reference weight was 5 kg, and were only
aware that the adjusted weights have the same weight as the
reference weight.

Figure 4: The subjective weight of the tanks in
Experiment 2
As in Experiment 1, if the effects on the estimates were due
to the physical load and not due to the subjective load,
significant differences should be observed between the
estimates.
As, in Experiment 1, the subjects were asked to estimate
the number of steps, but it was difficult to predict whether
the number is over-estimated or under-estimated by the
physical loading in comparison to the previous studies since
the correlations between the number of steps and the
distances and inclinations reported by those studies cannot
be guaranteed. Thus, in Experiment 2, they were instructed
to estimate the distance, and not the number, of the steps.

Procedure In each group, the subject was first asked to
perform the adjustment of the weight in accordance with the
PSE procedure. Subsequently, tasks of estimating the length
of the steps were performed with the self-adjusted weight, in
the case of the experimental group, and with the reference
weight, in the case of the control group, held in both hands.
As in Experiment 1, the up-bound steps of the Atago Shrine
were presented to the subject for 5 s. Next, each of the
subjects provided their estimates orally while still holding
the weight. Following this, the weight used for the distance
estimation task was also estimated.

Method

Results

Subjects Twenty-seven college students participated in the
experiment. Of them, 14 were assigned to the experimental
group and 13 were assigned to the control group. A singlefactor between-subjects design was used for the experiment.

First, the predicted values of the weight of the reference
weight are discussed. The mean value was 4.11 kg for the
control group and 4.25 kg for the experimental group. No
significant difference was found between the two groups
(t(25) = 0.26, p = 0.79, n.s., r = 0.05, Fig. 4).
Based on this result, the possibility that the sense of weight
was significantly different between those in the control
group and those in the experimental group was rejected.

1694

The estimate of the distance of the steps was 31.79 m for the
control group and 70.77 m for the experimental group. A
significant difference was found between the two groups
(t(25) = 2.65, p < 0.05, r =0.47, Fig. 5).

Discussion
In the present study, the result of experiments using
distance estimation tasks accompanied by physical loading
using the size-weight illusion showed that the effects of
physical loading on mentation are due to physical load
rather than subjective load. The subjects in the control group
in Experiment 2 estimated the length of the steps while
holding a 5 kg weight that they thought weighted 4 kg, and
the subjects in the experimental group while holding a 6 kg
weight that they thought was 4kg. The difference between
their length estimates of the two groups suggests that their
estimations were being influenced, not by how heavy they
thought the weights were, but rather by the actual physical
load exerted on the body. This also suggests that a load that
is exerted on the body may play an implicit role in making
inferences and judgments.
Unlike previous studies, a picture of stairs was used in the
present study instead of an actual environment. Nevertheless,
physical loading affected the participants’ distance
estimation. This shows robustness of the previous studies,
and suggests that participants mentally simulate action with
reference to physical load.

Future Issues
Although physical loading exerted effects in a manner
that did not reach the subjective level, it is not possible to
conclude that the amount of subjective load did not exert
any effect at all. Further, many aspects of the process by
which physical loading influenced the estimation have yet to
be elucidated. It is necessary to consider the mutual
relationship of and processing between the subjective load
and the physical load.
In the present study, the estimates were made when the
individuals were subjected to a physical load, but it is not
known to what extent the effects were sustained. As
indicated by previous studies, fatigue influences inference.
The degree of fatigue and the extent of recovery are
expected to also influence the duration for which the effects
are sustained.
In addition, the duration of the presentation of the object
to be estimated warrants some discussion. In this study, the
stimulus was presented for a limited duration of 5 s. The
subjective level could become dominant in processing when
the object of the estimation is presented for longer duration.
Moreover, many issues remain with regard to the mutual
relationship between the top-down processing of the
subjective view and the bottom-up processing from the
physical body.
In the literature of the cognitive process of metaphor, it is
thought that metaphors enable us to think about concepts on
the basis of concrete sensorimotor experiences. Previous

studies suggested that a conceptual representation was
linked to some somatic and physical state by some
metaphorical concept (Clark, 1973; Lakoff & Johnson,
1980). Researchers who investigated the haptic priming
effect found evidence to support that idea (Williams &
Bargh, 2008; Ackerman, Nocera & Bargh, 2010). In future
studies, the effects of physical load on conceptual
representation should be examined.

References
Ackerman, J. M., Nocera, C.C., & Bargh, J. A. (2010).
Incidental Haptic Sensations Influence Social Judgements
and Decisions. Science, 25, 1712-1715.
Bhalla, M., & Proffitt, D. R. (1999). Visual-Motor
recalibration in geographical slant perception. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance. 25(4), 1076-1096.
Charpentier A. (1891). Analyse experimentale: De quelques
elements de la sensation de poids. Arch Physiol Norm
Pathol, 3, 122-135.
Clark, H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child. In T.
Moore(Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of
language(pp. 27-63). New York, NY:Academic Press.
Gibbs, R.W. Jr.(2005). Embodiment and Cognitive Science.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Krishna, A. and Morrin, M. (2008), Does touch affect taste?
The perceptual transfer of product container haptic cues,
Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 807-818.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980), Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Narukawa, M., Ue, H., Uemura, M., Morita, K., Kuga, S.,
Isaka, T., and Hayashi, Y. (2010). Influence of prolonged
exercise on sweet taste perception. Food Science and
Technology Research, 16(5), 513-516.
Proffitt, D. R. (2006). Embodied perception and the
economy of action. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1(2), 110-122.
Williams L. E., & Bargh, J. A. (2008). Keeping one’s
distance: The influence of spatial distance cues on affect
and evaluation. Psychological Science, 19, 302-308.
Wilson, M. (2002) Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625-636.

1695

