UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Incremental Context on Conceptual Processing: Evidence from Visual World
and Reading Experiments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9710f64p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Frassinelli, Diego
Keller, Frank
Scheepers, Christoph

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Incremental Context on Conceptual Processing:
Evidence from Visual World and Reading Experiments
Diego Frassinelli (d.frassinelli@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Frank Keller (keller@inf.ed.ac.uk)
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

Christoph Scheepers (Christoph.Scheepers@glasgow.ac.uk)
Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Glasgow
58 Hillhead Street, Glasgow, G12 8QB, UK

Abstract

contexts associated with the target concept in different ways.
However, Frassinelli and Keller (2012) focused their analysis on the concept region, providing only indirect evidence
regarding effects taking place in the previous part of the sentence, where contextual information is integrated.
The aim of the present paper is to study contextual constraints on the processing of context, focusing in particular
on the question of how context is integrated with conceptual
information. According to Federmeier and Kutas (1999), contextual facilitation effects can occur in different tasks (and
affect, e.g., reading time, lexical decision times, pronunciation time); effects appear both at the level of lexical priming
and at the level of the entire sentence. Based on this assumption, we aim to clarify the relation between single contextual
words and the entire sentence. We constructed sentence materials that provide a differential number of context words that
bias comprehension towards the target concept. This design
allows us to determine how such facilitation (or bias) occurs,
and to distinguish two possible hypotheses: the incremental
activation hypothesis, which suggests that the degree of facilitation in concept processing increases with the amount of
context available; and the immediate activation hypothesis,
which states that once a sufficient amount of contextual support is reached, no more facilitation occurs.
We performed two experiments. In a self-paced reading experiment, we tested if the amount of context available has an
effect on the ease of conceptual processing, measured as the
reading time for the target concept. In a visual world study, we
presented the target concept pictorially, allowing us to measure the degree of facilitation (i.e., the number of looks) that
occurs while the context words are processed, giving us access to the time course of conceptual integration.

The analysis of the internal structure of concepts reveals the
presence of a substantial amount of contextual information.
Even though this interaction is easily recognizable, it is not
clear how contextual information is processed and included
into concept representations. The aim of this paper is to shed
light on this question by analyzing the effect that an increasing
amount of context exerts on conceptual processing. We report
a self-paced reading experiment and a visual world experiment
to test two hypotheses about the integration of context information: the incremental activation hypothesis suggests that the
degree of facilitation in concept processing increases with the
amount of context available; and the immediate activation hypothesis states that once a sufficient amount of contextual support is reached, no more facilitation occurs. Our data are compatible with the latter account.
Keywords: incremental processing; context effects; eye movements; visual world; self-paced reading.

Introduction
Contextual information plays an essential role in different
cognitive domains, including language processing, visual
processing, or reasoning. In this paper we investigate the effect that context exerts on conceptual processing (Murphy,
2002). A widely recognized way to analyze the internal structure of concepts is the use of semantic feature norms (Wu
& Barsalou, 2009; McRae, Cree, Seidenberg, & McNorgan,
2005). In experiments eliciting feature norms, participants
enumerate features associated with a target concept; these
lists can then be used to shed light on the internal structure of
concepts, including the role of context (Frassinelli & Keller,
2012). However, feature norms are static, and do not allow to
study the time-course of concept processing. Real-time data
are required to investigate how conceptual representations are
constructed, and how they interact with conceptual information. Relevant prior work includes a study by Huettig, Quinlan, McDonald, and Altmann (2006), which analyzed the activation of conceptual information over time using the visual
world paradigm (Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, &
Sedivy, 1995). However, Huettig et al. (2006) were not interested in contextual effects and used contexts that were as
neutral as possible. Frassinelli and Keller (2012) replicated
this study, but also introduced contextual variability as a factor, comparing the effect of a neutral context and two biasing

Experiment 1: Self-Paced Reading
The aim of this experiment was to analyze the effect that
context information has on participants’ reading time for the
target concept. As widely discussed in the reading literature
(Morris, 1994), higher coherence between the context and the
target word is reflected in lower reading time. We therefore
predict that reading times for a target word representing a

460

concept are reduced in proportion to the number of context
words presented that bias the reader towards the concept.

one after the other and then participants had to type a word related to the context word. The aim of this study was to exclude
syntactic effects (word order, but also the effect of the verb)
in the completion study. The outcome of this experiment was
in line with the sentence completion experiment, despite the
fact that the context words were presented in isolation rather
than in a sentence.
Finally, sixty participants performed a word association
study in order to test the associations between the six context
words (three LB and three HB words) and the target word in
the sentence. According to an Anova, the three HB context
words were equally strongly associated with the target word.
Furthermore, all of them were more associated with the target
than the LB words.

Method
Materials We used the same 24 concepts as Huettig et al.
(2006) (but we dropped their semantically related condition,
as it is not relevant for the present experiment). We embedded
these concepts into a sentential context using the following
general structure:
(1)

location – actor – verb – object – target concept –
spill-over region

The target word is in bold, the three context words in italics (see below for an example). For each target concept, we
identified three context words which were highly related to
it (high-biasing (HB) words) and three context words that
were unrelated to it (low-biasing (LB) words). Of the resulting eight possible combinations of LB and HB context words,
we chose four, illustrated by the following examples:
(2)

All LB context (None): On the path, the man was
holding a box full of mushrooms carefully.

(3)

HB location context (Loc): In the forest, the man
was holding a box full of mushrooms carefully.

(4)

HB location and actor context (LocAct): In the
forest, the picker was holding a box full of mushrooms carefully.

(5)

All HB context (All): In the forest, the picker was
holding a basket full of mushrooms carefully.

Procedure The 96 experimental sentences were distributed
over four lists of 24 items each according to a Latin square
design. Twenty-seven fillers were added and the list randomized for each participant. Twenty yes/no questions about the
sentence were also included.
Thirty-four native English speakers from the University of
Edinburgh took part in the experiment after giving informed
consent and were paid £5. Each saw one of the lists. We excluded one participant based on a low percentage of correct
answers (< 50%) and another participant with a reading time
averaging 2.5 standard deviations above the grand mean (as
suggested in Hofmeister (2011)).
We used a moving-window self-paced reading procedure
(Just, Carpenter, & Woolley, 1982), in which participants read
a sentence on the screen at their own pace. At the beginning
of each trial, all the words in the sentence are masked with
dashes and separated by spaces; participants had to press the
space bar to uncover the next word and hide the previous one.
For this experiment, we used the software package Linger
(version 2.94) on Apple computers.

This resulted in 96 experimental sentences: four contexts for
each of the 24 concepts.
Norming Studies In order to make sure that the context
words we chose had the biasing effect we expected them to
have, we conducted a series of norming studies on Amazon
Mechanical Turk.
First, 20 participants performed a sentence plausibility
judgment task: they assessed how plausible the experimental sentence was by rating it on a scale from 1 (completely
implausible) to 7 (completely plausible). A sentence was considered plausible when the averaged rating was higher than 4.
This process allowed us to identify those sentences that were
not completely plausible; they were replaced and re-tested.
A sentence completion study then evaluated the predictability of the target concept from the sentence context.
Twenty new participants had to complete each sentence
(with the target concept removed) by typing in a noun. An
Anova showed a statistically significant difference between
the None (6.4% of correct answers) and the All (43%) condition (F(1, 3) = 1.84, p < .001). The Loc (19.2%) and the LocAct (14.4%) were not significantly different (F(1, 3) = 0.64
and F(1, 3) = 0.40).
Twenty-four further participants performed a word completion study: the three context words appeared on the screen

Results
We analyze the reading times associated with the target word,
which can be assumed to index the amount of effort associated with processing the target concept. Table 1 shows the
mean reading times for the target concept across the four
context conditions. The results indicate that reading time decreases in proportion with the number of HB words in the
context. Table 2 reports a linear mixed-effects model (LME)
with log-transformed reading time as the dependent variable.
In the model, the factors Loc, LocAct, and All were contrast coded against the reference level None. Participant
and Item were included as random intercepts, and as random slopes under Loc, LocAct, and All (thus implementing
a maximal random effects structure, D. Barr, Scheepers, and
Tily (2013)). The LME model shows that LocAct and All are
statistically different from the None condition. After a HB
context, participants spend less time reading the target concept compared to a LB context. The difference in reading time
between None and the Loc does not reach significance.

461

Condition
None
Loc
LocAct
All

then declines, as predicted by immediate activation). In a visual world study, we measure the amount of activation for the
target concept at each context word in terms of the proportion
of looks received by the object corresponding to the target
concept.

Reading Time
390.1±25.2
358.5±21.4
346.0±15.5
336.7±10.5

Method

Table 1: Reading time (in ms) with standard errors for the
target concept in the four contextual conditions.

Materials We used visual scenes that consisted of four
black and white line drawings extracted from the Snodgrass
and Vanderwart (1980) collection: one target object and three
distractors randomly arranged in four quadrants. (These were
the same stimuli as in Frassinelli and Keller (2012), already
normed by Huettig et al. (2006)). The sentence materials were
the same as in Experiment 1, and the stimuli instantiated the
same 24 target concepts. As an example, consider the visual stimulus in Figure 1, which corresponds to the sentences
in (2)–(5).

Predictor
Coefficient
(Intercept)
12.771∗∗∗
Loc
−0.067
LocAct
−0.097∗
All
−0.094∗
∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .001
Table 2: Coefficients for the mixed effects model for the reading time data in Table 1.

Discussion
In this self-paced reading experiment, we looked at the relation between the amount of HB information in the context
and the reading time of the target concept. The hypotheses
we started with predict two distinct outcomes: the incremental activation hypothesis predicts that the reading time of the
target concept is reduced in proportion to the number of HB
context words that are present. On the other hand, based on
the immediate activation hypothesis, we expect that there is
a threshold on the amount of contextual information that is
required before an effect of context on reading time occurs.
Descriptively, the reading times in Table 1 are compatible
with incremental activation: each additional contextual concept results in a further reduction in reading time. However,
the mixed model analysis in Table 2 shows significant differences only between LocAct and None and All and None; Loc
on its own does not have a significant effect. Furthermore,
post-hoc tests failed to show significant differences between
the reading times in the three context conditions (Loc, LocAct
and All). This is a pattern that would be expected under the
immediate activation hypothesis: the contextual threshold has
been reached at LocAct, and additional context words do not
significantly pre-activate the target concept any further.
Taken together, the results of this experiment are inconclusive. We therefore performed a follow-up experiment which
directly tests our two hypotheses by measuring the amount of
activation the target concept receives during the processing of
each context word.

Figure 1: Example of the scene for the target concept mushroom (the box is not shown to the participants).

Procedure The 96 sentences in the experiment were spoken
by the speech synthesis system Festival (Clark, Richmond, &
King, 2007) using an HMM voice (Roger), so as to reduce
possible effects of prosody or speaker variation.
In order to counterbalance order or position effects, we rotated the four objects on the screen. The resulting 384 items
were distributed over 32 lists of 24 items each according to
a Latin square design. Twenty-five fillers were added and the
list randomized for each participant. Nine yes/no questions
about the sentence were also presented.
Thirty-four native English speakers from the University of
Edinburgh took part in the experiment after giving informed
consent and were paid £5. Each saw one of the lists.
Participants were sat in front of a 21” multi-scan monitor
with a resolution of 1024 × 768 pixels and their eye movements were recorded using an EyeLink II head-mounted eyetracker with a sampling rate of 500 Hz. Only the dominant
eye was tracked. At the beginning of the experiment and after
every ten trials, the eye-tracker was recalibrated using a ninepoint randomized calibration. Before each trial, drift correction was performed. At the beginning of each trial the scene

Experiment 2: Visual World
The aim of this experiment was to test whether the activation
of concepts happens gradually (more activation with every
new context word, as predicted by incremental activation), or
at once (the first context word triggers full activation, which

462

appeared on the screen, and the sentence began to play at the
same time; the scene disappeared 1500 ms after the end of the
sentence. The experiment lasted approximately 20 minutes.

0.45

0.40

Experimental
Condition
None
Loc
LocAct
All

P (fixation)

0.35

Data Analysis The analysis is based on the proportion of
fixations on the target object across experimental conditions.
We excluded out-of-screen fixations and blinks from the analysis.
In order to analyze the effects exerted by a context word before and after its acoustic offset, we aligned the fixation probabilities at that point (0 ms). In order to exclude any overlap
between two regions of analysis in the sentence we calculated
the minimum amount of time between the onset and the offset of the context word (150 ms) and between the offset of the
context word and the onset of the following one (400 ms for
location, actor, and concept; 150 ms for object). The vertical
line shows the offset of the context word, while the horizontal
dotted line indicates the probability of randomly fixating on
one of the four objects depicted on the screen (25% of total
fixations).
For each context word we report an LME analysis of the
results. As suggested by D. J. Barr (2008), the dependent variable of our models is the empirical logit of the fixation probability calculated for each bin. We used a bin size of 5 ms.
To compare the effects produced by HB and LB contexts, we
included three factors in contrast coding: each factor encodes
the differences between the reference level None (coded as
−.5) and one of the three other conditions (Loc, LocAct, All;
coded as .5). The continuous factor Time shows variations
over time. In order to identify the minimal model that best
fits our data, we used the best-path forward model selection
procedure (recommended by D. Barr et al. (2013) if a model
with full random effects structure fails to converge). We report only the coefficients and the significance levels for the
minimal model, i.e., we show only the main effects and the interactions included during the selection procedure. All models included Participant and Item as random intercepts, as
well as random slopes for Context and Time.

0.30

0.25

0.20
−200

−100

0

100

200

300

400

Time (ms)

(a) Location: Target Fixation probability
0.45

0.40

Experimental
Condition
None
Loc
LocAct
All

P (fixation)

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20
−200

−100

0

100

200

300

400

Time (ms)

(b) Actor: Target Fixation probability
0.45

0.40

Experimental
Condition
None
Loc
LocAct
All

P (fixation)

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20
−200

−150

−100

−50

0

50

100

150

Time (ms)

(c) Object: Target Fixation probability
0.65

0.60

Results

Experimental
Condition
None
Loc
LocAct
All

P (fixation)

0.55

Location Word The first context word we analyze is location. The plot in Figure 2(a) shows the probability of fixating the target object at this context word. Before its offset, it
is already possible to identify a general effect produced by
the presence of a location (both HB and LB), as the fixation
probabilities are higher than random. However, specific effects appear only 100 ms after the offset of the context word.
The None (low biasing) condition shows a decrease over time,
while an increase in fixation probability is observed in the
Loc and LocAct conditions (compared to None, the reference level), which corresponds to the significant interactions
Time:Loc and Time:LocAct (see Table 3, column 1). A similar effect is visible for All, but fails to reach significance.

0.50

0.45

0.40
−200

−100

0

100

200

300

400

Time (ms)

(d) Concept: Target Fixation probability

Figure 2: Fixation probabilities aligned at the offset (0 ms) of
the context words.

463

Predictor
(Intercept)
Time
Loc
LocAct
All
Time:Loc
Time:LocAct
Time:All

Coefficient Location Coefficient Actor Coefficient Object
−0.7548∗∗∗
−0.6764∗∗∗
−0.6215∗∗∗
∗∗∗
0.0005
0.0002
0.0003
0.1019
−0.7303
0.1955
−0.0388
0.4809
−0.0744
−0.1136
0.2204
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
0.0008
−0.0011
0.0003∗∗
−0.0024∗∗∗
0.0011∗∗∗
∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .001

Coefficient Concept
−0.0138
0.0003∗∗∗
−0.1110
−0.2919
−0.0849
0.0003∗∗
−0.0007∗∗∗
−0.0004∗∗∗

Table 3: Coefficients for the mixed effects model for the data in Figures 2(a), 2(b), 2(c), 2(d). Empty cells indicate that the
factor in question was not included during model selection.
Actor Word The plot in Figure 2(b) shows the fixations at
the word encoding an actor. In the Loc condition, participants
tend to fixate less on target object (compared to None), an effect that is more evident before the offset of the word. This
corresponds to a significant negative interaction Time:Loc in
the LME (see Table 3, column 2). The plot also seems to indicate an overall higher level of fixations in the LocAct condition (compared to All, which is identical at this point in the
sentence). However, this difference is not significant (no main
effect or interaction involving LocAct in the LME).

interaction Time:Loc, indicating an increase in fixation probability in this condition compared to None.

Discussion
The aim of this experiment was to analyze the effect of incremental context information over time. The analysis of actor
and object (see Figure 2(b) and Figure 2(c)) showed few interesting effects. The regions at which it was possible to identify a clear effect of contextual variability were location and
concept. Location is the first context word participants are exposed to and it had a strong effect on driving their fixations towards the target concept. This is in line with previous results
of visual world studies on language comprehension (Altmann
& Kamide, 1999), showing anticipatory eye movements towards a target as a result of predictive spoken language input. Less expected are the outcomes related to the concept
area. We found that high-biasing contexts allows participants
to identify and process the target object at an early stage: this
effect is visible even at the first context word (location in our
case). At the concept word itself, we then fail to observe a
sustained increase in fixations to the target object. The opposite pattern was observed in the low-biasing context: were we
see no increase in fixations at the context words, but a sustained increase once the concept word has been processed. In
an HB context, the target word is contextually expected, and
thus fixated less, while in the LB context, it is unexpected and
thus fixated more.

Object Word The next context word analyzed is the object
of the sentence. Figure 2(c) shows that before the offset of
the object, the HB conditions all show a higher overall fixation proportion compared to None. After the offset, the curves
diverge: All shows a steeper increase than None (significant
positive interaction All:Time, see Table 3, column 3). This
is explained by the fact that All is the only condition with
a HB object. The condition LocAct, shows a steep decrease,
i.e., the significant negative interaction LocAct:Time, while
Loc remains constant (no significant effects involving Loc).
Concept Word Figure 2(d) shows the number of fixations
at the point when participants hear the concept associated
with target object on the screen (note the different y-axis).
At this point, global effects of different amounts of HB information across conditions should be visible. After the offset
of the context word, there is an inverse relation between the
amount of HB information and the slope of the curves in the
Loc, LocAct, and All conditions. The more HB information
is available, the sooner fixation proportions decrease. This is
consistent with the pattern observed in the reading times of
the concept word in Experiment 1.
On the other hand, fixation probability in the None condition increases, in particular after word offset, and remains
high. The negative interactions Time:LocAct and Time:All
(see Table 3, column 4) are consistent with this observation,
indicating a significant decrease in fixations in LocAct and All
compared to None. Furthermore, there is a significant positive

One possible explanation for this pattern of results (i.e., a
decrease in target fixations at the target word after a biasing
context) is inhibition of return. This is a well-know effect in
eye-movements, which manifests itself in a low probability of
returning to a region once it has been fixated (Posner, Rafal,
Choate, & Vaughan, 1985). Our failure to find an increase
in fixations at the concept region in the HB conditions could
be due to inhibition of return, as the target had already been
fixated at an earlier point in these conditions (i.e., during anticipatory processing while hearing biasing context words).

464

General Discussion

ence. Cognition, 73(3), 247–264.
Barr, D., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. (2013). Random-effects
structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68(3), 255-278.
Barr, D. J. (2008). Analyzing ’visual world’ eyetracking data
using multilevel logistic regression. Journal of Memory
and Language, 59(4), 457–474.
Clark, R., Richmond, K., & King, S. (2007). Multisyn: Opendomain unit selection for the festival speech synthesis system. Speech Communication, 49(4), 317–330.
Federmeier, K., & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other
name: Long-term memory structure and sentence processing. Journal of memory and Language, 41(4), 469–495.
Frassinelli, D., & Keller, F. (2012). The plausibility of semantic properties generated by a distributional model: Evidence
from a visual world experiment. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles,
& R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1560–1565).
Sapporo.
Hofmeister, P. (2011). Representational complexity and
memory retrieval in language comprehension. Language
and cognitive processes, 26(3), 376–405.
Huettig, F., Quinlan, P. T., McDonald, S. A., & Altmann,
G. T. M. (2006). Models of high-dimensional semantic
space predict language-mediated eye movements in the visual world. Acta Psychologica, 121(1), 65–80.
Just, M., Carpenter, P., & Woolley, J. (1982). Paradigms and
processes in reading comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 111(2).
McRae, K., Cree, G., Seidenberg, M., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research Methods, 37(4), 547–559.
Morris, R. (1994). Lexical and message-level sentence context effects on fixation times in reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
20(1), 92.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Posner, M., Rafal, R., Choate, L., & Vaughan, J. (1985). Inhibition of return: Neural basis and function. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 2(3), 211–228.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized set of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Human Learning and Memory,
6(2), 174–215.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268(5217), 1632–1634.
Wu, L., & Barsalou, L. W. (2009). Perceptual simulation in
conceptual combination: Evidence from property generation. Acta psychologica, 132(2), 173–89.

The aim of this study was to test the effect that an incremental
amount of contextual information exerts on conceptual processing. We ran two experiments: a self-paced reading and
a visual world experiment. The former identified a reduction
of the time required to read a target concept with increasing
amount of biasing context. The visual world study showed increased looks to the target during the processing of the first
context word (location) and at the concept word itself.
The results obtained in our visual world study corroborate
the findings of Frassinelli and Keller (2012) who found that
a biasing context leads to an early recognition and processing of the target concept. Moreover, the results show an expectation effect: over time, the biasing contexts produced an
expectation of the target concept and this led to a reduced
number of fixations to the target object when the corresponding concept word occurred (potentially involving inhibition
of return as the driving mechanism behind this decrease in
fixation probability).
The key novel contribution of the paper is to elucidate the
time course of contextual integration. In the introduction, we
proposed two possible hypothesis on how context interacts
with concept processing: the incremental activation hypothesis (the degree of facilitation increases with the amount of
context) and the immediate activation hypothesis (once sufficient contextual support has accrued, no additional facilitation occurs). The results of Experiment 2 allow us to evaluate these two hypotheses. We found that when participants
are exposed to a low-biasing context, we see an increase of
fixations to the target concept only when that concept is mentioned. In the high-biasing conditions, on the other hand, this
increase occurs already at the first context word, with no further increases at the second or third context word. Also when
at the concept word, only a small increase in fixations is observed. It seems that a single context word is sufficient to
identify the concept on the screen. Additional context exerts
only a confirmatory effect. This pattern of results is compatible with the immediate activation hypothesis: a certain
amount of contextual information is sufficient to trigger conceptual processing; additional contextual information does
not trigger an incremental increase in concept activation.
In more theoretical terms, these results enhance our understanding of conceptual representation. They indicate that the
activation of a specific concept takes place when the overlap
between its internal structure and the information extracted
from the context reach a certain critical level.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the European Research Council under award 203427 “Synchronous Linguistic and Visual Processing”. We are grateful to Moreno I. Coco for comments.

References
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of subsequent refer-

465

