UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Collective Opinion on True-False Judgment and Information-Sharing
Decision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/18d29316

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Li, Huaye
Sakamoto, Yasuaki

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Collective Opinion on
True-False Judgment and Information-Sharing Decision
Huaye Li (hli21@stevens.edu)
Yasuaki Sakamoto (ysakamot@stevens.edu)
Howe School of Technology Management, Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA
Abstract
The purpose of the current work is to examine when and how
knowing collective opinion influences people’s judgments
and decisions in social media environments. In particular, the
present work focuses on people’s true-false judgment of
statements found on websites and the likelihood of sharing
these statements. The results from Experiment 1 revealed that,
for false statements, collective opinion had little influence on
people’s true-false judgments, but, for true and debatable
statements, their judgments were biased toward collective
opinion. The results from Experiment 2 indicated that the
likelihood of sharing the true, debatable, and false statements
followed the collective opinion, and that people were less
likely to share false statements than debatable or true ones
without collective opinion. These findings extend past work
on social influence and advance understanding of how people
make judgments and decisions in social media websites.
Keywords: Collective opinion, true-false judgment,
information-sharing decision, social media, social influence

Introduction
Social media technologies, such as Twitter and Facebook,
have become part of many people’s everyday lives. Using
these technologies, people not only acquire new information
but also generate content and influence trends. Given the
growing use and participatory nature of social media, better
understanding of how people behave in such an
environment is essential.
The objective of the current paper is to contribute to this
need by reporting the results from two experiments that
examine how people make true-false judgments on
statements found on websites and how they make decisions
about whether or not to share these statements in a social
media environment. In the current work, sharing of a
statement means passing of the statement to others. In
particular, the work presented here focuses on how social
influence plays a role in people’s true-false judgments and
sharing decisions in a social media context.

Collective Opinion
One of the main functions of social media is to share
opinions with others and collectively make decisions (e.g.,
Glushko et al., 2008). Collective opinion, such as how many
people have liked or shared a message, is part of social
media technologies. In Twitter, an example of collective
opinion is the number of re-tweets, or the number of people

who re-tweeted a particular message. Re-tweeting is a kind
of sharing, in which an original tweet, a brief message of
140 characters or less, is broadcast to the re-tweeter’s
followers through a simple clicking of a re-tweet button.
The re-tweeted messages become available to the public as
well, and the number of re-tweets associated with a tweet
signifies the popularity of the tweet. The more ret-tweets,
the more popular. Facebook uses ‘like’ to indicate the
popularity of photos, stories, communities, and so on. Many
review websites allow users to indicate their opinion about
the usefulness of a particular review.
Despite the abundance of collective opinion in social
media websites, when and how it affects people’s judgments
and decisions in such an environment is not well
understood. However, there are classic studies on social
influence in face-to-face environments, and more recent
work on social influence in online environments, whose
findings indicate that people use collective opinion to make
their judgments and decisions in various situations.

Social Influence
Past research in face-to-face environments has shown that
people have a strong motivation to compare their opinions
with others (Festinger, 1954), and they often adopt the
decisions of others (e.g., Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004;
Deutsch & Gerard, 1995; Gureckis & Goldstone, 2006) due
to their desire to make correct responses under uncertainty
(Sherif, 1935) or their desire to be liked by others (Asch,
1955). By relying on others’ opinions, individuals can learn
and entertain solutions that they would not have even
considered otherwise (Bandura, 1965).
More recent work has shown that knowing other’s
decisions also influences people’s decisions in online
environments. In an online market experiment, whereas
good music was always downloaded by many and bad
music was always unpopular, the popularities of the pieces
in between varied depending on whether or not people knew
the number of downloads the pieces had (Salganik, Dodds,
& Watts, 2006). In another set of online experiments,
subjects liked the same online news stories more when the
stories had many existing supporters than when the stories
had only a few supporters (Sakamoto et al., 2009). Subjects
even switched their preferences when the experimenter
flipped the assumed numbers of previous supporters
(Sakamoto, 2010; Salganik & Watts, 2008). These past
studies on social influence suggest that people’s liking and
rating can follow collective opinion in social media

2878

environments. The current research extends this past work
on social influence to true-false judgments and sharing
decisions in a social media environment.

Hypotheses
Social influence may be especially strong in social media
environments, as people experience a lot of information
whose factual accuracy is unclear, and they rely on
collective opinion in an attempt to reduce uncertainty.
During crises, for example, uncertainty is high and people
are under pressure mentally. People generate a large amount
of information in an attempt to make sense of the situation,
and they readily share this information without verifying its
factual accuracy, resulting in the dissemination of false
rumors (e.g., Allport & Postman, 1947; DiFonzo & Bordia,
2007). Consequently, a large amount of debatable
information appears during responses to disasters.
In relation to debatable information, one focus of the
current work is to examine how collective opinion
influences people’s judgment about whether a statement is
true, false, or debatable. The statements used in the current
research were related to health advice. A statement is true
when the advice in the statement is supported by clear
evidence according to health professionals. A statement is
false when it contains information identified as incorrect by
health professionals. A statement is debatable when health
professionals cannot verify its factual accuracy because
evidence is mixed or missing. The first hypothesis is that the
true-false judgment of debatable statements will be most
prone to social influence because their factual accuracy is
unclear; people will adopt collective opinion in an attempt
to make a correct decision when they encounter debatable
statements. In contrast, people’s perceptions of true and
false statements are relatively strong and hard to change,
just as good and poor pieces of music were immune to
social influence in Salganik et al.’s (2006) research.
Another focus of the present work is to examine how
collective opinion influences people’s intention to share a
statement differently depending on whether the statement is
true, debatable, or false. Because it is unlikely that people
strongly feel that they should or should not share the healthrelated statements used in the present work, they will rely on
collective opinion to make their decision. The second
hypothesis is that social influence takes place for true,
debatable, and false statements; people’s decision will
follow the collective opinion. If this is the case, there will be
a positive social influence, in which increasing the value of
collective opinion increases the likelihood of sharing.
An alternative account is that people want to share
information that others have not shared. There is evidence in
consumer research that some people want to be unique and
differentiate themselves from others (Berger & Heath 2007;
Snyder & Fromkin 1980; Tian, Bearden, & Hunter 2001).
According to this view, in deciding whether or not to share a
statement in social media, people will go against the
information about the number of people who already shared
the statement. This leads to a negative social influence.

It is unclear whether positive or negative social influence
takes place in information sharing decisions. In the
information transmission literature, researchers focus
mainly on how factors such as valence and source
credibility relate to the spread of information (e.g., Fragale
& Heath 2004; Ha & Ahn 2011; Heath 1996; Rene et al.
2012). Those who study social dimensions tend to examine
how social network structures, including the number of
followers and position in the social network, affect
information diffusion (e.g., Cha et al. 2010; Huberman et al.
2009; Kwak et al. 2010; Xin et al. 2012) and how to
maximize the spread of influence through online social
networks and the extent to which one could predict online
popularity (Kempe, Kleinberg and Tardos, 2003; Kim, Kim
& Cho, 2011). Social influences on sharing decisions are
not well studied.
Another important question the current work can address
is whether people are more likely to share true, debatable, or
false information, without knowing collective opinion.
Although this question does not involve the main topic of
social influence, the answer will be useful. Here, we borrow
an idea from the rumor psychology literature. The third
hypothesis is that debatable statements result in a higher
likelihood of sharing than false and true statements because
debatable statements will induce informational ambiguity
and anxiety by being disputable. Ambiguity and anxiety are
proposed to be strong predictors of rumor spread (Anthony
1973; Shibutani 1966).

Experiment 1
The main purpose of Experiment 1 is to examine how
collective opinion influences people’s judgment about
whether a statement is true, false, or debatable.

Method
Participants In return for a nominal fee, 227 workers of
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (https://www.mturk.com)
completed the experiment. The mean age was 36. Using
Mechanical Turk, a few research groups have replicated
classic psychological phenomena and have shown that
researchers can collect high-quality data (e.g., Buhrmester,
Kwang, & Gosling, 2011; Mason & Suri, 2011; Paolacci,
Chandler, & Ipeirotis, 2010). We followed their
recommendations.
Materials From Discovery, Food Networks and National
Institute of Health (NIH), 120 statements about health
advice were selected with two constrains: each statement
was clearly identified by health professionals as true,
debatable, or false, and the information carried by each
statement was familiar to most people. Of 120 statements,
40 were true, 40 were debatable, and 40 were false.
Design and Procedure Subjects were instructed to read a
health-related statement online, and to rate the extent to
which the statement was true using a 7-point scale, where 1
was definitely false and 7 was definitely true. A response

2879

around the middle of the scale indicated debatable. The 120
statements were presented sequentially in a random order.
There were three conditions.
1. Control: Statements were presented with no social
information. Fifty unique subjects rated each
statement. Figure 1 shows an example of the actual
screen used in the control condition.
2. Real: Each statement was presented with real
collective opinion, which was the mode of the 50
ratings from the control condition. We used the mode
because it preserved extreme ratings. With mean and
median, the ratings tended to go toward the middle of
the scale. Figure 2 shows an example.
3. Invented: Each statement was presented with invented
collective opinion. We transformed the observed mode
as follows: 1 à (became) 7, 2 à 6, 3 à 5, 4 à 7 if
the mean was smaller than 4, 4 à 1 if the mean was
larger than 4, 5 à 3, 6 à 2, and 7 à 1. Figure 3
shows an example.

Figure 1. Example of Experiment 1’s control condition

Figure 2 Example of Experiment 1’s real condition

Figure 3. Example of Experiment 1’s invented condition

Table 1 shows how the collective opinion observed in the
control condition was used to generate the collective
opinion shown to subjects in the real and invented
conditions.
Table 1. Collective opinion
Observed in the
control condition
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Used in the real
condition
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Used in the
invented condition
7
6
5
1 or 7
3
2
1

Results and Discussion
All participants were included in the analyses. The main
interest of Experiment 1 was whether and how collective
opinion might influence people’s true-false judgments.
Figure 4 shows the overall pattern of the results.
A 3 (statement: true, false, debatable) by 3 (condition:
control, real, invented) analysis of variance (ANOVA), with
true-false ratings as a dependent measure, revealed a
significant main effect of statement, F(2, 117) = 33.95, p <
.001. Collapsing across condition, the true-false ratings for
true (5.05), debatable (4.72), and false statements (3.62)
differed significantly. There was also a significant main
effect of condition, F(2, 396) = 26.65, p < .001. Collapsing
across different types of statements, the true-false ratings in
the control (4.97), real (5.53), and fake conditions (4.64)
conditions differed significantly, indicating that there might
be some sort of social influence. The statement by condition
interaction was significant, F(2, 234) = 11.28, p < .001,
indicating that the pattern of social influence differed
depending on the statement type.
Given the significant interaction between statement and
condition, we further analyzed social influence within each
statement type using a one-way ANOVA with condition as
independent variable and true-false ratings as a dependent
measure. Within true and debatable statements, the control,
real, and invented conditions differed significantly in the
true-false ratings, F(2, 117) = 18.29, p < .001, and F(2, 117)
= 5.601, p < .001, respectively. However, within false
statements, there was no significant difference across the
three conditions, F < 1.
Experiment 1 tested the first hypothesis that the true-false
judgment of debatable statements would be most prone to
social influence. This hypothesis was partially supported.
Although, as predicted, people adopted the collective
opinion when making true-false judgments for debatable
statements, the judgments of true statements resulted in the
same pattern. As predicted, there was little social influence
for the true-false judgments for false statements. As figure 4
shows, for true and debatable statements, the ratings
increased in the real condition and decreased in the inverted

2880

condition relative to the ratings in the control condition,
indicating a positive social influence. The true-false
judgments followed the collective opinion for true and
debatable statements.

True-false judgment

7

Statement
True
Debatable
False

6
5
4

Figure 5. Example of Experiment 2’s control condition

3
2
1
Control

Real

Invented

Condition
Figure 6. Example of Experiment 2’s real condition

Figure 4. Results of Experiment 1 are shown. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals.

Experiment 2
The focus of Experiment 1 was on the effect of collective
opinion on people’s true-false judgments. The main purpose
of Experiment 2 is to examine how collective opinion
affects people’s likelihood of sharing information in a social
media environment. The results from Experiment 2 will also
address the question of whether people are more likely to
share true, debatable, or false information, without knowing
collective opinion.

Figure 7. Example of Experiment 2’s invented condition

Results and Discussion

Method
Participants In Experiment 2, 220 workers of Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk completed the experiment for a nominal
fee. Their mean age was 28.
Materials The same as Experiment 1.
Design and Procedure The same as Experiment 1 except
that, in Experiment 2, the question asked how likely it is
that subjects will share the information, and the collective
opinion indicated information regarding collective
likelihood. Figures 5, 6, and 7 show an example of the
screen presented to the subjects in Experiment 2’s control,
real, or invented condition, respectively.

All participants were included in the analyses. The main
interest of Experiment 2 was whether and how collective
opinion might influence people’s sharing decisions. Figure 8
shows the overall pattern of the results in Experiment 2.
A 3 (statement: true, false, debatable) by 3 (condition:
control, real, invented) ANOVA, with people’s likelihood of
sharing as a dependent measure revealed a significant main
effect of statement, F(2, 117) = 12.99, p < .001. Collapsing
across condition, the likelihood of sharing true (4.27),
debatable (4.39), and false statements (3.96) differed
significantly. There was also a significant main effect of
condition, F(2, 396) = 10.55, p < .001. Collapsing across
statement, the likelihood of sharing in the control (4.29),
real (4.46), and invented conditions (3.87) differed
significantly, indicating the presence of social influence.
Moreover, there was a significant statement by condition
interaction, F(2, 234) = 11.16, p < .000. The pattern of
social influence differed depending on the type of statement.

2881

We analyzed social influence within each type of
statement using a one-way ANOVA with condition as
independent variable and the likelihood of sharing as a
dependent measure. Within true, debatable, and false
statements, the control, real, and invented conditions
differed significantly in the likelihood of sharing, F(2, 156)
= 13.92, p < .001, and F(2, 156) = 10.58, p < .001, and F(2,
156) = 4.399, p = 0.005, respectively.
The results from Experiment 2 show that collective
opinion affects people’s likelihood of sharing information,
and support the hypothesis that a positive social influence
takes place for true, debatable, and false statements. In
Experiment 2, people’s intention to share information
followed the collective opinion. In addition, Experiment 2’s
results partially supported the third hypothesis that
debatable statements would result in a higher likelihood of
sharing than false and true statements. Although people
were more likely to share debatable statements than false
statements in the control condition, the likelihood of sharing
debatable and true statements did not differ significantly, as
can be seen in Figure 8.

Likelihood of sharing

7

Statement
True
Debatable
False

6
5
4
3
2
1
Control

Real

Invented

Condition
Figure 8. Results of Experiment 2 are shown. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals.

General Discussion and Implication
In the current paper, we reported results from two
experiments that examined how collective opinion might
influence people’s true-false judgments and information
sharing decisions. In Experiment 1, we found that, for false
statements, collective opinion had little influence on
people’s true-false judgments, but, for true and debatable
statements, their judgments were biased toward collective
opinion. In Experiment 2, we learned that the likelihood of
sharing the true, debatable, and false statements followed
the collective opinion, and that people were less likely to

share false statements than debatable or true ones without
collective opinion. The current results reveal that whether or
not people adopt collective opinion in social media contexts
depends on the type of judgment they make and the type of
information they evaluate.
In the real social media environments, collective opinion
is updated constantly. Future research may examine several
iterations of the current experiments, in which collective
opinion is updated after each run based on the ratings of the
previous run. By doing so, we can study the evolution of
people’s ratings and collective opinion. Do the ratings
converge or diverge after several iterations? The ratings
might diverge when using mode as collective opinion as in
the current work, but they might converge when collective
opinion takes the form of median or mean.
Another characteristic of social media is that there are
diverse kinds of information. The focus in the current work
was information related to health advice. Future work
should extend the current findings to other kinds of
statements. We are currently examining the role collective
opinion plays in sharing information related to natural
disasters, such as Hurricane Sandy in 2012 and the Great
East Japan Earthquake in 2011.
Finally, although we used rating scales in the current
work, people’s information sharing decisions in social
media environments are binary. For example, there is a retweet button in Twitter. One extension of the current work
might be to measure actual behavior by creating a ‘share’
button that sends a message to an associated email account
when pressed. We can create a button and a Gmail account
for each condition in an experiment, and ask subjects to
click the button if they want to share the message. Although
the measure of intent using a rating scale can provide us
information about the strength of intent, it may or may not
translate to actual behavior. When stimuli are tweets, one
can examine whether or not there is a positive correlation
between the likelihood of sharing and the actual re-tweeting
number in Twitter. On the other hand, clicking of a share
button cannot capture information about how much people
want to share.
In conclusion, better understanding of how people make
judgment and decision in social media contexts is important.
People use social media technologies to share information
everyday, even during responses to disasters. More research
along this line can help the development of a set of
recommendations for enhancing people’s social media
literacy and for improving the design of socialcomputational systems to improve the quality of
information in social media, and more generally, to increase
the productivity and wellbeing of our society. We hope that
the present work can stimulate further investigation of social
influence in social media environments.

2882

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon the work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-1138658.

References
Allport, G.W., & Postman, L. (1947). The Psychology of
Rumor. Henry Holt and Company, New York, New York.
Anthony, S. (1973). Anxiety and Rumor. The Journal of
Social Psychology, 89, 91-98.
Bandari, R., Asur, S., & Huberman, B. A. (2012). The Pulse
of News in Social Media: Forecasting Popularity. Arxiv
preprint arXiv:1202.0332.
Berger, J., & Heath, C. (2007). Where consumers diverge
from
others:
Identity-signaling
and
product
domains. Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 121-134.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D.,
Marlow, C., Settle, J. E., & Fowler, J. H. (2012). A 61million-person experiment in social influence and
political mobilization. Nature, 489, 295-298.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011).
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of
inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on
Psychological Science.
Cha, M., Haddadi, H., Benevenuto, F., & Gummadi, K.P.
(2010). Measuring user influence in Twitter: The million
follower fallacy. In Int’l AAAI Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media (ICWSM).
Cialdini, R. B., & Goldstein, N. J. (2004). Social influence:
Compliance and conformity. Annual Review of
Psychology, 55, 591–621.
DiFonzo, N., & Bordia, P. (2007). Rumor psychology:
Social and organizational approaches. American
Psychological Association, Washington.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison
processes. Human Relations, 7, 117–140.
Fragale, A., & Heath, C. (2004). Evolving informational
credentials: The (mis)attribution of believable facts to
credible sources. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 30, 226-236.
Glushko, R. J., Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., & Barsalou, L.
W. (2008). Categorization in the wild. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 12, 129–135.
Gureckis, T. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2006). Thinking in
groups. In S. Harnad & I. Dror (Eds.), Distributed
cognition: Special issue of pragmatics & cognition, 14
(pp. 293–311). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
Ha, S., & Ahn, J. (2011). Why are you sharing others’
Tweets?: The impact of argument quality and source
credibility on information sharing behavior. ICIS 2011
Proceedings.
Heath, C. (1996). Do people prefer to pass along good news
or bad news? Valence and relevance of news as a
predictor of transmission propensity. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 68, 79-94.

Huberman, B., Romero, D., & Wu, F. (2009). Social
networks that matter: Twitter under the microscope. First
Monday, 14, 1-5.
Kempe. D, Kleinberg. M. J, & Tardos. E, (2003).
Maximizing the spread of influence through a social
network, KDD, pp. 137–146, ACM.
Kim. S, Kim. S, & Cho. H, (2011). Predicting the virtual
temperature of web-blog articles as a measurement tool
for online popularity, in IEEE 11th International
Conference on Computer and Information Technology
(CIT), 31, pp. 449–454.
Kwak, H., Lee, C., Park, H., & Moon, S. (2010). What is
Twitter, a social network or a news media? Proceedings
of the 19th international conference on World Wide Web
WWW’10.
Lerman. K., & Hogg. T, (2010). Using a model of social
dynamics to predict popularity of news. WWW, 621–630,
ACM.
Mason, W., & Suri, S. (2011). A Guide to Behavioral
Experiments on Mechanical Turk. Behavior Research
Methods.
Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2010).
Running experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Judgment and Decision Making, 5, 411-419.
Rene, P., Antonios, G., & Frank, S. (2012). Emotional
divergence influences information spreading in Twitter.
AAAI 2012.
Sakamoto, Y. (2010). The impact of collective opinion on
online judgment. Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Sakamoto, Y. (2012). Following trendsetters: Collective
decisions in online social networks. HICSS 2012.
Sakamoto, Y., Ma, J., & Nickerson, J. V. (2009). 2377
people like this article: The influence of other's decisions
on yours. In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, L. Schomaker, and
J. Nerbonne (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Sherif, M. (1935). A study of some social factors in
perception. Archives of Psychology, 27, 1–60.
Shibutani, T. (1966). Improvised news: A sociological study
of rumor. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Snyder, C., & Fromkin, H. (1980). Uniqueness: The human
pursuit of difference. New York: Plenum.
Soll, J. B., & Larrick, R. P. (2009). Strategies for revising
judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 35, 780-805.
Tian, K., Bearden, W., & Hunter, G. (2001). Consumers’
need for uniqueness: Scale development and validation.
Journal of Consumer Research, 28, 50-66.
Xin, S., Ying D., & Jerome B. (2012). Multiple spreaders
affect the indirect influence on Twitter. WWW 2012
Companion, Lyon, France.

2883

