UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Transitive and periphrastic sentences affect memory for simple causal scenes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2g4422g9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kline, Melissa
Muentener, Paul
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Transitive and periphrastic sentences affect memory for simple causal scenes
Melissa Kline1 (mekline@mit.edu)
Paul Muentener1 (pmuenten@mit.edu)
Laura Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Bran and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02139
Abstract

influence the type of description chosen. Conversely of
course, the way an event is described influences how people
represent it. Fausey and Boroditsky (2010) showed for
instance that listeners were more likely to attribute blame
and financial responsibility to the perpetrator of a causal
event following agentive descriptions (“He broke the vase”)
than non-agentive descriptions (“The vase broke”). Other
studies of event representations involved in language have
focused on generalizations above the level of individual
event-description pairings (Fausey and Boroditsky 2011;
Lakusta & Landau 2012). For instance, Fausey and
Boroditsky show that English speakers are more likely than
Spanish speakers to remember the perpetrator of an
accidental causal event, even when the events are presented
non-linguistically. They suggest that this may be because
typical descriptions of accidental causal events in English
(“He broke the vase”) focus on the agent whereas typical
descriptions of accidental causal events in Spanish do not
(“Se rompió el florero”, roughly “the vase broke itself”).
However, because this was a purely nonlinguistic task, we
cannot conclude whether the memory differences in this
study were primarily an effect of these particular sentences,
as opposed to other effects of language or culture.
Nonetheless, when different sentences include different
components of the event (i.e., by including or omitting
reference to the causal agent) it seems evident that linguistic
descriptions might influence event representation (and vice
versa). However, in some cases, more than one sentence is
available even to describe the same components of the event
(e.g., “The boy broke the window”/”The boy made the
window break”).
What nonlinguistic event representations might underlie
linguistic distinctions like these? One factor known to
influence event descriptions is the directness of the causal
event. In direct causal events, the causal agent immediately
impacts the causal patient. By contrast, in mediated causal
events, the causal agent’s action on the causal patient is less
direct; for example, acting through an intermediary (e.g., a
tool used to bring about the effect).
Work comparing direct and mediated causal events has
predominantly examined two types of linguistic structures:
lexical causatives and periphrastic causatives. While lexical
causatives encode the result in the main verb of a transitive
sentence (“The boy broke the window”), periphrastic

Can linguistic structures influence how people perceive and
remember causal events? Using a change-detection method,
we presented participants with direct causal scenes paired
with either transitive (He stretched the toy) or periphrastic
sentences (He made the toy stretch.) Participants then viewed
movies with changes to the manner of action (stretching the
toy with palms up vs. down), the result (stretching it a shorter
vs. longer distance), or no change. Participants judged
whether the two movies were identical. Reading periphrastic
sentences made people more likely to notice a change in
manner than a change in result. Reading transitive sentences
had the reverse effect – participants were more likely to
notice changes in result. This work provides an important
advance in our understanding of how rich conceptual
representations map into the grammatical structures of
language. We discuss how this novel method can provide
insight into the nonlinguistic representations recruited by
particular sentence structures.
Keywords: Causal language;
blindness, memory and language

event

structure,

change

Introduction
How do speakers map between richly structured event
representations and structured linguistic descriptions? For
many kinds of events, speakers have a wide range of
options. A speaker who sees a boy breaking a window with
a baseball can choose to say: “The window broke”; “The
boy broke the window”; “The boy broke the window with a
baseball”; “The boy broke the window with a baseball
during a Little League game” or, if the event was
unintentional, “The boy accidentally broke the window.”
Each of these choices selectively highlights some aspects of
the event (the result, the cause, the manner, the context, the
intent, etc.) perhaps at the cost of neglecting others (“The
boy broke the South Rose window of Notre-Dame”). Many
theories of verb argument structure and event representation
have been proposed to explain the conceptual primitives that
might underlie these descriptions (Gleitman 1990;
Jackendoff 1990; Levin & Rappaport-Hovav 2005; Pinker
1989; Talmy 1985).
Although all of these sentences describe the same actual
occurrence, how the speaker represents the event will
1

The first two authors contributed equally to this work

794

causatives (“The boy made the window break”) are multiclausal and encode the result in the embedded verb. The
exact syntactic differences between these sentence types are
subject to the particular linguistic framework used, but the
situations under which speakers tend to use each type have
been studied extensively. Research has shown that adults
both prefer and produce transitive sentences more often to
describe direct causal events than mediated events (Wolff,
2003; Song & Wolff 2005).
Here, we look at the impact of specific syntactic
structures on adults’ memory for events. We examine
transitive and periphrastic descriptions because unlike
agentive and non-agentive sentences, these two sentence
types both encode the causal agent and the result. When
both transitive and periphrastic sentences are acceptable,
does sentence choice affect participants’ visual memory for
causal scenes?
We used a change blindness paradigm (Pashler 1988;
Simons & Levin 1998; Simons & Chabris 1999) in which
we asked participants to report whether a movie changed
between the first and second viewing. Our hypotheses
concerned the effect that reading different sentences would
have on change detection. Wolff (2003) suggests that causal
transitive sentences should lead listeners to expect direct

causal scenes. Motivated by this hypothesis, we predicted
that when viewing intentional, direct causal scenes,
participants who read transitive sentences (e.g., “The boy
stretched the accordion”) would be relatively better at
detecting result changes (e.g. stretching an accordion toy a
little vs. a lot) and relatively worse at noticing changes in
manner (e.g. stretching an accordion toy with hands facing
up vs. down). In contrast, since periphrastic (but not
transitive) causal sentences can be used to describe
mediated causal events, we expected that participants who
read these sentences would be better at detecting manner
changes.

Experiment
Method
Participants 329 adult participants took part in the
experiment, which was conducted on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk platform. Participants were screened to be located in
the United States and self-reporting as native English
speakers. Testing was conducted over several days, and care
was taken (by monitoring user ID numbers assigned by

Figure 1. Sample stimuli images from 2 events. Each of 12 events had a base movie and 2 change movies (manner
change, result change). In the “Roll” event, the manner change involved the woman switching from using one hand to
using two hands. In the result change, the toy truck rolled across the table with its wheels up, rather than its wheels
down. In the “Rattle” event, the manner change involved the woman changing the direction she shook the toy ring. The
result change involved changing the sound the rattle made. The 10 additional event type triads were Bend, Bounce,
Close, Drop, Tip Over, Ring, Rotate, Spill, Spin and Stretch. In addition to the critical movies, all participants received 6
control ‘base-movie/no-change’ trials (not depicted).

795

Figure 2. A visual depiction of the procedure for a stimulus (ROLL) in the Periphrastic x Manner-Change condition. Notice
how the woman’s hands are positioned in each movie. For each experimental trial (n = 12), participants viewed the target
sentence followed by a base movie. After a 5-s delay they saw the altered movie followed by the detection question.
than once. After reading the target sentence again,
participants performed math problems during a 5 second
delay. Finally, they viewed a second movie. In the nochange trials, they simply saw the initial movie a second
time. In the change trials, they saw the altered version of the
movie that was appropriate for their condition (Manner or
Result.) Participants were asked whether they thought the
second movie was the same or different from the first, and
feedback was given after every trial. In total, participants
saw 12 change trials and 6 no-change trials.

Amazon) that participants did not take the survey more than
once.
Materials We constructed 12 stimulus movie sets, each
based around a simple, intentional causal action that could
be described in a simple transitive sentence. Two example
stimulus sets are shown in Figure 1, and videos of all stimuli
used the experiment are available online at
http://mit.edu/~mekline/www/KMS_cogsci13.html.
In
addition to the base movie, each set included a mannerchange version and a result-change version. In addition to
the twelve target stimuli, six movies used in a previous
study of direct, intentional causal actions (Muentener &
Lakusta, 2011) were included as control ‘no-change’
stimuli.
Stimuli were presented online using the Python package
EconWillow (http://econwillow.sourceforge.net).

Results
To ensure that participants were not simply reporting that
all movies contained changes, performance on the nochange trials was used as criteria for inclusion in the
analysis. 206 participants (mean 34.3 per condition)
answered at least 5 of 6 no-change trials correctly and were
included in all analyses below.
Figure 3 plots participants’ accuracy on change trials.
There was a significant Change x Sentence interaction (F(2,
200) = 4.54, p < 0.02) as well as a significant main effect of
Change type (F(1, 200) = 8.22, p < 0.01.) In the Transitive
condition, participants were significantly better at noticing
Result changes than Manner changes (t(75) = 3.53, p <
0.01); this difference was marginal in the Baseline condition
t(63) = 1.74, p = 0.086.) For Periphrastic sentences, there
was no difference in accuracy between Manner and Result
conditions (t(62) = 0.61, p = 0.55). As predicted, a planned
comparison showed that result changes were detected more
often following transitive sentences and manner changes
were detected more often following periphrastic sentences
(t(200) = 3.22, p < 0.01).

Procedure Each participant was randomly assigned to one
of six conditions, crossing sentence type (Transitive,
Periphrastic, Baseline/no sentence) and change type
(Manner, Result) in a between-subjects design. To ensure
that participants were able to view and hear the movies
presented over the Internet, and to check language skills, all
participants first watched a movie similar to the
experimental stimuli and provided a short description.
Participants were informed that they would view pairs of
movies and be asked to report whether they were the same
or different.
A schematic of a sample trial is shown in Figure 2. On
each trial, participants were first instructed to get ready for
the next movie, with the target sentence (or no sentence, in
the Baseline condition) printed below. Then they saw the
base movie for that stimulus – playback controls were
disabled so that participants could not watch movies more

796

for scenes. Participants who heard transitive sentences were
more likely to detect changes in the result of a direct causal
event than changes in the manner. Participants who heard
periphrastic causal sentences showed the reverse pattern,
showing better performance when detecting manner
changes. This pattern persisted when three items which were
not matched on baseline manner/result salience were
removed.
One concern with these results is that the periphrastic is a
less frequent and more complex linguistic description than
the transitive. As a result, participants may have simply
been more attentive to the events after they were described
with periphrastic sentences. Arguing against this
interpretation however, participants in the periphrastic
conditions were not more attentive to event changes across
the board: indeed, they were more likely to neglect result
changes. However, to further address this alternative
explanation, we are currently investigating participants’
memory for manner and result changes when they read
other complex or infrequent sentences.
Note that the effect of sentence structure on scene
representation in this experiment consists of relative
inattention to particular change categories. While the
manner and result detection rates are different for transitive
and periphrastic sentences, the more frequently detected
change in each case is statistically identical to the baseline
detection rate (t(63) = 0.96, p = 0.34; t(79) = 0.23, p = 0.82.)
This finding is consistent with the within/between category
effect found for color words (Winawer et al 2007.) Russian
speakers, who have separate basic color words for light and
dark blue (goluboy and siniy), showed a between-category
advantage for color perception. When they were asked to
distinguish between color chips that were both siniy or both
goluboy, they showed decreased performance compared to
color chips which were equally similar but crossed the
naming boundary. English speakers showed no such
advantage for dark blue vs. light blue colors.
Together with Winawer et al’s study, the current results
suggest that event perception helps us identify the
conceptual categories that are mapped to particular
linguistic structures. When no sentence is presented, both
manner and result changes are considered potentially
relevant. However, when people read a sentence description,
a particular perspective is imposed on their event
representation which seems to make some categories
important and some less important. For transitive sentences,
manner changes which preserve the result (e.g. bending a
toy with right vs. left hand, but reaching the same final
position) seem to constitute a relatively unimportant
difference, and changes are neglected. In contrast, the result
of the action is central to the event representation, and
participants continue to notice these changes. For
periphrastic causal descriptions, the reverse is true: minor
changes in the result are seen as relatively unimportant
whereas minor changes in the manner are seen as central to
the event.

Figure 3. Participants’ accuracy on the 12 change trials
Because there was an unanticipated difference in
detection rates for the Baseline (no sentence) conditions, we
examined detection rates on each of the 12 individual
‘change’ items. This difference was almost entirely due to
just three items where the salience of the manner and result
changes were not well matched. For these three items, the
result change was easier to detect at baseline than the
manner change. (Close – X2 = 7.79, p < 0.01; Drop – X2 =
7.61, p < 0.01; Tip-Over – X2 = 8.90, p < 0.01). To clarify
the nature of the differences observed for Transitive and
Periphrastic sentence conditions, we removed these three
items from subsequent analyses.
Following this removal of salience-mismatched items, the
only significant omnibus result was a significant Change x
Sentence interaction (F(1, 200) = 4.14 p < 0.02). Again, the
planned comparison was significant: result changes were
detected with greater success after reading transitive
sentences, while manner changes were detected more often
following periphrastic sentences (t(200) = 2.99, p < 0.01).
These results are depicted in Figure 4.

Discussion
As predicted, the choice of transitive or periphrastic
descriptions had a marked impact on participants’ memory

Figure 4. Accuracy on the 9 trials which did not show a
significant baseline difference in detection rate between
Manner and Result changes.

797

References

Note that Wolff’s theory of causal descriptions suggests
that lexical (transitive) causatives are used only for direct
causal events, while periphrastics are also used to describe
mediated events. Wolff focuses on how people choose
between the two sentence types for different scenes but does
not make specific reference to how these descriptions affect
attention to the manner in which a causal event is brought
about. In this study, we are able to extend this work by
showing that these descriptions have a specific effect on
event perception. Even when considering events that can be
described with either type of sentence, participants pay
more attention to how an event took place after reading
periphrastic causal descriptions than after reading transitive
descriptions. With this change-detection method, it will also
be possible to test other event aspects that have to do with
the types of events Wolff has studied, such as changes in
instrument or type of agent-patient contact.
Moving beyond causal descriptions, this method can also
be used to test other hypothesized correspondences between
syntactic structures and particular event features or semantic
concepts. After viewing sentence-event pairings, the
prediction is that participants will be more sensitive to
changes that have to do with the event feature
representations that map to the sentence. In contrast, when
changes of the same salience are made to event aspects that
are not central to the sentence-event mapping, participants
will fail to notice these changes. Thus, patterns of memory
and attention can allow us to discover the specific semantic
content of particular sentence types.
This work provides an important advance in our
understanding of how rich conceptual representations map
onto the grammatical structures of language, a key problem
in the study of language and thought. The mapping between
language and thought goes in both directions – language
provides the tools to describe a wide range of event
construals, and in turn, the specific descriptions we use can
influence event perception, altering which components of
event representations are seen as most important. By testing
how memory for events changes when people encounter
different types of sentences, we can experimentally discover
the underlying event features which structure our cognitive
and linguistic representations, and begin to understand how
these representations are used in the moment to understand
and describe events in the world.

Fausey, C. M., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Subtle linguistic cues
influence perceived blame and financial liability. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 17(5), 644–650. doi:10.3758/PBR.17.5.644
Fausey, C. M., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Who dunnit? Crosslinguistic differences in eye-witness memory. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 18(1), 150–157. doi:10.3758/s13423-0100021-5
Gleitman, L. R. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings.
Language Acquisition, 1, 3–55.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Lakusta, L., & Landau, B. (2012). Language and Memory for
Motion Events: Origins of the Asymmetry Between Source and
Goal Paths. Cognitive Science, 36(3), 517–544.
doi:10.1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01220.x
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (2005). Argument realization.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Muentener, P., & Lakusta, L. (2011). The intention-to-CAUSE
bias: Evidence from children’s causal language. Cognition,
119(3), 341–355. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2011.01.017
Pashler, H. (1988). Familiarity and visual change detection.
Perception & Psychophysics, 44(4), 369–378.
doi:10.3758/BF03210419
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and Cognition: The acquisition of
Argument Structure. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst:
sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic events.
Perception, 28(9), 1059–1074. doi:10.1068/p2952
Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T. (1998). Failure to detect changes to
people during a real-world interaction. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 5(4), 644–649. doi:10.3758/BF03208840
Song, G., & Wolff, P. (2005). Linking perceptual properties to the
linguistic expression of causation. In M. Achard & S. Kemmer
(Eds.), Language, Culture, and Mind (pp. 237–250). Stanford,
CA: CSLI Publications.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in
lexical forms. Language typology and syntactic description, 3,
57–149.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M. C., Wu, L., Wade, A. R., &
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects of language
on color discrimination. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 104(19), 7780–7785.
Wolff, P. (2003). Direct causation in the linguistic coding and
individuation of causal events. Cognition, 88(1), 1–48.
doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(03)00004-0

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by funding from National
Science Foundation and the John Merck Scholars Fund.
Thanks also to Daniel Friel and Tara Venkatesan for their
assistance with stimuli creation, and to the entire Early
Childhood Cognition Lab at MIT for helpful discussion and
feedback.

798

