UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two for one? Transfer of conceptual content in bilingual number word learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6k33v8nz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kimura, Katherine
Wagner, Katie
Barner, David

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two for one? Transfer of conceptual content in bilingual number word learning
Katherine Kimura
kkimura@ucsd.edu

Katie Wagner
kgwagner@ucsd.edu

David Barner
barner@ucsd.edu

Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego

Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego

Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Bilingual speakers are confronted with a unique challenge
when learning language as they must learn to express the
same concept in two separate languages. Here, we examine
whether learning number words in one language (i.e., L1)
facilitates the acquisition of analogous number words in a
second language (i.e., L2) or whether extensive experience
and familiarity with numbers within the second language is
required to learn words in L2. To do so, we tested 68
bilinguals speakers between the ages of 2 and 4 years and
show that conceptual knowledge of numbers in L1 reliably
predicted children’s conceptual knowledge of numbers in L2,
suggesting that knowledge transferred from one language to
the other. The effect, however, was limited to two
developmental transitions: one-knower to two-knower and
subset knower to CP-knower. Familiarity with L2 numbers as
well as age were also significant predictors of children’s
conceptual understanding of numbers.
Keywords: bilingualism; conceptual transfer; word learning;
number words.

Introduction
When children learn language, they are confronted with the
problem of discovering how words encode conceptual
content and thus encode their experience of the world.
Although children eventually overcome this challenge and
learn to associate specific words with specific concepts, this
process is slow and often involves making difficult
inductive inferences regarding the meanings of words
(Quine, 1960). In these cases where slow, inductive
inferences are required it is often unclear whether children’s
difficulty lies with forming the concept to be referenced (see
Carey, 2009) merely mapping the correct linguistic symbol
to the correct concept. This distinction between conceptual
and linguistic development is difficult to disentangle
because linguistic experience is almost always correlated
with other factors that influence conceptual development
including biological maturation and non-linguistic
experience. Although there are some striking examples
where language can be isolated from these other
developmental factors, for example international adoptees as
well as late learners of sign language, these cases may have
limited generalizability due to severe linguistic delay or a
sharp disruption of first language learning.
In contrast, bilingual children sometimes have limited
knowledge of their second language (i.e., L2) while still
having an intact first language experience (i.e., L1). This
separation of conceptual development and L2 linguistic
development can provide a unique test case for exploring
how linguistic competence and conceptual development are

related, while avoiding the challenges introduced by latelearners of sign language and international adoptees.
More specifically, bilingual speakers allows us to test
whether conceptual learning accomplished first in one
linguistic medium might facilitate the acquisition of
corresponding content in a second language by eliminating
several steps in the second language acquisition, thus
resulting in a faster second language acquisition rate relative
to the first language acquisition. In cases where children
must acquire concepts before mapping language to those
concepts, L2 acquisition of those words should be faster
than L1 acquisition because these concepts can transfer
from L1 to L2. In contrast, when children merely require
increased exposure to the language in order to map a word
to a pre-existing concept, no L2 facilitation would be
expected because this process is necessarily languagespecific.
In the present study we explored this idea by investigating
the acquisition of number words (e.g., one, two, three) – a
central test case in the study of conceptual change (see
Carey, 2009). To do so, we tested children learning two
languages and asked whether learning number word
meanings in one language (i.e., L1) facilitates the
acquisition of analogous number words in a second
language (i.e., L2).
Early in acquisition, children as young as two years learn
to recite a partial count list in a serial order (e.g., one, two,
three, four, five, etc.), pointing at objects as they do so (see
Gelman & Gallistel, 1978; Frye, Braisby, Lowe, Maroudas,
& Nicholls, 1989; Fuson, 1988). Despite this seemingly
procedural understanding of the relationship between
counting and cardinality, children at this stage in
development typically have little to no understanding of
how counting represents number (i.e., how the last number
of the count list represents the exact cardinality of the set)
nor have they acquired the meanings of any of the number
words (i.e., that numbers refer to specific quantities of a
set). Soon, however, children begin to acquire an exact
meaning for the number one, reliably giving one object
when asked for one and more than one when asked for a
contrasting number. After six to nine months as a ‘oneknower,’ children learn the meaning of two, becoming a
‘two-knower’ and, following this sequential pattern, learn
the meanings of three and four (Wynn, 1990, 1992). During
these early stages of number word learning, these children
who are classified as one-, two-, three-, and four-knowers
have meanings for only a subset of their number words (i.e.,
one, two, three, and four) and are thus collectively referred
to as ‘subset knowers.’ Eventually, twelve to eighteen

2734

months after children first acquire the concept of one, they
discover the cardinal principle that governs counting and
recognize that the counting procedure can be used to label
the cardinality of sets, at which point they are considered
Cardinal Principle knowers or ‘CP-knowers’ (for evidence
and discussion regarding these stages, see Le Corre &
Carey, 2007; Lee & Sarnecka, 2011; Piantadosi, Goodman,
& Tenenbaum, 2012; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Wynn,
1990, 1992; for discussion of what these children actually
know, see Davidson, Eng, & Barner, 2012).
By the time children acquire the concept of cardinality,
they have experienced at least three important qualitative
shifts in their conceptual understanding of numbers that
differentiates non-knowers from one-knowers, one-knowers
from two-knowers, and subset knowers from CP-knowers
(for review, see Carey, 2009). First, in order to learn the
meaning of one, children must have already acquired their
first linguistic representations of an exact cardinality.
During this stage, children begin to recognize that number
words represent specific numerosities, for example that one
represents precisely one item rather than an undefined
quantity or an amount defined by contrasting a number,
such as not one. Second, when children acquire the meaning
of two in languages that mark the singular-plural distinction,
they experience a fundamental shift in their understanding
of quantity that differentiates one-knowers from twoknowers. Unlike the concept of one, which corresponds with
the singular marker ‘a,’ the specific concept of two is not
marked by morphology in English, French, and Spanish (the
languages targeted in this study) as the plural morphology
can refer to sets of any size two or greater. This suggest that
once children acquire the concept of two, they may undergo
a conceptual leap as they must acquire this new concept of
duality. Third, when children become CP-knowers, they
learn of the unique relationship between counting and
cardinality, specifically that the counting procedure assigns
number words to sets. That is, children understand that the
last number recited in the count list refers to the specific
cardinality of the set.
The idea that each stage involves significant conceptual
change predicts that, once such changes have occurred in
one language (i.e., the PNL), subsequent learning of words
that encode identical concepts in a second language (i.e., the
SNL) should be substantially easier, at least to the degree
that acquisition in the PNL is delayed by the process of
constructing the relevant content. For those children who
understand the unique relationship between counting and
cardinality, learning may also be facilitated by recognizing
that the two count lists server similar functions in the
respective languages, thus allowing the formation of an
analogical mapping between the two (for a discussion of
analogical mapping, see Gentner, 1983; 2003; Gentner &
Markman 1997).
Although the construction of conceptual content predicts
that children’s understanding of numbers may transfer from
one language to another, it is equally possible that acquiring
concepts in one language is independent of acquiring

identical concepts in a second language. For example,
children may learn the meaning of one as a function of the
frequency of associations between the word ‘one’ and sets
of one, a process that is irrespective of children’s acquisition
of ‘uno’ in Spanish or ‘un’ in French. That is, knowledge
may be acquired as a result of exposure to the number word
and, therefore, may be represented and stored in the
language in which the concept was originally acquired and
fail to automatically transfer to a second language.
Previous studies of mathematical competence in
bilinguals find little evidence of transfer across languages.
For example, bilingual speakers exhibit a strong preference
for one language over another when performing arithmetic,
sometimes preferring the language of original instruction
despite being a dominant speaker of another language
(Dehaene, 1997; Dehaene, Spelke, Pinel, Stanescu, &
Tsivkin, 1999; Spelke & Tsivkin, 2001). When asked to
perform simple mathematical computations in their second
language, bilinguals not only perform calculations more
slowly but also do so with lower accuracy (Kolers, 1968;
Marsh & Maki, 1976; McClain & Huang, 1982). However,
these studies tell us little about how earlier processes of
bilingual learning and representational transfer take place.
This is because these studies focus on mathematical
operations, which may depend on a different, broader, set of
representational resources, including memorized procedures
and facts that may be uniquely dependent on linguistic
encoding (for discussion, see Dehaene, 1997). Thus,
although relevant to understanding the bilingual
representation of number, these studies do not directly
address whether early transfer of numerical concepts is
possible in bilingual learners, and thus whether the
foundations of arithmetic learning can be shared across
languages. Here, within the context of number word
acquisition, we explored this issue by testing children who
were second language learners and assessing their ability to
successfully denote the cardinalities of number words in
each language.
In the present study, we tested two populations of
bilingual 2- to 4-year-olds: French-English speakers and
Spanish-English speakers. Children participated in two tasks
in each language. First, they completed a Give-a-Number
task, which assessed their comprehension of number words,
and second they completed a counting task, which assessed
their familiarity with the count list in each language thus
acting as a proxy for their relative exposure to numbers.
Both of these measures allowed us to ask whether, when
controlling for counting ability and, thus, familiarity with
numbers, knowledge of number words in the L2 was
predicted by knowledge of number words in the L1. More
specifically, we asked whether there was evidence of
conceptual transfer in subset knowers, CP-knowers, or both.
Thus, we tested whether transfer is mediated by earlier
acquisition of exact cardinal meanings, like one, two, three,
and four, and whether it can be mediated by learning how
the counting procedure works when children become CPknowers.

2735

Method
Participants
Sixty-eight bilingual learners of either English and French
or English and Spanish from the San Diego metropolitan
area participated. In the French-English (FE) sample, 23
children (13 male) between the ages of 2;11 and 5;0 (M =
3;9, SD = 0;6) participated. These children were primarily
recruited from a French language preschool where
instruction is conducted exclusively in French. In the
Spanish-English (SE) sample, 45 children (22 male)
between the ages of 2;2 and 5;0 (M = 4;2, SD = 0;9)
participated after being recruited from either a Spanish
immersion preschool or a departmental database.
Participants were from predominately Non-Hispanic
Caucasian or from Hispanic middle-class families and were
contacted either through letters distributed by teachers at
local preschools or by phone using a departmental
recruitment database. An additional 15 children participated
but were excluded for completing the tasks in a language
other than the one being tested, for example, speaking in
Spanish when the tasks were conducted in English (N = 2),
for being trilingual speakers (N = 2) and for failure to
complete the counting task in at least one language (N =
11).
As reported by the caregivers, 5 of the FE children were
primarily French speakers, 14 of the SE children were
primarily Spanish speakers, and 43 of the FE (N = 14) and
SE (N = 29) children were primarily English speakers. Two
additional children were listed as having both Spanish and
English as their primary language. For the remaining four
children, no primarily language was reported.

Procedures
Testing sessions lasted approximately 20 minutes and
consisted of two tasks: a Give-a-Number task followed
directly by a counting task. Both tasks were administered
once in English and once in either French or Spanish, such
that each child completed both tasks in one language before
completing identical tasks in his or her second language.
The order in which the languages were tested was
randomized across children. As an additional measure of a
child’s fluency in both languages, we initially asked
caregivers to complete the Language Development Survey
in English and either French or Spanish (Rescorla, 1989).
However, because many parents were unable to complete
the survey in both languages (e.g., parents were
monolingual), we discontinued its use and do not report the
data here.
Give-a-Number Task This task was adapted from Wynn
(1992) using the non-titration method developed by
Sarnecka and Carey (2008) and was used to assess
children’s comprehension of number words in each
language. The experimenter began by presenting the child
with a red paper plate and ten plastic fish and inviting the
child to play a game with her toys. For each trial, the

experimenter asked the child to place a quantity of the fish
inside the red circle, omitting singular and plural markings
by asking, for example, “Can you put N in the red circle?
Put N in the red circle and tell me when you’re all done.”
Once the child responded, the experimenter then asked, “Is
that N? Can you count and make sure?” and encouraged the
child to count in the language tested. If the child recognized
an error, the experimenter allowed the child to change his or
her response. Following the completion of each trial, the
objects were returned to their original positions and the next
trial was administered until all were completed.
Participants completed up to twenty-one trials, consisting
of three trials for each of the seven numbers tested (i.e., 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 8, and 10). The order was quasi-randomized such
that each number was tested once before any number was
repeated, thus resulting in three sets of seven numbers.
Children were defined as an N-knower (e.g., three-knower)
if they correctly provided N (e.g., 3 fish) on at least two out
of the three trials that N was requested and, of those times
that the child provided N, did so in response to a request for
N on at least two-thirds of all trials. If children responded
correctly on two out of the three trials for each number
tested, then they were classified as CP-knowers.
Counting Task After administering the Give-a-Number
task, the experimenter asked the child, “Can you count as
high as you can?” If the child failed to respond or indicated
that he or she did not know how to count, the experimenter
provided the first number of the count list (e.g., one) with
rising intonation in an attempt to clarify the instructions and
encourage the child to continue counting. In the event that
the child failed to respond after the prompt, the
experimenter reassured the child and ended the task.
After the task, the experimenter recorded the highest
number recited, noting any errors such as omission (e.g.,
“…13, 14, 16”) and cyclical repetition (e.g., “…8, 9, 10, 1,
2”). The child’s highest number was defined as the largest
number counted to before error. For example, fourteen was
the highest number recorded for a child who omitted fifteen,
whereas ten was the highest number recorded for a child
who cyclically repeated the first ten numbers. In cases
where children failed to accurately count at the onset of the
task yet recited a string of numbers (e.g., “6, 7, 8…”), the
highest number was recorded as zero. In contrast, children
who refused to count were excluded from the analysis.
For each child, the language with the highest number
recorded (e.g., fourteen) was coded as his or her Primary
Number Language (i.e., PNL), while the language with the
lowest number recorded (e.g., diez) was coded as the child’s
Secondary Number Language (i.e., SNL). For example, a
child who counted to fourteen in English and diez in
Spanish was coded as having English as her PNL and
Spanish as her SNL. In cases where the highest number
recited was matched in both languages (e.g., ten and diez),
PNL was defined as the child’s primary language as
reported by the parent (N = 1) or, when the parent indicated
no preference for either language, was instead coded as

2736

English (N = 1). The highest number children counted to
without error ranged from 1 to 100 in PNL and from 0 to 39
in SNL. Except in the one case noted earlier, parental report
was not used to determine a child’s primary language for
numbers. This is because children frequently encounter
number words in formal classroom settings where
instruction is often conducted in a language that is not
spoken by the parent.

Results
Figures 1 and 2 reveal the mean performance on the
counting task in each language at each knower level
separated by FE speakers and SE speakers. As expected,
children’s familiarity with the count list as reflected in the
highest number recited increased as their comprehension of
number words progressed. Preliminary analyses revealed no
significant difference in performance between FE and SE
children. As a result, all analyses are collapsed across
languages.

To examine the relationship between children’s
comprehension of numbers, children’s familiarity and
exposure to number words, and children’s general
maturation, we conducted Spearman’s correlations between
knower level, highest count, and age. Not surprising, SNL
knower level was significantly correlated with PNL knower
level, ρ = 0.81, p < 0.01, SNL counting, ρ = 0.72, p < 0.01,
and age, ρ = 0.67 =, p < 0.01, indicating that children’s
understanding of numbers deepened as a function of their
familiarity with the count list and their general cognitive
development.
To isolate the individual effects of familiarity with the
count list on the one hand and comprehension of numbers
on the other hand, we conducted a logistic regression to
predict children’s knower level in SNL using SNL counting,
PNL knower level, and age as predictors. The full model,
when compared against a constant only model, significantly
predicted SNL knower level, indicating that the predictors
as a set reliably differentiated children’s knower level in
SNL, r2(U) = 0.45, χ2(6) = 85.8, p < 0.01, with a
misclassification rate of 0.27. A likelihood ratio test further
revealed a main effect of PNL knower level, χ2(4) = 24.07, p
< 0.01, suggesting that children’s comprehension of
numbers in PNL significantly predicted children’s
comprehension of numbers in SNL, perhaps through
conceptual transfer (see Figure 3). However, the effect was
restricted to two developmental transitions, as reflected in
the parameter estimates: a transition from a 1-knower to a 2knower, β = 2.91, β(SE) = 1.13; χ2(1) = 5.20, p = 0.02, and a
transition from a subset knower to a CP-knower, β = 2.41,
β(SE) = 0.91; χ2(1) = 3.51, p = 0.06. There were also effects
of SNL counting, χ2(1) = 12.05, p < 0.001 and age, χ2(1) =
3.90, p = 0.05.

Figure 1: The mean performance on the counting task by
knower level for French-English speakers.

Figure 3: The percentage of children at each SNL knower
level by PNL knower level.

Discussion
Figure 2: The mean performance on the counting task by
knower level for Spanish-English speakers.

We asked how transfer of number concepts from a first
language and familiarity with numbers in a second language
may facilitate the acquisition of number words in the second
language. We found that familiarity with number words

2737

facilitated the acquisition of number concepts and that when
children acquired the meaning of number words in their
primary language that knowledge transferred to their
secondary language during two stages of conceptual
development. Transfer was seen when children became twoknowers and when they became CP-knowers.
One possible mechanism explaining the effect of transfer
at the level of CP-knowers is a process of analogical
reasoning that results in the mapping of analogous concepts
across languages. As CP-knowers, children not only learn
the meanings of numbers greater than four but also
recognize the unique relationship between counting and
cardinality. More specifically, CP-knowers learn that
counting can be used to label the cardinality of sets and
eventually that each successive number is one greater than
the preceding one (i.e., N+1). Importantly, however, by
recognizing that number words belong to a class that forms
a structured list, children may infer that the lists in each of
their languages operate according to the same principles. As
a result, children who are CP-knowers may transfer their
knowledge of counting from one list to the other through
this process of analogical reasoning.
Another possible mechanism is that number word
learning, in general, is a process of conceptual change in
which new concepts, such as one, two, and three, are
constructed. According to Carey (2009), prior to learning
small number words, children cannot represent exact
cardinalities via language (see also Le Corre & Carey, 2007;
Sarnecka & Gelman, 2004; Wynn, 1990, 1992). Although
infants can keep track of small numbers of individual
objects (Feigenson & Carey, 2005), and can represent the
approximate cardinality of large sets (e.g., Xu & Spelke,
2003), they may not be able to represent the precise
numerosity of sets as a property distinct from the
individuals themselves. On this view, number word learning
is hard, in part, because it involves creating new conceptual
resources. Consequently, once these resources have been
built, learning the same meanings in a second language
should be substantially easier – i.e., there should be
“conceptual transfer.” In this case, language transfer might
also be observed in bilingual speakers during each of the
subset stages of number word acquisition.
In contrast, we failed to find evidence of any transfer
from the primary to the secondary number language when
children become 1-knowers and 3-knowers. This supports
an alternative view that children learn the meanings of these
number words (three and one) as a function of their
exposure to the number words in their secondary number
language, indicating that they must employ a languagespecific mapping between words and meanings. That is,
children may consistently hear the word “uno” in
association with sets of one and, as a result, form direct
mappings between the specific word, “uno,” and the
quantity, one. Without knowledge of the count list structure
that CP-knowers are privy to, bilingual subset knowers are
unable to draw comparisons between these numbers.
Consequently in these two cases, children gained little

advantage in their SNL number knowledge by graduating to
the next level of n-knower in PNL.
While transfer failed to occur at most subset knower
levels, there was evidence that the transition from being a
one-knower to a two-knower did transfer across languages
despite these children’s lack of knowledge of the count list
structure. This particular transition may mark a significant,
conceptual milestone in number word learning that can be
transferred across languages. Whereas English, French, and
Spanish use singular-plural morphology to mark the exact
quantity of one (e.g., “a”), none of these languages use
morphology to mark the exact cardinality of two (e.g. a dual
marker like that used in Slovenian, Corbett, 2000). For this
reason, there may be a conceptual barrier that children have
to pass before they are able to map number words two or
greater onto their corresponding quantities. Once this barrier
is passed in one language, children are able to learn the
words two and three in both languages, given that they have
sufficient familiarity with number words in both languages.
After passing this barrier, the transition from two-knower to
three-knower is not transferred across languages, unlike the
previous transition from one-knower to two-knower.
The singular-plural morphology in English, French and
Spanish also explains why no transfer was seen when
children become 1-knowers. The singular-plural
morphology may facilitate a concept of the exact cardinality
of one before children begin the number acquisition process
(Barner, Libenson, Cheung, & Takasaki, 2009).
In conclusion, we found that learning number words in
one language facilitates the acquisition of the analogous
number words in a second language at particular points in
the number word acquisition process that are characterized
by conceptual milestones. Although we suggest that
relatively simple concepts, like counting, transfer across
languages, it remains uncertain to what extent this occurs.
Future studies should explore the generalizations and
limitations of conceptual transfer by testing more advanced
numerical abilities like estimation.

Acknowledgments
We thank the members of the Language and Development
Lab for scheduling participants, collecting data, and coding
responses. This work was supported by the James S.
McDonnell Foundation Scholar Award to DB.

References
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Corbett, G. G. (2000). Number. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Barner, D., Libenson, A., Cheung, P., & Takasaki, M.
(2009). Cross-linguistic relations between quantifiers and
numerals in language acquisition: Evidence from
Japanese. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 103,
421-440.

2738

Davidson, K., Eng, K., & Barner, D. (2012). Does learning
to count involve a semantic induction? Cognition,
123, 162-173.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The Number Sense: How the Mind
Creates Mathematics. Oxford University Press: New
York.
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R., & Tsivkin,
S. (1999). Sources of mathematical thinking: Behavioral
and brain-imaging evidence. Science, 284, 970-974.
Feigenson, L., & Carey, S. (2005). On the limits of infants'
quantification of small object arrays. Cognition, 97, 295313.
Frye, D. Braisby, N. Love, J. Maroudas, C. Nicholls, J.
(1989). Young children's understanding of counting and
cardinality. Child Development, 60, 1158-1171.
Fuson, K. (1988). Children's counting and concepts of
number. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gelman, R. & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). The child's
understanding of number. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadows (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought (pp. 195-235).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Kolers, P. (1968). Bilinguals and information processing.
Scientific American, 218, 78-86.
Le Corre, M. & Carey, S. (2007). One, two, three, four,
nothing more: An investigation of the conceptual sources
of the counting principles. Cognition, 105, 395-438.
Lee, M. D. & Sarnecka, B.W. (2011). Number-knower
levels in young children: Insights from a Bayesian
model. Cognition, 120, 391-402.
Marsh, L. G., & Maki, R. H. (1976). Efficiency of
arithmetic operations in bilinguals as a function of
language. Memory and Cognition, 4, 459-464.
McClain, L., & Huang, J. Y. S. (1982). Speed of simple
arithmetic in bilinguals. Memory and Cognition, 10, 591596.
Piantadosi, S., Tenenbaum, J. & Goodman, N. (2012)
Bootstrapping in a language of thought: a formal model of
numerical concept learning. Cognition, 123, 199-217.
Quine W. V. (1960). Word and Object. The Mit Press.
Rescorla, L. (1989). The Language Development Survey: A
screening tool for delayed language in toddlers. Journal
of Speech and Hear Disorders, 54, 587-599.
Sarnecka, B. W. & Carey, S. (2008) How counting
represents number: What children must learn and when
they learn it. Cognition, 108, 662-674.
Sarnecka, B.W. & Gelman, S.A. (2004). Six does not just
mean a lot: Preschoolers see number words as specific.
Cognition, 92, 329-352.

Spelke, E. S., & Tsivkin, S. (2001). Language and number:
A bilingual training study. Cognition, 78, 45-88.
Wynn,
K (1990)
Children's understanding of
counting. Cognition, 36, 155-193.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of the number
words and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24,
220-251.
Xu, F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Large number discrimination
in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74, B1-B11.

2739

