UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Typicality and Object Reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mt2r0rb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Mitchell, Margaret
Reiter, Ehud
Van Deemter, Kees

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Typicality and Object Reference
Margaret Mitchell (m.mitchell@jhu.edu)
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence, Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211 USA

Ehud Reiter (e.reiter@abdn.ac.uk)
Kees van Deemter (k.vdeemter@abdn.ac.uk)
Computing Science Department, University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, Scotland AB24 3FX UK
Abstract
Does the typicality of an object affect how we identify it?
When we produce initial reference to a visible object, we are
influenced by a variety of factors, including what is visually
salient (bottom-up influences) as well as our previous experiences with the object (top-down influences). In this study, we
seek to understand how the top-down influence of typicality
affects initial reference to an object. We use real world, everyday objects, and focus on the visual properties of SHAPE and
MATERIAL . Our findings suggest that there is a tendency to
select the atypical over the typical. But we have only begun to
scratch the surface of understanding reference to real world objects. The annotated corpus from this study is made available
for future research on modeling reference in visual domains.1
Keywords: referring expressions; description; reference; vision; typicality

(a) A GRE3D3 scene.

Figure 1: Example scenes from the GRE3D3 Corpus and
the TUNA Furniture sub-corpus. Participants produce referring expressions such as yellow ball on top of the red cube
(GRE3D3) or small fan (TUNA).

Introduction
I never saw a purple cow.
I never hope to see one,
But I can say this anyhow:
I’d rather see than be one.
— Gelett Burgess

When we identify an object for a hearer, we have a number
of choices to make about what to mention. When the object is
visible to both speaker and hearer, properties that help guide
visual attention, such as color and size, are particularly informative (Treisman & Gelade, 1980; Wolfe, 2006). Properties
that are salient to the discourse or relevant to the speaker and
hearer’s previous interactions also affect what we will mention and describe (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Brennan &
Clark, 1996; Clark & Krych, 2004).
We hypothesize that when we generate initial reference to
an object for a hearer, our knowledge about objects of the
same type is also likely to affect what we mention. In other
words, our understanding of what is typical for an object category influences the selection of modifiers – the adjectives
and longer descriptive phrases – that we produce when we
first describe an object. This understanding of what is typical
for an object category may stem from stored object prototypes (Rosch & Mervis, 1975; Rosch, C. Mervis, W. Gray,
Johnson, & Braem, 1976) or mental representations of similar objects in previous situations (Yeh & Barsalou, 2006; Wu
& Barsalou, 2009). Because of typicality, we know that the
purple cow mentioned in the example above is remarkable.
Previous work on reference has paid little attention to the
role of typicality. This is equally true for psycholinguistic
1 http://m-mitchell.com/corpora/typicality

corpus/

(b) A TUNA scene.

work (Arnold, 2008) and for work on computational models of reference (Dale & Reiter, 1995; Krahmer, van Erk, &
Verleg, 2003; Krahmer & van Deemter, 2012). The present
study addresses what we believe to be a significant gap in our
understanding of reference.
We examine the role of typicality in reference to real world,
everyday objects, focusing on material and shape properties.
Objects are presented so that one of these two properties
will distinguish the object. We test whether there is a significant difference between groups when participants in one
may choose between atypical shape or typical material to
describe target objects, while participants in a second group
may choose between typical shape or atypical material to describe target objects. Our findings suggest that there is a tendency to select the atypical over the typical.
Although this study focuses on shape and material typicality, we release the full corpus from our experiments, annotated with a variety of visual properties, in hopes of helping
further work in constructing models of reference to real objects. Current available corpora for reference to visible objects, such as the GRE3D3 Corpus (Viethen & Dale, 2008)
or the TUNA Corpus (van Deemter, Gatt, van der Sluis, &
Power, 2012), were built from reference elicited to graphics
of simple objects presented on a computer screen (see Figure
1). In this work, we seek to better understand the rich details
of reference in real world visual domains, where a multitude
of different visual properties interact. This opens up several
aspects of reference that have not been researched before and
gives rise to further questions about the factors influencing
initial reference and visual object descriptions. We discuss
some of these issues, and their implications for a computa-

3062

tional model of reference.
To establish what properties are typical for an object, we
use semantic feature production norms. Semantic feature production norms provide a set of common properties for basiclevel concepts, and are collected to explore conceptual representations such as typicality (Rosch & Mervis, 1975) and
semantics (Wu & Barsalou, 2009). We use McRae’s norms
(McRae, Cree, Seidenberg, & McNorgan, 2005; McRae,
2011), which to our knowledge is the largest source of production norms to date. McRae’s norms were collected by providing participants with 10 blank lines for each basic category
and asking them to list features for each, such as physical
(perceptual) properties (how it looks, sounds, smells, feels,
and tastes), functional properties (what it is used for and
where and when it is used), and other information, such as
encyclopedic facts (e.g., where it is from).
For this study, we are interested in perceptual properties,
specifically shape and material properties, which are available
from the norms.2 For example, objects belonging to the bowl
category are listed as typically having a “curved” or “round”
shape, and made of a “ceramic” or “plastic” material. We
consider atypical properties to be properties (1) mentioned by
no participants for the object, and (2) difficult to find during
our object collection period.
Our initial list of possible objects included all inanimate
objects from McRae’s norms that could fit on an experiment
table, and this set was narrowed down by availability and our
abilities to control the visual properties of the objects. The
final set of test objects are listed in Table 1, along with their
typical and atypical shapes and materials. The full set of objects used in this study are shown and labeled in Figure 3.

and professionals in two countries (the U.S. and the U.K.), but
ideally in testing and modeling the production of reference,
the set of typical properties would be defined with respect to
a culture or group of people, or tailored to a specific person.
For our study, we use one set of objects, without changing
typical/atypical properties.

Interconnection
It is clear that there is an interconnection between different
visual properties. For example, material often entails color
and texture. An object made of wool is fuzzy or rough (texture values), while an object made of wood is usually tan or
brown, and for everyday objects, tends to be smooth (color
and e.g., smoothness values). Ideally, participants would
refer only to those properties that we vary; but they may
instead refer to interconnected properties, calling a woolen
bowl “coarse” or “flexible”, or a mug made of ceramic but
painted silver a “metal mug”.

Lexicalization
Another competing factor in this study is how easy a property is to lexicalize. Some shapes (e.g., “square”) are common and may be quick to access, while other shapes (e.g.,
“octagonal”) may take longer to produce, affecting the object
description. Further complications may arise when there is
competition over whether to use a prenominal modifier (“the
flower-shaped bowl”) or a postnominal modifier (“the bowl
that looks a bit like a flower”).

Shapes, Parts, and Object Categories

Using Real World Objects
A notable complication in this study is that we seek to use
a variety of everyday objects, while controlling the typicality of particular properties of those objects. This means
that the objects must look relatively commonplace, matching as closely as possible on every visual property except for
shape/material; and for these properties, one must be clearly
atypical while the other must be clearly typical. Finding everyday objects that fit within these rigid constraints is difficult. In some cases (bowl, mug, screw), we colored the objects to match one another, while in other cases (atypical envelope, key, ruler), we physically created the objects in order
for them to have all the desired properties. Real world objects bring with them a set of complications for any model of
reference, and we discuss some of these briefly. Although we
cannot address all of the issues we list, we hope to provide
evidence for a preliminary model of typicality in reference
while bringing to light areas for further research.

Cultural and Individual Differences
What is typical for an object varies person to person, culture
to culture. This study was conducted with a range of students
2 We use McRae et al.’s “external surface property”/“external
component” labels for shape and “made of” labels for material.

Figure 2: Bowl, Sugar Bowl, Creamer, Teacup, Mug, Pitcher:
Similar objects with different shapes tend to have different
names.
An object’s shape is often indicated by its name (Markman,
1989; Landau & Jackendoff, 1993), and therefore an object
designed to have an atypical shape may instead appear to belong in an entirely different object category (see Figure 2).
For some objects, we found that changing its full shape made
it unclear what the object was, or else created a subtype of our
target basic-level object category; in a few cases, we therefore
manipulated a part of the object’s shape. Rather than a round
head of a key, the head was square; the straight rectangular
center of a ruler was cut out with geometric shapes; and the
circular head of a screw was made atypically oval.

The Objects
The objects used in the study, as they were presented to participants (without the superimposed identifiers), are shown in
Figure 3. Test objects are listed in Table 1 along with their
shapes and materials. Those values in italics could not be
found in McRae’s norms and were added based on intuition
and object availability. Filler objects are listed in Table 2.

3063

Figure 3: Objects used in study, keyed to descriptions in Tables 1 and 2 below.
Table 1: Test objects with shapes and materials. Values listed
in italics were provided by the authors because they were not
listed in the McRae et al. (2005) norms.
G ROUP 1
ATYPICAL S HAPE
O BJECT ID
bowl
2
box
43
envelope 8
key
20
mug
ruler

4
6

screw

25

SHAPE

flower
heart
square
square
head
octagonal
with
holes
oval head

MATER .
ceramic
cardboard
paper
metal

ceramic
wood
metal

G ROUP 2
ATYPICAL M ATERIAL
ID

SHAPE

MATER .

1
42
9
19

round
square
rectangle
rounded
head
round
rectangle

wool
clay
foam
wood

3
7
24

metal
paper

flat circu- plastic
lar head

Table 2: Filler objects. See Figure 3 for corresponding images of the objects.
44
45
31
27
29
21
22
30
37
38
39

ball
ball
battery
bracelet
c-clamp
clip
clip
clip
clip
clip
clip

40
17
18
48/49
23
5
11
12
14
15
13
32

coin
33
comb
34
comb
35
cube*
16
fork
10
funnel
41
pen
46
48/49
pen
pen
28
pen
26
pencil
36
pushpin

pushpin
pushpin
pushpin
rolling-pin
rubber-band
salt-shaker
scissors
sphere*
staple-remover
stapler
toothpick

* These objects were varied by color/size/type as part of a separate pilot experiment.

Figure 4: Subjects sat across from an assistant, with objects
between them. An experimenter sat at the head of the table,
moving objects to their original positions between trials.

Figure 5: Example stimuli, ATYPICAL S HAPE group. Here,
the test object is the square envelope.

Experiment
Participants sat at a table across from an assistant (Figure 4),
with a variety of objects on the table between them (Figure
3). Subjects were asked to explain to the person sitting across
how to recreate images of the objects grouped in different patterns (Figure 5). There were two objects for each test object
category on the table, matched for color and size. One object
had atypical material and typical shape; the other had atypical
shape and typical material. Subjects could therefore not distinguish a test object to the hearer by its type alone, but could
distinguish it by mentioning its shape or material.
Atypical feature is a grouping variable both by subjects and
by materials. For the ATYPICAL S HAPE participants, shape
properties of the test objects were atypical, while material
properties were typical. For the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL participants, material properties of the test objects were atypical,
while shape properties were typical.

Method
Participants Thirty native English speakers with normal or
corrected vision in the United States and the United Kingdom
were paid for their participation ($5 or £5). Subjects were
recruited through word of mouth and online ads, 17 males
and 13 females, aged 20–55, and randomly assigned to one
of the two experimental groups, (1) ATYPICAL S HAPE or (2)
ATYPICAL M ATERIAL. Four male subjects and one female
subject were randomly removed to a held-out set to balance
gender, leaving 6 female and 6 male subjects in each group
(24 subjects total).
To check for possible outliers in each group, we calculate
the average number of references with shape, and the average number of references with material. Participants whose
total number of references with shape or material were more
than two standard deviations from the mean for that property
were identified as possible outliers. We found no outliers in
the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL group, and two possible outliers
in the ATYPICAL S HAPE group. The data for these two subjects (one male, one female) were removed and replaced with
gender-matched data from the held-out set.

3064

Table 3: Attributes annotated and example surface forms.
“square”
“shiny”
“little”
“weird”
“ball point”
“rough”
“box”
“for oil”
“light”
Examples of phrases conveying more
than one attribute
ANALOGY: SHAPE
“shaped like a P”
TYPE : SHAPE
“diamond”
PROCESS : ANALOGY
“that opens like a
purse”
SHAPE
SHEEN
SIZE
SUBJECTIVE
SUBTYPE
TEXTURE
TYPE
USE
WEIGHT

Shape

Material

50
40
30
20
0

Total Number of Expressions

50
40
30
20
10
0

Total Number of Expressions

60

Procedure & Design All participants consented to participate in the study. The experiment followed a director-matcher
paradigm, where the director (the participant) instructed the
matcher (the assistant). Participant and assistant sat opposite one another while the experimenter sat on a third side
of the table. Participants alone viewed pictures on a laptop
(positioned so screen was not visible to the assistant). Each
participant saw 8 pictures in randomized order including a
different atypical stimulus each time (see example in Figure
5). On each trial, the participant viewed the picture and explained to the assistant where each pictured object should go
on the grid laid out on the table between them. At the end of
each trial, the experimenter returned objects to their original
positions. Participants’ instructions were recorded onto the
laptop.

“like a cat”
“blue”
“empty”
“flexible”
“open”
“hard”
“dark”
“close to me”
“bright”
“copper”
“clear”
“other”, “another”
“with a slot on top”
“adjustable”

60

ANALOGY
COLOR
FILL
FLEX
FORM
HARDNESS
INTENSITY
LOCATION
LUMINESCENCE
MATERIAL
OPACITY
OTHER
PART- WHOLE
PROCESS

10

Materials Participants sat in front of a large set of everyday
objects (rulers, envelopes, pins, etc., as shown in Figures 3
and 4), with test objects and fillers mixed. Test objects for the
two experimental groups with their corresponding shape and
material properties are listed in Table 1.

Shape

Properties

ATYPICAL S HAPE

Results
Annotation Annotations are provided by the first author.
To test for adequacy of the annotation system, a second annotator annotated a random subset of 20 references to the test
objects. The annotator was given mark-up instructions and
examples of a variety of visual properties (shown in Table 3),
and told to mark which words referred to which properties
as best they could following their understanding of the examples. Treating shape and material as binary categorical variables, Cohen’s κ is very good for shape (κ=.894) and good for
material (κ=.798) between annotators. Disagreements were
over whether “metallic” in “the non-ribbed metallic cup” was
a material or a texture, whether “heart” in “a heart-shaped
box” was a shape or a type, and whether “silver” in “a silver
round cup” was a color or a material. The total number of
expressions produced for test items with shape and material
modifiers in each experimental group is shown in Figure 6.
Analysis We see a tendency to choose the atypical over the
typical in both groups. In the ATYPICAL S HAPE group, 54
expressions contain a shape modifier while 36 contain a material modifier; in the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL group, 28 expressions contain a shape modifier while 41 contain a material modifier (see Figure 6). There is a slight preference for
shape over material across the groups; 82 expressions contain
a shape modifier while 77 contain a material modifier.
We are interested in understanding whether there is a
significant difference in the selection of modifiers between
groups. For each participant, we subtract the number of test
object expressions containing a modifier for the object material from the number of test object expressions containing a
modifier for the object shape. In other words, for each participant p, given the number of expressions with material modifiers M p and the number of expressions with shape modi-

Material

Properties

ATYPICAL M ATERIAL

Figure 6: Number of expressions with shape and material
modifiers in each experimental group.
fiers S p , we calculate Vp = S p - M p . This provides a vector
for each group with differences in the number of modifiers
for shape and material. For participants in the ATYPICAL
S HAPE group, where shape is atypical, we expect positive
values for Vp . For participants in the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL
group, where material is atypical, we expect negative values
for Vp .
An independent samples t-test was conducted to compare the effect of property typicality on the production of
modifiers between groups. There is a significant difference
at α = .01 between the ATYPICAL S HAPE group (n=12,
mean=1.50, sd=1.62) and the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL group
(n=12, mean=-1.08, sd=2.07); t(21)=3.406, p=0.003.

Discussion
Current Study
These results suggest that atypicality affects object reference.
We find a tendency to select the atypical property over the
typical one, with participants in the ATYPICAL S HAPE group
preferring shape modifiers, and participants in the ATYPICAL
M ATERIAL group preferring material modifiers. This difference is significant between groups.
Shedding further light on these findings, when material was
included in a reference in the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL group, it
was often incorrect. Figure 7 illustrates how frequently subjects were correct and incorrect in the description of an object’s material. In the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL group (Figure
7a), the plastic screw was called “metal”, the paper ruler was
called “wooden”. The ruler in particular gave rise to incorrect
material modifiers – it was printed on paper with a wood print,

3065

12

12

6

Count

8

10

Correct
Neither
Incorrect

mug

key

box

bowl

ruler

0

2

4

6
0

2

4

Count

8

10

Correct
Neither
Incorrect

envelope screw

mug

key

box

Objects

envelope screw

12
6

8

10

Correct
Neither
Incorrect

2

mug

key

box

bowl

ruler

0

2

4

6

Count

8

10

Correct
Neither
Incorrect

4

Count

ruler

(a) ATYPICAL M ATERIAL shape modifiers

12

(a) ATYPICAL M ATERIAL material modifiers

0

bowl
Objects

envelope screw

Objects

mug

key

box

bowl

ruler

envelope screw

Objects

(b) ATYPICAL S HAPE material modifiers

(b) ATYPICAL S HAPE shape modifiers

Figure 7: Number of participants who included material modifiers that were correct, incorrect, or did not use a material modifier at all (neither). In the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL
group (a), ruler tends to evoke incorrect material modifiers.
The ruler, envelope, and screw had no correct material modifiers. In the ATYPICAL S HAPE group (b), the mug, box, and
bowl tended to evoke incorrect material modifiers. The mug
(painted silver) had no correct material modifiers.

Figure 8: Number of participants who included shape modifiers that were correct, incorrect, or did not use a shape modifier at all (neither). In the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL group
(a), there were no incorrect shape modifiers. In the ATYPI CAL S HAPE group (b), only the mug received incorrect shape
modifiers (e.g., “hexagonal” rather than “octagonal”).

so it was called “wooden”. Most participants in the ATYPI CAL M ATERIAL group did not use material modifiers for the
envelope and the screw, which may be partially due to the
fact that the screw was painted black and so was not clearly
plastic; and the envelope was made of foam, which may have
not been clear without physically touching the object. Some
examples of expressions in the ATYPICAL M ATERIAL group
that do not include material modifiers are given in Table 4.
A similar tendency to refer to incorrect material emerged in
the ATYPICAL S HAPE group (Figure 7b), where the ceramic
mug painted silver was called “metal” or “steel”, the ceramic
bowl was called “plastic”, and the cardboard box was called
“wooden”. In contrast, subjects were rarely incorrect about
shape (Figure 8). The only exception to this is the atypically
shaped mug (Figure 8b), which was called “octagonal” (correct), “hexagonal” (incorrect) and “septuplet” (incorrect).
These trends suggest that material is not purely visual, but
may also be guided by our tactile sensations of the objects;
without tactile input, our expectation of the typical material
for the object may be used in our reference rather than its
actual material, or we may disprefer material altogether. It is
not enough to judge whether a visual property is atypical or
not; it must also be judged whether that value is visually clear,
and whether other properties suggest another interconnected

property (which may not actually be true of the referent, as
when subjects use incorrect modifiers).
Future work could shed more light on these issues with a
variant of the experiment in which we look at how reference
here compares to reference towards objects of the same category that have typical shape and typical material, and likewise, atypical shape and atypical material. This should also
provide useful data on how to separate general preference for
shape or material versus a preference for atypical properties.

Towards a Model of Reference
As discussed in the introduction, current research on reference production has focused on very simple, constrained domains. In this work, we propose taking the object’s typicality
into consideration when deciding which properties to add to
an initial description. In a computational model, typical information may be made available in a knowledge base queried at
runtime. As part of the reference production process, the target object category could then be compared against a stored
object category. Property selection in such a model could be
a function of the typicality of the property for the object, as
well as, e.g., its contrastive value against the other objects.
This offers an extension to current models of referring expression generation (e.g., Dale and Reiter (1995)), and may
help to further explain the process of reference generation.

3066

Ruler
“the ruler”

Envelope
“the white
envelope”

Screw
“the screw”

“ruler that’s
flatter”

“the uh weird
padded looking
envelope thing”

“black flat head
screw”

“the darker
tan ruler”

“long rectangular
envelope”

“the screw with
the flat head”

References

Table 4: Examples of references without MATERIAL in the
Atypical M ATERIAL group. We see underspecified references and references describing the object’s size.

Conclusions and Future Work
This study has sampled a handful of real world objects to understand the role that typicality plays on reference. We have
focused on two visual attributes, shape and material, in a visual scenario where either may be used to identify an object.
We see a tendency to select the atypical property over the
typical one, and find a significant difference between the selection of atypical shape over typical material versus typical
shape over atypical material between groups.
Our study has focused on relatively crisp properties of objects. It would be interesting to explore whether our findings
extrapolate to properties that come in degrees, such as height,
weight, age, and so on. Based on our study, we hypothesize,
for example, that the length of a screw is more likely to be
mentioned if it is unusual (e.g., unusually long or unusually
short) than if it is not. In line with this, gradations of atypicality for an attribute may also affect reference; some values
may be more atypical than others, and thus more likely to be
included in a final description.
This study leaves many further open questions. To fully
model reference production to real world, visible objects, we
must better understand how the production of visual modifiers
is affected by interconnection and lexicalization issues, and
how notions of typicality are changed culture to culture.
In future work, we aim to focus directly on interconnection,
understanding how the degree of correlation between properties affects description. We would like to extend our set of
objects in order to examine reference when both properties
are typical, or both atypical. There may be a tendency to select the atypical over the typical, but we have only begun to
scratch the surface of the factors at play when we refer to real
world objects.

Acknowledgments
The first author of this paper was supported by funding
from the Scottish Informatics and Computer Science Alliance (SICSA), the Overseas Research Students Awards
Scheme (ORSAS) and Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU). Thanks to Ellen Bard at the University of Edinburgh for help with design and analysis. Thanks to students at
OHSU for volunteering their time as assistants and thanks to
SignWorksOfOregon – particularly Shannon Zuiderweg, for
the construction of the wooden key.

Arnold, J. E. (2008). Reference production: Productioninternal and addressee-oriented processes. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 23.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22.
Clark, H. H., & Krych, M. A. (2004). Speaking while monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of Memory
and Language, 50.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22.
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretations
of the gricean maxims in the generation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science, 19.
Krahmer, E., & van Deemter, K. (2012). Computational generation of referring expressions: A survey. Comp. Ling.,
38.
Krahmer, E., van Erk, S., & Verleg, A. (2003). Graph-based
generation of referring expressions. Comp. Ling., 29.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “what” and “where”
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16.
Markman, E. (1989). Categorization and naming in children:
Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McRae, K. (2011). McRae’s norms. Available from
http://amdrae.ssc.uwo.ca/McRaeLab/norms.php.
Accessed 5.Oct.2011
McRae, K., Cree, G. S., Seidenberg, M. S., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 37(4).
Rosch, E., C. Mervis, C., W. Gray, W., Johnson, D., & Braem,
P. B. (1976). Basic objects in natural categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 8.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12.
van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van der Sluis, I., & Power, R.
(2012). Generation of referring expressions: Assessing the
incremental algorithm. Cognitive Science, 36(5).
Viethen, J., & Dale, R. (2008). The use of spatial relations in
referring expression generation. Proc. INLG 2008.
Wolfe, J. M. (2006). Guided search 4.0. In W. D. Gray (Ed.),
Integrated models of cognitive systems. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Wu, L. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (2009). Perceptual simulation
in conceptual combination: Evidence from property generation. Acta Psychologica, 132.
Yeh, W., & Barsalou, L. W. (2006). The situated nature of
concepts. American Journal of Psychology, 119.

3067

