UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Complex Network Analysis in the Cognitive Sciences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6gj9f8bm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Beckage, Nicole
Vitevitch, Michael
Mehler, Alexander
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Complex Network Analysis in the Cognitive Sciences
Nicole M. Beckage (Nicole.Beckage@Colorado.edu)
University of Colorado, Boulder
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA

Michael S. Vitevitch (mvitevit@ku.edu)
University of Kansas
Department of Psychology, 1415 Jayhawk Blvd
Lawrence, KS 66045 USA

Alexander Mehler (mehler@em.uni-frankfurt.de)
Goethe University, Frankfurt
Department of Computer Science and Mathematics, Robert-Mayer Straße 10
Frankfurt am Main, 60325 Germany

Eliana Colunga (Eliana.Colunga@Colorado.edu)
University of Colorado, Boulder
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA
the idea of small-world structure, which has been shown to
allow for efficient processing and navigation of information.
From there we introduce the idea that network statistics
change with the size and density of a graph. That brings up
concepts of randomization and statistical tests. While these
will be handled initially as definitions and concepts, the
second part of the tutorial will include working through the
analyses that were conducted to yield the research results.
We will conclude the tutorial by allowing participants to
design their own hypothesis tests and help with refining
individualized research goals in light of network theory. If
time and interest permits we will also consider process
models of networks, inference on missing data and missing
link information as well as network-based algorithms.
We will teach participants how to do basic network
calculations with built-in functions of R as well as help
develop an intuitive understanding of network models. At
the end of the session we will also introduce the idea of
network process models specifically looking at preferential
attachment and page rank algorithms.

Keywords: Network analysis, graph theory, complex systems,
network descriptives, R, language

Objectives and Scope of the Tutorial
 Provide an elementary introduction to network
analysis as a tool within cognitive science, using
examples from the domain of language.
 Demonstrate how to import, manipulate, and analyze
network data using the R programming language.
 Participants who complete the tutorial will be able to
perform basic network analyses, and use this powerful
suite of analyses to examine relational data in their
own domains of research.

Tutorial Delivery
The general format of the tutorial will be a half-day
introduction to research in the field of complex network
analysis followed by a more detailed study of a specific
research project on language acquisition. In the course of
the more detailed study participants will have an
opportunity to perform some statistical and hypothesis
testing on networks while learning interpretations and
meaning of network analysis techniques.
We will begin by introducing a few research findings that
are specific to network analysis. These include results
showing that there are structural network differences that
can be quantified and compared between groups as well as
examples of conclusions that readily emerge from a
networking framework that would otherwise be difficult to
capture. These require a fundamental understanding of a
variety of network descriptives that will be defined and
applied to the research questions at hand. For example, in
capturing and explaining structural network differences, we
introduce the idea of clustering coefficients and geodesic
distance. These network descriptives have become
specifically relevant to the field, as they have given rise to

Instructor experience with Network Analysis
Nicole Beckage is a graduate student majoring jointly in
Cognitive Science and Computer Science at University of
Colorado Boulder. Nicole has spent most of her course work
and research focusing on network analysis and language
acquisition. She has helped run network tutorials at the
Institute of Social Network Analysis’s annual conference
and has taken many classes in a variety of disciplines with
network theory as a main topic. Her research has utilized
and designed novel network approaches and she has been
invited to give network related talks at many workshops and
conferences. The focus of the methodological tutorial will
be motivated by the techniques of her paper entitled ‘Small
worlds and semantic network growth in typical and late
talkers’ published in PLOS One in 2011.

37

Michael Vitevitch is an Associate Professor in the
Department of Psychology at the University of Kansas.
Prof. Vitevitch combines the analytic tools of Network
Science with conventional psycholinguistic tasks to better
understand the processes and representations involved in
spoken word recognition. His work in this area has appeared
in several mainstream Psychology journals (e.g., Cognitive
Science, Journal of Memory & Language, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance) as well as in journals that focus on the topics
of chaotic, complex, and nonlinear systems (e.g., Entropy,
and International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos). In
addition to organizing a satellite conference on the topic of
“Language and Network Science” at the 2012 NetSci
conference in Chicago, he has been invited to present his
network research at a number of international workshops
and conferences.
Alexander Mehler is professor for Computational
Humanities at the Goethe University Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, where he heads the Text technology Lab as part
of the Department of Computer Science and Mathematics.
He is a member of the executive committee of the LOEWE
Priority Program "Digital Humanities" at Frankfurt
University. His research interests include empirical analysis
and simulative synthesis of discourse units in spoken and
written communication. He aims at a quantitative theory of
networking in linguistic systems to enable multi-agent
simulations of life cycles. He integrates models of semantic
spaces with simulation models of language evolution and
topological models of network theory to capture the
complexity of linguistic systems. He heads several research
projects on the analysis of linguistic networks. His work has
appeared in several journals in the area of computational
linguistics, cognitive science and complex systems (Neural
Networks, Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, Computer
Speech and Language, Entropy, Applied Artificial
Intelligence). In 2012, he organized a conference on
Modeling Linguistic Networks based on which he will coedit the first (Springer) volume on linguistic networks in
cognitive science and related disciplines.
Eliana Colunga is an Associate Professor in the Departments of Psychology and Neuroscience and Computer
Science and a Fellow of the Institute of Cognitive Science at
the University of Colorado Boulder. Prof. Colunga studies
interactions between language and cognition using crosslinguistic, developmental and computational modeling
methods. Her work on computational models of language
development has been published in journals such as
Psychological Review, Cognition, Developmental Science,
and has been funded by the John Merck Fund and the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
& Human Development of the National Institute of Health.
She received her PhD in Computer Science and Cognitive
Science from Indiana University and her MS in Artificial
Intelligence and BS in Computer Science from the Instituto
Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey,
Mexico.

Why Network Analysis at Cognitive Science?
Over the last few decades the work on network analysis has
been revived and expanded with new analytical, numerical
and theoretical approaches. It has become a fundamental
force within a variety of fields from physics, computer
science and psychology to sociology and political science.
The types of questions many cognitive scientists ask, such
as studying the structure of language, studying group
dynamics or neuronal dynamics, can be framed within a
network perspective and we hope by building a team of
researchers who work with network analysis as their main
framework we can excite others in the field to utilize these
techniques. Further, utilizing a tutorial structure will allow
for us not only to explain our research findings but also give
others the tools they need in order to begin answering their
own questions within this framework. With this in mind, we
expect the audience of this tutorial to be interested in
learning about network analysis for any purpose.

Likely Audience for the Tutorial
Because our expertise is mostly tied to language many
participants may be interested specifically in language, but
the application of this method extends beyond language.
This tutorial is specifically useful for types of relational
data. Though the material covered in this workshop will be
relatively basic, we hope to give participants a flavor for the
strength and power of network analysis techniques.

Special Requirements for the Tutorial
The participants will be asked to bring laptops to the
meeting as well as have R and a few select libraries (statnet,
sna package and network package) installed. A .zip file will
be available with other necessary files for the completion of
the tutorial material. By working through past research
findings, participants will receive an overview of basic
network functions in R and have the opportunity to perform
cognitively meaningful network data manipulation. We will
also introduce visualization techniques of network data. We
perform statistical tests to understand the structure present
in the observed network compared to what might happen
under different conditions. This requires calculations of
network descriptives (e.g., centrality scores, graph-level
indices); and use of classical network analytic techniques
and network specific statistical tests.
No prior experience with R is necessary and attendees do
not need to have a familiarity with the basic concepts of
descriptive network analysis.

Acknowledgments
This tutorial was made possible with generous help from
Carter Butts at University of California, Irvine, Ryan Acton
at University of Massachusetts Amherst and Lorien Jasney
at the University of California, Davis who contributed
previous tutorial materials for adaption.

38

