UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Virtues and Vices in Monetary Tradeoffs

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9640h4jj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Scholten, Marc
Read, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Virtues and Vices in Monetary Tradeoffs
Marc Scholten (scholten@ispa.pt)
ISPA University Institute
Lisbon, Portugal
Daniel Read (daniel.read@wbs.ac.uk)
Warwick Business School
Coventry, United Kingdom

accept or reject receiving $150 less today and $200 more
in 1 year. This is a relative virtue: Less money in the short
term (-$150), but more in the long term ($200) or overall
($50). Alternatively, the choice may be represented as a
decision of whether to accept or reject receiving $150
more today and $200 less in 1 year. This is a relative vice:
More money in the short term ($150), but less in the long
term (-$200) or overall (-$50). These mental operations
involve direct comparisons between the options:
Comparisons between the outcomes available today ($150
and $0) and in 1 year ($0 and $200). The question is
whether and when people perform these operations, and
how it affects the decisions they make.
While most experimental research of intertemporal
choice has focused on single dated outcomes, many reallife choices involve prospects of multiple outcomes. A
distinction can be made between mixed and unmixed
sequences. Unmixed sequences can be goods, which are
composed of only positive outcomes, and bads, which are
composed of only negative ones. Mixed sequences
include, but are not restricted to, absolute virtues, or
virtues in short, which exchange sooner costs for largerlater benefits, and absolute vices, or vices in sort, which
exchange sooner benefits for larger-later costs.
With the exception of Prelec and Loewenstein’s (1998)
work on the mental accounting of investment and debt,
experimental research on virtues and vices has focused
almost exclusively on consumption, such as consumption
of healthy or unhealthy food items (Read & van Leeuwen,
1998, and thereafter), as in the dessert example given
above, and consumption of highbrow or lowbrow movies
(Read, Loewenstein, & Kalyanaraman, 1999, and
thereafter). In that research, there is no rigorous control
over whether the options are treated as absolute or relative
virtues and vices. Monetary tradeoffs, often the focus of
experimental research on single dated outcomes and
unmixed sequences, lend themselves perfectly for that
purpose. One goal of this extended abstract is, therefore,
to conduct an integrative analysis of choices involving
single dated outcomes, unmixed sequences, virtues, and
vices in monetary tradeoffs, where monetary virtues are
schedules of investment, and monetary vices are schedules
of debt.
As a whole, our results cannot be accommodated by

Abstract
Monetary intertemporal tradeoffs are a restricted, yet
underexplored, domain. In this extended abstract, we
provide an integrative analysis of monetary tradeoffs
involving single dated outcomes, unmixed sequences,
virtues (schedules of investment), and vices (schedules of
debt). Results include debt aversion, aversion to vices
(which adds to debt aversion) and relative vices, and
attraction to virtues and relative virtues. The results
motivate a comparative mental accounting model, which
includes direct comparisons between the outcomes
delivered by the options at consecutive delays. The model
accommodates not only the results reported in this
extended abstract, but also other puzzling phenomena in
choices involving sequences.
Keywords: Intertemporal choice, discounting; virtues;
vices; sequences; mental accounting.

Intertemporal choices are those in which outcomes of
choice are traded off against their timing. One example is
the choice between a chocolate mousse and a fruit salad
for dessert, where immediate gratification may favor the
former, but future health may favor the latter. Another
example is the decision of whether to consume on credit
now and pay off debt in the future or invest income now
and consume more in the future. Again, there is a tradeoff
between what is best now and what is best in the future.
The above choices can be viewed as choices between a
relative vice and a relative virtue (Wertenbroch, 1998),
where the relative vice is better in the short run but worse
in the long run or overall, whereas the relative virtue is
worse in the short run but better in the long run or overall.
Many intertemporal choices fit this definition, and also
elementary choices between single dated outcomes.
Consider the choice between $150 today and $200 in 1
year. By the above definition, the smaller-sooner outcome
is a relative vice, and the larger-later outcome is a relative
virtue. The notion of relative virtues and vices is
inherently comparative in nature. However, current
models of intertemporal choice do not consider the
possibility that people actually make the relevant
comparisons, and frame the options as relative virtues and
vices. For instance, the above choice between single dated
outcomes may be represented as a decision of whether to

1289

discounting unambiguous-ly favors the immediate gain, it
is conflicted for different timings of a loss, because
discounting, which favors the delayed loss, is
countervailed by debt aversion, which favors the
immediate loss. In this study, discounting was outweighed
by aversion to delayed losses.
Debt aversion operates in addition to loss aversion,
which is that the pain of loss is greater than the pleasure
of an equal gain (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). We next
report an aversion to vices, which operates in addition to
debt aversion.

any current model of intertemporal choice, so that a new
approach is needed. We propose an extension of Prelec
and Loewenstein’s (1998) double-entry mental
accounting model of preferences for schedules of
investment and debt. Essentially, the extension is that, in
choices involving sequences, people do make direct
comparisons between the outcomes available at
consecutive delays, which often means that they reframe
the options as relative virtues and vices. We discuss how
this comparative mental accounting model accommodates
the results reported in this extended abstract, and also
results reported elsewhere.
We collected data from many samples in three nations
(the United States, the United Kingdom, and Portugal),
sometimes with paid, sometimes with unpaid participants,
as we went along perfecting the experimental
comparisons in order to counter, as much as possible,
explanations offered by the current models of
intertemporal choice. The comparisons that we report are
the most challenging ones. This extended abstract,
however, can only cover a few. All choices reported were
part of surveys including a larger set of intertemporal
choices, the order of which was randomized across
participants.

Aversion to Vices
We asked 429 participants to choose from the following
pairs of options:
Set 3
Referent pair
W Pay $600 in 1 year (26%)
B Pay $450 today (74%)
Target pair
W Receive $50 today and pay $600 in 1 year (20%)
B Pay $450 today (80%)
W in the target pair is obtained from W in the referent
pair by adding an immediate $50. Because W in the target
pair dominates W in the referent pair, it should be more
popular. However, the opposite was true, χ2(1) = 7.72, p <
.05 (McNemar’s χ2 for dependent samples), suggesting
that a later payment, or a debt, hurts more when it is the
cost of a sooner benefit than when it is an uncompensated
loss. This is aversion to vices.
One possible explanation is offered by Loewenstein
and Prelec’s (1993) sequences model, according to which
people have a preference for improvement tempered by a
preference for spreading. A vice, however, exhibits
deterioration, which decreases preference for it. Another
possible explanation is offered by Prelec and Loewenstein’s (1998) double-entry mental accounting model: The
pleasure of the immediate benefit is attenuated by the pain
of the delayed cost (debt), and the experience of the
immediate benefit may, through attenuation, change into a
negative one.

Debt aversion
A basic assumption underlying models of intertemporal
choice is positive time preference: People would prefer a
gain sooner rather than later (impatience), and a loss later
rather than sooner (procrastination). To test this
assumption, we presented 36 participants with different
timings of receiving €100 and 78 participants with
different timings of paying €100. The results were as
follows:
Set 1
W Receive €100 in 1 year (11%)
B Receive €100 today (89%)
Set 2
W Pay €100 today (65%)
B Pay €100 in 1 year (35%)
Here and elsewhere, B denotes the best option in the long
run, whereas W denotes worst option in the long run. An
overwhelming chose B among receipts (positive time
preference), χ2(1) = 21.78, p < .005 (Pearson’s χ2), but a
smaller yet significant majority chose W among payments, χ2(1) = 7.38, p < .05 (negative time preference).
The observed pattern of results can be explained by
combining the discounting of delayed outcomes with an
aversion to delayed losses, or debt aversion. Discount-ing
favors immediate gains over delayed ones, and delayed
losses over immediate ones. Debt aversion, however,
favors immediate losses over delayed ones, thus
countervailing discounting. Therefore, while choice is not
conflicted for different timings of a gain, because

Attraction to Virtues
Two principles of outcome valuation are loss aversion and
diminishing sensitivity (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979):
The impact of a loss is greater than that of an equivalent
gain, and the marginal impact of an outcome decreases
with its magnitude. In the following set, we see both
principles being violated. We asked 435 participants to
choose from the following option pairs:
Set 4
Referent pair
W Receive €450 today (54%)
B Receive €600 in 1 year (46%)

1290

Target pair
W Receive €300 today (46%)
B Pay €150 today and receive €600 in 1 year (54%)

Set 6
Referent pair
W Receive €300 today (58%)
B Receive €400 in 1 year (42%)
Target pair
W Receive €300 today and receive €300 in 1 year
(47%)
B Receive €700 in 1 year (53%)

The target pair is obtained from the referent pair by
subtracting a common amount ($150) from both options
in period 1. This does not change the interest rate implied
by the options (33%), so that, objectively, the preference
between W and B should not change. Moreover, by loss
aversion and diminishing sensitivity, the value difference
between 300 and -150 in the target pair is more strongly
in favor of W than the value difference between 450 and 0
in the referent pair, so that W should be more popular,
and B less popular, in the target pair than in the referent
pair. Instead, B was more popular in the target pair than in
the referent pair, χ2(1) = 4.90, p < .05, suggesting that the
same receipt is more appealing when it is the benefit of an
investment than when it is an uncompensating gain. This
is attraction to virtues.
One possible explanation is offered by the sequences
model: Preference for improvement. Another possible
explanation is offered by the mental accounting model:
The pain of the immediate cost (investment) is buffered
by the pleasure of the delayed benefit, and the experience
of the immediate cost may, through buffering, change into
a positive one.

The target pair is obtained from the referent pair by
adding a common amount (€300) to both options in
period 2. This does not change the interest rate implied by
the options (33%), so that, objectively, the preference
between W and B should not change. However, B was
more popular in the target pair than in the referent pair,
χ2(1) = 21.59, p < .005. By diminishing sensitivity, the
value difference between 700 and 300 in the target pair is
less strongly in favor of B than the value difference
between 400 and 0 in the referent pair, so that B should be
less popular in the target pair than in the referent pair.
The above results are incompatible with the sequences
model: In Set 5, B deteriorates and yet it gained
popularity, and, in Set 6, W neither deteriorates nor
improves, and yet it lost popularity. The results cannot be
explained by the mental accounting model either,
because, in the absence of mixed sequences, i.e.,
schedules of costs and benefits, this model reduces to a
standard delay discounting model.
The results are consistent with the notion that choice
involving sequences promotes comparative accounting. In
the choice between a single immediate outcome and a
sequence (Set 5), the sequence is framed as a relative
virtue (‘€75 less today and €100 in 1 year’), and attraction
to virtues increases the preference for this option. In the
choice between a single delayed outcome and a sequence
(Set 6), the sequence is framed as a relative vice (‘€150
today and €200 less in 1 year’), and aversion to vices
decreases the preference for this option.

Unmixed Sequences
We asked the same 435 participants from the section on
attraction to virtues to choose from the following option
pairs:
Set 5
Referent pair
W Receive €75 today (68%)
B Receive €100 in 1 year (32%)
Target pair
W Receive €300 today (57%)
B Receive €225 today and receive €100 in 1 year
(43%)

A Core Anomaly
We asked the same 429 participants from the section on
aversion to vices to choose from the following option
pair:

The target pair is obtained from the referent pair by
adding a common amount (€225) to both options in
period 1. This does not change the interest rate implied by
the options (33%), so that, objectively, the preference
between W and B should not change. However, B was
more popular in the target pair than in the referent pair,
χ2(1) = 9.33, p < .005.
One possible explanation for the above result is
diminishing sensitivity: The value difference between 300
and 225 in the target pair is less strongly in favor of W
than the value difference between 75 and 0 in the referent
pair, so that W should be less popular, and B more
popular, in the target pair than in the referent pair.
However, diminishing sensitivity is being violated by the
results below:

Set 7
Receive $500 in 1 year and receive $500 in 3 years (29%)
Receive $1,000 in 2 years (71%)
A large and significant majority preferred the single
delayed receipt to the flat sequence of delayed receipts,
χ2(1) = 74.69, p < .005. We call this a core anomaly,
because no model of intertemporal choice accounts for it.
As to standard delay discounting models, such as
Loewenstein and Prelec’s (1992) hyperbolic discounting
model, discounting per se contributes to a preference for
the sequence, which is compounded by hyperbolic
discounting and diminishing sensitivity. As to the

1291

accept or reject the prospect of ‘receiving €300 today and
receiving €400 less in 1 year.’ To the degree that the
immediate receipt is attenuated by the delayed comparative loss, the tendency will be to reject this prospect.
Finally, our explanation of the preference observed in
Set 7 is that, the sequence was framed as two gains
interleaved with a comparative loss, and that, due to
attenuation of the gain in period 1 and aversion the
comparative loss in period 2, the tendency was to reject
the mixed prospect, notwithstanding a buffering of the
comparative loss in period 2 by the gain in period 3.

sequences model, the sequence neither improves nor
deteriorates, which contributes to indifference between
the sequence and the single delayed receipt. Finally, the
mental accounting model reduces to a standard delay
discounting model, because the choice does not involve
mixed sequences. In the next section, we try to account
for the whole set of results.

Theory
Our theory is an extension of Prelec and Loewenstein’s
(1998) mental accounting model of investment and debt.
In this model, sooner benefits are attenuated by later
costs, and sooner costs are buffered by later benefits.
This, by itself, accounts for aversion to vices and
attraction to virtues, as observed in Sets 3 and 4. The
model incorporates loss aversion, in that negative
experiences are augmented relative to positive ones.
Negative experiences include sooner benefits when their
attenuation by later costs results in a sign reversal, and
positive experiences include sooner costs when their
buffering by later benefits results in a sign reversal.
Experiences in each period are discounted as a function of
the delay to the experiences, and the option with the
highest discounted value is chosen.
Our extension of the mental accounting model draws on
two considerations. First, operating in addition to loss
aversion is debt aversion, meaning that delayed costs are
augmented relative to immediate ones. This
accommodates the preference observed in Set 2. It also
increases the aversion to vices observed in Set 3.
Second, the option that has the longest interval between
its soonest and latest outcome, i.e., the longest duration,
becomes the target option, the outcome of which in any
given period is compared with the outcome of the referent
option in that period. Thus, for instance, in the choice
between a sequence and a single dated outcome, the
sequence becomes the target option, and the single dated
outcome becomes the referent option. In the choice
between two single dated outcomes, neither option has
duration, and so there is no targeting and referencing. In
the choice between options of equal duration, either
option can become the target option.
From the vantage point of the extended mental
accounting model, the preference pattern observed in Set
5 shows attraction to relative virtues. In the target pair,
the sequence is the target option and the single immediate
receipt is the referent option. Thus, the choice is framed
as whether to accept or reject the prospect of ‘receiving
€75 less today and receiving €100 in 1 year.’ To the
degree that the immediate comparative loss is buffered by
the delayed receipt, possibly resulting in a positive
experience of the immediate comparative loss, the
tendency will be to accept this prospect.
The preference pattern observed in Set 6 shows
aversion to relative vices. In the target pair, the sequence
is the target option and the single delayed receipt is the
referent option. Thus, the choice is framed as whether to

Some Implications
The comparative mental accounting model resolves
several puzzles. Consider, for instance, the widely
investigated preference for improving sequences over
deteriorating ones. Loewenstein and Prelec (1993) discuss
a number of explanations of this phenomenon, which all
invoke within-option operations. One explanation is
adaptation and loss aversion. People adapt to ongoing
stimuli over time, and evaluate ensuing stimuli relative to
their adaptation level. An improving sequence becomes a
series of positive departures (gains) from the adaptation
level, while a deteriorating sequence become a series of
negative departures (losses) from the adaptation level.
Preference for improving sequences over deteriorating
ones then follows from loss aversion (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979).
Our explanation, in contrast, invokes between-option
operations. When people focus on the improving
sequence and compare it with the deteriorating one, they
experience an increasing series of comparative losses and
gains. Attraction to relative virtues increases the
attractiveness of this option, making choice of
improvement more likely. Alternatively, when people
focus on the deteriorating sequence and compare it with
the improving one, they experience a decreasing series of
comparative gains and losses. Aversion to relative vices
decreases the attractiveness of this option, making choice
of deterioration less likely. According to our explanation,
preference for improvement over deterioration is
fundamentally a choice-related phenomenon, because,
without direct comparisons between options, there would
be no mental construction of relative virtues and vices.
Indeed, it has been shown that preference for
improvement over deterioration evaporates in elicitation
tasks other than choice, in which other motives and
mental operations come to the fore (Frederick &
Loewenstein, 2008).
Another puzzle is the hidden-zero effect (Magen,
Dweck, & Gross, 2008), which is that the preference for
B over W increases when two single dated receipts are
changed into sequences by explicating the zero receipt.
Thus, for instance, choice of ‘$0 today and $400 in 1
year’ over ‘$300 today and $0 in 1 year’ is more likely
than choice of ‘$400 in 1 year’ and ‘$300 today.’ The
comparative mental accounting model explains the

1292

would make direct comparisons between the features of
the options under consideration. In this case, comparisons
between studying (or partying) and working, between the
jobs available with and without a college degree, between
prospective earnings, and between incurring and
foregoing tuition debt. Current models of intertemporal
choice are notably ignorant of such comparisons in
decision making: Each option receives its discounted
value, regardless of how it compares to other options, and
the option with the highest value is chosen. Our analysis
suggests that intertemporal choice is comparative in a
carefully crafted choice environment, and we would be
surprised if people suddenly ceased to make comparisons
in the wild.

hidden-zero effect as follows. Both sequences, each with
duration of 1 year, can become the target option. When B
is the referent option, W becomes a relative vice, and, by
aversion to relative vices, the preference for B over W
increases. When W is the referent option, B becomes a
relative virtue, and, by attraction to relative virtues, the
preference for B over W increases.
Yet another puzzle is the mere token effect (Urminsky
& Kivetz, 2011), which is a violation of independence in
which the preference for B over W increases when two
single dated receipts are changed into sequences by
adding a common consequence before both receipts. For
instance, choice of ‘€50 tomorrow and €400 in 1 year’
over ‘€50 tomorrow and €200 in 1 week’ is more likely
than choice of ‘€400 in 1 year’ over €200 in 1 week.’ The
comparative mental accounting model can explain the
mere token effect as well. With the introduction of the
token, the sequence of longer duration, B, becomes the
target option, whereas the sequence of shorter duration,
W, becomes the referent option. As a result of the
comparison process, the choice between B and W is
framed as a decision of whether to accept the relative
virtue ‘€200 less in 1 week and €400 in 1 year.’ By
attraction to relative virtues, the tendency will be to
accept this prospect.
In our article, we provide a much more exhaustive
analysis of recently discovered anomalies in choices
involving sequences. The comparative mental accounting
accommodates most.

References
Frederick, S., & Loewenstein, G. (2008). Conflicting
motives in evaluations of sequences. Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 37, 221-235.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory:
An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47,
363-391.
Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (1992). Anomalies in
intertemporal choice: Evidence and an interpretation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 573-597.
Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (1993). Preferences for
sequences of outcomes. Psychological Review, 100, 91108.
Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (1993). Preferences for
sequences of outcomes. Psychological Review, 100, 91108.
Magen, E., Dweck, C. S., & Gross, J. J. (2008). The
hidden-zero effect. Representing a single choice as an
extended sequence reduces impulsive choice.
Psychological Science, 19, 648-649.
Prelec, D., & Loewenstein, G. (1998). The red and the
black: Mental accounting of savings and debt.
Marketing Science, 17, 4-28.
Read, D., Loewenstein, G. & Kalyanaraman, S. (1999).
Mixing virtue and vice: Combining the immediacy
effect and the desire for diversity. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 12, 257-273.
Read, D., & van Leeuwen, B. (1998). Predicting hunger:
The effects of appetite and delay on choice.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 76, 189-205.
Urminsky, O., & Kivetz, R. (2011). Scope insensitivity and
the “mere token” effect. Journal of Marketing Research,
48, 282-295.
Wertenbroch, K. (1998). Consumption self-control by
rationing purchase quantities of virtue and vice.
Marketing Science, 17, 317-337.

Conclusion
Our results show an interesting pattern: People are
extremely impatient in gains, with many declining to
receive a 33% interest rate, much and much higher than
riskless market rates, but they become more farsighted
when faced with other intertemporal arrangements. First,
their impatience in gains decreases when future benefits
are preceded by immediate costs (attraction to virtues).
Furthermore, they are averse to procrastination in losses
(debt aversion), and become even more farsighted when
future costs are preceded by immediate benefits (aversion
to vices).
Our theoretical reconstruction suggests that, people
make direct comparisons between options. Specifically,
the outcomes of the option with the longest duration are
compared, period by period, with the outcomes of the
options with the shortest duration. The result is that even
sequences are cognitively represented as relative virtues,
relative vices, or, more generally, mixed prospects. This
proposal of comparative framing greatly increases the
scope of a mental accounting approach to intertemporal
choice.
It also opens avenues toward a better understanding of
real-life decisions. The paradigmatic example of
intertemporal choice is whether to get a job and earn a
living now or go to college and earn a better living later.
How is such a complex decision made? Plausibly, people

1293

