UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What They Don't know Might Help Them: A Demonstration of Subtle Social Inference from
Mimicry

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3293k7ss

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kavanagh, Liam
Bakhtiari, Giti
Suhler, Chris
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Nuanced Social Inferences about Trustworthiness from
Observation of Mimicry
Liam C. Kavanagh (lkavanag@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA
Giti Bakhtiari (giti.bakhtiari@uni-wuerzburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Würzburg
Röntgenring 10, Würzburg, DE
Christopher L. Suhler (clsuhler@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA
Patricia S. Churchland (pschurchland@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA
Rob Holland (r.holland@psych.ru.ni)
Department of Social and Cultural Psychology, Radboud University Nijmegen
6500 HE Nijmegen, Netherlands
Piotr Winkielman (pwinkielman@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA

Abstract

(Bernieri 1998), and are more prosocial after being
mimicked (Lakin, Jefferis, Cheng, & Chartrand, 2003).
Interestingly, many of these effects occur without
participants’ consciousness of mimicry (Chartrand & Bargh,
1999).
To date, the mimicry literature has focused on the
interacting dyad (for a review, see Chartrand & van Baaren,
2009). However, the social context of mimicry often
includes many interacting parties. Here, human observers
can use information about who mimics whom to make
social judgments. This was shown in a recent series of
experiments by Kavanagh, Suhler, Churchland, and
Winkielman (2011). Participants (observers) viewed videos
of one-on-one interviews, and evaluated the interviewee’s
competence. In some videos the interviewee mimicked the
interviewer’s gestures (leg crossing, chin-rubbing) and in
the other videos the interviewee did not mimic.
Additionally, the attitude of the interviewer towards the
interviewee was manipulated: in some videos, the
interviewers were cordial to the interviewee and in others
they were condescending to the interviewee.
The results showed that the impact of mimicry on the
observers’ (participants’) judgments of interviewees’
competence depended on whom the interviewee mimicked.
When the interviewer was rude to the interviewee,
mimicking interviewees were rated as significantly less
competent than non-mimicking interviewees. When the
interviewer was cordial to the interviewee, mimicking

Mimicry and imitation are crucial mechanisms of social learning
and rapport. Further, mimicry informs essential social judgments
formed not only by the interacting party but also by third-party
observers. How sophisticated are observer’s inferences from
mimicry? We examined this in the context of observers’ use of
mimicry to judge trustworthiness. Participants observed a dyadic
interaction in which a target mimicked or did not mimic a model.
Prior to observation, the model’s honesty was earlier defamed, or
praised, in front of some, but not other, targets. Observers always
knew the model’s reputation. Observers also knew which targets
were aware of the model’s reputation. Results suggest that
observers’ use of mimicry in trust judgments is very sophisticated
It reflects not just the presence of mimicry, but also the model’s
moral reputation and, critically, knowledge of the target’s
awareness of the model’s reputation. This sophistication leads
observers to rate targets as trustworthy when they mimic
untrustworthy models, but only when the observers know that the
model reputation is unknown to the target.
Keywords: Mimicry; Imitation; Inference, Social Judgment; Trust

Introduction
Mimicry is an essential part of the human social repertoire
that is inexorably bound up to basic social processes of
empathy, bonding, and in-group formation (Churchland,
2011; Kashima, 2008; Lakin & Chartrand, 2003; Lakin,
Jefferis, Cheng, & Chartrand 2003; Preston & De Waal,
2002). We have greater rapport with those who mimic us

734

interviewees were rated as non-significantly more
competent. Finally, when the interviewer was cropped out
of the videos, thus preventing participants from noticing
synchronous movements, all of the above effects
disappeared. Despite these effects, participants showed a
lack of conscious awareness of mimicry in debriefings.
Thus mimicry, when done in the wrong context, can
negatively affect observers’ judgments of our competence.
But this research leaves open two important questions,
which will addressed presently.

The link between mimicry and trust is particularly
important in situations where an observer watches an
interaction involving a person with a persuasive agenda. It
has been shown, for example, that children imitate others
more when they are attempting to persuade them to do
unpleasant things, such as eat unappetizing foodstuffs,
rather than enjoyable things (Thelen, Miller, Fehrenbach,
Frautschi, & Fishbein, 1980). Mimicry has also been shown
to be an effective technique in adult negotiations (Maddux,
Mullen, & Galinsky, 2008). In short, it is important, and
also novel, to explore how mimicry influences third-party
inferences about trust.

How Complex are Inferences From Mimicry?
The above-discussed judgments by observers can be seen as
relatively “sophisticated”, as they took the attitude of the
model (interviewer) towards the mimic (interviewee) into
account. Observers clearly did not simply equate mimicry
with competence. This seems to show that information
gleaned from mimicry is integrated with broader social
information in a subtle manner.
However, an alternative “non-intelligent” interpretation of
these findings is that gestural mimicry simply enhances the
perceived similarity between the interacting parties. As a
result, negative attributes of the model (e.g., rudeness or
cordiality) “rubbed off” on the mimic but not on the nonmimic. This can be explained as a relatively simple
associationist inference that a target person who behaves
like the model probably shares further traits with the model
(Andersen, Moskowitz, Blair & Nosek, 2007), or as a
reflection of observers’ belief that mimicry functions as a
means of enhancing perceived similarity (Over & Carpenter,
2012).
On the other hand, much research argues that mimicry
itself is a complex, and even intelligent, process. Mimicry
generation (despite its unconscious origins) depends on the
context and social relationship between the mimicker and
the model. People reduce their mimicry or even engage in
anti-mimicry when interacting with a partner who is
disliked, represents an out-group, or has different goals
(Bourgeois & Hess, 2008; Likowski, Muehlberger, Seibt,
Pauli, & Weyers, 2008; McIntosh, 2006; Stel et al., 2010). It
would thus seem maladaptive for perceivers to interpret
mimicry in a context-free manner.

Present Study
The goals of the present study were twofold. First we
examined whether third-party judgments about mimicry
result from a simple assumption of trait similarity between
similarly behaving individuals (i.e., the transference or “rub
off” effect described above), or whether they instead reflect
more nuanced social inferences. In particular, we tested
whether observers’ inferences about the target’s
trustworthiness reflected not only the presence/absence of
mimicry between the target and the model, and the model’s
past trust-relevant behavior, but also, critically, the
observer’s knowledge of the target’s epistemic state with
regard to the model’s past behavior. If mimicry inferences
are indeed complex, observers should be sensitive to
whether the mimicker “knows” about the model’s
reputation-related behavior. This is not unlike sensitivity
that observers, even relatively young children, show to the
epistemic state of an actor in “theory-of-mind” tests
(Premack & Premack, 1995).
Secondly, we explicitly attempt to show that mimicry can
influence third-party observers’ impressions of the
trustworthiness of dyad members. We do this by directly
influencing participants’ impressions of the trustworthiness
of one of the dyad members (the interviewer), and then
testing whether mimicry (and the mimic’s epistemic state)
moderates the extent to which this reputation carries over to
the other member (the interviewee).
The current paradigm was based on the previous work on
third-party observation (Kavanagh et al. 2011), with some
important changes. Participants again observed interviews
and made social judgments about interviewees. Interviewees
either mimicked or did not mimic their interviewer (model).
Additionally, in the current study, participants also had to
play an economic “trust” game (Berg, Dickhaut, & McCabe,
1995) with interviewees.
Critically, in the current study, the interviewer exhibited
the same neutral behavior in all videos – that is, she was not
directly cordial or directly rude to the target, as in Kavanagh
et al. (2011).
Rather, subjects’ perceptions of the
interviewer were manipulated by an experimental
confederate (also posing as a subject) who relayed a story.
The interviewer was depicted as trustworthy to half of
subjects, and as untrustworthy to the other half.

Mimicry, competence, and trust
It is also interesting and important to understand whether
perception of traits other than competence can be influenced
by perceived mimicry. Competence is one of the two main
dimensions of social judgment (Judd et al., 1995). The
other dimension is trust, which is critical to group cohesion,
relationships, and most social transactions. Indeed, mimicry
is posited to be part of the process of developing empathy
and interpersonal trust (Bavelas, Black, Lemery, & Mullett,
1987), and been called “social glue” (Lakin & Chartrand,
2003). Thus, the connection between mimicry and trust is of
obvious interest.

735

Participants’ understanding of whether they and the
interviewees had common knowledge of the interviewer was
also manipulated. We did this by having some of the
interviewees be present as “subjects” in the waiting room,
along with the actual participant. There they also heard
either the praising or defamatory story about the
interviewer. Other interviewees were not among the
subjects in the waiting room. Thus, the observers knew that
some interviewees, having heard the story, were aware of
the interviewer’s high/low trustworthiness, but that other
interviewees, having not heard the story, were not aware of
the interviewer’s high/low trustworthiness.
This step was motivated by the moral psychology
literature, as well as philosophical and legal perspectives on
responsibility more broadly, which suggest that observers
take into account an agent’s mental states (e.g., intent,
deliberation, knowledge) when determining culpability for
right/wrong actions (Suhler & Churchland, 2009).
Importantly, it seems that such considerations are relatively
automatic (Young & Saxe, 2009).
The current paradigm allows for a test of the sophisticated
inference hypothesis of mimicry. If mimicry (similar
movements) simply leads dyad members to be seen as
similar, then observers should judge interviewees
mimicking the trustworthy interviewer more favorably than
interviewees mimicking the untrustworthy interviewer,
regardless of the interviewee’s state of knowledge about the
interviewer’s trustworthiness/untrustworthiness. However,
the sophisticated inference account generates a more
nuanced set of predictions in the context of trust-related
situations.
The most straightforward prediction is that mimicking a
trustworthy interviewer should benefit interviewees who are
personally knowledgeable about his or her trustworthiness.
This prediction should be offered with the caveat that work
within the dyad has shown that some level of mimicry is
expected in a normal face-to-face interaction (Dalton,
Chartrand, & Finkel, 2010) and so it may be that very strong
mimicry would be required in order to “make a positive
impression” on the viewer.

The second and perhaps more interesting prediction is that
mimicking an untrustworthy interviewer may benefit
interviewees who are not knowledgeable about his or her
misdeeds. After all, for the observer, when an innocent
mimics an undesirable individual (i.e., shows affiliative
behavior toward an undeserving party), the mimic should be
seen as a particularly trusting (or naïve) and prosocial
individual. All this should result a three-way interaction
between
mimicry
(present/absent),
trustworthiness
(positive/negative), and knowledge (present/absent).

Method
Participants and Procedure. 123 UCSD undergraduates
participated for class credit. Upon arrival in the lab, subjects
were greeted by the experimenter, who consulted a list and
then told them that they would be in the rater condition and
placed in a waiting room marked “rater condition.” Another
waiting room, clearly visible, was marked “interviewer
condition” (this language was chosen to minimize ingroup
effects by emphasizing situational assignment to the
interviewee role). See Figure 1 for timeline (panel A) and
spatial schematic (panel B). Several minutes before the
supposed experimental start time, the confederate
(henceforth “the gossip”) who would be used to manipulate
opinions about the trustworthiness of the interviewer was
brought to the waiting room posing as another subject. Two
other confederate “subjects” (confederate interviewees),
who would eventually be transferred to the interviewee
condition, entered the room one at a time right around the
supposed experimental start time. This made their entrance
(i) noticeable by subjects and (ii) minimized their chances of
being engaged in conversation by subjects. After the last
confederate arrived, the experimenter then fetched another
confederate (“the interviewer”), introduced her to the
subjects, and while the interviewer stood on, told the
subjects (accurately) that they would see four interviews and
then would play with the interviewees an economic game in
which the trustworthiness of one’s partner would be crucial
to success. Subjects were also (deceptively) told that
interviews would take place live in the interview room and
that the video would be broadcast to computer screens in the
rating rooms via the local intranet. After all these
instructions, the experimenter left to take the interviewer to
the interview room.
While the interviewer was gone, “the gossip” loudly told
a story meant to either erode or build the participants’ trust
in the interviewer. In the praise condition the gossip
recounted that the interviewer had driven to his home to
return a lost wallet intact. In the defamation condition,
participants were told that the interviewer was a friends’
roommate who avoided paying all bills and shunned any
communication.
After sufficient time, the interviewer returned and said
that the experiment was ready to start but that two
“subjects” currently in the rater condition would need to be
transferred to the interviewee condition. The confederate
interviewees were chosen for transfer and taken to the

736

interview room, while subjects and the gossip were escorted
to small rooms equipped with a computer.
The computer portion of the experiment (see Figure 1,
right panel) consisted of viewing and responding to 4 videos
of interviews with 4 interviewees, all of whom were paired
with the confederate interviewer. At the start of the
computer portion, participants also viewed a detailed
explanation of the Trust Game (see below). To back up the
experimenter’s cover story that the videos were in fact live,
a screen of variable duration saying simply “waiting for live
feed” in slowly flashing text was added to each video. Each
subject now saw two interviewees (knowledgeable
interviewees) who had heard the same story that they did,
and two that did not (non-knowledgeable interviewees).
Within each of these knowledge conditions, videos were
arranged so that one member mimicked the interviewer and
one did not. Mimicry was implemented as is standard in
the literature, with neutral gestures (e.g., chin rubbing and
leg-crossing) and no differences between verbal or
meaningful nonverbal content.
Participants provided Likert scale (7-point) ratings for
each interviewee on trustworthiness. As a behavioral
measure, subjects also indicated how much money (from $0
to 10) they would entrust with the target in the investor
game (Berg et al., 1995). In this game, the participant is
endowed with $10 and can transfer some amount of this
endowment to the target. This money is then tripled, and a
partner could (if scrupulous) then return some money back
to the participant. Participants also rated targets on control
dimensions of competence, likability, and friendliness.
Finally, as a manipulation check, participants also rated the
interviewer herself on the same measures.
Postexperimental funneled debriefing was also performed to
check for conscious awareness of mimicry, belief that
videos were live, and skepticism towards the waiting room
manipulation (gossip).

(F=15), competent (F=5.1), and marginally more friendly
(F=3.8), all ps < .05. However, of the 4 ratings, the trust
rating was particularly strongly influenced, as reflected in
the 2-way interaction of reputation by rating type, [F(3,94)
= 5.9, p=.01]. In short, our manipulation was very
successful in changing the perception of the interviewer
(model), with the effects particularly pronounced on the
trust-related dimensions.

Results
As described above, the “sophisticated inferences from
mimicry” hypothesis predicts that evaluations made by
third-party observers should vary as a function of the
reputation of the model, presence or absence of mimicry by
the target (interviewee), and the observer’s knowledge about
whether the target is aware of the reputation of the model
(interviewer). Our central prediction was the observers
would take the target’s epistemic state into account. This
should lead to the inferences that are more than simply a
function of the goodness/badness of the model, as predicted
by an associationist/rub-off account.
Because our reputational manipulation (praising vs.
defamatory story) targeted the model’s trustworthiness, we
chose trustworthiness ratings, and monetary investment as
our critical DVs. We analyzed these variables as a function
of
reputation
(praise/defamation),
knowledge
(informed/ignorant), and mimicry (presence/absence), using
a 3-way, mixed-models MANOVA.
We first focused on the trustworthiness rating (Figure 2)
There were no significant main effects or interactions in the
knowledgeable condition (all Fs < 1). Critically, in the
ignorant condition, we found a 2-way interaction of
reputation and mimicry [F(1,93)=5.87, p=.02. Simple
effects (two-tailed) showed that ignorant participants who
mimicked bad (untrustworthy) models were perceived as mo

Manipulation-Checks
Analysis
of
debriefing
questionnaires revealed that 20 participants were suspicious
of the waiting room manipulation. A further 6 participants
were excluded because they personally knew one of the
confederates, and 1 participant was excluded because they
noticed mimicry. The final sample thus consisted of 96
participants (59 females and 37 males) who were, on
average, 20.23 years old (SD=1.58).
We tested how participants perceived the interviewer as
function of reputational manipulation (praise/defamation)
and as a function of interacting with a mimicking or nonmimicking interviewee. Across all dependent measures, a 2
x 2 MANOVA revealed only a main effect of reputation,
with no ME or interactions with mimicry on any measures.
Specifically, in the Trust Game probe, participants were
willing to give the interviewer more money in the praise
condition [M=4.8 vs. 3.17, F(1,94)=10.30, p=.002]. They
also rated the interviewer as more trustworthy [M = 5.05 vs.
3.67, F(1,94)=21.5, p<.001]. In the praise condition, the
interviewer was also rated as significantly more likeable

re trustworthy than participants who did not mimic bad
models (p < .06), and as more trustworthy than ignorant
participants who mimicked good (trustworthy) models (p <
.10). Overall, this pattern resulted in a significant 3-way
interaction [F(1,93)=4.58, p=.03]. We also found a main
effect of knowledge, such that targets who witnessed the
reputational manipulation were rated as more trustworthy

737

than targets who did not [F(1,93)=11, p <.01]. This effect
(also seen on other ratings, as discussed below) presumably
reflects that participants were personally familiar with
targets in the knowledge, but not the ignorant, condition.
On the investment measure of trust, we also found a 2way interaction of reputation and mimicry [F(1,94)=5.41,
p=.02]. Simple effects (two-tailed) showed that when
ignorant participants mimicked bad models, they were
perceived as marginally more trustworthy than participants
who did not mimic bad models (p<.12), and as more
trustworthy than ignorant participants who mimicked good
models (p<.01). There were no significant effects in the
“knowledgeable” condition (all Fs < 1). Overall, this
pattern resulted in a 3-way interaction [F(1,94)=3.42,
p=.07]. No other main effects or interactions were reliable.

(ii) the reputation of the person they mimicked, and also (iii)
whether the target was aware of their model’s reputation.
As such, the results speak against the hypothesis that third
party judgments of mimics reflect simple “rub-off”, where
the mimic is merely assigned traits of the model. More
generally, our results suggest that people can integrate their
perception of rapport with higher level social information.
Critically, this higher level information includes knowledge
about the target’s epistemic state.
The observed 3-way interaction was largely driven by the
fact that ignorant interviewees benefited from mimicking
the untrustworthy interviewer. As we suggested earlier, this
could reflect observers’ perception that mimicry is an
affiliative, courteous social behavior, so extending it,
unknowingly, to an undeserving party is demonstrating a
particularly trusting, perhaps gullible personality
disposition. However, we feel this explanation should be
tested explicitly in future extensions.
Another question for future research is why knowledgeable
targets were not seen as more trustworthy after mimicking a
trustworthy model. Targets were also not “blamed” for
mimicking a model they knew to be bad. One possibility,
consistent with the trust literature is that people do not give
moral credit or blame for social courtesy (mimicry) when
such courteous behavior is expected (Wojciszke, 2005). As
mentioned, past work shows that some level of mimicry is
expected in a normal social interaction (Dalton et al., 2003).
Another possibility is that mimicry effects disappeared in
the knowledgeable condition because the targets had
previously been personally encountered in the “waiting
room” portion of the experiment. As mentioned, this brief
acquaintance non-specifically enhanced several judgments,
including trust, friendliness, and competence. Familiarity
may also have caused these targets actions’ to be judged in a
more “charitable” manner. It may also be related to the fact
that people make more situational inferences about
acquaintances and more dispositional ones about strangers.
Also noteworthy is that, as expected, there was no
decrement in competence ratings when targets mimicked a
“defamed” interviewer. We believe this is because, unlike
previous work (Kavanagh et al, 2011) interviewers were
never directly condescending to the interviewee in this
study. This contextualizes previous work, in which
interviewees who mimicked to interviewers who
condescended directly to them were seen as less competent.
This provides further evidence that inferences from mimicry
are subtle and situated. Though the full extent and nature of
such inferences is not entirely clear, the results are the first
to point towards the integration of unconsciously processed
embodied signals with epistemic (e.g. Theory of Mind)
knowledge.

Other ratings. Similar analyses were conducted on other
ratings that were not directly related to trust. Analyses
revealed a main effect of knowledge, such that
“knowledgeable” targets were rated as overall friendlier (p <
.01) and more competent than “ignorant” targets (p < .05).
As mentioned above, this effect may be due to participants’
personal familiarity with targets in the knowledge condition
(due to having spent time with them in the waiting room).
Critically, none of the other ratings showed the 3-way
interaction involving mimicry, reputation and knowledge
(Fs < 1). This suggests that observers’ inferences were
restricted to the relevant trust-related dimensions that were
relevant to our praising/defaming story manipulation.

Discussion
Our central question was whether third-party observers’
inferences from mimicry are simple or sophisticated. Thus,
we tested whether such inferences take into account not only
the presence or absence of mimicry, but also the reputation
of the model and the target’s knowledge about the model.
We examined these third-party inferences of mimicry in the
context of morality-related judgments of trust – an important
social dimension.
Overall, our results support the idea that inferences made
about third-party dyad members on the basis of observed
mimicry are nuanced. Specifically, participants’ judgments
of trustworthiness reflected (i) whether the target mimicked,

References
Andersen, S.M., Moskowitz, G.B., Blair, I.V, Nosek, B.A.
2007. Automatic thought. In E.T. Higgins & A.W.
Kruglanski (Eds.), Social Psychology: Handbook of
Basic Principles (2nd Ed.) (pp. 138–75). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.

738

nonconscious mimicry. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior,
27, 145-162.
Likowski, K. U., Muehlberger, A., Seibt, B., Pauli, P., &
Weyers, P. (2008). Modulation of facial mimicry by
attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
44, 1065–1072.
Maddux, W. W., Mullen, E., Galinsky, A. D. (2008).
Chameleons bake bigger pies and take bigger pieces:
Strategic behavioral mimicry facilitates negotiation
outcomes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
44, 461–468
McIntosh, D. N. (2006). Spontaneous facial mimicry,
liking and emotional contagion. Polish Psychological
Bulletin, 37, 31–42.
Niedenthal, P. M., Barsalou, L., Winkielman, P., KrauthGruber, S., & Ric, F. (2005). Embodiment in Attitudes,
Social Perception, and Emotion. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 9, 184-211
Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2012). Putting the social into
social learning: Explaining both selectivity and fidelity
in children's copying behavior. Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 126, 182-192
Premack, D. and Premack, A.J. (1995) Origins of human
social competence. In The cognitive neurosciences
(Gazzaniga, M.S., ed.), pp. 205–218, MIT Press
Preston, S. D., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2002). Empathy: Its
ultimate and proximate bases. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 25, 1–71.
Stel, M., Blascovich, J., McCall, C., Mastop, J., van
Baaren, R. B., & Vonk, R. (2010). Mimicking disliked
others: Effects of a priori liking on the mimicry-liking
link. European Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 867–
880.
Suhler, C.L. and Churchland, P.S. (2009). Control:
conscious and otherwise. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
13, 341-347
Thelen, M. H., Miller, D. J., Fehrenbach, P. A., Frautschi,
N. M., & Fishbein, M. D. (1980). Imitation during play
as a means of social influence. Child Development, 51,
918-920.	  
Tomasello, M. (1999). The human adaptation for culture.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 28, 509–529.
Wojciszke, B. (2005). Morality and competence in person
and self-perception. European Review of Social
Psychology, 16, 155–188.
Young, L., Saxe, R. (2009). An fMRI investigation of
spontaneous mental state inference fo r moral judgment.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 1396-1405.

Baird, J. A., & Astington, J. W. (2004). The role of mental
state understanding in the development of moral
cognition and moral action. New Directions for Child
and Adolescent Development, 103, 37–49.
Bavelas, J. B., Black, A., Lemery, C. R., & Mullett, J.
(1987). Motor mimicry as primitive empathy. In N.
Eisenberg & J. Strayer (Eds.), Empathy and its
development (pp. 317-338). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J. & McCabe, K. (1995) Trust,
reciprocity, and social history. Games and Economic
Behavior, 10, 122-42.
Bernieri, F. (1988). Coordinated movement and rapport in
teacher-student interactions. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 12, 120–138.
Bourgeois, P., & Hess, U. (2008). The impact of social
context on mimicry. Biological Psychology, 77, 343–
352.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception–behavior
link and social interaction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 76, 893–910.
Chartrand, T. L., & van Baaren, R. B. (2009). Human
mimicry. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
41, 219–274.
Churchland, P. (2011). Braintrust: What neuroscience tells
us about morality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Heyes, C. M. (2011) Automatic imitation. Psychological
Bulletin, 137, 463–483.
Judd, C. M., James-Hawkins, L., Yzerbyt, V., & Kashima,
Y. (2005). Fundamental dimensions of social judgment:
Understanding the relations between judgments of
competence and warmth. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 89, 899–913.
Kashima, Y. (2008). A social psychology of cultural
dynamics: How cultures are formed, maintained, and
transformed. Social and Personality Psychology
Compass, 2, 107–120.
Kavanagh, L., Suhler, C., Churchland, P., & Winkielman,
P. (2011). When it’s an error to mirror: The surprising
reputational costs of mimicry. Psychological Science, 22,
1274–1276.
Kitayama, S., & Cohen, D. (2007). Handbook of cultural
psychology. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Lakin, J. L., & Chartrand, T. L. (2003). Using
nonconscious behavioral mimicry to create affiliation
and rapport. Psychological Science, 14, 334–339.
Lakin, J. L., Jefferis, V. E., Cheng, C. M., & Chartrand, T.
L. (2003). The Chameleon effect as social glue:
Evidence for the evolutionary significance of

739

