UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When to Hold and When to Fold: Detecting Structural Changes in Statistical Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6rf3g020

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Zinszer, Benjamin
Weiss, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When to Hold and When to Fold:
Detecting Structural Changes in Statistical Learning
Benjamin D. Zinszer (bdz107@psu.edu)
Center for Language Science
Departments of Psychology & Statistics, Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

Daniel J. Weiss (djw21@psu.edu)
Center for Language Science
Department of Psychology and Program in Linguistics, Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

Abstract
Studies of statistical learning have documented a remarkable
sensitivity to structural regularities in both infants and adults.
However, most studies of statistical learning have assumed a
single underlying causal structure with uniform variance. In
previous work in which two structures are presented
successively, a primacy effect has been reported in which
only the first structure is acquired. The present study explores
the conditions under which such primacy effects are observed
and learners are capable of acquiring both structures. We
argue that learners can detect multiple structures by
monitoring the consistency of the input.
Keywords: speech segmentation, statistical learning

Introduction
Over the past twenty years, research on language acquisition
has been transformed by the finding that infant and adult
learners can use rudimentary statistics to parse artificial
speech streams (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996; Saffran,
Newport, & Aslin, 1996). A large number of follow-up
studies have replicated and extended the initial findings,
determining that statistical learning is neither domain
specific (e.g., Fiser & Aslin, 2002a; Kirkham et al. 2002),
nor even restricted to humans (Hauser et al., 2001; Toro &
Trobalón, 2005). The term statistical learning has
consequently come to be associated with a wide range of
phenomena that rely on implicit calculations based on
distributional regularities in the environmental input.
The utility of these statistical learning experiments for
simulating the early stages of language acquisition has been
widely acknowledged. However, with few exceptions, the
input to learners in statistical learning experiments has been
characterized by a single, highly invariant statistical
structure. This uniform-variance property of the input does
not reflect the substantial variability inherent in natural
language corpora due to shifts in topic, speaker, accent, and
even language (in the case of bilingual acquisition). In some
instances, variance in the input may signal to the learner that
they are in a new context for which a different statistical
structure must be learned (e.g., a language change), but in
other cases this variation represents noise and should not
trigger a new structural representation (e.g., hearing foreign-

accented speech). Thus, the critical challenge confronting
language learners is much like Piaget’s description of the
processes of assimilation and accommodation (Piaget, 1985).
The learner must ultimately determine the number of causal
models that best characterizes the input, resolving when a
new causal model is required and when the existing model
can account for the observed data.
There are at least two potential sources of information
that may facilitate learners to detect that there has been a
change in structure over time, which in turn may facilitate
the formation of multiple representations (Gebhart, Aslin, &
Newport, 2009). The first source of information is the
availability of a contextual cue that is correlated with a
particular statistical structure (e.g., Weiss, Gerfen, &
Mitchel, 2009; Gebhart, Aslin, & Newport, 2009). The
existence of such a cue could result in computations that are
performed over a subset of the input and then compared
across contexts. If the computations differ by some criterion,
it would trigger the learner to form multiple representations
to accommodate the inputs associated with each context. A
second potential source of information for learners may be
derived from monitoring the consistency of the input
(Basseville & Nikiforov, 1993; see Gebhart, Aslin, &
Newport, 2009). If the surface statistics are entirely
consistent, the learner may conclude that the input likely has
arisen from a single underlying structure. Conversely, if the
variance in the surface statistics exceeds some criterion,
then the learner may conclude that the underlying structure
has undergone some change (see Gebhart, Aslin, & Newport
2009; Qian, Jaeger, & Aslin, 2012).
To date, only a few experiments have tested whether
contextual cues facilitate the formation of multiple
representations when multiple inputs are presented. In a
study by Weiss, Gerfen, & Mitchel (2009), learners were
presented with two artificial languages comprised of four
words each, in which the words were defined solely by
transitional probabilities. The languages were interleaved in
two-minute intervals twelve times total. When the languages
were presented in a single voice, only congruent language
pairs were learned (ones whose statistics, when combined,
yielded similar transitional probabilities to the languages

3858

presented in isolation). Incongruent languages (ones whose
statistics were incompatible and yielded a higher noise level
when combined) were only learned when a contextual cue
was added such that one language was presented in one
voice and the other in a second voice. Gebhart, Aslin, and
Newport (2009) used a similar methodology, presenting
learners with two five-and-a-half minute segments of
incompatible languages presented consecutively (in the
same voice). They reported a primacy effect in which the
first language was learned at above chance levels, while the
second language was not. However, learners succeeded in
acquiring both languages if there was an explicit cue
(informing the learners they would acquire two languages)
in conjunction with a brief pause between streams. Also,
tripling exposure time to the second language allowed
learners to perform above chance in both languages,
indicating that both languages could be acquired given
sufficient exposure to the new language. Together, these
results support the notion that the presence of a contextual
cue differentiating the inputs can facilitate the formation of
multiple representations, perhaps providing the learner with
a more efficient route to successful acquisition.
To the best of our knowledge, no study to date has
systematically investigated whether and how learners can
form multiple representations by monitoring the consistency
of the input alone. Arguably, some of the results from the
aforementioned studies begin to address this issue, though
the findings have not been easy to interpret (e.g., Weiss,
Gerfen & Mitchel reported that repeated presentations of
incongruent languages in the same voice resulted in no
learning whereas the single presentations in Gebhart, Aslin,
and Newport resulted in a primacy effect). In Experiment
1a, we set out to initially replicate the primacy effect of
Gebhart and colleagues using their own languages.
Subsequently, we manipulate both duration and languageswitching parameters to determine the conditions under
which learners can acquire both languages by monitoring
the consistency of the input in the absence of contextual
cues such as speaker voice or explicit instructions.

were divided into two conditions: 17 (11 female, 6 male)
participants in Experiment 1a with a mean age of 19.6 years,
and 17 (12 female, 5 male) participants in Experiment 1b
with a mean age of 19.6 years. All participants were English
monolinguals by self-report.
Languages The speech stream was composed of two
languages, each consisting of sixteen trisyllabic words based
on 12 unique CV syllables. These artificial languages were
previously used in Gebhart, et al.'s (2009) segmentation
experiment. Individually, the languages could be segmented
by tracking the transitional probabilities (TPs) between
syllables, with high TPs between syllables within a trigram
(representing a word) and low TPs between syllables across
different trigrams (representing word boundaries). See
Figure 1 for an illustration of TP-defined words boundaries.
In both languages, two vowel frames and six consonants
were used to define the trisyllabic words. The withintrigram transitional probability for syllables was 0.50.
Words within the stream were randomly sequenced yielding
a transitional probability of 0.25 between word-final and
word-initial syllables. The second language rearranged the
vowel frames and consonants of the first language, resulting
in a syllable inventory that overlapped by 50%. The
combined transitional probabilities (including all syllables
across both languages) varied from 0.33 to 0.67 both within
and between words. Consequently, they did not provide
consistent cues for segmentation (see Figure 1).
Procedure Participants were instructed to listen to a brief
recording of foreign speech and informed that they would
later be quizzed on what they had heard. In Experiment 1a,
participants listened to 5 minutes and 30 seconds of each
language (produced in the same voice) consecutively
without any cues to transition.
Order of language

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1a, our goal was to replicate the primacy
effect reported by Gebhart, Aslin, and Newport (2009) by
presenting learners with two consecutive artificial languages
with no explicit cue to the transition. We subsequently
extend the study by manipulating the number of transitions
between the two languages during the familiarization phase.
Thus, in Experiment 1b, we control for the amount of
exposure to each language while adding additional transition
points (i.e., presenting four 2-minute 45-second blocks of
each language versus two 5:30 blocks in Experiment 1a).

Methods
Participants Thirty-four undergraduate students were
recruited from a Psychology 100 subject pool. Participants

Figure 1 - Transitional probabilities defining the structure of
each language. When combined, the TPs of each language
result in a flat (uninformative) structure.

3859

Figure 2 - Durations of each experiment depicted together. Dark bars represent Language A,
and light bars represent Language B.
presentation was counter-balanced between participants, but
for simplicity we will always refer to the Language A as the
first language presented and Language B as the second. In
Experiment 1b, participants listened to 4 consecutive blocks
each consisting of 2 minutes and 45 seconds of one
language (2:45 A + 2:45 B + 2:45 A + 2:45 B, order of
actual
languages
was
counter-balanced
between
participants). In both conditions, total exposure to each
language was constant (5:30) as well as the total duration of
the familiarization phase (11:00).
After familiarization, participants completed a test phase
with thirty-two two-alternative forced choice trials in which
participants selected between statistically-defined words and
partwords. The partwords consisted of either the last
syllable of a word followed by the first two syllables of
another word or the last two syllables of a word followed by
a single syllable of another word. These items occurred
during the familiarization but were characterized as
partwords since the within-trigram transitional probabilities
were low. Participants were asked to judge which of the
trigrams sounded more familiar, with statistically-defined
words being counted as correct responses.

Results & Discussion
Mean correct responses on the test trials were computed for
each language. In Experiment1a, participants scored a mean
accuracy of 0.746 (SD=0.152) on Language A and 0.581
(SD=0.192) on Language B. These scores indicated a
primacy effect in which accuracy on Language A
significantly exceeded Language B (paired t(16)=2.82,
p=0.012). Accuracy on Language A was significantly above
chance (t(16)=6.67, p<0.001) while accuracy in Language B
was not (t(16)=1.73, p=0.102). By contrast, in Experiment
1b, Language A and Language B did not significantly differ
(paired t(16)=1.00, p=0.331). Also in contrast to Experiment
1a, Language A significantly exceeded chance (A: M=0.673,
SD=0.151, t(16)=4.73, p<0.001), while Language B was
also marginally significant (M=0.603, SD=0.207, t(16)=2.05,
p=0.057). Results are illustrated in Figure 3.
In Experiment 1, we successfully replicated the primacy
effect of Gebhart, et al. (2009) and discovered that
increasing the number of switches between the languages
could eliminate the primacy effect. Experiments 1a and 1b
differed only in the duration of the individual exposure
segments (5:30 vs. 2:45) and the number of switches

between languages in the familiarization phase (1 vs. 3).
Two causal hypotheses may be proposed for these results:
First, the greater number of switches in the 1b stream may
cue the listeners to the existence of two structures, allowing
them to begin acquiring Language B. Alternately, in
Experiment 1a (and the previous experiment by Gebhart and
colleagues), learners may become entrenched in the
statistical structure of Language A due to the lengthy
duration of initial exposure. This entrenchment may inhibit
detection or acquisition of the new structure. Experiment 2
was designed to disentangle these hypotheses.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we contrasted the entrenchment and
switching hypotheses proposed to explain the results of
Experiment 1. We accomplished this by presenting
participants with the following sequence of languages
without any breaks in between: 5:30 of Language A
followed by 2:45 of Language B, 2:45 of Language A again,
and finally 2:45 of Language B. The entrenchment
hypothesis predicts that the primacy effect found in
Experiment 1a should also be present for Experiment 2
since the duration of the initial block of Language A is
identical. The switching hypothesis predicts that both
languages will be learned at significantly greater than
chance levels since there are three transitions. This
prediction of learning is somewhat counter-intuitive given
that Language B was not learned in Experiment 1a and here
we are increasing exposure to Language A.

Methods
Participants Twenty Psychology 100 students participated
(12 female, 8 male; mean age 19.9 years).
Procedure As noted above, in this experiment the
languages were configured as follows: 5:30 A + 2:45 B +
2:45 A + 2:45 B (see Figure 2). All other procedures were
identical to Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
No primacy effect was observed in Experiment 2, where
Language A accuracy (M=0.697, SD=0.161) did not
significantly differ from Language B accuracy (M=0.694,
SD=0.137; paired t(19)=0.07, p=0.943). Moreover, both
languages significantly exceeded chance performance

3860

(A: t(19)=5.46, p<0.001; B: t(19)=6.31, p<0.001). Our
results clearly reject the entrenchment hypothesis, lending
support to the switching hypothesis as both languages were
learned at above chance levels and performance did not
significantly differ between languages.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 2, we eliminated the primacy effect found in
Experiment 1a by increasing the number of switches
between languages, even though Language A possessed a
relative advantage in initial presentation duration and
overall exposure time. In Experiment 3, we eliminate the
last Language B exposure to test whether Language B may
have been learned early in the sequence of exposures or
whether the learning of B occurred only after the third
transition (i.e., the last presentation). Notably, the only
occurrence of Language B coincides with the first transition
point in the sequence (and there are fewer transitions
overall). Understanding when learning occurs may shed
light on the type of processing that may be occurring for the
unlearned language in conditions eliciting a primacy effect.

importance of the second presentation of Language B for
learning. In the absence of the third switch and additional
exposure, performance was at chance levels for Language B.
These results raise the question of whether the deficit in
Language B learning was a function of the removal of the
third language switch or the decrease in overall Language B
exposure (from 5:30 to 2:45).

Experiment 4

Methods

The primacy effect observed in Experiment 3 emerged in
the context of fewer switches and very short overall
exposure. Therefore, in Experiment 4, we matched the
overall exposure durations of Experiment 2 by providing
learners with 5:30 of Language A followed by 5:30 of
Language B and then an additional 2:45 of Language A
again. This is essentially the sequence presented in
Experiment 1a followed by an additional short block of
Language A familiarization. Accordingly, the overall
duration of each language presentation resembles
Experiment 2 (in which both languages were learned), but
here only two language switches are provided. Also like
Experiments 2 and 3, Language A is advantaged in total
exposure duration relative to Language B.

Participants Fifteen Psychology 100 students participated
(13 female, 2 male; mean age 19.3 years).

Methods
Participants Seventeen Psychology 100 students
participated (13 female, 4 male; mean age 19.3 years).

Procedure In this experiment, languages were configured
as follows: 5:30 A + 2:45 B + 2:45 A (see Figure 2 for
illustration). All other procedures were identical to those
described for Experiment 1.

Procedure In this experiment, languages were configured
as follows: 5:30 A + 5:30 B + 2:45 A (see Figure 2 for
illustration). All other procedures were identical to those
described for Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
The primacy effect emerged again in this experiment (paired
t(14)=2.73, p=0.016), as Language A accuracy (M=0.729,
SD=0.179, compared to chance: t(14)=4.95, p<0.001)
significantly exceeded Language B (M=0.546, SD=0.139,
compared to chance: t(14)=1.28, p=0.221). The contrast
between these results and Experiment 2 highlights the

Results & Discussion
Although Language A did not significantly exceed chance
(M=0.596, SD=0.210, t(16)=1.88, p=0.079) and Language B
significantly exceeded chance (M=0.632, SD=0.132,
t(16)=4.12, p<0.001), accuracy in Languages A and B did

Figure 3 - Accuracy of participant responses in familiarity task. Chance level is 0.50, and error
bars denote 95% confidence intervals of the mean.

3861

not significantly differ from each other (paired t(16)=-0.67,
p=0.514). See Figure 3 for illustration. The findings of
Experiment 4 provide further evidence that that transitions
between the languages alters learning. As in Experiment 2,
we made the surprising observation that the additional
exposure to Language A could facilitate learning of
Language B. It is unclear at this point why Language A’s
learning was reduced and future experiments will explore
the source of this effect. Irrespective of this pattern, the
results from Experiment 4 do imply that some processing of
Language B occurs even in conditions resulting in a primacy
effect for Language A, such as the results reported by
Gebhart, Aslin, & Newport (2009) and our Experiment 1a.

General Discussion
In the foregoing experiments, we have explored a range of
conditions in which learners were familiarized with two
artificial language streams characterized by incompatible
underlying statistical structures. Unlike previous studies
investigating statistical learning of multiple streams, no
extralinguistic contextual cues were provided to the learners
to signal the presence of a second language and facilitate
learning. Consequently, successful learning of both
languages relied on sensitivity to the structures themselves
and the transition points between structures. In previous
research, when statistically incompatible artificial languages
were presented successively, learners have failed to
successfully acquire both structures. In instances in which
only a single switch was presented, learners exhibited a
primacy effect (Gebhart, Aslin, & Newport, 2009) whereas
when many switches occurred, there was a catastrophic
interference effect in which no languages were learned
(Weiss, Gerfen, & Mitchell, 2009; Mitchel & Weiss, 2010).
We presented learners with the same languages used in the
Gebhart, Aslin, & Newport (2009) study, and our results
suggest that learners are sensitive to the transitions between
the languages which can help them acquire both structures.
As noted above, in previous research, when learners
receive input from two structures with only a single
transition point, a primacy effect is observed (also replicated
in Experiment 1a). In the original study, this effect could
only be overcome by significantly extending exposure to
Language B. Our findings have demonstrated that the
primacy effect can also be overcome without increasing
exposure at all. In Experiment 1b, exposure to Languages A
and B were equivalent to the original study, though the
languages were presented in smaller blocks and interleaved.
This manipulation resulted in successful learning of both
streams. Likewise, the results of Experiment 2 demonstrate
that Language B can be learned even when our manipulation
increases exposure only to Language A. That is, adding
Language A training can, by virtue of the switching between
languages, support learning in Language B as measured by
our posthoc test.

We also explored whether there was any learning of
Language B when it occurred after only a single transition.
Gebhart, Aslin, and Newport (2009) as well as our
Experiment 1a findings leave open the possibility that
Language B was ignored altogether or that structures were
unlearnable in light of the prior learning of Language A.
The results of Experiment 4 cast doubt on either of these
interpretations. In Experiment 4, learners acquired
Language B at above chance levels despite the fact that
Language B occurred in the exact same context as in the
original condition (i.e., 5:30 of Language A followed by
5:30 of Language B). Like Experiment 2, the only
manipulation in this experiment involved additional
exposure for Language A.
We observed different learning outcomes between
Experiments 3 and 4, suggesting that the amount of
exposure to Language B prior to the second switch
modulates the success of learning. It is possible that the 2:45
block of Language B in Experiment 3 did not provide
adequate time for learners to sample the language, or
perhaps 2:45 is insufficient to support learning (as we do not
yet have baseline data for that duration). Because
Experiment 3 is the only condition in the present study that
limited Language B exposure to 2:45, further conditions
will be necessary to explore this issue.
When three transition points are provided in the input (i.e.,
Experiment 1b and Experiment 2), the two structures
become increasingly discriminable to learners, as evidenced
by their above-chance performance in both languages. As
noted above, the importance of these switches for detection
of the second structure is highlighted in those experiments
by the improvement in Language B performance despite
only receiving additional exposure to Language A. We
therefore conclude that learners are capable of identifying
whether input streams contain one or multiple structures by
monitoring the consistency of the input. This finding is in
accordance with previous speculation regarding the
conditions under which changes to statistical structures may
be detected (Gebhart, Aslin, and Newport, 2009). The
observed primacy effects in previous research and
Experiment 1a cannot be attributed to entrenchment in the
first language, as it has now been demonstrated that the
primacy effects can be overcome with additional transition
points between language streams.
While the present experiment made an extensive
demonstration of language learning with only lingustic
(syllable inventory) or statistical (TP) cues, a similar attempt
has yielded markedly different results: Weiss, Gerfen, and
Mitchell (2009) observed catastrophic interference when
two incompatible languages were interleaved in 2 minute
segments for a 24 minute stream. Under the switching
hypothesis, we would have predicted significant learning of
both languages. However Weiss and colleagues found that
neither language was learned significantly better than
chance. These two studies used different statistical

3862

structures, had different amount of overlap between the
languages, and a different number of switches. Future
experiments will try to systematically manipulate these
parameters to better understand how overlap (and statistical
compatibility) can influence the learning of multiple streams.
It has been hypothesized that describing how learners
detect changes in statistical learning may be best explained
by a hierarchical Bayesian model of change detection (Qian,
Jaeger, & Aslin, 2012). How learners interpret non-uniform
variance in statistical learning appears to rely on the
availability of statistical and linguistic cues, such as changes
in transitional probabilities or syllable inventory observed at
a transition point between languages. These cues may lead
learners to consider a second causal model to describe input
(accommodation) over a single causal model under which
the variance could occur (assimilation). This process of
proposing causal models, weighting them by their likelihood,
and comparing them to the input stream follows the
procedure of Bayesian model comparison. In the case of
extralinguistic cues in speech segmentation (e.g., pitch
change or pause), this model comparison may be aided by
the expectation of a context change and increase the prior
probability of a two-model explanation of variance.
Linguistic cues, such as the introduction of new syllables or
the change in transitional probabilities between syllables
may also effect such a change in the prior probability,
though by themselves are insufficient. Our results suggest
that change detection can be supported by variance-related
events such as language switches, and provides further
evidence that the Bayesian framework is a valuable analogy
for statistical learning in multiple contexts.
Qian, Jaeger, and Aslin (2012) describe statistical cues to
context change in terms of prediction error, i.e., a large
deviation of the input stream from the learner’s current
model. Linguistic cues to speech segmentation may elicit
such errors at language switches when the inventory or
transitions between syllables change. This error-based cuing
appears to be evidenced in the present study based on the
importance of language switches to learners’ performance.
While previous research has demonstrated the utility of
prolonged exposure to the second structure to detection of
two contexts (Gebhart, Aslin, & Newport, 2009), we
demonstrate that a relatively small set of high variation
events can also increase the prior probability for a twomodel hypothesis.
Our future work will attempt to determine the nature of
processing that occurs during the unlearned streams. It is
possible that learners detect the regularities in the second
stream but discard it as noise, or that it is blocked by the
learning of the first structure. Clearly, some information is
gathered during those periods, as evidenced by the results of
Experiments 2 and 4. One set of studies underway
introduces a third structure into the sequence (either a new
learnable artificial language or an unlearnable non-adjacent
transitional probability language). Thus, the sequence is

5:30 of A followed by 2:45 of Language C (noise or
learnable) followed by 2:45 of A and 2:45 of B. This
condition tests whether switches by themselves are useful
(without supporting the statistics of Language B). We are
also currently engaged in neuroimaging studies to localize
and contrast the learning of Languages A and B in a variety
of conditions.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Dr. Richard Aslin and Timothy Poepsel
for comments and discussion, as well as Tzuyu Chang for
assistance with data collection. This project was funded by
NIH grant R01 HD067250-01 to DJW.

References
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of Conditional Probability Statistics by 8Month-Old Infants. Psychological Science, 9(4), 321-324.
Basseville, M., & Nikiforov, I. (1993). Detection of abrupt
changes – Theory and application. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Statistical learning of new
visual feature combinations by infants. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 99(24), 15822-26.
Gebhart, A. L., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (2009).
Changing structures in midstream: Learning along the
statistical garden path. Cognitive Science, 33, 1087-1116.
Hauser, M. D., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2001).
Segmentation of the speech stream in a non-human
primate: Statistical learning in cotton-top tamarins.
Cognition, 78(3), 53-64.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: Evidence for a
domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83(2),
35-42.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibration of cognitive structures:
The central problem of intellectual development (Vol.
985). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Aslin, R. N. (2012). Learning to
represent a multi-context environment: More than
detecting changes. Frontiers in Psychology, 3(July), 228.
Saffran, J., Newport, E., & Aslin, R. (1996). Word
segmentation: The role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 621(35), 606-621.
Toro, J. M., & Trobalon, J. B. (2005). Statistical
computations over a speech stream in a rodent.
Perception and Psychophysics, 67(5), 867-875.
Weiss, D. J., Gerfen, C., & Mitchel, A. (2009). Speech
Segmentation in a Simulated Bilingual Environment: A
Challenge for Statistical Learning? Language Learning
and Development, 5(1), 30-49.

3863

