UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When words get physical: evidence for proficiency-modulated somatotopic motor
interference during second language comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jb6s58t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Vukovic, Nikola

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When words get physical: evidence for proficiency-modulated somatotopic motor
interference during second language comprehension
Nikola Vukovic (nv254@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge

Abstract
New theories of cognition posit an intimate link between
higher cognitive processes and the sensorimotor areas of the
brain. In a reaction time-based translation task, second
language (L2) speakers responded to action verbs using a
microphone or a response pad. A significant interaction
among Response Modality, Verb Type, and Proficiency
indicated that more proficient L2 speakers took significantly
longer to respond with their hands to previously seen handrelated verbs, but not mouth-related ones. Conversely,
responding using a microphone led to slower latencies in the
case of mouth-verbs, but not hand-verbs. Amidst virtually
exclusively monolingual research on embodied cognition, the
current study provides evidence that reading L2 action verbs
selectively interferes with subsequently performed manual or
verbal responses, suggesting that semantic representations of
these verbs are distributed over neural substrates underlying
action execution. The role of proficiency and experience in
language comprehension is discussed.
Keywords: embodied cognition, second language, semantics

Introduction
Ever since the cognitive turn in psychology, the human
mind has been likened to a computer, and the essence of our
mental life envisaged as the outcome of complex calculation
over abstract symbolic elements. In this traditional
framework, human cognition is defined as modular, with
distinct components operating on information independently
and autonomously (Fodor 1998). In contrast to this
perspective, recent years have witnessed the strengthening
of theoretical paradigms which posit thought as being
grounded in experience and sensation. These have become
known as Embodied Cognition theories. According to
Embodied Cognition, human concepts are not amodal
transductions of sensory data, but are instead grounded in
sensory-motor processing itself. Much evidence for
embodied cognition comes from studies of language
processing. Within this new framework, language
comprehension is thought of as grounded in, and intimately
linked to, neural resources used in action, perception, and
emotion (Barsalou 2008).
By now there exists a wealth of behavioural research
which supports the claim that language comprehension and
action execution are subserved by common neural
resources. For example, Glenberg and Kaschak (2002)
demonstrated an Action-Sentence Compatibility effect,
where judging the sensibility of sentences which implied a
movement towards or away from the body (You gave Andy
the pizza vs. Andy gave you the pizza) facilitated congruent
arm movements. In a similar sentence sensibility judgement
task, Zwaan and Taylor (2006) found that participants were

significantly faster to perform manual rotation of a response
knob when the rotation (clockwise or anti-clockwise) was
congruent with the meaning of previously presented
sentential material (turn the volume up/down). Bergen et al.
(2003) asked participants to manually verify names of
pictures representing actions, and found that response times
were slower when they had to reject actions performed with
the same (vs. different) effector. In a different study,
Buccino et al. (2005) had participants listen to and judge the
concreteness of sentences using hand or feet responses.
They observed interference effects pointing toward the
conclusion that verbally presented action sentences activate
the motor system. These studies suggest that language and
action are highly interconnected and that processing action
language functionally involves activation of motor
representations in the brain. Moreover, this interaction is
differentially articulated as facilitation or inhibition, based
on the temporal relationship between stimulus and response
(Boulenger et al. 2006).
The findings from behavioural studies outlined above find
additional support in the neurosciences, where experiments
have shown interdependence between cognition and
simulation of motor and perceptual states. There have by
now been numerous studies which demonstrate that
semantic processing of a word activates distributed and
diverse networks of sensory and motor information (Farah,
McClelland, 1991; Damasio 1990; Caramazza et al., 1990).
For example, processing the name of an action engages the
motor area which is active during performing that same
action (Martin et al., 1995 p. 649-652.). Hearing a word
activates auditory associations (Pulvermuller et al 2006),
and action-related words elicit cortical activation in the
motor areas of the brain, even when the participants are not
aware of hearing the word (Pulvermüller et al. 2005).
Intriguingly, comprehension of action words does not only
reliably activate the motor cortex, but does so in an effectorspecific i.e. somatotopic manner: face, arm, or leg words
activate the corresponding parts of the motor system in the
central and precentral cortex which control face, arm, or leg
movements (Buccino et al 2005, Hauk et al 2004).
Taken together, behavioural and neuroimaging data
strongly support predictions and claims of embodied
approaches to language and cognition. Semantic
representations of words are not amodal or entirely
symbolic, but seem to utilise the same neural resources
involved in action execution, and it is these strong links
which are made apparent in the interactions outlined in the
studies above.
Some proponents of disembodied and symbolic
approaches to cognition, however, have raised concerns

3711

about the functional relevance of sensorimotor processes in
language comprehension (Hickok, 2010; Mahon and
Caramazza, 2008). For example, Mahon and Caramazza
(2008) have argued that semantic motor activation, as it is
described above, could also be incorporated into traditional
theories. On this view, the motor cortex becomes activated
as an epiphenomenon of, and not part of, semantic retrieval.
In other words, semantic motor activation is a result of
induced imagery of action, and is as such a downstream
consequence of comprehension. However, a number of
recent studies presented evidence for automaticity and
causality of sensorimotor processes in language
comprehension. For example, Pulvermuller et al. (2005)
have demonstrated activity in the motor cortex as early as
100-200 ms following word recognition - speeds consistent
with the idea that these processes are crucial to semantic
retrieval (see also Shtyrov et al., 2004). Similarly, Liuzzi et
al. (2010) present compelling evidence that the motor cortex
is causally involved in learning and processing action
words. In their study, transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) was used to temporarily disturb the functioning of
the motor cortex, which in turn led participants to perform
significantly worse in an action word acquisition task,
compared to controls. The study indicates that the motor
cortex is vital, and even necessary, for word processing, as
is also suggested by other TMS, electrical stimulation, and
behavioural experiments (Pulvermuller 2005; Fischer and
Zwaan, 2008; Glenberg et al., 2008). Results to date thus
favour embodied approaches to language comprehension,
and make symbolic interpretations of motor semantics rather
difficult to maintain.

The Current Study
Motor and language processes in the brain seem to
form a dynamic and highly interconnected system, with
interactions appearing at very early stages. However, a
major shortcoming of investigations performed so far is the
fact that they are virtually exclusively based on monolingual
data, and data obtained from native speakers of a language.
Surely, however, any theory that seeks to explain linguistic
processes cannot call itself complete without at the same
time accounting for how these operate in the majority of the
world’s population (i.e. bilinguals: Gordon, 2005). With the
realisation that over half of the world’s population speaks
more than one language, this study aims to test the
predictions of embodied cognition on people other than
monolinguals. The primary question in the experiment
reported here is whether in second-language (L2) speakers
action-word semantics are distributed over neural substrates
involved in action execution. Will L2 speakers, just like
native ones, exhibit sensorimotor effects in lexical
processing? Do we, in other words, see evidence for
interaction between motor and linguistic processes or,
alternatively, is there evidence that in their case linguistic
processes operate completely independently of sensorimotor
ones? How are these affected by proficiency and

experience? Clearly, the extensive work in embodied
language processing is in need of specification in terms of
how and when grounding takes place in the course of
language development.
The current study employed a reaction time-based
translation task, which methodologically synthesizes
experimental and analytical tools drawn from second
language (Altarriba and Mathis 1997, Duyck and Brysbaert
2004) and embodied cognition research (Shebani &
Pulvermüller 2012, Bergen et al 2003, Marino BFM et al
2011). In every trial, participants were presented with a
mouth, arm, or leg related verb in their native language
(Serbo-Croatian), after which they would see a verb in
English. The task was to quickly indicate whether the
second verb was a good translation of the first verb, using a
button box in one, and a microphone in the other half of the
experiment. In half of the trials the English verb was a
translation of the Serbo-Croatian one, and in the other half it
was not. The critical trials in this experiment were those
where the verbs were translations, and were split into two
conditions: in one case, the English verbs denoted actions
performed with the same body part or effector as the one
used for the experimental response (mouth or hand,
depending on which experimental response was required),
whereas in the other case the verbs indicated actions
performed with a different effector.
If we assume a neurobiological model of language
in which lexicosemantic circuits are embodied
(Pulvermuller, 1999), then verbs describing actions should
be realised not only in perisylvian cortical regions
traditionally associated with language, but also as circuits in
the motor cortex, which is used for executing the actions
themselves. If it is true that understanding an action verb
produces motor activation, then introducing a concurrent
task (the user response) which makes use of that same part
of the brain should produce interference, reflected in slower
reaction times. In addition, the semantic somatotopy model
(Pulvermüller, 1999; 2001) predicts that this interference
should be highly specific: processing mouth-related verbs
should most strongly interfere with concurrent verbal
responses, but not manual ones. Similarly, processing a
hand-related verb should lead to much slower latencies
when responding with the hand, but not with the mouth.
In the current context of second language speakers,
we could expect several possible outcomes: 1. It might be
that non-native speakers process language in a completely
different way to that of their native counterparts. In other
words, their semantic representations might not be
distributed across sensorimotor neural substrates - a
distribution that might, therefore, be a distinctive hallmark
of native speakers. 2. It could be the case that L2 speakers
show identical patterns to those of native speakers. 3.
Finally, it is possible that L2 speakers show differing
amounts of sensorimotor embodiment, as modulated by
proficiency and experience.

3712

Experiment
Participants
Twenty-four right-handed native speakers of Serbo-Croatian
(13 female; mean age = 25.63 years, SD = 3.54) studying at
the University of Cambridge took part in the experiment.
All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision
and reported no history of neurological, psychiatric, or
language disorders. Participants varied in terms of L2
proficiency, as revealed by the language background
questionnaire (see below). All gave their informed consent
prior to participation. No participants were aware of the
purpose of the experiment.

Stimuli
A total of 72 lexical stimuli were used in the experiment:
36 Serbo-Croatian (SC) verbs, and 36 English ones. For
each language there were 12 mouth-related (e.g., bite, kiss,
sing), 12 hand-related (e.g., peel, take, write), and 12 legrelated (e.g. dance, jump, walk) action verbs. In addition, 18
verb pairs were constructed for the practice trials: 9 practice
trials per response modality (mouth/microphone vs.
hand/button box). All critical lexical stimuli were matched
for psycholinguistic variables such as number of letters,
number of phonemes, lexical frequency, and letter bigram
frequency. All SC verbs appeared inflected for first person
singular present as, for example, in the verb pišem (write),
where the suffix –m attaches to the base form piše-.

“no” on a button box, in one half of the experiment, and by
saying “yes” or “no” into a microphone, in the other half
(the order of “mouth response” and “hand response” blocks
was counterbalanced across participants). After they gave a
response (correct or incorrect), a blank screen was shown
for 500 ms, after which a new trial started. Accuracy
feedback was displayed only during the practice block.
Stimulus presentation and response time collection were
performed using the SuperLab Version 4.5 software
package (Cedrus Corporation). The experiment consisted of
a practice block, and two experimental blocks: one requiring
hand, and the other mouth responses. Participants therefore
saw each target verb twice, once in each half of the
experiment. Each target verb would appear in both the
matching and mismatching condition (actions conveyed by
L2 verbs shared/did not share the effector with the
experimental response). Items were rotated around two
presentation lists. If an English target verb was in the sameeffector condition on one list it was in the different-effector
condition on the other list, and vice versa. There were equal
numbers of same- and different-effector pairs on each list,
and equal numbers of participants were tested on each list.

Language Background Questionnaire

Procedure
The experiment took place in a sound-attenuated and
dimly lit room. Participants sat comfortably in front of a
computer screen at a distance of about 60 cm. Stimuli were
presented centrally on the screen in lowercase Arial font
(size = 20). Each trial started with a fixation cross presented
in the centre of the screen for 1000 ms, followed by a SC
verb displayed for another 1000 ms. After a 500 ms interstimulus interval (ISI), an English verb appeared and stayed
on the screen until a response was given. Participants were
instructed to respond, as quickly and as accurately as
possible, whether the English verb was a translation of the
previously seen SC verb. They did so by pressing “yes” or

All participants completed a language background
questionnaire. The sample was homogeneous, with all
participants being native speakers of Serbo-Croatian, raised
in the ex-Yugoslavia territory, and having started learning
their L2 at approximately the same time (Mean AoA: 7.86
years, SD = 2.4). Overall, participants rated their
proficiency in English relatively high, though there were
still differences, with some participants having just arrived
to England for their undergraduate and graduate courses,
and others having been in the country for longer as part of
their PhD or postdoctoral research. A simple median split
was performed on the proficiency scores, thus creating two
groups, the lower and the higher proficiency group, with 12
people in each. The difference in L2 proficiency ratings
between these two groups was statistically reliable, t(22) = 7.30, p = .001. These and other proficiency measures from
the language background questionnaire which, importantly,
were found to correlate with participants’ self-ratings, are
summarized in Table 1.

Proficiency
Age of Acquisition Time spent in UK
IELTS score b
rating a
(years)
(months)
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
0.2
7.58
2.96
9.83
4.56
7.25
0.39
Lower Proficiency Group 5.87
3
0.3
8.08
1.78
25.25
19.85 8.54
0.40
Higher Proficiency Group 6.71
3
Table 1. Mean data for participants’ (n = 24) language history and self-assessed proficiency ratings
a
based on a scale from 1 – 7
b
Since the majority of scores were IELTS scores, TOEFL and Cambridge Exam scores were also converted
to the IELTS scale using the standard Equivalency Table

3713

Figure 1. Mean reaction times for both participant groups in all conditions (H=hand; M=mouth; L=leg).
Significant differences in response latencies (p<.05) are marked with an asterisk.

Results
First, trials with erroneous responses were removed.
Given that errors were very rare (0.02% of total trials), they
were not analysed separately. No participant performed at
less than 90% accuracy. Response latencies for correct trials
larger than 2SD ± mean RT were excluded from statistical
analysis as outliers. In total, no more than 0.5% of data was
lost (Ulrich and Miller 1994).
For the remaining trials, mean RT values for each
participant in each condition and block were calculated (see
overall means in Figure 1) and entered into a repeatedmeasures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with two withinsubject variables: Response Modality (microphone vs.
button box), Verb Type (mouth vs. hand vs. leg), and
Proficiency (lower vs. higher) as a between-subject variable.
Response latencies were longer when using the microphone
than with the button box, and correspondingly the ANOVA
revealed a main effect of Response Modality, F(1, 22) =
44.27, p = .001; partial η2 = .668. No other main effect was
significant (p>.05). A two-way significant interaction
among Response Modality and Verb Type was found: F(1,
22) = 12.58, p = .002; partial η2 = .364. In addition, there
was a three-way significant interaction among Response
Modality, Verb Type, and Proficiency: F(1, 22) = 15.22, p =
.001; partial η2 = .409.
Most importantly, the significant three-way interaction
directly addresses the main questions which motivate this
study. The interaction indicates that second language
speakers of different proficiencies differentially exhibit
somatotopic interference on action execution during verb
processing. The group of lower proficient speakers showed
no significant differences in response times in any of the
blocks and conditions. However, more proficient L2
speakers responding with the microphone were slower on
mouth verbs than on hand verbs (1394 and 1206 ms
respectively, t(11) = 3.096, p = .010). Conversely, their
hand responses were slower when processing hand, but not
mouth verbs (678 and 620 ms, respectively, t(11) = 2.80, p

= .017). Responses to leg verbs always patterned with other
non-response modality verbs.
Overall then, for the more proficient L2 speakers in the
sample, the results reveal a double-dissociation pattern of
response interference.

Discussion
This study reveals differential interference for mouth and
hand responses, brought about as a consequence of
processing lexical semantics of action verbs involving
different parts of the body, namely the mouth and the hands.
Interestingly, this selective effect was modulated by speaker
L2 proficiency. In both participant groups, response
latencies given with the microphone were longer than those
given with the button box. However, our finding that verbal
responses are slower than manual ones in L2 speakers is
quite in line with results and latencies obtained in previous
second language studies (see, for example Kroll et al.,
2002). Apart from this main effect, participants in the lower
proficiency group demonstrated no significant differences in
response times across blocks and conditions. Interestingly,
slower responses with hands were observed when higher
proficiency participants processed hand verbs, but not
mouth or leg verbs. The reverse effect, slower responses
during mouth (but not hand or leg) verb processing, was
seen when participants used a microphone to respond. These
results follow a double dissociation pattern (Shallice 1988;
Jones 1983), which allows for much more reliable
inferences about the causal and interactive status of the
systems and processes involved than was possible in some
previous, conceptually similar studies, which only used a
single response modality, or used pictorial stimuli where
priming from visual features could not be reliably
dissociated from true motor interference (see for example
Bergen et al 2003; Marino BFM et al 2011). Specifically,
this study demonstrates that in more proficient participants
processing resources located in specific parts of the motor
cortex are shared between action execution and lexicosemantic representations of related verbs. These data,
although behavioural in nature, directly bear upon and

3714

support predictions made by psychological and neural
models of embodied language processing. Apart from
providing novel and strong evidence for embodied
semantics, the present study is the first to demonstrate
double dissociated and effector specific shared neural
resources between action execution and language in nonnative speakers. In addition, it has implications for theories
of how grounding takes place, as it suggests that speakers
increasingly come to activate non-linguistic systems during
word processing as a function of proficiency and
experience.
The findings in this study can be interpreted with regard
to neurobiological models of language learning and
processing. These do not view lexicosemantic
representations as static, but adopt an approach in which
variation primarily comes not from the strength of formmeaning connections, but the distribution of semantic
representations themselves. In other words, it might be the
case that there is less meaning associated with L2 lexical
forms (for similar proposals see Williams & Cheung 2011,
and Duyck and de Houwer 2008). This explanation makes
intuitive sense if we think about the amount of real-life
experience with L2 words. For example, L2 words are
associated with a much smaller range of senses than L1
words (Finkbeiner and Nicol 2003), and are in the majority
of cases learned in artificial classroom environments, often
through the use of crude lexical translation. This account is
consistent with the literature on cortical learning, where
words can be thought of as functional cell assemblies in the
brain, formed through Hebbian processes (Pulvermuller
1999). Hebbian learing (“what fires together, wires
together”) would thus predict that cortical distributions of
L2 word semantics are much more restrictive than those of
L1 words, due to different (and fewer) learning and usage
experiences. If this is the case, then L2 words, learned
through translation and with no or limited real-life usage,
would be strongly left lateralized and distributed mainly
over perisylvian cortices. We should, therefore, as was the
case presently, find little activation outside of primary
linguistic brain areas. However, if speakers start using L2
words in real-life embodied contexts, such as when studying
in a foreign country, then these words would increasingly
come to be co-activated with extra-linguistic neural
substrates (including the motor cortex), and would “wire
together” into a new assembly. The present results are
therefore consistent with the idea that the amount of
experience and real-life usage leads to changes in the way
we semantically represent words. Crucially, there were
differences in the amount of time both groups of speakers
spent in an English-speaking country (see Table 1), and this
difference was statistically reliable (t(12) = -2.60, p = .023).
In fact, there is evidence for this conclusion from studies
testing the linguistic performance of L2 students learning
their second language in a classroom vs. an immersed, study
abroad setting. Using experimental paradigms similar to the
one employed presently, Linck et al. (2009) and Talamas et
al (1999) demonstrate that as their proficiency increases, L2

speakers move from exhibiting primarily form-level effects,
to showing increased semantic access. This could explain
why in the results reported here the participants who spent
less time in the UK showed no motor semantic interference
during lexical processing, whereas the other group with a
significantly longer residence in the country showed reliable
double-dissociated interference when processing action
verbs. However, while this proposal seems plausible and
consistent with neurobiological models of language, it must
presently remain at the level of speculation. More work is
thus needed to further clarify the questions of how and when
grounding takes place in the context of second language
acquisition and learning.

Conclusion
It has been suggested that embodied sensorimotor systems
are an integral part of language comprehension. The current
study, for the first time in second language speakers,
demonstrates that they increasingly come to incorporate into
their action-word semantics the same processing resources
used for effector-specific action execution. The resulting
somatotopic interference effects observed in proficient L2
speakers present evidence in favour of embodied approaches
to language.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. John N. Williams,
for his valuable comments and statistical advice. This study
was supported by a CISS graduate scholarship from the
University of Cambridge.

References
Altarriba, J., & Mathis, K. M. (1997). Conceptual and
lexical development in second language acquisition.
Journal of Memory and Language, 36, 550-568.
Barsalou, L. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59, 1–21.
Bergen, B., Narayan, S., and Feldman, J. (2003). Embodied
verbal semantics: evidence from an image-verb matching
task. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society.
Boulenger, V., Roy, A., Paulignan, Y., Deprez, V.,
Jeannerod, M., & Nazir, T. (2006). Cross-talk between
language processes and overt motor behavior in the first
200 msec of processing. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 18(10), 1607–1615.
Buccino, G., Riggio, L., Melli, G., Binkofski, F., Gallese,
B., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005). Listening to action-related
sentences modulates the activity of the motor system: A
combined TMS and behavioral study. Cognitive Brain
Research, 24, 355–363.
Caramazza, A., Hillis, A. E., Rapp, B. C., & Romani, C.
(1990). The multiple semantics hypothesis: Multiple
confusions? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 7, 161-189.

3715

Damasio, AR. (1990). Category-related recognition deficits
as a clue to the neural substrates of knowledge. Trends in
Neuroscience, 13:95-98.
Duyck, W. & de Houwer, J. (2008). Semantic access in
second-language visual word processing: Evidence from
the semantic Simon paradigm. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15, 961–966.
Duyck, W. & Brysbaert, M. (2004). Forward and backward
number translation requires conceptual mediation in both
balanced and unbalanced bilinguals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 30, 889–906.
Farah, M. J., & McClelland, J. L. (1991). A computational
model of semantic memory impairment: Modalityspecificity and emergent category-specificity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 339-357.
Finkbeiner, M., & Nicol, J. (2003). Semantic category
effects in second language word learning. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 24, 369-383.
Fischer, M.H., Zwaan, R.A., (2008). Embodied language: a
review of the role of the motor system in language
comprehension. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology (Colchester), 61 (6), 825–850.
Fodor, J. A. (1998). Concepts: Where Cognitive Science
Went Wrong. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Glenberg, A.M., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., (2008). Useinduced motor plasticity affects the processing of abstract
and concrete language. Current Biology, 18 (7), R290–
R291.
Glenberg, A., and Kaschak, M. (2002). Grounding language
in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558–565.
Gordon, R. G., Jr. (Ed.). (2005). Ethnologue: Languages of
the world. Dallas, TX: SIL International.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in the motor
and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301-307.
Hickok, G. (2010). The role of mirror neurons in speech
perception and action word semantics. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 25: 749-776.
Jones, G.V. (1983). On double dissociation of function.
Neuropsychologia, 21 (4), 397-400.
Kroll, J. F., Michael, E., Tokowicz, N. & Dufour, R. (2002).
The development of lexical fluency in a second language.
Second Language Research, 18, 137–171.
Kroll, J.F. & deGroot, A.M.B. (1997). Lexical and
conceptual memory in the bilingual: Mapping form to
meaning in two languages. In A.M.B. deGroot & J.F. Nas
(eds.) Tutorials in Bilingualism.
Kroll, J.F. & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
Linck, J., Kroll, J. F., & Sunderman, G. (2009). Losing
access to the native language while immersed in a second
language: Evidence for the role of inhibition in second
language learning. Psychological Science, 20, 1507-1515.

Liuzzi, G., Freundlieb, N., Ridder, V., Hoppe, J., Heise, K.,
Zimerman, M., et al., (2010). The involvement of the left
motor cortex in learning of a novel action word lexicon.
Current Biology, 20 (19), 1745–1751.
Mahon, B., and Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at the
embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal for
grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology
Paris, 102(1-3): 59-70.
Marino, B. F. M., Gough, P. M., Gallese, V., Riggio, L., &
Buccino, G. (2011). How the motor system handles
nouns: a behavioral study. Psychological research.
Martin, A., Haxby, J.V., Lalonde, F.M., Wiggs, C.L., &
Ungerleider, L.G. (1995). Discrete cortical regions
associated with knowledge of color and knowledge of
action. Science, 270, 102-105.
Pulvermüller, F., Huss, M., Kherif, F., Moscoso del Prado
Martin, F., Hauk, O., Shtyrov, Y. (2006). Motor cortex
maps articulatory features of speech sounds. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science USA 103, 7865-7870.
Pulvermüller, F., (2005). Brain mechanisms linking
language and action. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6 (7),
576–582.
Pulvermüller, F., Shtyrov, Y. & Ilmoniemi, R. (2005) Brain
signatures of meaning access in action word recognition,
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(6), 884-892.
Pulvermüller, F. (2001). Brain reflections of words and their
meaning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5: 517-524.
Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain’s language.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22: 253-336.
Shallice T. (1988). From Neuropsychology to Mental
Structure. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shebani, Z., & Pulvermüller, F. (2011). Moving the Hands
and Feet Specifically Impairs Working Memory for Armand Leg-Related Action Words. Cortex, 1-10.
Shtyrov Y., Hauk O., and Pulvermuller F. (2004).
Distributed neuronal networks for encoding categoryspecific semantic information: The mismatch negativity to
action words. European Journal of Neuroscience, 19(4):
1083-1092.
Talamas,A., Kroll, J.F. and Dufour, R. (1999). From form to
meaning: stages in the acquisition of second language
vocabulary. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 2, 45–
58.
Williams, J.N. & Cheung, A. (2011). Using priming to
explore early word learning. In P. Trofimovich & K.
McDonough (Eds) Applying priming methods to L2
learning, teaching and research: Insights from
psycholinguistics. John Benjamins, 73-103.
Zwaan, R. A., & Taylor, L. J. (2006). Seeing , Acting ,
Understanding : Motor Resonance in Language
Comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 135(1), 1-11.

3716

