UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Whether Chinese Speakers Think about Time More Vertically Depends on their
Immediate and Lifetime Experience of Reading Horizontal or Vertical Texts: Evidence
from Contextual Priming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2zs378dp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Chen, Jenn-Yeu
Frederich, Michael
Shu, Hua

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Whether Chinese Speakers Think about Time More Vertically Depends on their
Immediate and Lifetime Experience of Reading Horizontal or Vertical Texts:
Evidence from Contextual Priming
Jenn-Yeu Chen (PSYJYC@NTNU.EDU.TW)
Michael Friederich (MICHAEL_TAIWAN_AG@YAHOO.COM)
Department of Chinese as a Second Language, National Taiwan Normal University
162 Heping East Road Section 1, Taipei, Taiwan 106

Hua Shu (SHUH@BNU.EDU.CN)
National Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University
19 Xinjiehouwai Street, Beijing, China 100875

Abstract
Do Chinese speakers think about time vertically
because they use vertical spatial metaphors to
express time? Inconsistent findings have been
reported even when the same paradigms were used.
The
present
study
examined
participants’
performance on a temporal judgment task while
holding language constant but varying their lifetime
and immediate reading experience of horizontal and
vertical texts. Chinese participants from Taiwan and
China were randomly assigned to a reading task
involving horizontally or vertically arranged texts
(contextual primes). A temporal judgment task
(spatial-temporal association of response codes or
STARC) followed the reading task, asking the
participants to judge if the event depicted in a second
picture occurred earlier or later than that in a first
picture. Responses were faster when the left keys
represented the ‘earlier’ responses than when the
right keys did, representing a STARC effect. Half of
the participants responded with horizontally oriented
keys while the rest with vertically oriented keys. For
the Taiwan participants, the overall STARC effect
was greater when the response keys were vertical
than horizontal, but no difference was observed for
the China participants. A questionnaire indicates that
the two groups of participants had similar lifetime
experiences of reading horizontal texts, but the
Taiwan participants read vertical texts in their life far
more frequently than the China participants.
Immediate reading experiences interacted with
lifetime experiences in modulating the vertical bias.
For the Taiwan participants, the vertical bias was
strong following the vertical prime, but disappeared
following the horizontal prime. For the China
participants, the horizontal prime led to no vertical
bias whereas the vertical prime brought about a
horizontal bias. We conclude that the directionality of
orthography and speakers’ immediate and lifetime
reading experiences, rather than the use of vertical
spatial metaphors, can better explain the vertical bias
(or the lack of it) in the Chinese speakers.
Keywords: linguistic relativity; temporal reasoning;
reading direction

Introduction
Once denounced as scientifically unsound (Devitt and
Sterelny, 1987; Pinker, 1994), the linguistic relativity
hypothesis has regained much attention in the past two
decades. The essence of the hypothesis is that the

particular linguistic form in a language can shape the
habitual way of thinking by the speakers of the language
(Whorf, 1956; Hunt & Agnoli, 1991). For example, if
language A does not distinguish two shades of blue
whereas language B does, speakers of language A would
not be able to tell apart the two shades of blue as easily as
speakers of language B (Davidoff, Davies, & Roberson,
1999; Gilbert, Regier, Kay, & Ivry, 2006; Winawer et al.,
2007). Similarly, if language A does not encode the
biological gender lexically whereas language B does, the
gender information would become less accessible to
speakers of language A than speakers of language B
(Chen & Su, 2011). In the temporal domain, it has been
observed that Chinese speakers seem to conceptualize
time continuously and maintain an “extended present”
view that encompasses recent past and near future,
whereas English speakers tend to maintain a relatively
discrete view of time with distinct present, past and future.
This cross-linguistic difference has been attributed to the
use of explicit tense and aspect markers in English and
the lack of them in Chinese (Chen, Su, Lee, &
O’Seaghdha, 2012; Chen, Su, & O’Seaghdha, 2013).
While much of recent empirical work has produced
evidence consistent with the linguistic relativity
hypothesis, there were controversies due to inconsistent
findings as well. One particular controversy comes from
the study of spatial metaphors of time. An early study
employing a spatial priming paradigm found that the
frequent use of vertical spatial metaphors to express time
in Chinese led to a vertical bias in the Chinese speakers’
conception of time whereas the rare use of such
metaphors in English led to a horizontal bias in the
English speakers (Boroditsky, 2001). However,
subsequent studies were unable to confirm such a
differential bias (Chen, 2007; January & Kako, 2007; Tse
& Altarriba, 2008; Sanvido, de Rose, & Chen, 2011).
More
recently,
a
SNARC-like
paradigm
(spatial-numerical association of response codes,
Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993) applied to temporal
processing (spatial-temporal association of response
codes or STARC) detected a similar vertical bias in the
Chinese speakers relative to the English speakers
(Boroditsky, Fuhrman, & McCormick, 2011; Fuhrman et
al., 2011; Miles, Tan, Noble, Lumsden, & Macrae, 2011).
In a STARC task, the participants saw two photographs of
an event and had to determine if the second photograph

2017

occurred earlier or later than the first one. In the canonical
condition, they pressed a left key to indicate ‘earlier’ and
a right key to indicate ‘later’ while in the non-canonical
condition, the key assignment was reversed. Response
times were typically slower in the non-canonical
condition relative to the canonical condition, representing
a STARC effect. For half of the participants, the keys
were placed horizontally while for the other half, the keys
were oriented vertically. It was found that Chinese and
English speakers displayed similar horizontal STARC
effects, but more importantly, the Chinese speakers
demonstrated a greater vertical STARC effect than the
English speakers. Unfortunately, inconsistent findings
were observed with this paradigm as well. Chen and
O’Seaghdha (2012 accepted) observed a vertical bias in
the Chinese speakers from Taiwan, but no such bias in the
Chinese speakers from China. Because horizontal printing
of texts is a national policy in China, but not in Taiwan,
where vertical texts are fairly common, it was suggested
that reading experience of horizontal and vertical texts
might have something to do with the participants’
performance on the STARC task. The suggestion,
however, was inferred from quasi-experimental evidence.
The present study was designed to test the effect of
reading experience on Chinese speakers’ performance on
the STARC task by experimentally manipulating the
layout of texts (horizontal or vertical) which participants
read before the STARC task. The reading task, serving as
a contextual prime, was expected to bias the Chinese
participants towards displaying a greater or smaller
horizontal or vertical STARC effect depending on the
direction of reading. The modulation of immediate
reading experience might interact with Chinese speakers’
lifetime reading experience, which was assessed by
including participants from Taiwan and China. The
participants from Taiwan would have more extensive
experience of reading vertical texts than the participants
from China.

Method
Participants
Fifty-six native Mandarin Chinese speakers from Taiwan
and the same number from China participated in this
study. The participants from Taiwan were graduate or
undergraduate students from National Taiwan Normal
University and nearby universities in Taipei, while those
from China were similar students from Beijing Normal
University and nearby universities in Beijing. The age
range for the participants was from 18 to 26. All the
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and
they were paid 200 TWDs or 20 RMBs for participation.

Design and Materials
The Reading Task Seven short essays with 11
comprehension questions were chosen from the Taiwan
University Entrance Exams for the reading task. Two
versions of the texts (the essays and the questions) were
prepared as paper booklets, one arranged horizontally and
the other vertically. Participants were randomly assigned
to one version. There was no time pressure for taking the

task. On the average, it took approximately 15 to 20
minutes for the participants to complete this task. Upon
completion, the participants proceeded immediately to the
STARC task.
The STARC Task The design and procedure of the
STARC task followed those of Chen & O’Seaghdha
(2013). The materials were 37 action events, each being
photographed at three different phases of time (e.g., Time
X: a man holding the handle and about to turn the key to
open a door, Time Y: door being open with the man
stepping half into the room, and Time Z: door being half
closed with the man inside the room facing inward with
his left hand holding against the closing door). On each
trial, a Time Y picture was randomly chosen from the 37
events and shown to the participants. The Time Y picture
was followed by a Time X or a Time Z picture. The
participants were asked to determine whether the action
depicted in the second picture occurred earlier or later
than the action depicted in the first. In one condition (the
canonical response), the number-4 key on the numeric
keypad of a standard keyboard, marked with a blue
sticker, was designated as the ‘earlier’ response, and the
number-5 key, marked with a orange sticker, was
designated as the ‘later’ response. In the other condition
(the noncanonical response), the key assignment was
reversed, i.e., the ‘5’ key was the blue one designated as
the ‘earlier’ response and the ‘4’ key was the orange one
designated as the ‘later’ response. Canonicity was a
within-subjects factor. The same set of 37 action events
was used in the two canonicity conditions, with the Time
X and the Time Z pictures appearing exactly once in each
condition. The order of the two conditions was
counterbalanced
across
the
participants.
A
between-subjects factor was also included. Half of the
participants, randomly determined, responded with the
keyboard placed on the desk in a normal horizontal
orientation, and the other half responded with the
keyboard oriented vertically (propped up against a
bookend).
The task was programmed in E-Prime and was run on a
desktop (ASUS B53S with an Intel® Core™ i5 2520M
processor and a 15.6" 16:9 HD 1366x768-resolution LED
screen) and a laptop computer (ASUS R500V with an
Intel® Core™ i7 3610QM 2.3 GHz processor and a 15.6"
16:9 HD 1366x768-resolution LED screen), both with a
separate USB- connected numeric keypad (Kingyo). A
trial began with a fixation cross which appeared at the
center of the screen for 500 msec. and was followed by a
blank screen for 500 ms. Then, the first picture in a pair
appeared at the same location for 2000 ms followed by
another blank screen for 500 ms. The second picture
followed and stayed on until the participants responded.
Upon a response, a last blank screen of 500 ms replaced
the second picture and the next trial began. Both pictures
measured 22.5 cm in width and 17 cm in height. The
participants sat at a viewing distance of 70 cm in front of
the computer screen. The participants were told to
respond with the index finger of their preferred hand as
quickly and accurately as soon as the second picture
appeared. The index finger was parked at the gulf
between the blue and orange keys at the beginning of a

2018

The Reading Experience Questionnaire Upon
completion of the reading task and the STARC task, the
participants also filled out a questionnaire to indicate how
frequently they encountered a vertical text, a horizontal
text printed from left to right, and a horizontal text printed
from right to left on a 8-point scale ranging from never (0)
to very frequently (7). They also reported the sources of
the texts (e.g., magazines, newspapers, textbooks, street
signs, slogans, advertisements, etc.).

the vertical one; under the horizontal prime, the vertical
STARC effect was greater than the horizontal one, but the
interaction fell short of the conventional level of
significance, F(1, 3926) = 3.22, p = .0728. Worth noting
is no significant difference between the horizontal and
vertical STARC effects (p = .57), indicating no overall
vertical bias in the Beijing participants. None of the other
effects were significant, p’s > .24.
0.2

STARC Effect

trial. The participants received five practice trials before
going on with the experimental trials.

Results
The Taiwan Sample

0.05

Horizontal

Vertical

Response Key Orientation

Figure 1: The STARC effect (difference in log RT of the
noncanonical condition minus the canonical condition) as
a function of response key orientation and type of
contextual prime (the Taipei sample).
0.2
0.15

Horizontal Prime
Vertical Prime

0.1
0.05
0
Horizontal

Vertical

Response Key Orientation

Figure 2: The STARC effect (difference in log RT of the
noncanonical condition minus the canonical condition) as
a function of response key orientation and type of
contextual prime (the Beijing sample).

The Beijing Sample
For the Beijing sample, the participants’ comprehension
scores in the reading task were also close to perfect. Their
rated experience of vertical texts, horizontal left-to-right
texts and horizontal right-to-left texts was 2.7 (SD=1.6),
6.9 (SD=0.7), and 1.3 (SD=1.3), respectively. Their
averaged error rate in the STARC task was 3%. The
analysis of their log-transformed response times in the
STARC task shows the pattern in Figure 2. The overall
STARC effect was significant by the linear mixed-effect
analysis: F(1, 7857) = 50.07, p < .0001. As the figure
shows, the STARC effect interacted significantly with
prime and response orientation: F(1, 7857) = 8.01, p
= .0047. Separate post-hoc analyses show that the
response orientation by canonicity interaction was
significant under the vertical prime, F(1, 3895) = 4.83, p
= .0280, showing a greater horizontal STARC effect than

0.1

0

STARC Effect

For the Taiwan sample, the participants’ comprehension
scores in the reading task were close to perfect. Their
rated experience of vertical texts, horizontal left-to-right
texts and horizontal right-to-left texts was 5.7 (SD=1.6),
6.5 (SD=0.5), and 1.4 (SD=1.6), respectively. Their error
rate in the STARC task was on the average 3%. The
analysis of their log-transformed response times in the
STARC task shows the pattern in Figure 1. The STARC
effect on the Y-axis represents the averaged difference in
log-transformed response time of the noncanonical
condition minus the canonical condition. The overall
STARC effect was significant by the linear mixed-effect
analysis: F(1, 7915) = 59.18, p < .0001. As the figure
shows, the STARC effect was greater when the response
keys were oriented vertically than when they were
oriented horizontally: F(1, 7915) = 11.13, p = .0009. This
indicates an overall vertical bias in temporal judgment by
our Taiwan participants. The figure also shows that
whereas the vertical bias was fairly strong following the
vertical prime (i.e., having read the vertical texts and
questions), it was substantially reduced (in fact
disappeared) following the horizontal prime. Statistically,
the response orientation by canonicity interaction was
highly significant under the vertical prime, F(1, 3952) =
18.51, p < .0001, but the same interaction was far from
being significant under the horizontal prime, F(1, 3927)
= .35, p = .5564.

0.15

Horizontal Prime
Vertical Prime

Discussion
The Chinese language employs both horizontal and
vertical spatial metaphors for expressing time. It has been
suggested that the common use of vertical spatial
metaphors biases the Chinese speakers to conceptualize
time vertically. We hypothesized that reading experience
of horizontally and vertically arranged texts might be a
potent variable contributing to such a bias. The
hypothesis was tested by assigning Chinese participants
from Taiwan and China to a reading task involving either
horizontally or vertically arranged texts, followed by a
STARC task. Although the vertical STARC effect was
overall greater than the horizontal one among the Taiwan
participants, such a vertical bias was absent among the
China participants. These results can be accounted for by
the significantly more frequent lifetime experience of
encountering vertical texts among the Taiwan participants

2019

than among the China participants: 5.7 vs. 2.7, t(110) =
9.9, p < .0001. The rated experience of encountering
horizontal left-to-right texts was similar between the two
groups of participants: 6.5 vs. 6.9.
Furthermore, the vertical bias, when present, was
modulated by the immediate reading experience such that
it disappeared when the Taiwan participants had just read
horizontally arranged texts. For the China participants,
the immediate reading experience also modulated the
vertical bias, but in the opposite direction. The horizontal
prime led to no significant vertical bias while the vertical
prime brought about a horizontal bias. The different
patterns of results between the Taiwan and the Beijing
participants indicate that lifetime reading experience
interacts with immediate reading experience in its effect
on the participants’ temporal judgment in the STARC
task.
The finding of a causal role of directionality of
orthography and reading experience in Chinese speakers’
temporal judgment is consistent with the findings of
many studies in the literature showing a relationship
between the directionality of orthography and the
performance on a space-implicated task (Tversky,
Kugelmass, and Winter, 1991; Dehaeneet al., 1993;
Zebian, 2005; Chan & Bergen, 2005; Fuhrman &
Boroditsky, 2010; Ouellet, Santiago, Israeli, & Gabay,
2010). In conjunction with these findings as well as the
facts that (1) horizontal spatial metaphors are used far
more frequently than vertical ones in Mandarin Chinese
(Chen, 2007) and (2) our Taiwan and China participants
speak the same language, the results of the present study
suggest that the directionality of orthography and
speakers’ (immediate and lifetime) reading experience,
rather than the use of spatial metaphors per se, can better
explain the vertical bias (or the lack of it) in the Chinese
speakers.
Chen and O’Seadhgha (2012 accepted) previously
observed a vertical bias in the Chinese participants from
Taipei (Taiwan), but a horizontal bias in the Chinese
participants from Guangdong (China). The discrepancy
was attributed to the fact that China has adopted the
national policy of printing all texts horizontally whereas
both horizontal and vertical directions are allowed and
prevalent in Taiwan. The evidence, however, is indirect
due to the quasi-experimental nature of the study. By
directly manipulating the participants’ experience of
reading horizontal and vertical texts, the present study
offers the needed evidence for establishing the causal role
of directionality of orthography and reading experience.
Reading experience can also account for the
inconsistent findings across studies. Because the Chinese
participants in the previous studies came from different
regions, their experience of reading horizontal and
vertical texts could vary greatly, which was attested to by
the rating data in the present study, and thus could
contribute to the inconsistency in findings.
Returning to the use of spatial metaphors for expressing
time, Chen (2007) has previously reported that horizontal
spatial metaphors were actually used far more frequently
than vertical spatial metaphors in Chinese. He argued that
the usage pattern did not lend the logical support for the
hypothesis that Chinese speakers would think about time

more vertically. Boroditsky et al. (2011) countered Chen’s
argument by maintaining that it was the cross-language
difference in the usage of vertical spatial metaphors that
predicted the vertical bias in the Chinese speakers.
However, without controlling for potent factors such as
directionality of orthography and speakers’ reading
experience, it is impossible to make certain that Chinese
speakers do think about time differently than English
speakers and that this is due to the differential usage of
vertical spatial metaphors in the two languages.
The hypothesized conceptual link between spatial and
temporal reasoning has also been questioned recently
with respect to the use of frame of reference. It has been
claimed that people reference time onto space, and
because different linguistic communities prefer different
spatial frames of reference, their temporal references vary
as well. Beller, Rothe, Hüther and Bender (2012)
examined existing data as well new data, concluding that
there is not a close link between referencing preferences
across spatial and temporal domains.
Although linguistic relativity has manifested itself in
several domains of cognition, whether it extends to the
conception of time in relation to the latter’s
metaphorically projected meaning requires further
investigations at best.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by "Aim for the Top University
Plan" of the National Taiwan Normal University and the
Ministry of Education, Taiwan, R.O.C. Preparation of this
manuscript was supported by the NSC 101-2410-H-003
-105-MY2 grant. We thank Yahsin Huang for conducting
the experiments and Lijuan Zou and Tian Hong for
helping with recruiting participants in Beijing.

References
Beller, S., Rothe, A., Hüther, L., & Bender, A. (2012).
Moving forward in space and time: How strong is the
conceptual link between spatial and temporal frames of
reference? Frontiers in Cultural Psychology, 3:486. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00486.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-22.
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2011).
Do English and Mandarin speakers think about time
differently? Cognition, 118, 123-129.
Chan, T.-T., & Bergen, B. (2005). Writing direction
influences spatial cognition. In Bara, B., Barsalou, L., &
Bucciarelli, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
412–417). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chen, J.-Y. (2007). Do Chinese and English speakers think
about time differently? Failure of replicating Boroditsky
(2001). Cognition, 104, 427–436.
Chen, J.-Y., & O'Seaghdha, P. G. (2012 accepted). Do
Mandarin and English speakers think about time
differently? Review of existing evidence and some new
data. Journal of Chinese Linguistics.

2020

Chen, J.-Y., & Su, J.-J. (2011). Differential sensitivity to
the gender of a person by English and Chinese speakers.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 40, 195-203
Chen, J.-Y., Su, J.-J., Lee, C.-Y., & O’Seaghdha, P. G.
(2012). Linguistically directed attention to the temporal
aspect of action events in monolingual English speakers
and Chinese-English bilingual speakers with varying
English proficiency. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 15, 413-421.
Chen, J.-Y., Su, J.-J., & O'Seaghdha, P. G. (2013).
Enduring moments: The extended present in Chinese
speakers' orientation to event time. Journal of
Pragmatics, 45, 90-103.
Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Robertson, D. (1999). Colour
categories in a stone-age tribe. Nature, 402(6762),
604-605.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371–396.
Devitt, M., & Sterelny, K. (1987). Language and reality:
An introduction to the philosophy of language. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-cultural
differences in mental representations of time: Evidence
from an implicit non-linguistic task. Cognitive Science,
34, 1430–1451.
Fuhrman, O., McCormick, K., Chen, E., Jiang, H., Shu, D.,
Mao, S., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). How linguistic and
cultural forces shape conceptions of time: English and
Mandarin time in 3D. Cognitive Science, 35, 1305-1328.
Gilbert, A. L., Regier, T., Kay, P., & Ivry, R. B. (2006).
Whorf hypothesis is supported in the right visual field
but not the left. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 103(2),
489-494.
Hunt, E., & Agnoli, F. (1991). The Whorfian hypothesis: a
cognitive psychology perspective. Psychological
Review, 98(3), 377-389.
January, D., & Kako, E. (2007). Re-evaluating evidence
for the linguistic relativity hypothesis: Response to
Boroditsky (2001). Cognition, 104, 417–426.
Miles, L. K., Tan, L., Noble, G. D., Lumsden, J., &
Macrae, C. N. (2011). Can a mind have two time lines?
Exploring space–time mapping in Mandarin and English
speakers. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 18,
598-604.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010). Is
the future the right time? Experimental Psychology, 57,
308-314.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. N.Y.: Harper
Perrenial.
Sanvido, G. B., de Rose, J. C., & Chen, J.-Y. (2011
November). Chinese speakers do not think about time
differently than Portuguese speakers. Poster presented at
the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Seattle, USA.
Tse, C.-S., & Altarriba, J. (2008). Evidence against
linguistic relativity in Chinese and English: A case study
of spatial and temporal metaphors. Journal of Cognition
and Culture, 8(3/4), 335-357.

Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. & Winter, A. (1991).
Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought and reality:
Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf, ed. J. B.
Carroll. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M. C., Wu, L., Wade, A.
R., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal
effects of language on color discrimination.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 104(19), 7780–7785.
Zebian, S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts,
spatial thinking, and directionality of writing: The
SNARC effect and the REVERSE SNARC effect in
English and Arabic monoliterates, biliterates, and
illiterate Arabic speakers. Journal of Cognition and
Culture, 5, 165-190.

2021

