UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Whorf for the 21st century: From interactive processing to linguistic relativity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9248998c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Lupyan, Gary

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Whorf for the 21st century: From interactive processing to linguistic relativity
Gary Lupyan (lupyan@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
sides, all participants predictably drew triangles: 50% were
isosceles/equilateral and 50% were parallel to the bottom of
the page. When a separate group was asked to draw a ―triangle,‖ 91% drew isosceles or equilateral triangles and 82%
drew triangles with bases parallel to the bottom of the page
(the canonical horizontal orientation). These differences do
not stem solely from pragmatics. In a speeded recognition
task, participants were faster to verify isosceles than scalene
triangles, and horizontally-oriented than oblique triangles,
but only on trials on which they actually heard the word
―triangle‖ and not on trials on which they viewed the same
shapes after hearing ―three-sided‖ (all factors withinsubjects) . Finally, in an untimed visual-reasoning task, participants were asked to estimate the angle of the base of
various three-sided polygons. These shapes were referred to
as ―triangle‖ or a ―three-sided shape‖ (between subjects). As
shown in Fig. 1, when the shape was referred to as a ―triangle,‖ its tilt was perceived as deviating more from the canonical (horizontal) as steeper than when the category name
was omitted. On one interpretation, these results support the
hypothesis that the representation activated by the word
―triangle‖ are a better match to more ―canonical‖ triangles
than a formally equivalent cue. Despite denotative equivalence between ―triangles‖ and ―three-sided polygons‖ the
category label ―triangle‖ seems to reliably activate a more
―canonical‖ triangle as measured by both explicit and implicit tasks—prima facie evidence of category labels augmenting underlying representations in systematic ways.
B
A
1200

p<.0001

Mean onset of first saccade (ms)

The crux of the Whorfian thesis is that our thought and
behavior are influenced in deep ways by the language we
use. In recent years we have seen a wave of rigorous and
creative investigations of this thesis (Boroditsky, 2010;
Wolff & Holmes, 2011 for reviews). Yet, many researchers
remain highly skeptical of findings purporting to support
Whorfian claims (Gleitman & Papafragou, 2005), and
much confusion remains about how to integrate these findings into existing theories of cognition. A major barrier to
understanding the degree to which various aspects of human
cognition may be affected by speaking different languages
is understanding the relationship between language—any
language—and the rest of cognition. To remove this barrier
we need to address a fundamental question: To what degree
is normal human cognition actually language-augmented
cognition? I will argue that a surprising variety of behavior
previously assumed to be ―nonverbal‖ shows signs of being
influenced by linguistic factors and I will outline a theory of
language-augmented thought that offers a mechanistic account of where we might expect to find effects of language
on ―nonverbal‖ cognition (Lupyan, 2012a, 2012b, for reviews).
One of the core features of language is using words to
denote categories, e.g., using the word ―dog‖ to refer to
dogs. Words are commonly seen as a kind of ―pointer‖ to
concepts, the content of which is independent of language.
In recent work, we have argued for an alternative: verbal
labels do not simply point or refer to nonlinguistic concepts,
but rather actively modulate conceptual representations that
are brought online during ―nonverbal‖ tasks. For example,
Lupyan & Thompson-Schill (2012) showed that hearing
referential labels such as ―dog‖ consistently enhanced picture recognition compared to equally familiar, predictive,
and unambiguous nonverbal cues such as a barking sound.
This label advantage extended to newly learned labels and
sounds. Despite participants’ equivalent facility in learning
what a novel object is called and what sound it makes, newly learned verbal labels were subsequently more effective in
activating the concept than nonverbal sounds. In particular,
hearing a label appeared to activate more category-typical
information than hearing equally predictive nonverbal cues.
This and related findings that verbal labels selectively activate category-typical features is hypothesized to underlie
detrimental effects of labeling on visual memory such as the
ability to remember not just that one saw a chair, but what
kind of chair it was (Lupyan, 2008a).
As a further example of the kinds of powerful and surprising effects that category labels have on putatively nonverbal tasks, consider the following results (summarized in
Lupyan, 2012a): When asked to draw a figure with three

900

Click on th
figure in t

600
300
0

Figure 1: Left: Perceived orientation of shapes is systematically affected by whether they are called “triangles” or “three-sided”. Right: Participants take
longer to look at scalene (atypical) triangles when
they hear the word “triangle.”
Thus, referring to an object by its name appears to activate a
different representation than when ostensibly the same concept is activated without using the name (Lupyan &
Thompson-Schill, 2012; Lupyan, 2008b).

1678

Click on th
in the …"

Looks to isos

Why do labels have these effects? On the present account these effects are a product of (1) the association history of the discrete label with numerous category exemplars
and (2) the feedback of the label on conceptual/perceptual
representations. Under the influence of this feedback, the
representations of various entities (objects, relations, etc.)
become more categorical. This account can explain, for example, findings of pervasive effects of language on color
perception (e.g., Regier & Kay, 2009; Lupyan, 2012a for
discussion). Stated simply: the association of a label such as
―green‖ with a range of colors means that when one sees a
greenish color, the label is rapidly activated, temporarily
warping the perceptual space. Viewing a green object becomes a hybrid visuo-linguistic experience.
To better understand this account, a simulation of how
feedback label-feedback can augment conceptual and perceptual representations will be presented. Fig 2A shows a
schematic of an interactive neural network trained on a bidirectional mapping between bit-vectors (representing featurebased object
label
(A)
representations) and cat“conceptual”
egory
labels
(i.e., learning
to label chairs
“perceptual”
as ―chairs‖ and
learning
to
(B)
activate a likely visual representation of a
chair given the
label).
After
training, when
the network is
Labels prevented
allowed
Labels prevented Labels
Labels
allowed
presented with
from feeding back
to feed back
from feeding back
to feed back
a
perceptual Figure
2. (A) Schematic of a neural
input, the label network for studying the role of label
becomes au- feedback on object representations. (B)
tomatically
Activation dynamics in the “conceptuactivated, and al” layer. Each line represents an actithen
feeds vation of a category exemplar over the
back to affect course of a single trial. Color represents
representations category membership.
as they unfold
in time in the ―perceptual‖ and ―conceptual‖ layers. We can
then examine what role the label is playing in the activation
and maintenance of the representation of a particular category exemplar by directly perturbing the activation of the label
or its feedback onto these layers. Feedback from labels
(whether activated by the network on its own, or provided
externally) provides much more categorical (clustered) representations (Fig. 2b), leading to improved categorization—
a prediction confirmed by overt categorization tasks (Lupyan, 2009; Lupyan, Rakison, & McClelland, 2007; Lupyan
& Thompson-Schill, 2012). Additional evidence for verbal
labels augmenting ―nonverbal‖ representations comes from
their apparent effects on basic visual perception. Visual rep-

resentations activated by verbal means appear to be different—specifically, more categorical—than ostensibly the
same representations activated by nonverbal means (Lupyan
& Spivey, 2008, 2010; Lupyan, 2008b).
Given that small linguistic manipulations affect how
perceptual and conceptual information is brought online
even within the same language community, we may expect
that the substantial cross-linguistic differences in human
languages should have substantially larger consequences on
―thought,‖ but there seems to be fewer such differences than
expected. I will argue that this curious absence of evidence
is due to a dichotomy made by researchers between verbal
and nonverbal processes (e.g., ―thinking for speaking‖) with
the consequence that investigators may of linguistic relativity may have been looking in the wrong places.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2010). How the languages we speak shape the
ways we think: the FAQs. In M. J. Spivey, M. Joanisse,
& K. McRae (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Psycholinguistics (p. forthcoming). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Gleitman, L., & Papafragou, A. (2005). Language and thought. In
K. Holyoak & B. Morrison (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook
of Thinking and Reasoning (pp. 633–661). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lupyan, G. (2008a). From chair to ―chair:‖ A representational shift
account of object labeling effects on memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 137(2), 348–369.
Lupyan, G. (2008b). The conceptual grouping effect: Categories
matter (and named categories matter more). Cognition,
108(2), 566–577.
Lupyan, G. (2009). Extracommunicative Functions of Language:
Verbal Interference Causes Selective Categorization Impairments. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(4), 711–
718.
Lupyan, G. (2012a). Linguistically modulated perception and cognition: the label-feedback hypothesis. Frontiers in Cognition, 3(54).
Lupyan, G. (2012b). What do words do? Towards a theory of language-augmented thought. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation (Vol. 57, pp. 255–
297). Academic Press.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007). Language
is not just for talking: labels facilitate learning of novel
categories. Psychological Science, 18(12), 1077–1082.
Lupyan, G., & Spivey, M. J. (2008). Perceptual processing is facilitated by ascribing meaning to novel stimuli. Current Biology, 18(10), R410–R412.
Lupyan, G., & Spivey, M. J. (2010). Redundant spoken labels
facilitate perception of multiple items. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 72(8), 2236–2253.
Lupyan, G., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2012). The evocative power of words: Activation of concepts by verbal and nonverbal means. Journal of Experimental PsychologyGeneral, 141(1), 170–186. doi:10.1037/a0024904
Regier, T., & Kay, P. (2009). Language, thought, and color: Whorf
was half right. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(10),
439–446. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2009.07.001
Wolff, P., & Holmes, K. (2011). Linguistic relativity. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2(3), 253–265.

1679

