UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Workshop Proposal: PRE-CogSci 2013: Bridging the gap between cognitive and
computational approaches to reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56z5k8jk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gatt, Albert
Van Gompel, Roger
Bard, Ellen Gurman
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Workshop Proposal: PRE-CogSci 2013 – Bridging the gap between cognitive and
computational approaches to reference
Albert Gatt

Roger van Gompel

Ellen Gurman Bard

Outline

Emiel Krahmer

Kees van Deemter

NWO-VICI project Bridging the gap between psycholinguistics and computational linguistics: the case of Referring Expressions (Krahmer, 2009 – 2013), and the (British) EPSRC
project REFNET An Interdisciplinary Network Focussing on
Reference, (Bard and van Deemter, 2012-2015). Four new
themes have recently emerged in this area, which will be explored during the workshop:

This full-day workshop explores the Production of Referring
Expressions (PRE) from different perspectives. It follows
two earlier workshops on the same theme, which were associated with two earlier CogSci conferences. The first of
these, PRE-CogSci 2009, focussed on the interplay between
computational and empirical methods.1 The second, PRECogSci 2011, broadened this theme to include work on dialogue and linguistic theory.2 Both events were highly successful, with each containing over 20 presentations and an
audience of over 60 participants. Following the first workshop, the Topics in Cognitive Science journal published an issue containing 8 peer-reviewed articles selected from 28 full
paper submissions (Krahmer et al. 2012). Following the second workshop, we are finalising a Special Issue of the journal
Language and Cognitive Processes; accepted papers are expected to appear in 2013-14. A survey of research, by 2 of
the organisers, on the generation of referring expressions that
came out in the journal Computational Linguistics in March
2012 has since been downloaded over 700 times.
This third PRE workshop is part of CogSci 2013. It will be
different from its predecessors in two ways. Firstly, a range
of new intellectual themes will be explored that have emerged
in recent years. Second, the workshop will be coupled with
a satellite event, which will be separately funded, and which
will be devoted to the role of reference in practical applications. We expand on these issues below.

• Collaborative reference. Referring expressions are often
produced collaboratively, as when one speaker says “The
hill just north of us” and the other adds “You mean with
the tower on top?” We believe the time has come to address
collaborative reference using the combination of computational and empirical methods that have become mainstream
in the study of reference. Research that takes off from a
view of language as a social and collaborative phenomenon
has the potential to shift the goal of production models
away from the aim of identifying a referent uniquely towards effective communication.
• Nondeterminism in production. Evidence suggests that
a given speaker, confronted with a given situation, will not
always produce the same utterance (just like a marksman
doesn’t always hit the same area of a target). Recent models have started to model algorithmically what variation is
found in the production of referring expressions.
• Interaction between comprehension and production.
Work on comprehension (i.e., interpretation) and production (i.e., generation) has typically proceeded separately.
Recent work on reference, however, has started to study
comprehension and production jointly, seeking to exploit
their common mechanisms and discover their differences.

Workshop overview
Interest and significance As the earlier workshops demonstrated, there is abundant scope for cross-disciplinary research on reference. Recent advances (see below) have
caused the interest in PRE-CogSci 2013 to increase further.

• Combinations with research on vision. Recently, researchers in Natural Language Generation and researchers
in Computer Vision have joined forces (e.g., EPSRC’s Vision & Language Net in the UK, Belz and Makris 20102013) for example to allow computers to describe a picture
and refer to objects in it. This has raised new questions
concerning the way in which visual information is represented in the human brain, and how this may be modelled
computationally.

Importance The boundaries between the different disciplines
working on reference are starting to shift, with computational
methods (e.g., stochastic and Bayesian methods; ACT-R) permeating theoretical and experimental work. Increased collaboration between computational linguists and psycholinguists
is bound to be mutually beneficial: computational work will
benefit from a greater awareness of psycholinguistic methods
and findings; psycholinguistic models (which often underdetermine the phenomena) have the potential to benefit from
precise and explicit algorithmic models. The importance of
this cross-disciplinary collaboration has been acknowledged
though the award of two recent projects, namely the (Dutch)

Relevance to CogSci 2013 Apart from its relevance to language comprehension and production, the workshop’s focus
on collaborative reference – in which a sequence of actions
by two or more agents achieves an effect that none of them
might have achieved on her own – will make it directly relevant to the modelling of social interaction. Our satellite event
(see below) will lend further emphasis to social aspects of reference, focussing on real-life situations.

1 See http://pre2009.uvt.nl/ for the website and proceedings of the first workshop.
2 See http://pre2011.uvt.nl/ for the website and proceedings of the second workshop.

28

Suitability of organisers Apart from their success in organising the first two PRE-CogSci workshops, the organisers are
leading researchers in the field of reference, and their backgrounds range from psycholinguistics to theoretical and applied computing science.

•
•
•
•

Publicity
and
impact
A
dedicated
website,
http://pre2013.uvt.nl/, links to the sites of the previous
editions of PRE-CogSci, and will (eventually) contain the
electronic workshop proceedings, in the form of extended
abstracts. The workshop has been advertised on several
emailing lists in experimental psychology, computational
linguistics and theoretical linguistics. As in the case of the
previous two workshops, we envisage a special issue in an
appropriate scholarly journal.

Proposed format and funding For the main event, we envisage a full-day workshop, consisting of two half-sessions, each
starting with an address by a keynote speaker. We envisage
8-10 oral presentations and a poster session. Travel expenses
of the keynote speakers will be split between the abovementioned projects NWO-VICI and EPSRC-REFNET.
As a satellite, probably on the day before the workshop,
we envisage a Cross-pollination meeting in which researchers
will interact with practitioners in Human-Computer Interaction, Robotics, and Geographical Information Systems, to
discuss challenges involving reference that come from real
applications. The satellite event will not be part of the workshop and will be financed by the RefNet project (see above),
but we expect the two events to dovetail well, thus adding to
the number of people likely to want to come to CogSci.
Likely audience and attendees The workshop will be of interest to a variety of cognitive scientists, including psycholinguists with an interest in computational modelling; computational linguists with an interest in experimental methods; and
a limited number of others who will be attracted to the event
because of the (satellite) Cross-pollination event; these will
probably include a number of representatives from industry.
Based on the experience of the first two editions of the workshop, we expect 50-70 participants.
Two keynote speakers have agreed to speak at the workshop: Professor Herb Clark, and Dr Noah Goodman. Professor Clark (Stanford) is a psycholinguist whose longstanding experimental work on reference has been more influential than anyone else’s; his work has often stressed collaboration and other social aspects of communication. Dr Goodman
(MIT, then Stanford) works in a new area where computer science overlaps with psychology; he has done extensive work
in concept learning and has recently turned his attention to
the modelling of reference using stochastic algorithms, integrating models of interpretation with models of production.
Both speakers’ work is highly relevant to the workshop. (See
the themes mentioned under the header Importance.) In addition, the following people have agreed to form part of the
programme committee:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Amanda Stent, AT&T Labs and Stony Brook Univ., USA;
Matthew Stone, Rutgers University, USA;
Takenobu Tokunaga, Tokyo Inst. of Technology, Japan;
Mariët Theune, Twente University, Netherlands.

List of Requirements The only requirements are a data
projector and computer, preferably with internet connection.

Contact details
Deemter3

Kees van
Professor in Computing Science
Computing Science department
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, Scotland, UK
email: k.vdeemter@abdn.ac.uk
Names and affiliations of additional authors:
Albert Gatt, Universities of Malta and Tilburg4
Ellen Gurman Bard, University of Edinburgh5
Roger van Gompel, University of Dundee6
Emiel Krahmer, Tilburg University7

References
Krahmer, Van Gompel, Gatt and Van Deemter (2012). Topic
“Bridging the Gap between Computational and Empirical
Approaches to Reference”, TopiCS in Cognitive Science 4 (2),
pp.165-329. (Contains 8 peer-reviewed articles.)

Mira Ariel, Tel Aviv University, Israel;
Jennifer Arnold, University of North Carolina, USA;
Adrian Bangerter, Univ. of Neuchâtel, Switzerland;
Dale Barr, University of Glasgow, UK;
Eva Belke, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany;
Holly Branigan, University of Edinburgh, UK;
Susan Brennan, Stony Brook University, USA;
Sarah Brown-Schmidt, Univ. Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Herb Clark, Stanford University, USA;
Victor Ferreira, University of California, USA;
Jeanette Gundel, University of Minnesota, USA;
Martijn Goudbeek, Tilburg University, The Netherlands;
Markus Guhe, University of Edinburgh, UK;
Daphna Heller, University of Toronto, Canada;
John Kelleher, Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland;
Frank Keller, University of Edinburgh, UK;
Ralf Klabunde, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany;
Danielle Matthews, University of Sheffield, UK;
Margaret Mitchell, Johns Hopkins University, USA;
Paul Piwek, Open University, UK;
Massimo Poesio, University of Trento, Italy;
Ehud Reiter, University of Aberdeen, UK;

3 http://homepages.abdn.ac.uk/k.vdeemter/pages/
4 http://staff.um.edu.mt/albert.gatt/
5 http://www.lel.ed.ac.uk/∼ellen/
6 http://www.dundee.ac.uk/psychology/rpgvangompel/
7 http://www.emielkrahmer.nl/

29

