UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Young children's developing sensitivity to discourse continuity as a cue to reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ch1t4bv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Horowitz, Alexandra
Frank, Michael

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Young children’s developing sensitivity to discourse continuity as a cue to reference
Alexandra C. Horowitz

Michael C. Frank

ahorowit@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

A large body of research has been devoted to children’s
ability to map names to inferred referents through disambiguation of a single new item and label. In the presence
of a known item and an unknown item, children map a
novel label to the novel item rather than the already-named
item (Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Merriman, Bowman, &
MacWhinney, 1989; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994; Clark, 1990).
Though the mechanisms at play are debated, this finding establishes that children can make inferences about a speaker’s
likely intended meaning in constrained contexts. While employing their repertoire of word-object mappings may allow
children to disambiguate some novel referents, there may be
other situations in which multiple items are unknown.
Children can also use social-pragmatic cues to infer novel
word reference. By age 2, children map novel labels to novel
objects that the speaker attends to rather than what they themselves may be attending to (Baldwin, 1991), and even after
a time delay (Baldwin, 1993). Young children apply new
terms to the target but not non-target items of a speaker’s
search (Tomasello & Barton, 1994), show evidence of considering not only their own novelty perspective, but also what is
novel to a speaker in a discourse context (Akhtar, Carpenter,
& Tomasello, 1996), and can recognize that speaker naming
events may convey social-pragmatic implications about information that is expected to be shared (Diesendruck & Shemer,
2006).
Despite this body of evidence on general pragmatic cues,
few studies have investigated children’s sensitivity to discourse structure. Nevertheless, some work suggests that discourse continuity may provide important opportunities for
learning. Frank, Fernald, and Tenenbaum (2013) examined a
video corpus of caregivers interacting with their 6–18 monthold children. In these natural settings, they found discourse
continuity (that utterances in close succession are likely to
relate to the same topic) was as reliably linked to reference
as were social cues such as pointing and gaze (Frank, Tenenbaum, & Fernald, 2013). Although this result suggests that
discourse continuity may be an available cue to disambiguate
reference in the presence of competitors, their work did not
provide evidence that learners actually make use of this information. Therefore, our present studies provide the first test of
whether discourse position can be used to determine reference in word learning.
We discuss two experiments indicating that both children
and adults can use discourse position to resolve reference ambiguity. Additionally, our control condition shows that children and adults rely on the informativeness of discourse structure rather than simpler heuristics such as temporal proxim-

Children can learn new words in pedagogical contexts, but they
may also infer reference using a variety of other information
sources. Here we investigate children’s sensitivity to the placement of novel labels within discourse structure as a possible
mechanism for word learning. In Experiment 1, children ages
2–6 years participated in word learning trials featuring two
novel items and one novel label. In critical trials, the labels
were embedded between two sentences about the same item,
whereas in a control condition, the label was introduced after
two sentences about the item. Children of all ages were more
likely to attribute the label to the toy whose descriptions bracketed the embedded label, and response strength increased with
age. Children across all ages responded at chance in the control
condition. In Experiment 2, adults showed the same patterns
of responses as children in both critical and control conditions.
Together, these results suggest that discourse continuity is a
reliable cue to reference for both children and adults.
Keywords: word learning; discourse; social cues; language development.

Introduction
Children use a variety of strategies for learning new words.
In overtly pedagogical situations, children can use cues such
as pointing, joint attention, and labeling to establish a direct
mapping between an object and name. However, many situations do not feature ostensive labeling events. In these cases,
children must rely on other strategies to infer the referent of a
novel word. One source of information may come from discourse structure (the order of utterances and how they relate
to each other). Recognizing how speakers relate topic information may help children resolve reference that would otherwise be ambiguous in the absence of the broader context.
For example, a child may not have an idea of what chinchilla means from an utterance such as, “I love chinchillas!”,
but she may apply her knowledge of discourse structure to
infer its meaning when the same utterance is related to topical information, such as “I got a new pet. I love chinchillas!
They’re so soft.” Children are exposed to information about
discourse structure whenever they hear speech, and their accumulation of experience may help them to update and refine
their expectations about topic relationships. This developing
expertise may allow children to infer meaning that is locally
ambiguous, yet resolvable in the context of broader discourse.
Little work has explored whether children use discourse
structure to scaffold reference disambiguation. Our aim
is to address this question by investigating children’s and
adults’ recognition of communicative structure when dissociated from other social and ostensive cues. Understanding the
contribution of discourse knowledge in children’s reference
disambiguation may help identify opportunities for children
to infer meaning from topic coherence.

621

Figure 1: Schematic order of events for “A” trials across conditions. In the During condition, the experimenter makes eye
contact without other gaze cues and introduces the naming event between two descriptions of a single toy. In the After control,
events are identical except that the experimenter introduces the naming event after two descriptions of a toy.
ity. Our findings suggest that language users are able to apply their knowledge about how utterances relate within a discourse to make inferences about speakers’ intended referents.
Overall, this work suggests that children are not constrained
to social and contextual cues from individual utterances, but
can evaluate how information may relate across broader discourses.

An alternative explanation for why children might choose
the toy whose descriptions bracketed the naming events is that
children are making a temporal association between the label and the toy descriptions rather than considering discourse
structure per se. That is, children may be selecting the toy
that is described closest to the naming event, which would
always correspond with the toy surrounding the introduction
of the label in During trials. Therefore, we also ran a control
condition to dissociate temporal proximity from discourse coherence. In the control After condition, the naming event was
introduced after descriptions of either Toy A or Toy B rather
than between descriptions of that toy. Thus the naming event
could occur next to descriptions of both toys in After A trials,
or next to only Toy B in After B trials. Sample scripts for each
trial type are listed in Table 1.
Our design allows us to make the following predictions:
If children recognize discourse continuity as a cue to reference, they should infer that new information contained within
a single topic is likely to also refer to that topic. Therefore,
children should select Toy A in During A trials and Toy B in
During B trials, but not have a clear strategy in After trials. If
children rely on temporal association rather than topic coherence, they should select a referent according to what comes
closest to the naming event, i.e. Toy A in During A and Toy
B in During B trials, as well as Toy B in After B trials because

Experiment 1
We designed a novel task to investigate children’s recognition
of discourse structure as a cue to reference. In a large sample of 2– 6 year–olds, we introduced children to two novel
toys accompanied by only one novel label, and we manipulated where in discourse the name was introduced. We were
interested in which toy children selected as the referent of the
label. The experimenter made eye contact with the child but
gave no gaze or gesture cues to the referent of the label during the naming event, so the only cue to reference was the
location of the naming event within the broader discourse.
In the critical During condition, children were introduced to
a novel label within descriptions about either the first (“A”)
or second (“B”) toy (see Figure 1). Because the label was
embedded within descriptions of the same toy in critical trials, we were interested in whether children would infer topic
continuity and link the label to that toy.

622

it is the only description proximal to the naming event. These
predictions are outlined in Table 2.
Table 1: Sample scripts for each condition (During or After)
and trial type (Toy A or Toy B). The green sentences are descriptions of Toy A, and the blue sentences are descriptions
of Toy B.
During A
After A
The top of this one is wobbly.
The top of this one is wobbly.
Have you seen a toma before? Look how to move this switch.
Look how to move this switch. Have you seen a toma before?
The sides of this one are bumpy. The sides of this one are bumpy.
Look how to squish the top down. Look how to squish the top down.
During B
After B
The top of this one is wobbly.
The top of this one is wobbly.
Look how to move this switch. Look how to move this switch.
The sides of this one are bumpy. The sides of this one are bumpy.
Have you seen a toma before? Look how to squish the top down.
Look how to squish the top down. Have you seen a toma before?

Table 2: Predictions for reference selections (Toy A or Toy
B) across each trial type if participants rely on discourse continuity or temporal association.
During A
During B
After A
After B

Discourse Continuity Temporal Association
A
A
B
B
either
either
either
B

Methods
Participants One hundred sixty-six children were recruited
from the San Jose Children’s Discovery Museum to complete a planned sample of 128 children. Children were given
a sticker and certificate as compensation their participation.
Parents were asked to fill out a short demographic form about
their children’s language background, and only children who
were reported to hear English at least 75% of the time were
included in the study. Twelve children were excluded due
to insufficient English exposure, 12 children whose language
information was not reported were excluded, and 14 children
were excluded for not completing all four trials of the study.
Children were recruited in four age groups: 2–year–olds
(n=32, 18 girls, mean age 2 years 6 months), 3–year–olds
years (n=32, 10 girls, mean age 3 years 6 months), 4–year–
olds (n=32, 14 girls, mean age 4 years 6 months), and 5–year–
olds (n=32, 18 girls, mean age 5 years 4 months).

in a training trial featuring ostensive labeling of a single toy
(“This toy is called a blicket. Can you point to the blicket?”)
before seeing four discourse disambiguation trials. For the
discourse disambiguation trials, the experimenter placed two
toys on the table and described each in turn (see Figure 1).
The toy pair remained in view of the child throughout the duration of the trial. All children heard the same scripts used
to describe the toys; the only difference was the discourse location where the label was introduced. In a between-subjects
manipulation, half the participants in each age group (n=16
per age) participated in four During trials; the other half participated in four After control trials. Order and toy pairs were
counterbalanced across participants. At the end of each trial,
the experimenter prompted the child to identify the named
item by pointing. If children did not respond immediately,
they were prompted again to make their best guess. The sessions were videotaped and coded offline. The entire task took
about 5 minutes to complete.
Sample scripts for each condition and trial type are shown
in Table 1. In During trials, the experimenter introduced the
naming event between two sentences about the same toy (e.g.
“You can push this button. Hey [child’s name]! Have you
seen a toma before? Tomas are so neat! What cool handles.”). For two trials the label introduction was embedded
during descriptions of the first toy (Toy A) and for two trial it
was introduced during descriptions of the second toy (Toy B).
When describing the toys, the experimenter directed her gaze
to the toy and demonstrated a feature of the toy. There was
a brief pause between each sentence. For the naming event,
she disengaged from the toy and maintained a neutral position while drawing the children’s attention using their names
and establishing eye contact. The experimenter did not give
any gaze cues or other indicators to the referent of the novel
name. Thus, the naming event in itself carried no information
to guide disambiguation; the only cue available was its location within discourse. In During trials, the naming event was
always embedded between descriptions of a single toy. The
After trials were identical except that the naming event appeared after the two descriptions about a toy (e.g. “You can
push this button. What cool handles. Hey [child’s name]!
Have you seen a toma before? Tomas are so neat!”).

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 illustrates the proportion of children selecting the
second toy (Toy B) as the referent of the label across conditions (During and After) and trial types (whether the label
was introduced with Toy A or Toy B). The figure also includes
adult performance across conditions and trial types from Experiment 2.
Children showed increased sensitivity to discourse coherence over development. Overall, children in the During condition were more likely to select Toy B when the label was
embedded during descriptions about Toy B, and were less
likely to select Toy B (thus more likely to select Toy A) when
the naming event was bracketed by descriptions about Toy A.
This pattern became more pronounced as children got older.

Stimuli Four pairs of unusual items (e.g. a faucet aerator
and a spaghetti measure) served as the novel toys. An additional item was used for training.
Procedures Participants were seated across from the experimenter in a quiet room at the museum. Children participated

623

$%&'&%()&*+&,+-#.&*/+0&1+234+-#5#.()&*6

>?%)*"

!,(#%

=87

B Trials

78<

B Trials

78;

78:

A Trials
A Trials

789

9+@+A+1#B%6

A+@+:+1#B%6

:+@+C+1#B%6

C+@+;+1#B%6

!/?5(6

9+@+A+1#B%6

A+@+:+1#B%6

:+@+C+1#B%6

C+@+;+1#B%6

!/?5(6

!"#

Figure 2: Combined data from Experiments 1 and 2. Mean proportion of selection of the second toy across condition (During
or After) and trial type (label given with first toy: A, or second toy: B). Chance performance is at 0.5, error bars represent 95%
confidence intervals.
This finding suggests that children’s sensitivity to discourse
coherence as a cue to disambiguate reference increases across
ages 2–6 years.
In After trials, children were at chance in selecting either
toy for both After A and After B trials for all age groups. This
result shows that children did not develop a consistent strategy to disambiguate reference when cues to topic coherence
from discourse structure were not available.
To test the reliability of these patterns, we ran a generalized linear mixed model predicting toy selection as an interaction between condition (During or After), trial type (trial
location A or B), and age with random effects of participant.
There was a significant three-way interaction between condition, trial type, and age (β = 0.89, p = 0.03), indicating that,
with increasing age, participants were more likely to select
Toy A in A trials and Toy B in B trials only for the During
condition. No other factors were significant.
We also ran a series of paired t-tests to examine response
differences between trial types (naming event with Toy A or
Toy B) within condition (During or After) for each age group
(2–3s, 3–4s, 4–5s, and 5–6s) (Table 3). Significant differences in reference selection were found across trial types in
the During condition for children ages 3–6 years; at these
ages, children were more likely to select Toy A in During A
trials and Toy B in During B trials. By age 3, children were
able to consider the broader discourse structure to help disambiguate the target referent.
In the naming events, children shared eye contact with the
experimenter and were introduced to a novel word, but there
were no indicators of the referent of the label other than its
location within the broader discourse. Children’s systematic
responding to selecting the toy whose descriptions bracketed
the naming event thus suggests that they can recognize and

refer to discourse coherence to infer reference in the absence
of other social cues.
Could participants have assumed that the novel labels referred to both toys at once? The uniqueness of the toys makes
this situation unlikely. Toys were distinct artifacts with different colors, shapes, and functions, and items in a pair were
presented at opposite ends of the table, giving no visual signal that the toys were grouped. Additionally, if participants
believed that both toys in a pair were examples of a novel category, we would have observed responding at chance across
both During and After conditions. Thus we do not believe
that a superordinate interpretation of the novel terms would
explain the pattern of data we observed.
Finally, children did not appear to use temporal proximity
to disambiguate reference in After trials. We found no significant differences between reference selections across After A
and After B trials for any age group, suggesting that children
did not have consistent strategies for disambiguating the intended meaning of a novel term when topic coherence information is not available. While the After trials lacked definitive cues to establish reference, we were unsure whether adult
users might have strategies for interpreting these trials.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we extended our design to adult participants.
We wanted to confirm adults’ sensitivity to discourse continuity as a cue to word learning in During trials, and assess
strategies for referent disambiguation in After trials to compare with our developmental results.

Methods
Participants Twenty-five adult participants were recruited
from the San Jose Children’s Discovery Museum, and were

624

Together, these results suggest that language users are sensitive to how information relates within discourse structure.
Adults and children systematically disambiguated reference
when they could infer topic coherence in During trials. In
contrast, we found that listeners did not develop consistent
response strategies for information that is isolated from social and discourse context in After trials. Neither children
nor adults followed heuristics such as resolving reference by
temporal association.

Table 3: Results from paired t-tests examining response differences across trial types (naming location with Toy A or Toy
B) within condition (During or After) for each age group (2–
3s, 3–4s, 4–5s, and 5–6s). Children ages 3–6 years show significant differences in their response selections between During A and During B trials. No other significant differences
across trial types are found.
Age
2–3
3–4
4–5
5–6

During condition
t-value df p-value
-1.23 15
0.24
-2.52 15
0.02
-5.48 15
<0.01
-8.22 15
<0.01

After condition
t-value df p-value
-1.58 15
0.14
-1.23 15
0.24
-1.95 15
0.07
-1.58 15
0.14

General Discussion
We investigated whether adults and children could use position in discourse as a cue to resolve reference. In our experiments, adults made use of discourse position effectively and
children showed increasing sensitivity to discourse position
across childhood. All groups except the youngest in our study
successfully used discourse position to infer the mapping of
a label. Taken together, our findings suggest that language
users learn to make inferences about reference not only from
pragmatic or social cues, but also from information about the
general discourse in which a novel label is embedded.
Our experimental design ruled out two alternative explanations. The first is that children were simply selecting the referent most proximal to the naming event. In the During condition, this temporal proximity account would make the same
predictions as a discourse-based account. Our After condition
allowed us to rule out this possibility. While temporal proximity remains ambiguous in After A trials, it is unambiguous in After B trials because Toy B is the only toy described
proximate to the naming event. However, children at all ages
responded around chance for both After A and After B trials
with no difference between naming location, suggesting that
children did not use temporal proximity alone to make their
judgments.
Our After condition rules out a second possible interpretation as well: that children’s mappings are driven purely by
novelty. By age 2, children state novel rather than given information in their productions (Baker & Greenfield, 1988)
and apply similar expectations to other speakers by mapping
new labels to items novel to the speaker’s perspective (Akhtar
et al., 1996). Children’s behavior in the During condition is
consistent with a novelty account: they chose the toy that was
most recently attended to by the experimenter (the one newest
to the discourse). But on this account, children should assign
Toy B as the referent in After A trials, because the naming
event directly precedes the introduction of this toy. Instead,
responses from the After A condition were at chance between
the two toys, suggesting that novelty alone also did not account for our findings.
Children can learn from ostensive naming events when
they are available, but many situations they encounter are
not overtly pedagogical, and the ability to extract information that is embedded in discourse may help children deduce
the meanings of words in these cases. As our initial chinchilla
example illustrated, discourse position is a powerful informa-

offered a sticker and certificate for their participation. They
were informed that the task was designed for children. Only
participants who reported using English at least 75% of the
time were included in the study. One participant was excluded for reporting English use under this threshold.
Stimuli and procedure The stimuli and procedure were
identical to Experiment 1, with the exception that adults did
not undergo a training trial to practice pointing. Otherwise,
adults were randomly assigned to either the During or After
condition, and trial order and toy pairs were counterbalanced
across participants.

Results and Discussion
Results were coded for whether participants selected the second toy (Toy B) as the referent of the novel label (see Figure 2). Participants almost never selected Toy B in During
A trials, but were near ceiling at selecting Toy B for During B trials. Responses to each trial type were significantly
different from chance in exact binomial tests (p < 0.01 for
both trial types), and significantly different from each other
(β = −2.06, p = 0.01) in a generalized linear mixed model
predicting toy selection by condition (During or After) and
trial type (trial location A or B) with random effects of participant. These results illustrate that adults were sensitive
to naming events within discourse structure as informative
cues to referent disambiguation; like the results in Experiment 1, adults demonstrate referent selections that correspond
with discourse coherence, selecting the toy whose descriptions bracketed the naming event.
For After trials, adult participants were at chance in selecting Toy B in both After A and After B trials (p > 0.3 in
exact binomial test for each). Performance was not significantly different between After A and After B trials (β = 0.85,
p = 0.15). These findings indicate that adults did not exhibit
a strategy for disambiguating reference in After trials; they
were at chance in determining a referent when the naming
event followed the descriptions of either toy. This pattern of
results also parallels the developmental results. Adults, like
children, did not show systematic response patterns when discourse information was not available.

625

tion source for understanding language and for learning new
words. Children who can infer how new information relates
to the current topic may be able to accumulate knowledge
more accurately and more efficiently. Because of its accessibility to young children in our study (and the possibility that
even younger children might use discourse position in a simpler task), the use of discourse structure to help disambiguate
reference might be one of the array of learning mechanisms
that helps explain children’s rapid vocabulary growth. Using
topic coherence to make inferences about novel terms and information may allow children to access learning opportunities
that would otherwise be unavailable.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the staff and families at the San Jose Children’s Discovery Museum.

References
Akhtar, N., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (1996). The role
of discourse novelty in early word learning. Child Development, 67(2), 635–645.
Baker, N., & Greenfield, P. (1988). The development of new
and old information in young children’s early language.
Language Sciences, 10(1), 3–34.
Baldwin, D. (1991). Infants’ contribution to the achievement
of joint reference. Child Development, 62(5), 874–890.
Baldwin, D. (1993). Early referential understanding: Infants’
ability to recognize referential acts for what they are. Developmental Psychology, 29(5), 832.
Clark, E. (1990). On the pragmatics of contrast. Journal of
Child Language, 17(02), 417–431.
Diesendruck, G., & Shemer, G. (2006). Young children’s
expectation of competence in word learning. Journal of
Child Language, 33(2), 321.
Frank, M., Tenenbaum, J., & Fernald, A. (2013). Social and
discourse contributions to the determination of reference in
cross-situational word learning. Language, Learning, and
Development.
Markman, E., & Wachtel, G. (1988). Children’s use of mutual
exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words. Cognitive
psychology, 20(2), 121–157.
Merriman, W., Bowman, L., & MacWhinney, B. (1989). The
mutual exclusivity bias in children’s word learning. Monographs of the society for research in child development.
Mervis, C., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the novel
name–nameless category (N3C) principle. Child development, 65(6), 1646–1662.
Tomasello, M., & Barton, M. (1994). Learning words in
nonostensive contexts. Developmental Psychology, 30(5),
639.

626

