A 6-month longitudinal study on numerical estimation in preschoolers
Pierina Cheung
mcheung@wesleyan.edu
Department of Psychology
Wesleyan University

Emily Slusser

Anna Shusterman

emily.slusser@sjsu.edu
Child & Adolescent Development
San Jose State University

ashusterman@wesleyan.edu
Department of Psychology
Wesleyan University

Abstract
The current study investigated the development of numerical
estimation in 3- to 5-year-old children sampled monthly for six
months. At each session, children completed a task that
assesses verbal number knowledge (Give-N task) and a
numerical estimation task that assesses approximate number
knowledge (Fast Cards). Results showed that children who
acquired the cardinal principle (CP) during the course of the
study showed marked improvement on the estimation task.
Following CP acquisition, estimation became more accurate
overall but also fluctuated widely. We discuss the implications
of our findings for number word learning, particularly the
mapping between verbal number and the approximate number
system (ANS).
Keywords: numerical estimation; approximate number;
subset-knowers; cardinal principle knowers; longitudinal

Introduction
How do children acquire number word meanings? On one
view, the approximate number system (ANS) – a non-verbal
representation of number – provides meanings for number
words. That is, the initial meanings of number words are
ANS representations (e.g., Dehaene, 2011; Gallistel &
Gelman, 2000). The current paper investigates the mapping
between ANS and verbal number in a longitudinal study, by
tracking the development of number word learning and the
ANS-to-word mapping in a group of preschoolers.
Starting at around the age of 2, children begin to recite the
count list, but they lack meanings for number words. Slowly
and gradually, over the next 1 ½ to 2 years, children learn the
meanings of the first few number words in order. Using the
Give-N task, Wynn (1990, 1992) showed that children first
acquire the meaning of ‘one’ – these children give one object
when asked for ‘one’ (1-knower). Approximately 6 months
later, children become 2-knowers and have exact meanings
for ‘one’ and ‘two’ but not higher numbers. Later, they
acquire the meaning of ‘three’ (3-knower) and ‘four’ (4knower). Collectively, they are called ‘subset-knowers’
because they have acquired a subset of number word
meanings. Shortly thereafter, children understand that
counting can be used to generate any set size within their
count list. At this stage, children are called cardinal principle
knowers (CP-knowers) because they understand that the last
word of a counted set denotes the cardinality of the set and
have exact number word meanings for all numbers in their
count list (e.g., Gelman & Gallistel, 1978; Le Corre, Van de
Walle, Brannon, & Carey, 2006).
The question of how children acquire number word
meanings has sparked interest on the interface between non-

verbal and verbal representations of number. In particular,
some have highlighted the importance of parallel
individuation – a non-verbal system for representing up to 3
or 4 individual objects in parallel – as the primary source of
meanings for small number words (i.e., ‘one’ through ‘four’;
Carey, 2009; Le Corre & Carey, 2007). Nevertheless, parallel
individuation has a set size limit and cannot represent exact
number concepts for numbers beyond four.
Unlike parallel individuation, the ANS – a system that
represents number as continuous magnitudes – has no set size
limit (Dehaene, 2011; Gallistel & Gelman, 2000). The ANS
follows Weber’s law and exhibits scalar variability (i.e., the
variability of estimates increases linearly with the mean of
estimates, see Feigenson, Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004, for
review). The ANS is a dedicated system for representing
number: it supports numerical computations such as
comparison, addition, subtraction, and multiplication (e.g.,
Barth, La Mont, Lipton, Dehaene, Kanwisher, & Spelke,
2006; McCrink & Wynn, 2004).
A growing body of research has examined the development
of approximate number knowledge and verbal number
knowledge and found conflicting results with regard to when
children map number words onto representations in the ANS.
In a widely cited study, Le Corre and Carey (2007) tested
children’s number word knowledge using Give-N and
developed a task – Fast Cards – to assess the mapping of
number words on ANS representations. In Fast Cards, an
array of dots is presented quickly (~1s) and children are asked
to estimate the number of dots without counting. Le Corre
and Carey (2007) analyzed the slope of average estimates
produced as a function of set size. The main interest was
children’s estimates beyond the capacity limit of parallel
individuation – sets larger than 4. They found that many
subset-knowers and some CP-knowers produced slopes that
were not significantly different from zero in the large number
range (> 4), suggesting that these children provided similar
estimates when shown sets of 6, 8, and 10. In other words,
they did not provide larger estimates for larger set sizes.
Further, Le Corre and Carey (2007) found that only some CPknowers were able to provide an estimate that approximately
matched target sets; these children showed positive slopes
that were significantly different from zero. Based on these
findings, Le Corre and Carey (2007) hypothesized further
development after the CP induction, and they set a criterion
for classifying children who have mapped number words
onto nonverbal numerical magnitudes as having slopes
greater than or equal to 0.3. They called these children “CPmappers”. On the other hand, children were identified as “CP
non-mappers” if their slopes were less than 0.3. CP non-

2813

mappers were on average 6 months younger than CPmappers. From this cross-sectional data, they inferred that
children first become CP non-mappers and eventually
become CP mappers. Moreover, given that CP-knowers only
mapped large sets onto the ANS after acquiring the cardinal
principle, they argued that the ANS cannot be foundational to
the acquisition of early number word meanings.
Others have, however, reported different results. Using a
modified Give-N task, Wagner and Johnson (2011) found
that children between the ages of 3 and 5 often do produce
larger sets for larger requests. For example, they found that
although subset-knowers gave an incorrect number when
asked to give ‘eight fish,’ they were nevertheless more likely
to generate a larger set than when asked to give ‘four fish’.
They took this to suggest that even subset-knowers had
approximate number word knowledge, and thus, the ANS
plays a crucial role in children’s acquisition of number words,
even before children acquire the cardinal principle. However,
they did not assess ‘knower-level’ in the same way as other
researchers in the literature, making it difficult to directly
compare their results to Le Corre and Carey (2007).
More recent studies have offered some insights into these
discrepant findings. First, Gunderson and colleagues (2015)
showed that the range of set sizes included in the analysis for
both Fast Cards and Give-N could affect the results.
Specifically, the slopes of subset-knowers were found to be
positive and different from zero only when the analysis
included numbers that were immediately beyond the range of
a child’s knower-level (N+1 for an N-knower); for most
children except for 4-knowers, this analysis included
numbers smaller than or equal to 4. On the contrary, they did
not find positive slopes when the analysis included numbers
beyond the small number range (> 4; e.g., ‘five’, ‘six’). These
findings suggest that subset-knowers understand that
numbers between N + 1 and 4 are smaller than numbers larger
than 4. Given that children’s representation of small numbers
can be supported by parallel individuation, slopes that include
numerosities in the small number range cannot provide
definitive evidence for the role of ANS in number word
acquisition.
Odic and colleagues (2015) offer a different view, arguing
that the mapping between verbal number and the ANS is not
bidirectional. In Fast Cards, children are shown an array of
dots and asked to generate a numeral, and thus the mapping
is from the ANS to number word (ANS-to-Word mapping);
in tasks where children are asked to generate sets of objects
upon a verbal request, such as Give-N, the mapping is from
number word to ANS (Word-to-ANS mapping). They found
that Word-to-ANS mapping develops prior to ANS-to-Word
mapping, and that subset-knowers show only Word-to-ANS
mappings. Given their results, it remains a possibility that
ANS could play some role in children’s acquisition of exact
number concepts.
Taking a different approach, a recent longitudinal study
tested the relation between the precision of ANS
representation (Panamath task) and children’s verbal number
knowledge (Give-N). Shusterman and colleagues (2016)

found that improvements in ANS acuity were related to the
acquisition of the cardinal principle, but not to other stages in
number word acquisition. They also found that the largest
changes in ANS acuity were observed at or after children
became CP-knowers, but not before, suggesting that while
the ANS could be related to number word learning, especially
cardinality, it is unlikely to be the driving force. Additionally,
while the longitudinal data confirmed the knower-levels
trajectory proposed by Wynn (1992), the data did not support
a transition from CP non-mapper to CP mapper as proposed
by Le Corre and Carey (2007).
Studies on the mapping between ANS and number words
thus far suggest that the ANS and number word acquisition
may be related (Odic et al., 2015; Shusterman et al., 2016;
Wagner & Johnson, 2011, but see Le Corre & Carey, 2007;
Gunderson et al., 2015), but none have clarified how changes
surrounding children’s number word acquisition are related
to mapping to the ANS. To address this, we analyzed the
numerical estimation data from the Fast Cards task in a 6month longitudinal study, with two goals: First, we aimed to
investigate children’s mapping between the ANS and number
words, and specifically, the relation between changes in the
ANS-to-Word mapping and changes in children’s number
word knowledge. If mappings to ANS representations do in
fact support the transition from subset to CP knower, then
improvement in the quality of ANS-to-Word mappings
should be evident prior to this transition. The second goal was
to understand the dynamics of CP knowers’ mapping
between number words and ANS representations. If CPknowers are indeed a heterogeneous group with respect to the
quality of ANS-to-Word mappings (i.e., non-mappers and
mappers), then individual children should exhibit some
stability in their performance and clear improvement over
time. Further, if ANS-to-Word mappings develop most
substantially after the CP transition, as proposed by Le Corre
and Carey (2007), such development should be apparent in
this longitudinal data set.

Longitudinal Study
Methods
Participants A group of 33 children (15 male) between the
ages of 36 and 55 months (M = 46.6 months) participated.
Children were recruited in Central Connecticut and spoke
English as their primary language. They were tested once a
month for a total of six months. All children completed at
least four sessions, with most participating in all six sessions.
Procedure Participants were tested individually at local
preschools. Written consent was obtained from parents. In
each testing session, children completed an ANS acuity task
(Panamath; Halberda, Mazzocco & Feigenson, 2008),
elicited counting task, Give-N (Wynn, 1990), and the
numerical estimation task (Fast Cards, adapted from Le Corre

2814

& Carey, 2007), always in that order.1
Elicited Counting. Children were asked to count a set of 10
objects.
Give N. Children were shown a set of 20 fish and a large
bowl. The experimenter started by asking the child to put one
fish in the bowl (“Can you make one fish go swimming?”) If
the child gave 1 fish, the experimenter asked for N + 1 fish
(“Can you make two fish go swimming?”) After the child
placed some fish in the bowl, the experimenter asked to
confirm, “Is that N?” If the child responded “no”, they were
given the opportunity to fix it. If the child succeeded, the
experimenter moved on to the next number, and if the child
failed, the experimenter asked for N – 1. This process
continued until the child could give 8 fish correctly. A child
was classified as an N-knower if s/he was correct 2 out of 3
times when N was asked, and failed 2 out of 3 times on
requests of N + 1. Children who had only acquired a subset
of the numeral meanings were collectively termed “subsetknowers” (1-knowers, 2-knowers, 3-knowers, 4-knowers).
Children who could give all sets correctly up to 8 were
classified as cardinal principle knowers (CP-knowers).
Fast Cards. At the beginning of the task, children were told
that they would see some objects on the screen. They were
encouraged to guess how many objects there were, as quickly
as possible, without counting. The study began with a training
session in which a set of objects, ranging from 1 to 15 objects,
was presented in numerical order.
There were four blocks in the Fast Cards task. In each
block, there were seven trials. Sets of 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, 14
objects were used. Because it is questionable whether
children could discriminate sets of 8 and 10 items, set sizes
used in the original Fast Cards task, we changed the stimuli
to clearly discriminable sets of 6, 10, and 14. In each trial,
identical objects of the same kind were presented. Each trial
lasted for 1s. Numbers were randomized within each block.
On two of the blocks, total surface area co-varied with
numerosity, and on the other two, total surface area was held
constant.

Results
Elicited Counting. All children could count up to 10 with no
more than one error.
Give-N 2 At the beginning of the study, we found 14 subsetknowers (3 1-knowers, 3 2-knowers, 4 3-knowers, 4 4knowers), and 19 CP-knowers. At the end of the study, 8 of
the subset-knowers became CP-knowers, 6 children
remained subset-knowers, and 19 children remained CPknowers throughout the study.
Fast Cards In the following analysis, we focused on three
main questions. First, we aimed to document developmental
changes in children’s estimation ability. Second, we
investigated whether the ANS is related to the cardinal
1 The ANS acuity task was administered as part of a larger project
and the data were reported elsewhere (Shusterman, et al., 2016).
2 Longitudinal analyses of the Give-N task are reported in
Shusterman, et al. (2016).
3
Averaging across all sessions, children from all knower-level

principle acquisition. Third, we sought to replicate previous
findings that there are two groups of CP-knowers – mappers
and non-mappers. To address these questions, we analyzed
the development of children’s estimation ability by
calculating average slopes and error rates.
Relationship between changes in children’s estimation
ability and verbal number knowledge To examine whether
the mapping between ANS and number words differed
depending on children’s knower-level status, we categorized
children into three knower-level groups based on
developmental changes observed on the Give-N task, and
included this as a variable in our analysis. The “subset-only
group” included children who were subset-knowers
throughout the study; the “subset-to-CP group” included
children who acquired the cardinal principle during the 6month period, and “CP-only group” included children who
were CP-knowers throughout the study.
Linear slopes. To examine whether children have mapped
large number words onto non-verbal number representations,
we assessed the slope of children’s estimates as a function of
target set size. Linear slopes were computed separately in the
small (1-4) and large number range (6, 10, 14). Given that our
main question concerns the role of the ANS, we focused our
analysis on the large number range because sets less than 4
can also be represented by parallel individuation.3 If ANS
representations support cardinality development, or vice
versa, we should observe significant improvement in ANSto-Word mappings in children who acquired the CP during
the course of the study (subset-to-CP).
To test this, we asked whether children’s slopes differed as
a function of their Knower-Level Group (i.e., subset-only,
subset-to-CP, and CP-only). We constructed mixed effects
model, with random intercepts for subjects, and Age (in
months), Session and Knower-Level Group as fixed effects.
We found no effect of Age, X(1) = .039, p = .84, or Session,
X(5) = 4.61, p = .46, suggesting that children’s ANS-to-Word
mapping did not significantly improve over time during the
6-month period. As predicted, we found a significant main
effect of Knower-Level Group, X(2) = 9.80 p = .0074, and a
significant interaction between Knower-Level Group and
Session, X(10) = 18.88, p = .042.
The significant interaction indicated that the
developmental trajectory in estimation differs depending on
children’s knower-level status. We conducted analyses
separately on each of the three knower-level groups. Results
showed that there was no effect of Session for the subset-only
group, X(5) = 1.45, p = .92, and CP-only group, X(5) = 2.87,
p = .72, but there was a significant effect of Session for
subset-to-CP knowers, X(5) = 20.25, p < .001 (see Figure 1).
As indicated in Figure 1, the subset-to-CP group
groups showed significantly positive slopes in the 1-4 range, ps <
.008 (mean slopes: subset-only = 1.18, subset-to-CP = 1.10, CP-only
= 1.07), indicating that children were able to estimate small sets and
that they were engaged in the task.

2815

demonstrated the largest improvement in slopes in the large
number range.

Figure 2: Average error rates across sessions in the large
number range. Error bars represent SEM.

Figure 1: Average slopes from Session 1 and Session 6 in
the large number range (6, 10, 14).
We further explored the changes in slopes in the large
number range for the subset-to-CP group by comparing their
average slopes across sessions prior to and after the CP
acquisition. Consistent with the group-level analysis, we
found significant improvement in slopes, t(13.72) = -2.31, p
= .037. Children’s slopes were close to 0 before they acquired
the cardinal principle (Mslope = .079) and improved after they
became a CP-knower (Mslope = .33).
While it is possible that this improvement in slopes was an
effect of repeated testing, note that there was no effect of
Session among the subset-only and CP-only groups. If
practice effects are what drive children’s improvements on
Fast Cards, then we should observe similar levels of
improvement in the subset-only and CP-only group.
Error rates. Similar analyses were conducted using error
rates as a measure of accuracy. Error rates were computed as
the difference between children’s response and the target
value. For example, when shown a set of 14 objects, the error
rate was -4 if the response was 10, or +1 if the response was
15. A value of 0 indicates accurate mapping. Negative error
rates indicate that children were underestimating and positive
error rates indicate that they were overestimating.
Mean error rates were computed for each session. Using
the same linear mixed effects model as the previous analysis
on slopes, we found a main effect of Session, X(5) = 27.22, p
< .001, and an effect of Knower-level Group, X(2) = 9.54, p
= .0085, but there was no interaction between Knower-level
Group and Session, X(10) = 12.62, p = .25. There was also no
effect of Age, X(1) = .019, p = .89. Figure 2 displays average
error rates for each session. Our results also showed that,
consistent with previous studies, children tend to
underestimate in Fast Cards (Odic et al., 2015).

We compared overall error rates across the three groups.
CP-only group was significantly more accurate than the
subset-to-CP group, t(14.69) = 2.35, p = .033, and the subsetonly group, t(13.18) = 5.28, p < .001. The subset-to-CP group
had significantly lower error rates (Merror = -3.49) than those
who remained subset-knowers throughout the study (Merror =
-5.17; t(12) = 2.26, p = .043), suggesting that the ANS-toWord mapping between subset-to-CP group and subset-only
group is qualitatively different.
Results from the slope and error rate analysis both
suggested that children’s performance on Fast Cards
improved over the course of a 6-month period. Importantly,
subset-knowers who acquired the cardinal principle during
the study improved to a greater extent than those who
continued to be subset-knowers at the end of the study. These
findings point to a previously unexplored relationship
between cardinal principle acquisition and ANS-to-Word
mappings—namely, that these mappings develop neither
before nor after, but primarily in concert with, the CP
transition. Although these results cannot definitively address
the causal relation between ANS mappings and the CP
acquisition, they suggest that acquiring cardinality allows
children to fine-tune ANS mappings to generate more precise
ANS mappings (we will return to this point in the
Discussion). In our final analysis, we investigated the
developmental trajectory of children’s mapping ability by
examining the stability of their mapper vs. non-mapper
status.
Mappers vs. Non-Mappers Previous research identified
separate groups of CP-knowers who had mapped large
number words onto ANS as ‘mappers’ and those who had not
as ‘non-mappers’ (Le Corre & Carey, 2007). The criterion for
establishing mappers and non-mappers is often set at slopes
≥ 0.3, with some reporting that a criterion between 0.3 and
0.5 reveals similar results (e.g., Odic et al., 2015). To
investigate whether there are two groups of CP-knowers in
our sample, we conducted a Shapiro-Wilk test, which showed
that CP-knowers’ slopes violated the normality assumption
in the first two sessions of the study (Session 1: W = .88, p =
.029; Session 2: W = .87, p =.001), but the distribution was
more evenly distributed from Session 3 through Session 6
(Ws > .95, ps > .14). As shown in Figure 3a, children’s slopes

2816

in Session 1 had two peaks, one at around 0 and another at
0.5, but towards the end of the study in Session 6, children
had a mean slope of .43 (see Figure 3b).

Figure 3a: Histogram of slopes in the large number range
for CP-knowers at Session 1

Figure 3b: Histogram of slopes in the large number range
for CP-knowers at Session 6
Next, we adopted the same criterion as previous studies and
identified children as ‘mappers’ if their slopes were ≥ 0.3 (Le
Corre & Carey, 2007; Gunderson et al., 2015; Davidson et al,
2012; Odic et al., 2015). In a cross-sectional study, Le Corre
and Carey (2007) found a 6-month difference in age between
CP-mappers and CP-non-mappers, and Gunderson and
colleagues (2015) found a 3-month difference in age. To
investigate the developmental trajectory of mappers and nonmappers, we identified CP-knowers as mappers if their slopes
were ≥ 0.3 at Session 1, and non-mappers if their slopes were
less than 0.3. We asked (1) how likely CP-non-mappers were
to become mappers at the end of the study, and (2) whether
CP-mappers continued to be mappers throughout the course
of the study.
We first asked how likely children who were non-mappers
at Session 1 were to become mappers by Session 6. Among
the 7 non-mappers, only 1 child became a mapper, 4
remained non-mappers, and 2 children did not complete
Session 6. While this finding may suggest that most CP nonmappers remained non-mappers throughout the six-month
period, an inspection of the individual development of slopes
shows that children’s slopes fluctuated over time (Figure 4).
We found that the 7 non-mappers remained non-mappers for
the remaining five sessions approximately 60% of the time (3
out of 5 sessions). In contrast, children who were mappers at
Session 1 remained mappers 80% of the time (approximately
4 out of 5 sessions).
Scalar variability. If numerals are mapped onto the ANS
representations, children’s estimates in Fast Cards should
exhibit scalar variability (e.g., Cordes et al., 2001). That is,
the mean estimates and variability should increase linearly as
the set size increases. This is typically calculated as the ratio
of the standard deviation over the mean estimates (i.e., the
coefficient of variation, COV). We computed COVs for each

target set size in each session. We hypothesized that if CP
mappers used mappings to the ANS in Fast Cards, their
COVs for each of the large sets should remain similar to each
other.
A linear mixed effects model with Set Size (6, 10, 14),
Session (1-6), children’s mapper status in Session 1, and Age
(in months) revealed that there was a significant effect of Set
Size, X(1) = 9.24, p = .002. Pairwise comparisons revealed
that COV-14 (M=.21, SE = .071) was significantly different
from COV-6 (M = .32, SE = .071), p = .001, and COV-10
(M=.33, SE = .071), p = .058, but COV-6 and COV-10 did
not differ from each other, p = .70. No other effects were
found. Our results on COVs for 6 and 10 replicate previous
studies on ANS-to-Word mapping, which did not include sets
larger than 10 (Le Corre & Carey, 2007; Odic et al., 2015).
Although our prediction that COVs would be constant was
not validated, since the COVs for 14 were different than those
for 6 and 10, we speculate that a potential explanation is that
not all children could stably count to 14. Further work is
needed to understand how COVs reflect children’s estimation
performance. Nevertheless, these results support the claim
that children’s estimates for sets smaller than 10 were based
on mappings to ANS representations.

Figure 4: Scatterplots of mean slopes for each session for
children who started as a) CP non-mappers (top) and b) CP
mappers (bottom).

Discussion
The current study revealed two main findings. First, we found
that subset-knowers who acquired the cardinal principle
(subset-to-CP) showed the greatest improvement in response
slopes in an estimation task – they became better at
generating larger estimates for larger sets. Results with error
rates also showed that these children had smaller error rates

2817

than children who remained subset-knowers throughout the
study (subset-only). These results are consistent with
previous studies that suggest that the ANS may be related to
the acquisition of the cardinal principle (e.g., Wagner &
Johnson, 2011; Odic et al., 2015; Shusterman et al., 2016).
Our second main finding is that CP knowers’ estimation
slopes fluctuate over time. While it is often assumed that CP
non-mappers would eventually become a mapper, our results
showed that this is not necessarily the case. Children’s status
as a mapper or a non-mapper varied from session to session,
suggesting that researchers should be cautious about using
0.3 as a ‘standard’ cut-off point for determining mapper
status. We do not suggest that the mapper and non-mapper
distinction is a false dichotomy. Indeed, similar to previous
studies (Le Corre & Carey, 2007; Odic et al., 2015), we also
found a non-normal distribution of CP-knowers’ slopes at the
beginning of the study, suggesting that CP-knowers are a
heterogeneous group with regard to their ANS-to-Word
mapping; furthermore, children who started as mappers were
relatively more likely to retain that status across sessions.
Rather, our results highlight the fragile nature of children’s
estimation in Fast Cards, and suggest that the period
following the CP transition is characterized by large
fluctuation in estimation quality, rather than consistently poor
estimation.
The current paper provides an important piece of data to
the debate on whether the ANS drives cardinal principle
acquisition. Using a longitudinal design, we found that ANSto-Word mapping significantly improved right at the moment
when children became CP-knowers, but not prior to the CP
acquisition. A previous analysis from the same longitudinal
study showed that the largest improvement in Weber’s
fraction is observed at or after children acquire the cardinal
principle (Shusterman, et al., 2016). Given that the ANS-toWord mappings fluctuate to a much greater extent than
previously assumed, especially around the subset-CP
transition, it seems unlikely that the ANS underlies number
word acquisition. Cumulatively, the evidence suggests that
while the ANS and verbal number is closely related,
acquiring the CP helps children fine-tune the ANS-to-Word
mappings.
If the ANS does not drive the CP acquisition, what is the
precise relationship between the non-verbal and verbal
number acquisition? We speculate that in acquiring the
notion of cardinality, children begin to understand the exact
relation between number words and sets of objects – i.e., a set
has a cardinality N if and only if you follow a stable count list
and are assigning each object with a number word. Through
counting an exact number of objects and noticing the
difference between different cardinalities, children may thus
begin to more accurately estimate a set of dots in Fast Cards.
A question that this current work raises is why the slopes
of children’s estimates fluctuate for such a long period of
time. We speculate that factors such as children’s attention
and processing ability may affect their verbal estimation
performance. Another possibility is the length and stability of
children’s count list. Future studies should examine the

potential of these additional factors to predict verbal
estimation.

Acknowledgments
We thank all participating families and preschools. We also
thank Angela Lo, Alexander Hoyle, Anthony Gutierrez, Jessica
Taggart, Sarah Edelman, and Barry Finder for their help with
data collection and analysis. This work was supported by an NSF
CAREER grant (DRL-0845966) awarded to A.S.

References
Barth, H., La Mont, K., Lipton, J., Dehaene, S., Kanwisher, N.,
& Spelke, E.S. (2006). Non-symbolic arithmetic in adults and
young children. Cognition, 98, 199-222.
Cordes, S., Gelman, R., Gallistel, C. R., & Whalen, J. (2001).
Variability signatures distinguish verbal and nonverbal
counting for both large and small numbers. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 8(4), 698-707.
Dehaene, S. (2011). The Number Sense: How the mind creates
mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Feigenson, L., & Carey, S. (2003). Tracking individuals via
object files: Evidence from infants’ manual search.
Developmental Science, 6(5), 568-584.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S. & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems
of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7), 307-314.
Gelman, R. & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). The Child’s
Understanding of Number. Oxford: Harvard University Press.
Gallistel, C.R., & Gelman, R. (2000). Non-verbal numerical
cognition: From reals to integers. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4(2), 59-65.
Gunderson, E.A., Spaepen, E., & Levine, S.C. (2015).
Approximate number word knowledge before the cardinal
principle. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 130, 3555.
Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Individual
differences in nonverbal number acuity predict maths
achievement. Nature, 455, 665-668.
Le Corre, M. & Carey, S. (2007). One, two, three, four, nothing
more: An investigation of the conceptual sources of the verbal
counting principles. Cognition, 105, 395- 438.
McCrink, K., & Wynn, K. (2004). Large-number addition and
subtraction by 9-month-old infants. Psychological Science,
15, 776-781.
Odic, D., Le Corre, M., & Halberda, J. (2015). Children’s
mappings between number words and the approximate
number system. Cognition, 138, 102-121.
Shusterman, A., Slusser, E., Odic, D., & Halberda, J. (2016).
Acquisition of the cardinal principle coincides with
improvement in approximate number system acuity in
preschoolers. PLoS ONE, 11(4), 1-22.
Wagner, J.B., & Johnson, S.C. (2011). An association between
understanding
cardinality
and
analog
magnitude
representations in preschoolers. Cognition, 119, 10-22.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36(2), 155-193.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of number words and
the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24(2), 220-251.
Xu, F., & Spelke, E.S. (2000). Large number discrimination in
6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74, B1-B11.

2818

