A cross-linguistic investigation on the acquisition of complex numerals
Pierina Cheung (mcheung@wesleyan.edu)
Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, 207 High Street, Middletown, CT, 06457, USA

Meghan Dale (meghan.dale@queensu.ca)
Faculty of Education, Queen’s University, 511 Union Street, Kingston, ON, K7M 5R7, Canada

Mathieu Le Corre (mathieu@uaem.mx)
Centro de Investigación Transdisciplinar en Psicologia, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, Mexico
millions” – but digits cannot – e.g., “Vaccination could save
threes” is ungrammatical.
Across all natural languages with a numeral system, digits
and multipliers can be combined in two ways to form
complex numerals: conjunction and multiplication.
Numerals can be combined via conjunction explicitly with
the use of ‘and’ as in “one hundred and one” or implicitly as
in “twenty-three.” Moreover, similar to a determiner phrase
in which a determiner is combined with a noun (e.g., “a” +
“dog”  “a dog”), a digit and a multiplier can be combined
to form a numeral phrase (e.g., “one” + “hundred”  “one
hundred”). Each of these two types of combinations maps
onto a unique arithmetic operation. Conjunctions map onto
addition (e.g., twenty-three means 20 + 3), and numeral
phrases map onto multiplication (e.g., two hundred means 2
x 100).
In this paper, we focus on the mapping between the
structure of complex numeral phrases such as ‘one hundred’
and its multiplicative meaning as a first step to investigate
the acquisition of the compositional nature of numerals.

Abstract
Complex numerals (e.g., four hundred) have a multiplicative
structure (four hundred = 4 x 100). This paper investigates
whether children are sensitive to the meaning of the
multiplicative structure. We designed a novel word learning
paradigm and taught 4- to 6-year-old children the meaning of
a novel numeral phrase (e.g., ‘one gobi houses’ to mean a
group of three houses). We then asked whether they could
generalize it to a novel context (e.g., ‘two gobi butterflies’ to
mean two groups of three). Experiment 1 showed that only
English-speaking children who received multiplier syntax
training were able to generalize. Experiment 2 extended
findings from Experiment 1 to Cantonese-speaking children
and found that they could also generalize a novel multiplier to
novel contexts. These results suggest that children as young
as 4 can create a mapping between the structure of complex
numerals and a multiplicative meaning.
Keywords: complex numerals, digits, multipliers, syntax,
semantics, preschoolers, cross-linguistic investigation

Introduction
Numerals are built using a compositional system, in which a
set of individual numerals can be combined to form many
different numerals. For example, to count to one hundred in
English, we only need to remember 28 words: one through
nineteen, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty,
ninety, and hundred. Counting to one trillion, a number that
is 10,000,000,000 times larger than 100 requires only four
additional words: thousand, million, billion, and trillion.
How numerals are combined to form complex numerals
such as ‘twenty-three’ and ‘two hundred’ are governed by
compositional rules (e.g., Hurford, 1975; Ionin &
Matushansky, 2006). The current study investigates the
developmental origins of the compositional rules of
numerals, by examining the linguistic and conceptual
building blocks of the system.
Linguists have long observed that there are two types of
numerals based on which compositional rules apply: digits
(two, five) and multipliers (hundred, thousand; Hurford,
1975; Ionin & Matushansky, 2006). Digits and multipliers
have different syntactic properties. First, multipliers are
similar to singular count nouns in English. They must be
preceded by a numeral or a determiner – e.g., “A/one
million people watched the game.” In contrast, digits can be
used in its bare form – e.g., “Three people watched the
game.” Second, multipliers in English such as hundred and
million can be pluralized – e.g., “Vaccination could save

Acquisition of compositional rules of numerals
How do children discover the compositional rules that
govern the combination of digits and multipliers? On one
view, children discover the rules of the numeral system on
their own (e.g., Hurford, 1975; Siegler & Robinson, 1982).
For example, after encountering numeral phrases in their
language, children may discover a rule that maps the
structure of complex numerals onto multiplication. They are
then able to apply this rule to generate new numbers in the
form of ‘digit multiplier’ and assign them a multiplicative
meaning.
Alternatively, acquisition of complex numerals may be
item-based. For example, after learning ‘one hundred’,
children still have to separately learn numerals that are of a
similar form – e.g., ‘two hundred’, ‘three hundred’, and
‘four hundred’. In other words, children’s learning is not
initially rule-based, and only later do they learn the
underlying compositional rules that govern numeral
structure, perhaps via explicit instruction. Thus, children
may learn complex numerals by rote memorization prior to
decomposing them (Fuson, 1990).
Although no previous studies have examined the
acquisition of multipliers, there is related, though indirect,
evidence from studies on the acquisition of the count

2711

sequence and the place-value system that provide insights
into how compositional rules for numerals may be acquired.
First, previous studies have demonstrated that children’s
counting experience is related to discovering the underlying
structure of the count sequence. For example, Siegler and
Robinson (1982) asked a group of 3- to 5-year-olds to
repeatedly count from one over multiple sessions, and to
count on from a particular number that was beyond their
counting range. They found that children who counted
between 20 and 99 always ended with ‘nine’ (twenty-nine,
thirty-nine, etc), suggesting that they understood the withindecade structure but were limited by the knowledge of the
next decade word. They also found that those who counted
up to 100 understood the within-decade structure and
showed some knowledge of the between-decade structure.
Thus, a majority of children did not simply memorize up to
an arbitrary number. Rather, children’s counting reveals the
different rules that they discover about the count sequence
(e.g., the order of one to nine, the order of decade terms).
In addition, cross-linguistic studies have shown that the
numeral structure of some languages may facilitate the rule
discovery process (Miller, et al., 1995; Miller & Stigler,
1987). Numerals in Korean and Chinese follow a highly
regular structure. For example, in Chinese, the numbers
following ten (shi) are ten-one (shi-yi) and ten-two (shi-er),
while the words for twenty and thirty are two-ten (er-shi),
and three-ten (san-shi), respectively. This contrasts sharply
with the irregularities in English (e.g., eleven, fourteen,
twenty). Previous studies have found that 4-year-old
children learning Chinese and Korean are able to count
higher than their English counterparts (Miller et al., 1995),
suggesting that the regularity of a language’s numeral
system may help children discover the count sequence
structure.
Another piece of evidence comes from studies on
children’s understanding of the place-value system.
Previous studies have found that when asked to represent 2digit numerals (e.g., 11, 42) with blocks, children starting at
around the age of 6 are able to use a combination of unit
blocks and tens blocks. For example, children represent 42
using four blocks of 10 and two single blocks rather than 42
single blocks. Some have also documented cross-linguistic
differences with children’s place value understanding,
showing that Japanese-speaking children are more likely to
use a combination of tens and units blocks than Englishspeaking children (Miura, 1987; Miura, Kim, Chang, &
Okamoto, 1988; but see Saxton & Towse, 1998; Vasilyeva
et al., 2015). These results suggest that children are able to
decompose complex numerals into its constituents.
Nevertheless, children’s understanding of the place-value
system only reveals knowledge of written numerals and
leaves open the question of what young children understand
about the compositional nature of numerals prior to
acquiring the place-value system.

The present experiments
To investigate whether and when children acquire the

mapping between the compositional structure of complex
numerals and their meaning, we designed a novel word
learning paradigm. Specifically, in two experiments, we
asked when children between the ages of 4 and 6½
recognize that a complex numeral in the form of ‘digit
multiplier’ maps onto multiplication.
The general logic of our experiments was to teach
children a novel noun phrase that described a set of three
objects (e.g., the experimenter described a group of three
houses as ‘one gobi houses’). Then, we tested whether
children have learned the meaning of the phrase (e.g., ‘one
gobi Xs’ to refer to a group of three objects). Critically, we
asked whether children can generalize the novel noun
phrase to a novel context involving ‘two’ (e.g., Who has
two gobi books?).
In Experiment 1, we provided one group of Englishspeaking children with informative multiplier syntax – i.e.,
the numeral ‘one’ followed by a novel multiplier ‘gobi’ (one
gobi Xs), and another group with uninformative syntax,
with only a novel word modifying the noun (gobi Xs). The
two groups of children saw the same pictures but they heard
verbal descriptions that differed only in the structure of the
noun phrase (one gobi Xs vs. gobi Xs). We hypothesized
that if children are sensitive to the mapping between
complex numeral of the form ‘digit multiplier’ and its
multiplicative meaning, then they should be more likely to
generalize the learned novel numeral phrase to new contexts
when they are presented with informative multiplier syntax
than uninformative syntax.
In Experiment 2, we tested children learning Cantonese
Chinese, which has a regular numeral structure, using the
same paradigm. Cantonese Chinese, similar to Mandarin
Chinese, has no irregularities in the naming of the numerals,
and multiplier syntax occurs as early as 20 (ji-sap). We
asked whether they would also demonstrate sensitivity to
the multiplier syntax, and if so, whether they would show
earlier knowledge of the multiplier structure than Englishspeaking children. To the extent that they do, we asked
whether this was due to linguistic differences or other
educational or cultural factors. Tests of general receptive
vocabulary and mathematical competence were included as
control measures. We also included a highest count measure
to investigate if counting experience affects children’s
sensitivity to multiplier structure.

Experiment 1 – English-speaking children
We taught English-speaking children a novel numeral
phrase with multiplier syntax – i.e., the numeral ‘one’
followed by a novel multiplier ‘gobi’ (one gobi Xs;
Multiplier condition), and asked if they could generalize it
to a novel context involving ‘two’. For example, children
heard ‘one gobi houses’ when shown a group of three
houses, and they were then asked to choose which one of
two sets contained ‘two gobi books’. To investigate if
children’s understanding of multipliers is specific to
multiplier syntax, we adopted a between-subjects design and
presented another group of children with the same visual

2712

stimuli but with uninformative multiplier syntax.
Specifically, the novel word ‘gobi’ was presented without
the numeral ‘one,’ (gobi Xs; the No Digit condition). Thus,
the only difference between the two conditions was in the
syntactic structure of the noun phrase.

Method
Participants A total of 98 children between the ages of 4;2
and 6;6 participated. Sixty-eight of them were assigned to
the Multiplier condition (M = 5;4), and 30 in the No Digit
Condition (M = 5;4). They were recruited at daycare centres
and schools in southwestern Ontario. All children spoke
English as their primary language.
Design and Procedure
Highest count Children were asked to count as high as they
can, and were stopped if they could count up to 100.
Novel Word Learning The novel word learning paradigm
had two conditions: Multiplier and No Digit conditions, and
each condition proceeded in three phases, including
modelling, training, and generalization.
Multiplier Condition During modeling, children were told
that they were going to learn a new word – gobi. They were
shown sets of three objects that were labelled with a novel
numeral phrase. Children in the Multiplier condition were
provided with multiplier syntax, e.g., “This is one gobi
houses” (see Figure 1a). There were a total of six trials. On
the last modelling trial, children were shown groups of two,
three, and four objects (e.g., two phones, three phones, four
phones). They were told that the collection of three phones
was ‘one gobi phones.’ Importantly, they were also told that
the collection of two phones and that of four phones were
not ‘one gobi phones.’
After the modelling phase, children proceeded to the
training phase. During training, children were given a
forced-choiced task. They were shown a boy and a girl, one
of whom had three objects and the other had either four or
two. Children were asked, “Who has one gobi clocks?”
(Figure 1b). Children were corrected if they chose the
wrong character and praised if they chose the right one.
Children passed training if they correctly answered 4 trials
in a row, with a maximum of 16 trials in the training phase.
After training, children were asked to generalize to a
novel numeral phrase involving the numeral ‘two’. Children
were shown the boy and the girl characters, and were asked,
“Who has two gobi books?” (Figure 1c). Children who
passed the training phase completed all generalization trials.
Unlike the training phase, feedback was not provided.

a) Modelling

b) Training

c) Generalization

The forced-choice task in the generalization phase
consisted of a character who had two groups of three or a
group of six, and another character who had one of four
different types of competitor sets: two individuals, a group
of three, two groups of two, and four groups of three (see
Figure 2). These competitor sets were designed to test the
scope and the specificity of the acquired meaning of ‘digit
multiplier’. We outlined our reasoning for including the four
different competitor sets below:
(1) To test whether children interpreted the novel
numeral phrase as one that refers to groups or to
individuals (two individuals).
(2) To test whether children interpreted the novel
numeral phrase as one that applies to two groups of
any number (two groups of two).
(3) To test whether children interpreted ‘gobi’ to mean
‘three’ (a group of three).
(4) To ensure that children did not simply pick the
more numerous set (four groups of three).
There were a total of 24 trials, four of each type. Children
completed two blocks of 12 trials. The presentation of the
competitor sets was pseudo-randomized in each block. The
boy and the girl had an equal number of correct answers.
The task was presented on a laptop computer. A different
kind of object was used for each trial. The stimuli set
contained a total of 46 objects that were familiar to
preschoolers (e.g., butterflies, houses, bags, cups).

Figure 2: Six types of competitor sets. a) 2 groups of 3 vs.
2 individuals; b) a group of 6 vs. 2 individuals; c) 2 groups
of 3 vs. 4 groups of 3; d) 2 groups of 3 vs. 1 group of 3; e) a
group of 6 vs. a group of 3; f) 2 groups of 3 vs. 2 groups of
2
No Digit Condition Another group of children were
presented with uninformative multiplier syntax in which the
digit was removed from the numeral noun phrase.
Specifically, children were modelled on ‘gobi Xs’ (e.g.,
This is gobi houses), trained on ‘gobi Xs’ (e.g., Who has
gobi clocks?), and were asked to generalize to ‘two gobi Xs’
(Who has two gobi books?).

Figure 1a-c: A schematic illustration of the experimental
set-up.

2713

Control measures1
Receptive vocabulary We used the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 2012) to measure
children’s receptive vocabulary. Children were asked to
point to one of four pictures in response to a target word.
They received one point for each correct answer, and a total
score was computed for each child.
General mathematical competence We chose three
subtests of the Test of Early Mathematics Ability (TEMA;
Ginsburg & Baroody, 2003) as a measure of children’s math
skills: mental number line, verbal numerical comparison,
and mental addition. Percent correct averaged across the
three subtests was computed for each child.
Task Order Each testing sessions always began with a
highest count task, followed by the novel word learning
task. Children in the Multiplier condition also completed
PPVT and TEMA.

Results and Discussion
Training phase A majority of children from the Multiplier
condition (78%) passed training and were included in the
analysis. Those who were included (M = 5;5) were on
average five months older than those who did not pass
training, t(66) = 2.07, p = .042. All children from the No
Digit condition passed training and were included. Of those
who passed the training phase, 85.9% of them did so within
4 to 6 trials.
Generalization phase We first examined how likely
children in the Multiplier condition generalized to ‘two
gobi.’ Children’s scores in the generalization phase
followed a bimodal distribution (see Figure 3). A ShapiroWilk test confirmed that the distribution of scores violated
the normality assumption, W = .85, p < .001.

we defined above chance performance as answering more
than 16 out of 24 trials correct (binomial test, p = .06).
Results showed that 25/53 (47.2%) of children scored at
least 17 on the generalization task (M = 21.6, SD = 2.0); we
labelled these children ‘generalizers’. The remaining
children scored on average 6.6 trials correct (SD = 3.7), and
we labelled them ‘non-generalizers’.
These results suggest that some children between the ages
of 4 and 6 were able to generalize a novel numeral phrase
‘one gobi Xs’ to ‘two gobi Xs’. This provides evidence that
children are able to create a mapping between a numeral
phrase in the form of ‘digit multiplier’ (e.g., one gobi) and a
multiplicative meaning. Nevertheless, these results do not
demonstrate that this mapping is unique. It is possible that
the context of the training and generalization tasks allow
some children to interpret any novel numeral phrase with a
multiplicative structure, regardless of the actual form of the
numeral phrase itself. To address this question, we analyzed
how likely children in the No Digit condition generalized.
We found that only 3 of them were ‘generalizers’, receiving
a total score of 17 or higher, and a majority of them (n = 27)
were ‘non-generalizers’. Compared to those in the
Multiplier condition, a significantly lower proportion of
children in the No Digit condition generalized, χ2(1) =
10.24, p = .001. These results provide evidence that children
who were provided with informative multiplier syntax were
able to map the form ‘digit multiplier’ to multiplication.
Effect of age and highest count Next, we analyzed whether
children’s age or counting experience predicted the
likelihood that they generalized in the Multiplier condition.
We conducted a logistic regression with age in months and
highest count as predictor variables. The dependent measure
was children’s status as a ‘generalizer’. There was no effect
of age, β = .060, SE = .048, p = .21, or counting, β = .015,
SE = .011. p = .17. Nevertheless, the final model was
significantly better than the constant-only model, Χ2(2) =
9.91, p < .001.

Discussion

Figure 3: A histogram of children’s scores in the
generalization phase (Multiplier Condition).
As indicated in Figure 3, the distribution of scores formed
two peaks, one at the highest end and another at the lowest
end of the distribution, suggesting that some children were
able to generalize from ‘one gobi’ to ‘two gobi’
consistently, and some were consistently unable to do so. To
capture the dichotomous nature of children’s responses and
to investigate their performance in the generalization phase,
1

2.

Analyses on these control measures are reported in Experiment

Results from Experiment 1 showed that 4 to 6½-year-old
children who were trained to pair the novel numeral phrase
‘one gobi’ with sets of three were more likely than those in
the No Digit condition to generalize to ‘two gobi’,
suggesting that children in the Multiplier condition can
create a mapping between a novel complex numeral in the
form of ‘digit multiplier’ and a multiplicative meaning. This
provides the first piece of evidence that children are
sensitive to the multiplier syntax. In the following
experiment, we extended this finding to another language
group, and asked whether language structure affects
children’s sensitivity to the multiplier structure.

Experiment 2 – Cantonese-speaking children
Experiment 1 showed that English-speaking children
between the ages of 4 and 6½ successfully generalized a
novel numeral phrase ‘one gobi’ to novel contexts. We also

2714

found that this knowledge was specific to complex numerals
in the form of ‘digit multiplier.’ In Experiment 2, we asked
whether children learning Cantonese, a language with
transparent numeral system, would demonstrate earlier
knowledge of the meaning of the multiplier structure.
Cantonese belongs to the family of Chinese languages, and
has a regular numeral structure. For example, numerals in
the teens in Chinese are highly regular, unlike English –
e.g., eleven is literally translated to ‘ten one’ (sap jat) in
Cantonese Chinese, and twelve is ‘ten two’ (sap ji). Starting
at the numeral twenty begins the multiplier structure – ‘two
ten’ (ji sap), whereas in English, the multiplier structure
appears at one hundred. Given these differences in numeral
structure, we predicted that Cantonese-speaking children
may demonstrate earlier sensitivity to the meaning of the
multiplier structure.
To test this, we recruited a sample of Cantonese-speaking
children and tested them using the same novel word
learning paradigm as Experiment 1.

and among them, 80.7% of them did so within 4 to 6 trials.
Children required an average of 5.02 trials (SD = 2.30 trials)
to pass training. Children who did not pass training were
excluded (n = 6 in the Multiplier condition; n = 6 in the Nodigit condition).
Generalization phase Similar to English-speaking children
in Experiment 1, Cantonese-speaking children’s responses
in the generalization task followed a bimodal distribution
(see Figure 4). A Shapiro-Wilk test confirmed that the
normality assumption was violated, W = .80, p < .001.

Figure 4: A histogram of children’s scores in the
generalization phase (Multiplier Condition).

Method
Participants A total of 122 children between the ages of 4
and 6½ participated. Sixty-three children participated in the
Multiplier condition (M = 5;3; range = 4;0 to 6;6), and 59
children participated in the No Digit condition (M = 5;3;
range = 4;0 to 6;6). They were recruited at daycare centres
in Hong Kong. All children spoke Cantonese as their
primary language.
Design and Procedure The design of this experiment was
identical to Experiment 1. Children were first modelled on a
novel numeral phrase, followed by a training phase with
feedback and a generalization phase without feedback.
Children were tested by a native Cantonese speaker. In
the Multiplier condition, children were taught ‘one gobi
classifier Xs’. In the No Digit condition, children were
trained on ‘gobi classifier Xs’. All noun phrases were used
with a general classifier (CL) – goh.2
Similar to Experiment 1, children also completed a
highest count task, a receptive vocabulary test (PPVT) and a
general mathematical competence test (TEMA).

Results
Training phase In the Multiplier condition, 90.5% of
children passed the training phase (57/63 children), and
among them, 94.7% of them did so within 4 to 6 trials.
Children required an average of 4.72 trials (SD = 2.37 trials)
to pass training. In the No Digit condition, a majority of
children passed the training phase (89.8%; 53/59 children),
2
Cantonese is a classifier language in which nouns cannot
co-occur directly with numerals, but require classifiers (CL).
There is also no obligatory plural morphology. For example,
‘three balls’ is translated to ‘three classifier ball’. In this
experiment, we used the general classifier – goh – the most
frequent classifier in Cantonese (Matthews & Yip, 1994).

Similar to Experiment 1, we defined above chance as
answering more than 16 out of 24 trials correct (binomial
test, p = .06). In the Multiplier condition, 33/57 children
performed significantly above chance, t(32) = 16.97, p <
.001 (M=21.7 trials, SD=1.9 trials), and were thus termed
‘generalizers’. In contrast, the ‘non-generalizers’ scored on
average 5.3 trials correct (SD = 2.4 trials).
In the No Digit condition, surprisingly, 26/53 children
performed significantly above chance, t(25) = 12.11, p <
.001 (M=20.7 trials, SD=12.0 trials), and the remaining
children – ‘non-generalizers’ - scored on average 7.8 trials
correct (SD=4.2 trials). This contrasts with the findings
from Experiment 1. We discuss reasons for this diverging
result in the Discussion section.
Effect of age and highest count We analyzed whether
children’s age or counting experience predicted the
likelihood that they generalized in the Multiplier condition.
We conducted a logistic regression with age in months and
highest count as predictor variables. The dependent measure
was children’s status as a ‘generalizer’. Results showed that
there was no effect of age, β = .011, SE = .042, p = .78, but
a marginal effect of highest count, β = .024, SE = .013, p =
.064. The model with both predictors was significantly
better than the constant-only model, Χ2(2) = 6.50, p = .038.
Cross-linguistic comparison Next, to investigate whether
there is a cross-linguistic difference in how likely children
generalize the novel multiplier, we conducted a logistic
regression with language (English, Chinese) as a predictor.
We also included age in months, highest count and the two
control measures – PPVT and TEMA – in the model. The
dependent variable was children’s status as a ‘generalizer’.
This analysis was performed for children in the Multiplier
condition. We found no effect of language, β = -.26, SE =

2715

.51. p = .61, suggesting that although proportionally more
Chinese-speaking children were generalizers compared to
English-speaking children, this difference was not reliable.
None of the control measures were significant, all ps > .09.

Discussion
Experiment 2 extended the findings from Experiment 1 to
children learning Cantonese, a language with regular
numeral structure. We found that Cantonese-speaking
children between the ages of 4 and 6½ could map complex
numerals in the form ‘digit multiplier’ onto multiplication.
We also found that some children in the No Digit condition
demonstrated knowledge of the multiplier structure, which
contrasts sharply with children learning English
(Experiment 1). We speculate that this is due to the fact that
in Cantonese, the numeral ‘one’ can often be dropped in
conversations (Erbaugh, 2002; Matthews & Yip, 1994).
This raises the possibility that even in absence of the word
‘one’ during modelling and training, children in the No
Digit condition interpreted ‘gobi CL Xs’ as if it means ‘one
gobi CL Xs’, and assigned it a multiplicative meaning.
Another possibility is that the classifier may provide cues to
Chinese speakers that ‘gobi CL Xs’ is a numeral phrase. We
think that this explanation cannot fully explain the pattern of
results because English-speaking children in the No Digit
condition could identify a set of three objects as ‘gobi Xs’.
Their difficulty lies in generalizing it to novel contexts.

General Discussion
Two experiments explored whether and when children are
able to map the multiplier structure, ‘digit multiplier’ (e.g.,
one hundred), onto multiplication. Using a novel word
learning paradigm, we found that both English- and
Cantonese-speaking children between the ages of 4 and 6½
who were taught the meaning of ‘one gobi Xs’ to refer to a
group of three objects were able to generalize to ‘two gobi
Xs’ as meaning two groups of three objects. We also found
that knowledge of this mapping in complex numerals is
specific to the form of ‘digit multiplier’ - when provided
with uninformative syntax in which the digit was not
presented, English-speaking children failed to generalize the
novel noun phrase to a novel context. The current set of
experiments are the first to investigate the acquisition of the
multiplier syntax in children, and our results demonstrate
that children as young as 4 can create a mapping between
the multiplier structure – ‘digit multiplier’ – and a
multiplicative meaning with minimal training.
Our findings provide some support for the rule-based
learning account of the acquisition of complex numerals.
With only six modelling trials, a majority of children
learned that ‘one gobi’ refers to a group of three objects, and
approximately half of those generalized to a novel context.
Although not all children could generalize, our results
indicate that even with very little input, children are able to
map the syntax of multipliers to its semantics.
Nevertheless, the current study leaves open two questions.
First, we found that Cantonese-speaking children in the No

Digit condition were also able to generalize. Further studies
are required to investigate whether Cantonese-speaking
children would generalize the novel numeral phrase to novel
contexts when presented with other uninformative syntactic
structures. Second, we found that age, general vocabulary
and mathematical skills, and the regularity of a language’s
numeral system did not predict how likely children
generalized in the Multiplier condition. Counting experience
was only marginally significant in the Chinese sample. It
remains to be tested what may predict children’s sensitivity
to multiplier syntax.
In summary, the present results suggest that numeral
syntax may provide a rich foundation for numeral learning.
They also highlight the importance of investigating the
linguistic aspects of the numeral system, and provide a
fruitful avenue for examining the linguistic and conceptual
building blocks of the acquisition of number.

References
Erbaugh, M. (2002). Classifiers are for specification:
complementary functions for sortal and general classifiers in
Cantonese and Mandarin, Cahiers de linguistique-Asie
orientale, 31, 33-69.
Fuson, K. (1990). Conceptual structures for multiunit numbers:
Implications for learning and teaching. Cognition and
Instruction, 7(4), 343-403.
Ginsburg, H., Baroody, A. (2003). Test of Early Mathematics
Ability. 3rd edition. Autsin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Hurford, J. (1975). The linguistic theory of numerals.
Cambridge University Press.
Ionin, T., & Matushansky, O. The composition of complex
cardinals. Journal of Semantics, 23, 315-360.
Matthews, S., & Yip, V. (1994). Cantonese: A comprehensive
grammar. New York: Routledge.
Miller, K. F., & Stigler, J. W. (1987). Counting in Chinese:
Cultural variation in a basic cognitive skill. Cognitive
Development, 2, 279-305.
Miller, K. F., Smith, C. M., Zhu, J., & Zhang, H. (1995).
Preschool origins of cross-national differences in
mathematical competence: The role of number-naming
systems. Psychological Science, 6(1), 56-60.
Miura, I.T. (1987). Mathematics achievement as a function of
language. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 79-82.
Miura, I.T., Okamoto, Y., Kim, C., Steere, M., & Fayol, M.
(1993). First graders’ cognitive representation of number and
understanding of place value: Cross-national comparisons.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 24-30.
Siegler, R.S., & Robinson, M. (1982). The development of
numerical understandings. In H. W. Reese & L. P. Lipsitt
(Eds.), Advances in child development and behavior (pp.
241-312). New York: Academic Press.
Saxton, M., & Towse, J. N. (1998). Linguistic relativity: The
case of place value in multi-digit numbers. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 69, 66–79.
Vasilyeva, M., Laski, E., Ermakova, A., Lai, W-F., Jeong, Y.,
& Hachigian, A. (2015). Reexamining the language account
of cross-national differences in base-10 number
representations. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
129, 12-25.

2716

