Attention and the Development of Inductive Generalization: Evidence from
Recognition Memory
Tracey Miser (miser.4@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH43210 USA

Vladimir Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH43210 USA

knowledge-based view, induction is always based on
category information, even in young children. In
knowledge-based induction, the category of a novel item is
identified and properties are inferred based on whether the
novel item belongs to the same category as the familiar
target. Proponents contend that children are able to make
knowledge-based inferences because they hold many a
priori assumptions about categories (Gelman & Markman,
1986). For example, assumptions that natural kind
categories share many properties, including internal
structure (Gelman, 1988; see Murphy, 2001 for a review).
Considering children are most familiar with basic-level
categories, this view posits that children are more likely to
infer properties at the basic-level.
According to the similarity-based view, knowledge-based
induction is a product of development and not reliant on a
priori assumptions, while early induction is similarity-based.
In similarity-based induction, multiple features of the novel
input are assessed for similarity to a familiar entity.
Properties are then inferred based on how similar the novel
item is to the known target. There is evidence that, in
addition to visual features (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a),
linguistic labels (Deng & Sloutsky, 2013) and salient
motion (Deng & Sloutsky, 2012) may factor in the
similarity computation. According to this view, in
knowledge-based induction, a novel item is labeled (either
externally or by self-generating the label), then the label of
the novel item is compared to the label of the familiar target
and properties are inferred based on whether the entities
belong to the same category. As such, this mechanism
depends on the knowledge that items from the same
category share many properties, including shared labels
(Deng & Sloutsky, 2013), but also causal (Badger &
Shapiro, 2012Bulloch & Opfer, 2009), and ontological
(Gelman & Davidson, 2013) properties.
A critical difference between the above accounts is
whether children use a different mechanism than adults
when performing induction. In order to test this, Sloutsky
and Fisher (2004a) developed the Induction-thenRecognition paradigm (ITR) in which participants perform
an induction task followed by a surprise memory test of
items that were presented during induction and items that
were not. The ITR paradigm is based on the “level-ofprocessing effect” in which deeper semantic processing

Abstract
Induction, the ability to generalize knowledge from known to
novel instances, is essential for human learning. This study
investigates how attention allocation during category learning
and induction affects what information is represented and
encoded to memory. In Experiment 1 5-year-olds and adults
learned rule-based categories. They were then presented with
an Induction-then-Recognition task. Similar to previous
results with familiar categories, children exhibited better
memory for items than adults. In Experiment 2, adults learned
similarity-based categories and then were presented with an
Induction-then-Recognition task. In this condition, adults’
memory was as good as children’s memory in Experiment 1.
These results indicate that the way categories are represented
affects the way induction is performed.
Keywords: Induction; Learning; Memory.

Introduction
By means of induction humans have the ability to
generate new knowledge, reason about new objects, and
learn in new situations. Induction enables the generalization
of properties from the familiar to the novel. For example, if
one learns that honey bee exoskeletons are composed of
chitin, this knowledge could be extended to other types of
bees and wasps, to all hymenoptera, or even to all
arthropods. There is considerable evidence that inductive
generalization appears early in development (Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a), with infants as
young as 9-months exhibiting this ability (Baldwin,
Markman & Melartin, 1993; Graham, Kilbreath, & Welder,
2004; McDonough & Mandler, 1998; Mandler &
McDonough, 1998), and further evidence that the
development of induction is protracted to at least 11 years of
age (Fisher& Sloutsky, 2005). Despite considerable
literature describing the mechanisms of induction, it is still
not understood what, if anything, develops. Thus, the goal
of the current study is twofold: (1) to understand what
changes, and (2) to determine how those changes are
reflected in the use of different mechanisms of induction.
In order to describe the mechanisms of induction, two
theories have been proposed: the knowledge-based and the
similarity-based views. Each theory presents arguments for
how induction is performed and describes what
developmental changes may occur. According to the

632

increases recognition accuracy (i.e., “hits”; Craik &
Lockhart, 1972; Craik & Tulving, 1975), while at the same
time also increasing the proportion of false recognitions of
non-presented, but categorically related, items (i.e., “false
alarms”; Koutstaal & Schacter, 1997; Rhodes & Anastasi,
200; Tharpar & McDermott, 2001). Thus, the overall result
(i.e., hits – false alarms) is negative. In contrast, shallower
perceptual processing may yield similar proportions of hits,
but false alarms will be much lower (Marks, 1991). The
result in this case is more accurate memory.
Following the above logic, Sloutsky and Fisher (2004a)
proposed that memory for items presented in an induction
task may reveal the level of processing used when
performing induction. That is, use of a similarity-based
mechanism, which is shallower than the semantic level of
processing, will result in more accurate memory following
induction. This pattern of memory was predicted for young
children with either familiar or novel categories and for
adults with novel categories. And while the above account
has received much empirical support (Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004a; 2004b; Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005), many questions
remain. For example, if the knowledge-based theory is
correct and children use the same mechanism as adults,
what explains age related differences in memory for items
following induction (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a; Fisher &
Sloutsky, 2005)? However, if the similarity-based view is
accurate and children use a different mechanism than adults,
what accounts for high induction performance in tasks
where perceptual information is in contrast with category
label (Gelman & Markman, 1986)? To address these
questions, each view posits specific predictions about what
develops.
The knowledge-based view posits that what develops is
category knowledge (Gelman, 1988). This view holds that
the mechanism driving induction does not change, and any
changes in how induction is performed can be explained by
changes in children’s knowledge. Such age related gains
include a shift from domain general to domain specific
knowledge, knowledge regarding the hierarchical structure
of categories, and scientific knowledge (Gelman & E.
Markman, 1986; Gelman & Heyman, 1999; Gelman, 2004).
For example, Gelman and O’Reilly (1988) found that school
age children were able to successfully perform induction
when superordinate category labels were provided, while
preschool children did not. According to the authors, this
finding demonstrates developmental gains in understanding
of, and the ability to use, hierarchical category structure.
On the other hand, the similarity-based view holds that
what develops is a different mechanism of induction
(Sloutsky & Fisher 2004a). That is, changes in induction
performance are due to a shift from an early similarity-based
mechanism to a mature knowledge-based mechanism. If this
is the case, then Gelman and O’Reilly’s (1988) findings
could result from children failing to make inferences within
the superordinate category because the exemplars provided

for the broad category of “animal” were too perceptually
different to promote similarity-based induction. Importantly,
according to this theory, a similarity-based mechanism
would still be available for use by adults with novel
categories, not that one mechanism replaces the other.
Adding to the above arguments regarding what develops,
there is growing evidence in the category learning literature
indicating that developmental changes in attention
contribute in key ways to changes in category learning and
representation. In an eye-tracking study by Best, Yim, and
Sloutsky (2013), it was found that adults, but not 6- to 8month-old infants, demonstrated a cost of attention when
switching from categorizing learned categories to novel
categories. Adults continued to focus on the previously
learned category rule feature even when new categories
were introduced. Infants, however, did not show a similar
cost. It was argued that the difference between infants’ and
adults’ switching was due to adults’ more developed
selective attention and resulting focus to a single predictive
feature. Similar results with adults were found by Hoffman
and Rehder (2010). In that study, participants demonstrated
the same cost of attention such that they continued to attend
to a category rule feature even when new categories were
introduced.
The changing role of attention in categorization was also
demonstrated by Deng and Sloutsky (2015). In that study,
children and adults were trained to perform either item
classification or feature inference, it was found that older
children and adults demonstrated an asymmetry between
their responses during item classification and feature
inference such that participants relied on a single
deterministic feature when classifying, but on multiple
probabilistic features when inferring a missing feature. The
same asymmetry was not found in younger children. The
authors argued that younger children’s representations
remained similarity-based regardless of training, while older
children’s and adults’ representations were flexible (i.e.,
capable of being knowledge- or similarity-based) depending
on the demands of the task.
Considering that categorization, like induction, is a
generalization process, it is possible that developmental
changes in attention also contribute to changes in how
inductive generalization is performed. Distributed attention
may promote forming a similarity-based category
representation as well as a similarity-based mechanism of
induction. If this is the case, then memory for specific items
would be high. That is, attention to multiple features would
result in encoding the overall appearance of an item (Marks,
1991). Alternately, attention focused to a single feature,
such as a rule feature or label (Deng & Sloutsky, 2013),
would promote forming a knowledge-based representation
and use of a knowledge-based mechanism of induction. It
then follows, use of this mechanism would result in poor
memory discrimination for individual entities because
encoding would be limited to a single feature.

633

and perfectly predicted category membership (i.e., the
category rule feature). The remaining six features were
probabilistic and varied from one exemplar to the next so
that the overall appearance of the items was also predictive
of category membership. Subsets of the primary stimuli
described above were created for use during different phases
of the experiment.

Overview of the Current Study
The current experiments were designed to further
examine the mechanism of induction across development. In
Experiment 1, children and adults were taught rule-based
categories. After testing their categorization, participants
were given an Induction-then-Recognition task with one of
the studied categories after which their memory for items
was tested. If children perform induction on the basis of
similarity, and adults on the basis of the rule, then children
should exhibit better memory for items than adults.
However, even if children’s memory is better than adults’, it
could be argued this effect stems from adults being more
efficient in their induction. This issue was addressed in
Experiment 2 where adults learned similarity-based
categories and were then presented with the ITR task. If
adults are merely more strategic at induction than young
children, then memory for items in this condition should
remain as low as in Experiment 1. In contrast, if Experiment
1 reflects differences in how induction is performed, then
adults in this experiment should exhibit better memory for
items after induction than in Experiment 1.

Procedure The experiment consisted of four phases: (1)
Instructions and Category Training, (2) Category Testing,
(3) Induction, and (4) Recognition Memory. Instructions
and feedback for all phases and both age groups were
presented in text on the computer monitor. Adults read the
instructions at their own pace, while children were read the
instructions aloud by an experimenter. Adults made
keyboard responses, and children made verbal responses
which were then logged by the experimenter via the
keyboard.
Instructions and Category Training: In Instructions prior
to Training, participants were shown the default
deterministic feature for Category D, then the default
deterministic feature for Category F. Features were
presented one at a time along with the feature label and a
statement directing attention to that feature (e.g., “Daxes
always have this kind of tail.”). During Training, corrective
feedback was provided after every trial with statements
directing attention to the deterministic feature (e.g.,
“Correct! That one is a dax. It has a dax tail.”). This phase
contained three blocks of twelve trials each. Only High
Similarity items were presented in this phase (see Table 1
for stimuli structure).
Category Testing: Participants were told to continue
categorizing, as in Training phase. This phase contained two
blocks. Block one presented the same twelve High
Similarity items from Training, plus twelve new Medium
Similarity items. Block two presented twelve Switch items
(see Table 1 for stimuli structures). No feedback was
provided in this phase.
Induction: Participants were shown an example of a High
Similarity Category F exemplar and were informed that
“This fep has beta-cells in its body.” Participants were then
asked to view other animals and decide whether they also
have this property. Corrective feedback followed each trial
indicating that only the target category (Category F)
exemplars had beta-cells (e.g., Incorrect. That one does not
have beta-cells). Items included six Probabilistic New items
from each category, six Probabilistic Switch items from
each category (see Table 1 for stimuli structures), and
twelve Distracter items. This phase contained one block of
36 trials. The upcoming recognition memory test was not
mentioned.
Recognition Memory: Participants were instructed they
would be presented “old” items from the Induction phase as
well as “new” items that had not been presented at any time
during the experiment. Subjects were asked to determine

Experiment 1: Deterministic Instructions
Method
Participants Thirty-one adults (Mage = 20.3 years) and
thirty-four children (Mage = 5.4 years) participated in the
experiment. One additional child and two additional adults
were dropped from analysis due to failure to follow
directions during part of the experiment. Two children were
dropped from analysis for not responding above chance to
High and Medium Similarity items at Category Testing.
Materials Both experiments presented here used visual
stimuli consisting of two categories of artificial insects. The
category structure was similar to that previously used by
Deng and Sloutsky (2012, 2013). Each category was
provided a novel label: dax (Category D), and fep (Category
F). Items in both categories were composed of seven
features (head, body, legs, wings, antennae, claws, and tail),
which differed between categories on the shape and color of
each feature. All the default features of Category D were
given the value of 1 (e.g., head1, body1, etc.), and all
default features of Category F were given the value of 0
(e.g., head0, body0, etc.; see Table 1 for example stimuli
structures). Each category had one prototype that was
assembled from all of the default feature values for that
category (Prototypes are pictured in Figure 1). The
remaining stimuli were constructed by exchanging
probabilistic features between categories or introducing new
probabilistic features.
Of the seven features present on each stimulus, one was
deterministic and was never exchanged between categories.
That feature (the tails) remained constant within a category

634

Table 1: Example of stimulus structures used in Experiments 1-2
Category F
Category D
Head Body Legs Wings Antenna Claws Tail
Head Body Legs Wings Antenna Claws Tail
Prototype
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Prototype
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
High Sim.
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
High Sim.
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
Med Sim.
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
Med Sim.
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
Switch
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
Switch
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
Prob. New
0
0
0
0
N0
0
0
Prob. New
1
N1
1
1
1
1
1
Prob. Switch 0
0
0
N1
0
0
0
Prob. Switch 1
1
N0
1
1
1
1
Low Sim.
N1
1
1
N2
N0
0
0
Low Sim.
1
1
N1
N2
N0
1
1
Note: 0 = dimension corresponding with Category F features; 1 = dimension corresponding with Category D features. Nn = new
feature and the corresponding feature identifier.
Experiment 1 d’ scores are presented in Table 3 alongside d'
scores for Experiment 2. Children’s memory (H(.77) –
FA(.31) = .46, d’ =1.48) was significantly better than that of
adults (H(.80) – FA(.45) = .36, d’ = 1.06), t(60) = 1.92, one
tailed p=.03.
Results of Experiment 1 indicate that both children and
adults ably learned the categories, generalized learning to
new exemplars, and correctly inferred properties to the
target category. Furthermore, children’s proportion of rulebased responses on Switch items was very high, suggesting
that they (like adults) did learn a rule-based category.
However, children exhibited better memory than adults,
indicating they did not use their knowledge of the rule to
perform induction. This finding suggests that children were
likely attending to more than just the category defining
feature during induction. These findings are consistent with
the theory that children rely on overall similarity when
performing induction. It could be argued however, that these
memory differences simply reflect developmental
differences in the efficiency of allocating attention during
induction. Experiment 2 addresses this question.

Figure 1: Prototypes of Category F and
Category D
Category D

Category F

Note: Prototypes were not presented during the
experiment.
which items were old and which were new. Items included
the same twelve target category items from the Induction
Phase (old Category F exemplars), twelve novel Low
Similarity target category items (new Category F exemplars,
see Table 1 for stimuli structures), six non-target category
items from the Induction Phase (old Category D
exemplars,), and six novel Distracters.

Experiment 2: Probabilistic Instructions

Results and Discussion

This experiment was similar to Experiment 1, with one
exception: adults were trained on similarity-based (rather
than rule-based) categories. If Experiment 1 simply reflects
differences in attentional efficiency during induction, adults’
memory after induction should remain low in Experiment 2.
In contrast, if memory for items is reflective of the
mechanisms of induction, adults’ memory in Experiment 2
should be higher than that in Experiment 1.

Accuracy in Category Training was high for both children
(M = 95%) and adults (M = 97%) with both groups
performing significantly better than chance (both ps < .001).
Proportions of rule-based responses to High Similarity and
Switch items in Category Testing are reported in Table 2
along with results of Experiment 2. Both children and adults
made significantly more rule-based responses than would be
expected by chance (both ps < .001). Induction accuracies
were also above chance for children (M = 85%, t(30) =
13.14, p < .001) and adults (M = 91%, t(30) = 18.88, p <
.001). The remaining analysis focused on results of the
Recognition Memory Phase.
Memory discrimination was analyzed using signal
detection d' scores calculated from the Z-score normalized
proportions of hits (H) and false alarms (FA). If participants
do not discriminate old from new items, d' is at or below 0.

Method
Participants Thirty-seven adults (Mage = 20.3 years)
participated. Four additional adults were dropped for failing
to follow directions (N = 2) or not meeting category
learning criteria described in Experiment 1, N = 2).

635

adults’ having more efficient attention allocation than young
children.

Materials, Design and Procedure Visual Stimuli were
identical to those used in Experiment 1. Procedures for this
experiment were similar to those described in Experiment 1,
with two exceptions: (1) Instructions preceding Category
Training, and (2) feedback during Category Training. In this
experiment, instructions preceding Category Training
introduced each probabilistic feature, one feature at a time,
and one category at a time, for both categories. Each feature
was presented with text indicating the feature label and a
statement directing attention to that feature (e.g., “Most feps
have this kind of head.”). Feedback during this phase redirected attention to overall appearance of the items (e.g.,
“Correct! This is a fep. It looks like a fep.”).

Table 3:Mean d’ scores for Experiments 1 and 2
Age Group
d’
Adults – Experiment 1
1.06 (.88)
Children – Experiment 1
1.48 (.84)
Adults – Experiment 2
1.80 (.80)
Note: Experiment 1 (Deterministic Instructions),
Experiment 2 (Probabilistic Instructions). Standard
deviations are in parentheses.

Results and Discussion

General Discussion

Accuracy in Category Training was high (M = 86%) and
significantly better than chance (p < .001). Proportions of
rule-based responses to High Similarity and Switch items
presented in Category Testing are reported in Table 2. The
proportion of rule-based responses on High Similarity items
was significantly better than chance (p < .001), however,
Switch item responses in this experiment were lower than
adults in Experiment 1 (F(1, 62) = 497.65, p < .001) and
lower than chance (t(32) = -10.36 , p < .001). Induction
accuracy was high (M = 81%), perhaps somewhat lower
than that in Experiment 1 but still significantly higher than
chance (t(32) = 10.21, p < .001). The remaining analysis
focused on memory discrimination in the Recognition
Memory Phase.

The two experiments reported here aimed to further
understand the development of induction, and specifically,
the role of attention in the development of inductive
mechanisms. To do so, novel categories were introduced as
a means to test how adults and children attend to entities
during category learning, how they represent those
categories for purposes of generalization, and how well they
discriminate between entities encoded to memory.
In Experiment 1, adults focused on a single rule feature,
resulting in a constricted, knowledge-based representation
as evidenced by high proportions of rule-based responses to
Switch items and low memory discrimination. However, in
Experiment 2 adults’ attention was broadened to the overall
appearance, thus their representation included more detail as
evidenced by low proportions of rule-based responses to
Switch items and greater memory discrimination.
Importantly, adults’ responses to Switch items and their
memory scores in Experiments 1 and 2 correspond with the
instructions and feedback provided during Category
Training. Low memory in Experiment 1 was not due to
more efficient induction, but rather a result of training. And,
while children had high proportions of rule-based responses
to Switch items in Experiment 1, their memory
discrimination was higher than that of adults who were
provided the same training on the category inclusion rule. It
is clear that children followed the category rule when
categorizing but seems very likely that their attention
remained distributed across multiple features of the stimuli.
As such, children formed similarity-based representations
during category learning, used a similarity-based
mechanism during induction, and had higher memory
discrimination in the recognition test.
Together, these findings demonstrate that adults can use
either a knowledge- or similarity-based mechanism of
induction, while children use only a similarity-based
mechanism. The question being addressed here was what
underlies the development of the mature knowledge-based
mechanism? Results presented here implicate attention as
the catalyst of representational and mechanistic change.

Table 2:Mean Proportions of Rule-based Responses
during Category Testing Phase
High Similarity
Switch
Adults- Experiment 1
.98 (.03)
.97 (.07)
Children- Experiment 1
.92 (.09)
.91 (.17)
Adults-Experiment 2
.82 (.10)
.16 (.19)
Note: Experiment 1 (Deterministic Instructions),
Experiment 2 (Probabilistic Instructions). Standard
deviations are in parentheses.
Memory discrimination d' scores for Experiment 2 are
presented in Table 3, alongside d' scores for Experiment 1.
To further examine adults’ memory discrimination, d’
scores from both experiments were submitted to a One Way
ANOVA. The analysis revealed a significant difference
between the experiments, F(1, 60) = 10.28, p = .002, with
adults in Experiment 2 having higher memory sensitivity
scores (H(.79) – FA(.23) = .56, d' = 1.80).
Results of Experiment 2 clearly indicate that postinduction memory is reflective of how induction was
performed. Adults’ high memory in this experiment
indicates that results of Experiment 1 do not stem from

636

That is, as children develop the ability to attend selectively
to relevant visual input and filter out the irrelevant (Enns &
Cameron, 1987), the kinds of representations formed during
category learning and the inductive mechanisms used
develop in kind. In sum, the inductive mechanism is directly
related to the pattern of attention during category learning
and the subsequent representation formed.

Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within
natural kind and artifact categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 20, 65-95.
Gelman, R. (2004). Cognitive Development. Stevens’
Handbook of Experimental Psychology.
Gelman, S. A.,& Davidson, N. S. (2013). Conceptual
influences on category-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 66, 327-353.
Gelman, S. A., & Heyman, G. D. (1999). Carrot-eaters and
creature-believers: The effects of lexicalization on
children's inferences about social
categories. Psychological Science, 10, 489-493.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A.,& O’Reilly, A. W. (1998). Children’s
inductive inferences within superordinate categories:
The role of language and category structure. Child
Development, 59, 876-887.
Graham, S. A., Kilbreath, C. S., & Welder, A. N. (2004).
Thirteen-month-olds rely on shared labels and shape
similarity for inductive inferences. Child Development,
75, 409-427.
Hoffman, A. B.,& Rehder, B. (2010). The costs of
supervised classification: The effect of learning task on
conceptual flexibility. Journal of Experimental
Psychology General, 139, 319-340.
Koutstaal, W., & Schacter, D. L. (1997).Gist-based false
recognition of pictures in older and younger adults.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 555-583.
Mandler, J. M., & McDonough, L. (1998). Studies in
inductive inference in infancy. Cognitive Psychology,
37, 60-96.
Marks, W. (1991). Effects of encoding the perceptual
features of pictures on memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 566577.
McDonough, L.,& Mandler, J. M. (1998). Inductive
generalization in 9- and 11-month-olds. Developmental
Science, 1, 227-232.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rhodes, M. G., & Anastasi, J. S. (2000). The effects of a
levels-of-processing manipulation on false recall.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 158-162.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher A. V. (2004a). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher A. V. (2004b). When
Development and learning decrease memory.
Psychological Science, 15, 553-558.
Thapar, A., & McDermott, K. B. (2001). False recall and
false recognition induced by presentation of associated
words: Effects of retention interval and level of
processing. Memory and Cognition, 29, 424-432.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the NSF (BCS0720135) to V. M. Sloutsky.

References
Badger, J. R.,& Shapiro, L. R. (2012). Evidence of a
transition from perceptual to category induction in 3- to
9-year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 113, 131-146.
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M.,& Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infants’ ability to draw inferences about nonobvious
object properties: Evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64, 711-728.
Best, C. A., Yim, H., &Sloutsky, V. M. (2013). The cost of
selective attention in category learning: Developmental
differences between adults and infants. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 116, 105-119.
Bulloch, M. J.,& Opfer, J. E. (2009). What makes relational
reasoning smart? Revisiting the perceptual-to-relational
shift in the development of generalization.
Developmental Science, 12, 114-122.
Craik, F. I. & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing:
A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Craik F. I. & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and
the retention of words in episodic memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 268-294.
Deng, W.,& Sloutsky, V. M. (2012).Carrot eaters or moving
heads: Inductive inference is better supported by salient
features than by category labels. Psychological Science,
23, 178-186.
Deng, W.,& Sloutsky, V. M. (2013). The role of linguistic
labels in inductive generalization. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 114, 432-455.
Deng W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2015). The development of
categorization: Effects of classification and inference
training on category representation. Developmental
Psychology, 51, 392-405.
Enns, J. T., & Cameron, S. (1987). Selective attention in
young children: The relations between visual search,
filtering, and priming. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 44, 338-63.
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2005). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development, 76, 583-597.

637

