Blink durations reflect mind wandering during reading
Stephanie Huette (shuette@memphis.edu), Ariel Mathis, & Art Graesser
University of Memphis
Department of Psychology and the Institute for Intelligent Systems
369 Psychology Bldg
Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Abstract

Default Mode Network

Mind wandering is a prevalent but highly subjective phenomenon
that is difficult to measure. Typically studies use probes at
random points throughout at study that pop in and ask participants
“Are you mind wandering” where they indicate yes or no, and
then resume the study. This study investigated a method of
extracting eye blinks from raw eye tracking data while
participants were reading texts that varied in degree of
engagingness on a similar topic. Blink durations were found to
increase for less engaging texts. We hypothesize that eye blink
durations may increase with mind wandering and discuss
implications for mind wandering research.
Keywords: mind
consciousness

wandering,

reading,

eye

The default mode network is hypothesized to be a network
used when the mind is in a “resting state”, supported by
imaging research examining cortical regions involved in
mind wandering (Mason, Norton, Horn, Wegner, Grafton &
Macrae, 2007). Importantly the default mode network has
been shown to be active during mind wandering using fMRI
measurements, demonstrating a strong link between the
phenomena of mind wandering and an underlying neural state
(Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith & Schooler, 2009).
This is a kind of auto-pilot the brain can use when it is not
closely coupled to a stimulus, allowing the mind to process
information internally. Allowing for a brief period of rest
may allow subsequent performance on attention and focusdriven tasks to improve performance. The default mode
network is active during many phenomena including mind
wandering, daydreaming, thinking about the self, or thinking
about the past or planning for the future (Spreng & Grady,
2010; Qin & Northoff, 2011). While the significance and
meaning of the default mode network is a matter of debate
(see Raichle, 2015), the literature provides hints into more
covert measures of mind wandering that may be useful in
detecting when a person becomes disengaged from a task. In
the present work, we will demonstrate eye blink durations
could be an indication the mind is wandering more often
when reading difficult texts.
One recent study demonstrated eye blinks activating the
default mode network temporarily (Nakano, Kato, Morito,
Itoi & Kitazawa, 2013). Critically, this is not due to a
temporary lack of stimulus from the eye closing. A condition
where the video turned black for the duration of an eye blink
did not produce the same pattern of activation as eye blinks.
Thus, it can be inferred that blinks are linked to triggering the
mind’s resting state. When there is a task that involves close
attention such as reading, the rate of blinking tends to
decrease. Blinking is an underutilized resource for measuring
engagement in a task. Part of this paper is to provide
guidelines for extracting blinks from a continuous time series
of eye movements.

tracking,

Introduction
Mind wandering is considered a state of moving from one
thought to another internally, uncoupled from external
stimuli (Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). There are task
related thoughts (e.g. thinking about one’s own experiences
with making pasta while in a cooking class) and task
unrelated thoughts (e.g. thinking about what to eat this
evening while in a physics lecture). This is classically a
difficult phenomenon to study, because we cannot directly
observe the process of mind wandering unfolding, nor
understand the contents of another’s mind without directly
asking about them. The process of asking participants to
reflect on their mind wandering disrupts the process itself,
interrupting the mind wandering and perhaps perturbing
subsequent processing (Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). The
focus of the present research is identifying a potential covert
measurement of mind wandering that might globally index
how engaged or disengaged a participant is with a given task.
Without focus on external stimuli we cannot process or
learn new material from reading or listening nor can we do
goal-oriented interactive tasks, all of which require attention,
perceptual cognitive processing, and in some cases, action.
This makes mind wandering important to understanding data
from all domains of psychological research, because
participants coming into a laboratory for many psychological
experiment are likely to mind wander at some point during
the task. However, mind wandering is not purely negative in
its effects. More recently it has shown to play a role in aiding
creative problem solving as well as autobiographical
planning (see Mooneyham & Schooler, 2013 for a review).
From a biological perspective it actually serves a functional
role of resting the mind, even though it involves some of the
same brain areas that are involved in tasks that require
attention and goal-orienting.

Reading & Mind Wandering
Studies investigating text difficulty and mind wandering have
been mixed. Self-report measures from people reading
passages varying in difficulty demonstrated no differences in
amount of mind wandering. Instead, differences in mind
wandering were found in how interested the participant was
in the topic (Giambra & Grodsky, 1989; Grodsky & Giambra,

253

1990). In more recent research, when text difficulty was
varied (Feng, D’Mello, & Graesser, 2013), Difficult texts
positively correlated with more self-reported mindwandering. This is inconsistent with prior work that predicts
simpler tasks to induce mind wandering (Smallwood &
Schooler, 2006), presumably because there are more
cognitive resources available for mind wandering. However,
both overly easy and overly difficult tasks could both induce
this kind of mind wandering. For the purposes of the present
preliminary work, we are assuming there to be a correlation
between mind wandering and how engaging a text is to read,
in line with the Feng et al. findings (2013) where more mind
wandering was correlated with more difficult to read texts.
The second important link to the present work is between
blinks and mind-wandering, which appears to be wellestablished.
Finding an observable behavioral characteristic of mindwandering is a challenge. People are able to read entire pages
of text while moving their eyes across the page while thinking
about what they want to eat for dinner, making it difficult to
predict or observe mind wandering without directly asking
someone. Blinks have been investigated as an indicator of
mind wandering. Smilek, Carriere, & Cheyne (2010)
reported that blink frequency (blinks/sec) increased in
periods prior to self-reported mind wandering during reading.
However, this difference relied on separating the data
according to self-report, whereas text difficulty was not
varied.
Schad, Nuthmann, and Engbert (2012) proposed an
attentional decoupling, finding that eye movements were
predictive of overlooking text errors at different levels of
language processing. The first level to be lost was the
semantic/thematic information from text, followed by
syntactic and lexical information, indicating mind wandering
is not an on/off state of mind. This makes levels of language
lost and degrees of mind wandering an important topic to
pursue to understand what most impacts text comprehension
and later recall (see also Uzzaman & Joordens, 2011). Other
studies have also found that mind wandering is not a discrete
state rather a gradual decoupling from external stimuli (Singh
& Fawcett, 2008).

internal train of thought that is detached from the external
stimulus. This is phenomenologically one of the most
interesting aspects of the experience of mind wandering,
where in one moment you are listening to a lecture, and the
next you realize you’ve missed the last ten minutes while
thinking internally about the day’s events, or future plans for
the evening. Being able to detect when someone is about to
begin mind wanderingis becoming of interest to more
researchers and has been steadily progressing in recent years
(Blanchard, Bixler, Joyce, & D’Mello, 2014; Bixler &
D’Mello, 2014).
The goal of the current research was twofold: (1) to
observe whether stimuli known to be less engaging to
different degrees would produce blink duration differences,
and (2) to observe this without the use of explicit probes. One
of the challenges of mind wandering research is participants
must be asked “Were you mind wandering?” at random
points during experiments. While this approach typically
yields interpretable results it poses problems that are readily
acknowledged in the literature (Smallwood & Schooler,
2015). The first is it interrupts processing, perhaps perturbing
subsequent mind wandering by bringing awareness and focus
to the mind wandering aspect of the study. The second is
participants may be engaging in mind wandering outside of
their own awareness, or disengage to various degrees as a
function of how engaging the current stimuli are. Asking if
participants are mind wandering also does not reveal how
deeply they are mind wandering. The blink frequency study
of Smilek et al. (2009) used self-report, whereas we instead
are relying on text characteristics to induce more or less
mind-wandering. That is, mind wandering is predicted to
decrease as a function of text difficulty, as we have shown in
previous studies for these texts. We don’t know whether or
not participants in this particular study were indeed mind
wandering but we rely on the established relation with text
difficulty in this sample. Again, relying on self-report and
probes also has its downsides in that it disrupts processing.
Here we can rely on the assumption that more boring texts
will induce more mind wandering (Feng et al., 2013).
Thus, instead of using a binary measurement of yes/no,
eye blink duration affords a continuous measurement that
could be sensitive to a spectrum of boring to engaging stimuli
of all kinds. It also addresses the problem of interrupting
processing because no overt response or knowledge of the
study being related to mind wandering is required in order to
collect eye movement data. This study may also help to
address whether mind wandering occurs more frequently
with engaging texts or with boring texts, helping to resolve
conflicting results in prior studies.
This study includes one experiment and a description of
methods on how eye blinks were extracted from a Tobii X2
system post-hoc. Eye trackers do not directly report whether
samples are lost because of blinks, inaccuracy in calibration,
head turns, or off-screen fixations. This poses a difficult
computational problem for extracting blinks, and this
algorithm could be used with any binocular eye tracking
system. To determine a blink with high confidence, we used

Study Motivation
Because prior research strongly points to the duration of
blinks being linked to the default mode network, we
hypothesized blink duration may also vary as a function of
how engaging a text passage is during reading. This account
is compatible with both the executive-resource hypothesis
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2006) and a control-failure
hypothesis (McVay & Kane, 2010), which both posit
cognitive capabilities as important aspects to when and how
mind wandering occurs. The present research asks if we can
detect, using a covert measurement technique without probes,
whether someone is mind wandering, and to what degree they
are mind wandering? There is little research focusing on the
temporal dynamics of how the mind transitions from a state
of tight attentional coupling to the external stimulus to the

254

only timepoints where both eye tracks were lost. We also
used a reasonable duration of consecutive missing samples,
because although eye blink duration has individual variability
it is a relatively stable range. Single eye track loss is likely
due to track loss from calibration error, and both eye samples
being missing is likely to be looks off-screen. .
Educational outcomes are fundamentally tied to text
comprehension and thus mind-wandering during reading is
the focus of the present work. Three texts were given to all
participants in randomized order, with similar thematic
content and varying in degree of engagingness. We
hypothesized blink durations would increase on the texts that
were less engaging, regardless of the order in which they are
read (which controls for fatigue effects). If the default mode
network is activated with blinks, and less engaging texts
induce more mind wandering, the duration of blinks will
increase with less engaging texts, and decrease
monotonically as text becomes more engaging.

Readings were presented one page at a time and were
between seven and eight pages long.
Fixation points consisting of a white screen with a black
and white target at the center were presented between tasks.
Participants advanced past these by pressing the space bar on
the keyboard.
Procedure. Participants were seated in a stationary chair at a
Tobii X2-60 eye tracker. The research assistant briefly
outlined the experiment and informed participants to use the
space bar to advance after written instructions, fixation
points, and through the readings. Participants were further
instructed to hold their heads steady during the experiment
and to not stare off screen. The eye tracker was then
calibrated and the experiment was started. Written
instructions indicating where the space bar should be used as
well as the presence of the blank screen as the first task were
shown on screen. Participants then stared at a blank screen
for three minutes before the experiment automatically
advanced.
The participants were next instructed to read through three
selections and to press space bar to advance to each page.
Readings were counterbalanced to control for order effects.
Participants were not able to backtrack through the readings
once they had advanced to the next page.

Method
Participants
Thirty-nine undergraduate student participated in exchange
for course credit in an undergraduate psychology course.
Participants were right handed native English speakers with
corrected to normal or normal vision by self-reported criteria.
The study was not advertised as a mind wandering study to
prevent self-selection.
Eleven participants were excluded from analysis due to
low track quality, and one participant was excluded due to
not finishing the experiment. Twenty-seven participants were
included in the final analysis.

Data Processing. Both eyes were used and matched at each
timepoint to see if one or both samples were present or
missing. Timepoints where both eye tracks were lost, or one
or both were present were calculated. If both eye samples
were missing, these time points were counted as ones, and
present samples were counted as zeros. The position of the
eye is not relevant to the current analysis and so what
remained was a vector indicating track loss for both eyes,
continuously over the course of reading, linked with vectors
of participant information and the text being read. Only
samples where the participant was reading were used (e.g.
instructions and calibration/drift correction screens were not
used). The data was filtered so that only samples with both
eyes missing for between 100 and 1000ms were counted.
Prior research has demonstrated blink durations exhibit many
individual differences but are within this range (Martens,
Munneke, Smid & Johnson, 2006). For this reason a large
range was chosen that is most likely to be a blink, and not
sample loss due to track inaccuracies, head turns, or eyes
closing deliberately for a longer duration.

Design
The independent variable was text engagingness (3
levels). The data collected was a continuous stream of x,y
pixel coordinates, sample presence or absence as indicated by
the Tobii X2 system, as well as other standard data output
from an eye tracker. The dependent measure to be derived
was the average blink duration (in ms) per participant per
condition. Other tasks were done after the reading, but this
does not interfere with the results of the reading portion
which is the only task to be discussed here.
Materials. The experiment was built using Tobii Studio and
a Tobii X2-60 eye tracker was used to track eye movements.
The experiment consisted of two segments: a blank screen
and selected readings. Order of task type was kept constant,
however the three levels within the reading task type were
counterbalanced. The blank screen consisted of a dark gray
screen which was used to gauge gaze behaviors in the
absence of outside stimuli.
Three readings were selected to represent varying levels of
engagement: high, medium, and low. Readings were
historical in nature with topics including a selection of the
United States Constitution, a reading on law and punishment
in Plymouth colony, and an article on the Salem witch trials.

Results. The text conditions were Low engagement, Medium
engagement, and High engagement. Blink durations were an
average of 320ms for Low engagement (StDev: 185ms),
258ms for Medium engagement (StDev: 94ms) and 224ms
for High engagement (StDev: 51ms). A repeated measures
ANOVA found a significant effect of text engagement level
(F(2,50)=4.6, p=.01). This was in the direction of the more
engaging the text, the shorter the blink durations. The results
appear to be fairly consistent across participants, as seen in
Figure 1.

255

rest period before the blink has even occurred (perhaps during
the motor planning phase, Default Mode Network areas begin
to activate). These are intriguing possibilities, and ones that
might be addressed in follow-up research by incorporating
imaging and EEG in conjunction with eye tracking.

Discussion
This study tracked eye movements over the course of reading
three similar texts that varied in how engaging they were. We
developed an algorithm to extract blinks from raw data, and
found a relationship between blink duration and text
engagingness, where longer blink durations were observed in
less engaging texts. We hypothesize this reflects Default
Mode Network activation, the brain areas and connections
thought to be responsible for mind wandering.
However, this is very preliminary research that could have
multiple interpretations. If blinks functionally trigger mind
wandering as was observed in Nakano et al.’s work (2013), it
could be that an increase in blinks slowly begin moving the
mind deeper into the mind wandering state in a continuous

Limitations
There are many limitations to the current work we readily
acknowledge. The first is that we don’t know if a given
participant was mind wandering. It could be that some
individuals did not mind wander and were very engaged in
all the readings, while others were mind wandering for each
passage. Follow-up research that includes probes or
debriefing questions to measure mind wandering are
necessary, and at this point we are assuming blink durations
reflect mind wandering, when it could in fact be task

Figure 1 Individual subjects blink duration by condition, as a total of all conditions. Percentages are based on the
individual’s total average blink durations per condition. This shows the consistency of the effect, where it appears
that most people show shorter blink durations for high engagement text, with few exceptions.
fashion. That is to say, the reader may not be blinking because
difficulty, syntactic or lexical processing differences, or even
they are mind wandering, but instead, are mind wandering
something like word concreteness.
because they are blinking. While the current work cannot
Other studies have quantified text characteristics using a
disentangle the directionality of what may be causing what,
tool called Coh-Metrix (Graesser, McNamara, Louwerse &
it is not impossible that blinks may be what allow the mind
Cai, 2004). This could potentially be used to control for text
to wander more, and that the brain can anticipate this short
characteristics and various measures of text cohesion that

256

Feng, S., D’Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. (2013). Mind
wandering while reading easy and difficult texts.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20(1), 586-592.
Giambra, L. M. & Grodsky, A. (1989). Task-unrelated
images and thoughts while reading. In Imagery. (pp. 2631). Springer US.
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Cai,
Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and
language. Behavior research methods, instruments, &
computers, 36(2), 193-202.
Grodsky, A. & Giambra, L. M. (1990). The consistency
across vigilance and reading tasks of individual
differences in the occurrence of task-unrelated and taskrelated images and thoughts. Imagination, Cognition and
Personality, 10(1), 39-52.
Huette, S., Winter, B., Matlock, T., Ardell, D. H., & Spivey,
M. (2014). Eye movements during listening reveal
spontaneous grammatical processing. Frontiers in
psychology.
Martens, S., Munneke, J., Smid, H., & Johnson, A. (2006).
Quick minds don’t blink: Electrophysiological correlates
of individual differences in attentional selection. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(9), 1423-1438.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M.,
Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Response to
Comment on" Wandering Minds: The Default Network
and
Stimulus-Independent
Thought".
Science,
317(5834), 43-43.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2010). Does mind wandering
reflect executive function or executive failure?
Comment on Smallwood and Schooler (2006) and
Watkins (2008). Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 188197.
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and
benefits of mind-wandering: A review. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology/ Revue canadienne
de psychologie expérimentale, 67(1), 11-18.
Nakano, T., Kato, M., Morito, Y., Itoi, S., & Kitazawa, S.
(2013). Blink-related momentary activation of the
default mode network while viewing videos.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
110(2), 702-706.
Qin, P., & Nordhoff, G. (2011). How is our self related to
midline regions and the default-mode network?.
Neuroimage, 57(3), 1221-1233.
Raichle, M. E. (2015). The brain's default mode network.
Annual review of neuroscience, 38, 433-447.
Schad, D. J., Nuthmann, A., & Engbert, R. (2012). Your mind
wanders weakly, your mind wanders deeply: objective
measures reveal mindless reading at different levels.
Cognition, 125(2), 179-194.
Singh, K. D., & Fawcett, I. P. (2008). Transient and linearly
graded deactivation of the human default-mode network
by a visual detection task. Neuroimage, 41(1), 100-112.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind
wandering: Empirically navigation the stream of

account for thematic language processing as well as other
variables. It could be these characteristics that prompt one’s
mind to begin wandering, but this should be tested
systematically.
The connection here between mind wandering and blink
duration is tenuous but the data warrants further
investigation. The literature and evidence showing a
systematic difference between texts in this way does point
toward this being an effect of mind wandering, but like all
psychological measures, we have indirect evidence and more
replication and validation of this paradigm will be required to
establish this as an informative measure of engagement and
mind wandering. We consider this first study to be
observational rather than predictive, meaning

Conclusion
Despite many limitations, we have observed a connection
between text engagingness and blink durations, meaning this
is potentially a very useful measurement for future research
in reading and mind wandering, and has the potential to
quantify individual differences or may even be predictive of
mind wandering starting to occur. With eye tracking
technology becoming cheaper and more reliable, this could
be used in conjunction with intelligent tutoring systems to
help bring student’s engagement back to the material. This
could be generalizable to other stimuli and tasks as well, or
even experiments without a task (such as passive listening to
a story i.e. Huette, Winter, Matlock, Ardell & Spivey, 2014).
This is the current direction of this research to generalize this
to other tasks varying in the degree of engagingness, to help
corroborate the current findings of differences in reading.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSF grant # 1108845 to Sidney
D’Mello and Art Graesser. Thank you to Sidney D’Mello
and Andrew Olney for their helpful comments on this work.

References
Bixler, R. & D’Mello, S. (2014).Toward fully automated
person-independent detection of mind wandering. In V.
Dimitrova, T. Kuflik, D. Chin, F. Ricci, P. Dolog, G. J.
Houben (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and
Personalization (pp. 37-48). Switzerland: Springer
International Publishing.
Blanchard, N.,Bixler, R., Joyce, T., & D’Mello, S. (2014).
Automated physiological-based detection of mind
wandering during learning. In Intelligent Tutoring
Systems (pp.55-60). Springer International Publishing.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., &
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during
fMRI reveals default network and executive system
contributions to mind wandering. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(21), 8719-8724.

257

consciousness. Annual review of psychology, 66, 946948.
Smilek, D., Carriere, J. S., & Cheyne, J. A. (2010). Out of
mind, out of sight eye blinking as indicator and
embodiment of mind wandering. Psychological Science,
21(6), 786-789.
Spreng, R. N., & Grady, C. L. (2010). Patterns of brain
activity
supporting
autobiographical
memory,
prospection, and theory of mind, and their relationship to
the default mode network. Journal of cognitive
neuroscience, 22(6), 1112-1123.
Uzzaman, S., & Joordens, S. (2011). The eyes know what you
are thinking: Eye movements as an objective measure of
mind wandering. Consciousness and cognition, 20(4),
1882-1886.

258

