Boredom, Information-Seeking and Exploration
Andra Geana (ageana@princeton.edu)*+ Robert C. Wilson (bob@email.arizona.edu)°
Nathaniel Daw (ndaw@princeton.edu)*+ Jonathan D. Cohen (jdc@princeton.edu)*+
*

Department of Psychology/+Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
°Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721 USA
Abstract

Any adaptive organism faces the choice between taking
actions with known benefits (exploitation), and sampling new
actions to check for other, more valuable opportunities
available (exploration). The latter involves informationseeking, a drive so fundamental to learning and long-term
reward that it can reasonably be considered, through evolution
or development, to have acquired its own value, independent
of immediate reward. Similarly, behaviors that fail to yield
information may have come to be associated with aversive
experiences such as boredom, demotivation, and task
disengagement. In accord with these suppositions, we propose
that boredom reflects an adaptive signal for managing the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff, in the service of optimizing
information acquisition and long-term reward. We tested
participants in three experiments, manipulating the
information content in their immediate task environment, and
showed that increased perceptions of boredom arise in
environments in which there is little useful information, and
that higher boredom correlates with higher exploration. These
findings are the first step toward a model formalizing the
relationship between exploration, exploitation and boredom.
Keywords: boredom, exploration, information-seeking

Introduction
The complexity and uncertainty of the real world makes
choosing between behavioral options challenging. We often
have numerous alternatives from which to choose, and we
often have incomplete information about many of these.
When making a choice, therefore, we must often consider
two competing goals: one is earning as much reward as
possible, and the other is to gain information about the
alternatives, that may improve our choices in the future.
This dilemma is known as the exploration-exploitation
tradeoff (Cohen, McClure & Yu, 2007) that has been the
subject of growing investigation.
Ample evidence has shown that humans and animals
engage in information-seeking, even at the cost of current
reward (Behrens et al. 2007; Bromberg-Martin & Hikosaka,
2009). Theoretical models show that the information
acquired under these scenarios can improve the computation
of value estimates, leading to better choices and greater
reward over the longer term (Wilson et al. 2014). In this
context, it is worth noting that evidence from the literatures
on curiosity and creativity suggests that humans and other
animals find new information valuable even when it is not
possible to immediately use it to acquire better reward
(Gottlieb, 2012; Kidd & Hayden 2015), and that this desire
for information can lead to the disengagement from
activities that are otherwise rewarding. This type of

disengagement is a widespread and long-documented
phenomenon, and has been considered to be an important
factor in boredom (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000; Eastwood et al.,
2012). That is, boredom may reflect a bias toward the
pursuit of behavior that is not immediately rewarding, but
that may provide information useful for increasing longterm reward — in other words, exploration.
Consistent with this proposition, monotonous, repetitive,
or insufficiently informative or stimulating tasks increase
the perception of boredom (Hill & Perkins 1985; Pattyn et
al. 2008), and they are valued and attended to less
(Schmidhuber, 1997; Eastwood et al., 2012). Furthermore,
observed behavioral correlates of boredom seem to suggest
a link to exploration: boredom has been found to prompt the
search for new stimulation (Fowler 1967; Meagher &
Mason 2012), the increased drive to discover new goals and
resources (Eastwood et al. 2012), and the tendency toward
innovation and creativity (Bench & Lench 2013).
Complementing these empirical findings, studies in the
reinforcement learning and machine learning literatures
have suggested that boredom might serve an adaptive
function – for instance by signaling an increased
opportunity cost of choosing the current option compared to
other available options (Kurzban et al. 2013), or by ensuring
that too-well-known (i.e. insufficiently informative) options
are penalized in value, which can lead to better learning and
a higher long-term reward rate (Schmidhuber, 1991; Simsek
& Barto, 2006). While these empirical and theoretical lines
of work are consistent with the assertion that boredom
reflects a signal biasing behavior toward exploration, to date
there has been no direct test of this hypothesis. Empirical
work has largely been qualitative and observational (Hill &
Perkins 1985), while theoretical predictions have not been
tested in human participants.
To address this gap in the literature, we conducted three
experiments that parametrically manipulated the information
content of participants’ task environment, examined
perceptions of boredom, choices to engage with the task or
abandon it in favor of an alternative, and the link between
self-reported boredom and overall exploration behavior.
Results showed that varying information content elicited
correlated changes in boredom, and that people showed
increased exploration in response to boring (i.e., less
informative) contexts. We conclude by discussing the
relationship of our findings to a theoretical model that
parallels optimal foraging theory (which focuses on
immediate reward) to formalize the value of information (as
a proxy for future reward) in explore-exploit decisions.

1751

Experiment 1
This experiment tested for correlations between selfreports of boredom and the amount of useful information
that can be gained by continued engagement in the current
task. Previous theoretical work has suggested that prediction
error (PE) can be used to measure the amount of useful
information left to learn in a given task environment
(Schmidhuber, 1997). Specifically, it was proposed that
asymptotically low prediction errors signal that a good
representation of the task has already been learned, and
persistently high PEs signal that the task environment is too
random and errors cannot be reduced. Both cases were
suggested to cause boredom, and the increased drive to
disengage and search for more informative alternatives.
(Schmidhuber, 1990; Luciw et al., 2013). Accordingly, we
used change in prediction error as an index of learning and,
correspondingly, participants' estimates of information
available in the task environment,
We found that, in line with theoretical work, people's selfreported boredom ratings correlated negatively with change
in prediction errors, consistent with the hypothesis that
boredom increases as the amount of information that can be
gained from the task decreases. When participants played a
computer game for which they already had all the
information necessary to perform perfectly (so there was
nothing left for them to learn), or the outcomes were
completely random (so there was no task structure to learn),
they reported being more bored than in a task in which they
could acquire useful information as they played.

Methods

deviation; however, each number was not displayed until
after the participant recorded their guess. In the “Certain”
condition, numbers were generated from a Gaussian, and
displayed on the screen before the participant made their
response. In the “Random” condition, numbers were
generated uniformly between 0 and 100, but again not
displayed until after the participant recorded their guess.
Therefore, the underlying distribution of the numbergenerating machine was such that participants had to either
learn the generative process to gradually reduce their
prediction error (in the Gaussian condition), they were
already told the next number and did not need to learn
anything to make perfect predictions (the Certain condition),
or the numbers were randomly generated and participants
could not reduce their prediction error (in the Random
condition). Participants were also asked to self-report their
level of boredom on every fourth trial (for a total of ten
times throughout each game). They did so by adjusting
another slider (the "boredom slider") at the bottom of the
screen (figure 1A).

Results
The “Certain” condition elicited the highest boredom ratings
in all participants (repeated measures ANOVA, F(2, 60) =
5.03 , p = 0.01). The ratings for the Certain condition were
consistently higher than for the Gaussian and Random
conditions in both early trials (first six games) and late trials
(last six games), as shown in figure 1B, and for the average
ratings within a game (1C). The Gaussian condition, by
contrast, was consistently rated as the least boring. The
Random condition was rated in-between the other two.

Participants
Twenty-five
Princeton
University
undergraduates (ages 18 to 22) performed the experiment in
exchange for course credit.
Task Participants were asked to predict numbers generated
by a virtual machine (for a similar design, see Nassar et
al.2010). On each trial, they made their predictions by
adjusting a vertical slider (the "prediction slider", see fig
1A) between 0 and 100 to indicate the next value that the
virtual machine would generate. After they adjusted the
slider, they pressed the space key to confirm their
prediction, and the machine generated the number for that
trial. Games in the task consisted of thirty trials, and
changes between games were signaled to the participants;
there were twenty-four games in total, with the session
lasting approximately one hour.
The critical experimental variable was the difference
between the participants’ prediction and the actual generated
number, that we refer to as the Prediction Error (PE).
Participants were rewarded based on these prediction errors:
the smaller the error (i.e., the closer their prediction was to
the actual number), the more points they received.
The machine generated numbers according to an
underlying distribution, which differed between conditions.
In the “Gaussian” condition, numbers were generated from a
Gaussian distribution with a fixed mean and standard

Figure 1: A. Task design: participants had to predict the
next number generated by the virtual machine (the red
rectangle). They predicted by adjusting the vertical slider to
the left. They rated their boredom using the horizontal slider
at the bottom. B, C. Ratings for the Certain condition (no
useful information content) were significantly higher both
within a game, and for early and late games. D. Average
change in prediction error within a game correlated with the
average boredom rating for that game.

1752

There was also a significant observed main effect of time
on boredom ratings: for all three conditions, later ratings
were significantly higher than earlier ratings, both within a
game , and across the entire session in early versus late trials
(figures 2A and 2B, two-way repeated measures ANOVA,
F(2,18) = 13.39 , p < 0.01).
Absolute prediction errors were computed for each game
(as the absolute value of the difference in participants’
prediction from the number generated on each trial), and the
average change in prediction error for each game was
computed as the average difference between PEs on
consecutive trials. These values were then binned for
changes in PE, and the average boredom ratings
corresponding to those games were calculated (regardless of
which condition those games were in – although, as
explained in the methods, the participants were only able to
significantly reduce their PE in the Gaussian condition). As
shown in figure 1D, there was a significant negative
correlation between the change in prediction error and the
boredom ratings (𝑅2 =0.2613, p < 0.01).

Discussion
This first experiment revealed a correlation between the
information content available in a task (operationalized as
change in prediction error), and the subjective perception of
boredom. The results suggest that the amount of information
that can be learned from a task is linked to how boring the
task is perceived: the Certain condition – i.e., the one in
which there was no useful information to be learned by
performing the task, because all the information was already
given to participants – elicited the highest boredom ratings
(fig. 1B). Conversely, the Gaussian condition, in which it
was possible to improve predictions by learning the
underlying number-generating distribution, was rated as the
least boring. This is consistent with previous theories on
‘too much or too little information’ causing suboptimal
levels of arousal (Schmidhuber, 1997; de Rijk, Schreurs &
Bensing 1999), as well as with the notion of “desirable
difficulty” – i.e., the notion that there is a certain amount of
effortful information-processing that helps learning and is
perceived as desirable (Bjork & Bjork, 2011). To our
knowledge, this is the first direct empirical demonstration of
a correlation between state boredom and a quantitative
manipulation of information-content.

Experiment 2
This experiment examined the extent of task
disengagement and exploratory behavior in response to
information-content. Using the same three conditions that
elicited differential boredom levels in participants in
Experiment 1, we modified the number-prediction task to
allow participants to decide, on their own, whether they
wished to persist in the current game or quit and move on to
another game. This afforded a more direct examination of
the relationship between information content and
exploration, and how this traded off against present reward.

Methods
Participants Twenty Princeton University undergraduates
(ages 18 to 22) performed the experiment. They were
compensated with $12 for their time, plus a performancedependent bonus of up to $7.
Task Participants played a variant of the number-prediction
task used in Experiment 1. However, in this version, games
did not have a fixed length. Rather, participants were told
that a game could go on for up to one hundred trials, but
they could choose to end it earlier and move on to a new
game at any time by pressing the “reset” button on the
screen (figure 2A). If they pressed the “reset” button, they
would see a brief inter-game screen, and then start a new
game with a new number-generating process. Participants
were told that the task would take approximately fifty
minutes, regardless of how many games they went through
in that time: the task finished at the end of the current game
once the fifty-minute time period was up. There was no
boredom slider in this design. In all other respects, the tasks
and conditions (Gaussian, Certain and Random) were the
same as in Experiment 1. After each game ended (either
because the participant pressed the “Reset” button, or after
100 trials), the next game was drawn from one of the three
conditions with equal probability.

Figure 2: A. Variant of the Experiment 1 task. Participants
could click a ‘Reset’ button to end current game and start a
new one. B. Participants spent most time in the Gaussian
games (where information content was most useful), despite
the fact that the Certain games were the most rewarding.

Results
No participants chose to stay in any game for the entire
duration of one hundred trials; all pressed the “reset” button
to move on to a new game well before the total number of
possible trials in the current game had elapsed. There was a
significant difference, however, in the average number of
trials spent in a game before choosing to switch (repeated
measures ANOVA, F(2,69) = 7.04, p < 0.01; fig 2B), with
most participants spending significantly longer on games in
the Gaussian condition than in either of the other two
conditions (F(2,69)=9.22, p<0.01). The difference between
the Certain and Random conditions was not significant
(paired t-test, t(23) = -1.29, p = 0.206). Furthermore, the
probability of switching away after the first trial of a new
game was significantly higher for the Certain games than
either of the other two conditions; again, the values for the

1753

Certain and Random and Certain conditions were
statistically indistinguishable (t(23) = 0.11, p = 0.91).

Discussion
The results of this experiment suggest that the conditions
with low information content, and associated with boredom
in Experiment 1, carry a “penalty.” The three conditions
elicited a U-shaped curve for quitting times that mirrored
the curve for boredom in Experiment 1 (figure 2B). This
behavior is particularly striking for the Certain condition, in
which the potential for reward was highest (participants had
access to the correct prediction on every trial). Despite this,
none of the participants stayed in a Certain game until it
terminated, choosing instead to switch away from these
games more frequently than from the other two conditions.
Thus, participants were willing to take a point loss in order
to quit the Certain game early.
This switching behavior resembles exploration –
foregoing current reward-maximizing behavior in favor of
options associated with a greater likelihood to gain
information. There are at least two ways in which such
behavior could be viewed as adaptive. First, it might help
improve participants' representation of the task
environment, and thus make better decisions about which
tasks to perform: Experiencing more games could lead to
faster discrimination between the Gaussian and Random
games, by reducing estimation uncertainty (PayzanLeNestour & Bossaerts, 2011). This could help participants
determine the condition they were in earlier in the game
which, in turn, would allow them to quit Random games
earlier — a reward-maximizing strategy. Second, even if
participants were not consciously trying to improve their
representation of the task environment, but rather just aimed
to terminate boring games earlier, it is possible that this
drive to escape boring situations reflects an endogenous bias
toward exploration, acquired over the course of evolution
and/or development. Such a bias may reflect the prevailing
value of exploration in the real world which is complex and
rich in opportunities to gain information. This is consistent
with previous work suggesting that humans and animals
show an inherent aversion to low-stimulation, informationpoor tasks (Fowler, 1965). Experiment 3 was conducted to
further explore this possibility and, in particular, the idea
that boredom, exploration and the value of information are
sensitive to the alternatives available in the environment.

Experiment 3
This experiment examined whether boredom and
exploration are dependent not only on the information
content of the current task, but also on the (perceived)
alternatives in the task environment. This builds on prior
suggestions that engagement in a current task engagement is
sensitive to global properties of the environment (Fowler
1967; Csikzentymihalyi 1997), and that motivation and
boredom are associated with the opportunity cost of current
behavior compared to alternative possible behaviors
(Eastwood et al. 2012; Kurzban et al. 2013). However, to

our knowledge, these ideas have not yet been tested in
controlled laboratory experiments..
Here, we tested whether it was possible to change
people’s perceptions of boredom by manipulating the
availability of other more or less attractive options in the
task environment, and the extent to which this impacted
exploratory behavior.

Methods
Participants Forty participants recruited from the Princeton
University undergraduate community received course credit
for participating in this experiment.
Task Participants played a task that consisted of two parts
(referred to as part A and part B, figure 3A), played in order.
They were told at the beginning of the experiment about
both parts, and what each part would entail. They were also
regularly reminded about part B while playing part A (they
received three reminders, every five minutes, for the twentyminute duration of part A).
Part A involved a two-armed bandit horizon task used in
previous work to quantify exploratory behavior (Wilson et
al., 2014). Participants had to choose between an ambiguous
bandit (from which they had seen only one reward sample),
and an unambiguous bandit (from which they had seen three
reward samples). The decision horizon of the task was
manipulated to be either short (a total of five trials: four
forced-choice trials during which participants received three
samples from one bandit, and one sample from the other,
and one free-choice trial in which they could choose
whichever bandit they wished), or long (a total of ten trials:
four force-choice, six free-choice trials). This task can be
used to quantify exploratory behavior (defined as the
frequency with which the ambiguous option is chosen when
its estimated value falls below that of the unambiguous
option), and has shown that such behavior increases with
task horizon. Every seven games, participants received a
query screen that asked them to assess task-related factors
such as difficulty, the average number of points they earned,
or how many games they have played so far. Among these
questions, there were regular queries about their level of
interest in the game, which they were asked to rate a total of
six times over the course of the task. Part A was the same
for all participants, and lasted for a total of seventy-two
games and approximately twenty minutes.
Part B differed between participants. There were four
conditions, each involving one of a set of tasks that had
been previously rated by a different sample of participants
in a brief interest-rating study. As noted above, participants
were instructed from the start that they would be performing
Part B after Part A was finished, and they were reminded
about it three times during part A. Each participant was
randomly assigned to one of the four conditions, as follows:
10 participants watched a “CrashCourse” YouTube video
(previously rated as a highly interesting task); 10
participants counted the number of words in a two-page
mathematical typography article (a task previously rated as
highly boring); 11 participants played a simple color-

1754

matching game (previously rated at medium levels of
interestingness), and 9 participants played another round of
a bandit task very similar to the one played in part A.

were both significantly higher in the long horizon with high
boredom ratings).

Discussion

Figure 3. A. Participants played 20 minutes of the twoarmed bandit horizon task (Wilson et al., 2014), followed by
a break, and 20 minutes of Task B. B. Choice curves for the
short horizon (black) and long horizon games (red)show
more exploration in long horizon. C. People’s ratings of
how boring Task A was differed depending on which Task
B they had to perform. D. Higher boredom ratings led to
more exploratory behavior in the long horizon.

Results
Participants rated the interestingness of the bandit task
(played by all participants during part A) differently,
depending on the task they were told they would play during
part B: the YouTube video (rated as highly interesting), the
word-counting task (highly boring ), or one of the control
tasks (intermediate ratings). A one-way ANOVA showed a
significant main effect of condition (F(2,26) = 9.07 , p <
0.01 ), with participants who expected to watch the video (in
part B) rating the bandit task (while performing it during
part A) as more boring than those participants who expected
to perform the word-counting task (paired t-test, t(1,15) =
5.21, p < 0.01). The ratings for the two controls fell in an
intermediate range (fig 3C).
Exploration in the bandit task was defined as choosing
the ambiguous bandit. Participants replicated the results
from previous studies (Wilson et al., 2014) regarding the
impact of decision horizon on exploration: the decision
curve for the long horizon (fig. 3B, red) is flatter and shifted
to the right compared to the curve for the short horizon
(black), suggesting higher exploration for long horizons,
both in the form of decision noise and of information bonus.
Average exploration within each correlated significantly
with participants’ ratings of the task: the higher the boredom
rating, the more likely participants were to explore (figure
3D). This pattern was only observed in the long decision
horizon, and not in the short horizon (F (1,33) = 6.01, p =
0.02 for Horizon 6, F(1,33) = 1.88, p = 0.17 for Horizon 1),
and it was observed for estimates of both exploration-related
parameters: decision noise and information bonus (which

Experiment 3 showed that it was possible to manipulate
participants’ perceptions of boredom and bias toward
exploration within a given task, based on a manipulation of
the task environment (in this case, the next task to be
performed). All participants played the same bandit task for
the same period of time, but those participants who had been
told they would perform an interesting task (watch a
YouTube video) after finishing the bandit task, rated the
bandit task as significantly more boring than those who had
been told that they would have to perform a boring task
(word-counting; figure 3C). This is consistent with previous
findings regarding the effect of increased available
stimulation on relative motivation (Fowler, 1967), as well as
the theoretical framework proposed recently by Kurzban et
al (2013) that relates boredom to perceived opportunity cost.
A second result was the strong correlation between
participants’ boredom and their exploratory behavior in the
two-armed bandit horizon task: participants who rated the
bandit task as more boring also showed significantly higher
exploration (fig 3E). Increased exploration in response to a
boring situation has previously been suggested in the
literature (Cohen, McClure & Yu 2007), but this is the first
report of an empiricaclly measured correlation between selfreported boredom and a quantitative measure of exploration.
Interestingly, Task B’s identity is, by design, irrelevant to
the value of exploration within the bandit task (since Task B
only occurs after it is over), but nevertheless affected it.
This suggests the perceived value of alternatives is a
globally estimated quantity that generalizes freely and
potentially inappropriately to particular, more constrained
choices, much as has been suggested for opportunity costs
in other domains (Niv et al., 2007).

General Discussion: An Information-Sampling
Account of Boredom and Exploration
The results of the three experiments described above
provide convergent support for a relationship between
information context, boredom, and exploration. We showed
that levels of reported boredom correlate with the amount of
useful information that participants can extract from the
environment, such that when there is too much or too little
available information, they become more bored (Experiment
1). We also showed that perceptions of boredom can be
modulated based on the environment in which the task is
performed (Experiment 3). This strongly suggests that when
people compute the value of staying with the current
behavior, they take into account some measure of relative
value between the local and global environments. Lastly, we
showed that when boredom levels are high (due to low
information content), people show a greater propensity to
switch away from the current task – both in situations when
that may be useful (Experiment 3), and even when it would
appear to be suboptimal (Experiment 2).

1755

These findings suggest two factors contribute to boredom
and the tendency to switch behavior: a lack of useful
information in the current task, and the availability of more
(valuable) information outside the current task. This is
consistent with both previous theoretical work linking
boredom to too much or too little available information
(Schmidhuber, 1997; Csikszentmihalyi, 2000), and with
more recent accounts that suggest that boredom might signal
an increased opportunity cost of performing the current task
(Kurzban et al, 2013). Our results are also consistent with
the idea that humans need constant access to a certain
amount of information in order to maintain a satisfactory
level of adaptive behavior (Zakay 2014), and that that
information comes in the form of optimal levels of
variability in the environment (Kidd et al., 2012).
The work presented here provides an important first step
toward formalizing the link between information, boredom
and exploration. Our treatment of exploration — as the
decision to switch away from a current task with the specific
goal of acquiring more information — parallels the formal
theoretical treatment of foraging behavior, in the marginal
value theorem (MVT; Charnov, 1976), as the decision to
switch away from a current task with the specific goal of
acquiring greater reward. In related work, we have sought
to formalize this definition of exploration in a model that
relates it to information acquisition in a way that parallels
the definition of foraging for reward in MVT, and to test
this model in an empirical study. In aggregate, this line of
work promises to offer a normative understanding of human
exploratory behavior and, within this framework, to cast
boredom as an adaptive response to situations that should
favor exploration in the service of learning, and the
maximization of long-term reward.

References
Behrens. T.E.J., Woolrich, M.W., Walton, M.E.
Rushworth, M.F.S. (2007). Learning the value of
information in an uncertain world. Nature Neuroscience
10: 1214 – 1221
Bench, S. W., & Lench, H. C. (2013). On the function of
boredom.Behavioral Sciences, 3(3), 459-472.
Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2011). Making things hard on
yourself, but in a good way: Creating desirable difficulties
to enhance learning. Psychology and the real world:
Essays illustrating fundamental contributions to society
Bromberg-Martin, E. S., & Hikosaka, O.(2009). Midbrain
dopamine neurons signal preference for advance
information about upcoming rewards. Neuron, 119-126.
Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M. & Yu, A. J. (2007).Should I
stay or should I go? How the human brain manages the
trade-off between exploitation and exploration.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society:
Biological Sciences. 362, 933–942
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Beyond boredom and anxiety.
Daw, N. D., O’Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., &
Dolan, R. J. (2006). Cortical substrates for exploratory
decisions in humans. Nature, 441, 876 – 879

de Rijk, A. E., Schreurs, K. M., & Bensing, J. M. (1999).
Complaints of fatigue: related to too much as well as too
little external stimulation?. Journal of Behavioral
Medicine, 22(6), 549-573.
Eastwood, J. D., Frischen, A., Fenske, M. J., & Smilek, D.
(2012). The Unengaged mind defining boredom in terms
of attention. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(5),
482-495.
Fowler, H. (1967). Satiation and Curiosity: Constructs for a
Drive
and
Incentive-Motivational
Theory
of
Exploration. Psychology of learning and motivation,
Gottlieb, J. (2012). Attention, learning, and the value of
information. Neuron,76(2), 281-295.
Hill, A. B., & Perkins, R. E. (1985). Towards a model of
boredom. British Journal of Psychology, 76(2), 235-240.
Kidd, C., & Hayden, B. Y. (2015). The psychology and
neuroscience of curiosity. Neuron, 88(3), 449-460.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2012). The
Goldilocks effect: Human infants allocate attention to
visual sequences that are neither too simple nor too
complex. PloS one, 7(5), e36399.
Kurzban, R., Duckworth, A., Kable, J. W., & Myers, J.
(2013). An opportunity cost model of subjective effort
and
task
performance. Behavioral
and
Brain
Sciences, 36(06), 661-679.
Luciw, M., Kompella, V., Kazerounian, S., & Schmidhuber,
J. (2013). An intrinsic value system for developing
multiple invariant representations with incremental
slowness learning.
Nassar, M. R., Wilson, R. C., Heasly, B., & Gold, J. I.
(2010). An approximately Bayesian delta-rule model
explains the dynamics of belief updating in a changing
environment. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30(37),
12366-12378.
Pattyn, N., Neyt, X., Henderickx, D., & Soetens, E. (2008).
Psychophysiological investigation of vigilance decrement:
boredom or cognitive fatigue?. Physiology & Behavior,
93(1), 369-378.
Payzan-LeNestour, E., & Bossaerts, P. (2011). Risk,
unexpected uncertainty, and estimation uncertainty:
Bayesian learning in unstable settings. PLoS
Computational Biology, 7, e1001048.
Schmidhuber, J. (1991, November). Curious model-building
control systems. In Neural Networks, 1991. 1991 IEEE
International Joint Conference on (pp. 1458-1463). IEEE.
Şimşek, O., & Barto, A. (2006). An intrinsic reward
mechanism for efficient exploration. Proceedings of the
23rd international conference, 833-840.
Wilson, R. C., Geana, A., White, J. M., Ludvig, E. A., &
Cohen, J. D. (2014). Humans use directed and random
exploration to solve the explore–exploit dilemma. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(6), 2074.
Zakay, D. (2014). Psychological time as information: The
case of boredom.Frontiers in psychology, 5.

1756

