But vs. Although under the microscope
Fatemeh Torabi Asr1 and Vera Demberg2
University, Bloomington (IN), USA
fatorabi@indiana.edu
2 Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany
vera@coli.uni-saarland.de
1 Indiana

Abstract

Causal connectives like because have been argued to
carry truth-conditional meaning, i.e., to extend to the set
of statements entailed by the sentences they combine (in
the case of A because B, this additional statement would
consist of B being the cause of A, on top of the facts
asserted by the arguments, A and B separately). Some
researchers distinguish between connectives such as because and before that affect the truth-conditional state of
what is said, and connectives regarded as non-truth conditional, such as but and furthermore.
Note though that non-truth-conditional connectives
like although can trigger implications (Blakemore,
2002). For example, a sentence in the experiment run by
Noordman & Vonk (1992), “Chlorine compounds make
good propellants because they react with almost no other
substances.”, entails that propellants must not combine
with other substances. A connective like although (instead of because) in the same sentence would imply that
propellants should combine with some substances. 1 Our
study investigates the effects of the connectives but and
although on interpretation of the two arguments of a discourse relation, and discusses the resulting effects on the
integration of upcoming content.
A second important point of this study is addressing the ambiguity of connectives but and although. We
know from large discourse relation annotated corpora
such as the PDTB (Prasad et al., 2008) that almost all
discourse connectives are ambiguous (Asr & Demberg,
2012, 2013): while some connectives such as since are
ambiguous between highly different relations (temporal vs. causal), others, like and can be present with almost any discourse relation. Existing proposals for describing the meaning of the discourse connectives but
and although have considered sentence pairs such as
(1), which seem to be fairly similar in meaning. Fraser
(1998) suggests to describe each connective in terms of
its core meaning, with further effects of inference being attributed to the discourse arguments. This approach
boils down to assignment of an under-specified meaning
to both connectives.

Previous experimental studies on concessive connectives
have only looked at their local facilitating or predictive effect on discourse relation comprehension and have often
viewed them as a class of discourse markers with similar effects. We look into the effect of two connectives,
but and although, for inferring contrastive vs. concessive
discourse relations to complement previous experimental
work on causal inferences. An offline survey on AMTurk
and an online eye-tracking-while-reading experiment are
conducted to show that even between these two connectives, which mark the same set of relations, interpretations
are biased. The bias is consistent with the distribution of
the connective across discourse relations. This suggests
that an account of discourse connective meaning based on
probability distributions can better account for comprehension data than a classic categorical approach, or an approach where closely related connectives only have a core
meaning and the rest of the interpretation comes from the
discourse arguments.

Introduction
There exists a substantial body of research on the processing of discourse connectives like because, but or nevertheless and their role in facilitating the linking of text
segments to one another (Kintsch & Van Dijk, 1978;
Just & Carpenter, 1980; Millis & Just, 1994; Murray,
1995, 1997; Sanders & Noordman, 2000; Rohde & Horton, 2014), as well as a discourse connective’s effect in
helping comprehenders anticipate and integrate upcoming content (Köhne & Demberg, 2013; Xiang & Kuperberg, 2014; Drenhaus et al., 2014). Most studies have
however compared connectives that substantially differ
in meaning, e.g., additives vs. contrastives, or causals
vs. concessives. The present study contributes to the existing body of experimental research as well as theoretical framing of the meaning of connectives by investigating the effect of two connectives, but and although, that
can mark the same set of relations, but differ in their distribution of how frequently they are used to mark these
relations.
A first question that this study addresses is therefore
what effect these connectives have on the meaning of
the overall discourse. Do they affect the interpretation
of the arguments themselves (instead of just signaling
the relation), and if yes, how can this be accounted for?
We already know that connectives like because may trigger causal inferences, which would not be made solely
based on the meaning of the related clauses (Noordman
& Vonk, 1992; Millis et al., 1995; Traxler et al., 1997).

(1)

She fried the onions, but / although she steamed
the cabbage.
1 Interested

readers are referred to Grice (1975) and Bach
(2006) for detailed discussions on entailment vs. implication
(implicature).

366

Alternatively, the meaning of a connective can be described based on its usage, i.e., extending distributional
semantics accounts to discourse connectives, such that
each connective potentially has more than a single meaning, and inferences are subject to the probability distribution over the meanings.
The goals of the present paper are

c.

In (2-a), the first clause states that she desired something savory, which gives rise to the expectation that
she’ll take something savory from the fridge. The second clause however contrasts with this expectation, stating that she takes something sweet (cake). This segment
can hence be classified as a violated expectation relation.
Definition: A violated expectation relation holds
between two discourse segments wherever a discourse
connective indicates that one of its arguments describes a
situation A which causes C, while the other asserts or implies a state C0 that contrasts with C. In other words, one
argument of a violated expectation relation denotes
a fact that triggers a set of potential consequences, while
the other argument denies one or more of them.
In (2-b) on the other hand, a different reading is possible, where she takes the cake from the fridge, and then
realizes that she wants something savory. In this case,
there is no direct causal relation between the wanting
something savory and taking something from the fridge.
Hence, we analyze it as a contrast relation.
Definition: A contrast relation holds between two
discourse segments when their arguments A and C contrast with one another in one or more respects. The difference to violated expectation relations is that there is
no straightforward causal relationship between A and a
(negated) C.
Finally, consider Example (2-c). Our hypothesis is that
in this case, both interpretations are possible, i.e., the relation is ambiguous between a violated expectation
and a contrast relation. Our experiment hence compares interpretations of sentences like (2-b) with a preferred contrast interpretation to ambiguous sentences
like in (2-c).

• to better understand the effect of the connectives although and but on the interpretation of a text, and
• to test whether and how the distribution of different
meanings of a connective affects comprehension.
We address these questions by a corpus study on the
distribution of discourse relations with these connectives
in PDTB as well as an offline coherence judgment task.
Other experiments have shown that online and offline effects don’t necessarily agree, due to shallow processing /
lazy inferences during online comprehension (Noordman
& Vonk, 1992). We therefore follow up the coherence
judgment task with a reading study using eye-tracking.

Discourse relations marked by but and
although
A first important difference to note between the connectives but and although is of course that they differ in syntax (although is subordinating while but is a coordinating connective). Additionally, they have been suggested
to be subject to a semantic asymmetry (Blühdorn, 2008),
which means that one argument is more salient or central
to the discourse than the other one.
Previous work investigating the relations marked by
the connectives but and although (e.g., König, 1991;
Blakemore, 2002; Hall, 2004; Iten, 2000) has used different names to refer to the relevant discourse relations;
in today’s most well-known annotation schemes, the relation most typically expressed by but is known as “contrast”, “antithesis” or “negative additive”, depending on
the scheme, while the relation most typically marked by
although is variously known as “concessive”, “negative
causal”, “concessive.expectation” or “violated expectation”. We will therefore briefly define the relations we
are interested in here, and will then proceed to a corpus
analysis to assess their frequency of occurrence. A comparison between the interpretation of sentence pair (2-a)
with that of (2-b) elaborates the inferences in which we
are interested.
(2)

a.
b.

She took some cake from the fridge, although she desired to have something savory with her drink.

Corpus study: PDTB
The Penn Discourse Treebank contains annotation of discourse relations in newspaper text for about one hundred
connective types, including but and although. Violated
expectation relations of the kind shown in (2-a) are annotated as COMPARISON.Concession.expectation relations in PDTB, see examples (3) and (4) below.
Contrast relations like the one in (2-b) are annotated
as COMPARISON.Contrast relations in PDTB. They differ from Concession relations in that no (denied) direct
causality is present between the arguments, see examples
(5) and (6).

Although she desired to have something savory with her drink, she took some cake
from the fridge.
She took some cake from the fridge, but she
desired to have something savory with her
drink.

(3)

367

You might find something, but the chances are
low.
(WSJ 21 54)

tions. Context is changed by alternating cake/pizza and
savory/sweet. The final sentence is designed to disambiguate between the two alternative discourse relations:
eating pizza will be consistent with a contrast interpretation in a setting where Mary took some cake from the
fridge (8a) but then realized she wants something savory.
In a violated expectation interpretation, eating pizza
is consistent with taking pizza from the fridge (8b), despite having originally wanted something savory.

Figure 1: Distribution of discourse relations senses for
but and although in PDTB.

(7)
(4)

Oil prices haven’t declined although supply has
been increasing.
(WSJ 02 31)

(5)

He was on the board of an insurance company
with financial problems, but he insists he made
no secret of it.
(WSJ 00 41)

(6)

She didn’t elaborate, although earlier US trade reports have complained of videocassette piracy in
Malaysia [....]
(WSJ 00 20)

We find that but and although frequently occur as markers in both COMPARISON.Contrast and COMPARISON.Concession relations. However, their distribution
is different: but most frequently marks COMPARISON.Contrast relations while although most frequently
marks COMPARISON.Concession relations. A closer
look at the sentence initial vs. medial usage of although
reveals that the distribution of discourse relations for
sentence-initial vs. sentence-medial although also differs. In particular, the sentence medial use of although is
divided half-half between Contrast and Concession (see
Figure 1)2 . Based on the corpus study, we hence predict that comprehenders will predominantly make a contrastive inference in the presence of but, but that both a
contrastive and a violated expectation relation may be inferred when although in sentence-medial position is used.

Introduction: Mary was feeling tired and hungry
when she came home yesterday evening.
a. She took some cake from the fridge,
but/although she desired to have something
savory with her drink.
b. She took some pizza from the fridge,
but/although she desired to have something
sweet with her drink.
Disambiguating sentence: She had a piece of
pizza and went to bed earlier than usual.

In this experiment, people are asked to judge the coherence of the entire story after reading it carefully (no time
pressure). We expect but to cause a strong bias for a
contrast interpretation. Therefore, condition (a) with
but should prepare the reader for accepting the continuation eating pizza, whereas condition (b) with this connective should result in a contradiction at the end of the story,
thus incoherence. On the other hand, although should
be more ambiguous, i.e., trigger either a contrast or a
violated expectation inference. We expect the average coherence rating of the two although conditions to
be more similar if the interpretation depends on learned
prior usage in text.
As a pretest of the stimuli, we included four additional conditions that exclude the final disambiguating
sentence, to make sure that the coherence of the texts
up to the disambiguating sentence is matched. Thus,
a total of 8 conditions: 2 (connective) * 2 (context) *
2 (with/without final sentence) are constructed for 24
items.

Experiment 1
Our first experiment aims to investigate the difference between but and although in terms of their biases towards
contrast and violated expectation inferences in an
offline text comprehension setup.

Procedure

Design and stimuli

We recruited 48 native speakers of English (25 female
and 23 male aged between 22-68) on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Eight different lists of 24 stories in equally
distributed conditions mixed with filler items were published as HITs. The worker were only allowed to do a
single HIT (i.e., one list) of the experiment, so that nobody would see two conditions of the same item. Subjects scored the coherence of each story on a Likert scale
from 1 (incoherent) to 7 (perfectly coherent). A compensation of $2.5 was paid per HIT.

We design short narrative texts like (7) embedding a discourse relation marked by but and although. Introduction and continuation are kept identical across condi2 COMPARISON.Concession has another subtype in PDTB,
called contra-expectation, which differs from the expectation
subtype in terms of which of the arguments is the one that creates the expectation, and which one denies it. We found many
similar instances of contra-expectation relations to Contrast,
therefore, looked at the proportion of expectation vs. contraexpectations in the corpus (for but vs. although) as well and
found very similar proportions to those illustrated in Figure 1.

368

Data treatment

expectation inferences and contrast inferences were
both judged to be equally coherent. This finding is in line
with our hypothesis, as it directly reflects the distribution
of discourse relations that were observed in the corpus.

In total 2400 samples (48 participant * 50 items including
26 fillers) were collected. Only 7 samples were left unanswered in total. Coherence judgment scores for the obviously incoherent and coherent filler items were checked
to make sure that the participants understood the task and
provided a sensible rating.

Experiment 2
The above results show that interpretation of readers
wrt. connected sentences in short stories are affected by
the fine-grained inferences triggered by the specific discourse connective. The results of the coherence judgments however do not necessarily imply that these inferences are drawn also during natural reading that doesn’t
include a task focussing on coherence judgments. In this
section, we investigate whether readers pick up on the
difference between but and although during online reading, and show effects of coherence on reading times of
the final sentence.

Results
Pretest (short versions): Coherence scores assigned to
the stories excluding the final sentence were examined
first as a pretest of local coherence. According to Anova
and mixed-effect regression (with participant and item as
random factors, and connective and context as fixed effects), no significant difference is observed between the
local coherence of the stories containing either of the two
connectives (with an mean rating of 5.14 for although
and 5.34 for but). This shows that there was no difference in coherence between the usage of the connectives
in our experimental items. Any difference in coherence
judgments for the full texts can therefore be attributed
to the final sentence which disambiguates the coherence
relation to a violated expectation or contrast relation.
Main results (full stories): Table 1 presents the average
ratings and standard deviations obtained for the complete
versions of stories from different conditions.

Design and stimuli
Stimuli in the eye-tracking experiment are similar to (7),
except we test each item also with an alternative final
sentence to achieve a fully counterbalanced design. We
hence have 4 conditions in this experiment: 2 (connective) * 2 (context). Disambiguating sentence B in (8) has
the same function for conditions (8b) as disambiguating
sentence A has for conditions (8a).
(8)

Table 1: Coherence scores by context & connective
Condition
Mean score SD
Contrast:but
5.38
1.71
Contrast:although
4.85
1.86
ViolExp:but
3.31
1.80
ViolExp:although
4.52
1.91

Disambig. sent. A: She had a piece of pizza and
went to bed earlier than usual.
Disambig. sent. B: She had a piece of cake and
went to bed earlier than usual.

Items are mixed with filler stories, as well as items of two
other experiments with similar length and narrative content. Every participant read 84 stories (including 12 but
items and 12 although items) and answered a YES/NO
comprehension question about the introduction part of
the stories (not the part depending on the variable interpretation), e.g., “Was Mary at home the entire day yesterday?”. The purpose of the questions was to make sure
subjects read for comprehension, and to analyze the correlation between coherence of the story and the response
time and correctness of the answers. Fillers had questions
from all different parts of the text. For our analysis, we
collected the total reading time of a story, response time
to the question, and the reading time of a critical region
in the disambiguating final sentence. The critical region
(the word cake/pizza) is highlighted in example (8).

We fitted a linear mixed effects model with random
intercepts and slopes for participant and item, using forward selection on fixed effects and backward selection on
random slopes (in case the full model didn’t converge).
The final model (including random slopes for item and
participant under connective and relation, as well as the
interaction of connective and relation) shows a significant negative main effect of the connective but (reflecting the very low coherence judgments for the connective but in a violated expectation relation), as well
as a significant interaction between connective and discourse relation. The presence of the interaction confirms that the two connectives affect interpretation of the
discourse differently. Among the but conditions, stories with a last sentence consistent with a violated
expectation inference were rated to be significantly
less coherent than stories with a continuation consistent
with a contrast inference. For texts including the connective although, completions consistent with violated

Procedure
The eye-tracking experiment was implemented within
the Experiment Builder software for an EyeLink 2000
tracker, tracking at 500Hz on both eyes. All text material
on the screen were shown in Lucida Console font (with

369

Table 2: Answers to the comprehension questions
Condition
Mean %correct SD
Contrast:but
0.85
0.36
Contrast:although
0.83
0.38
ViolExp:but
0.79
0.41
ViolExp:although
0.81
0.40

Table 3: Critical region total RT
Condition
Mean RT
SD
Contrast:but
296.28
235.46
Contrast:although
331.90
346.72
ViolExp:but
332.92
266.05
ViolExp:although
328.48
263.06

same length characters), size 20 and triple line spacing.
Subjects were asked to press the space key after reading
a story to navigate to the question screen, and press J and
F keys for YES and NO answers, respectively.
A total of 39 native English speakers were recruited
for the experiment at the University of Edinburgh and
received a compensation of 12 pounds for a two hour
session. The eye-tracking experiment was followed by
a standard memory test, to measure subjects’ memory
spans. People’s memory span size can play a confound
role in the correctness of their answers to the comprehension questions and also might affect reading patterns,
e.g., when a sentence contradicts with a non-immediate
but related sentence in the preceding context.

ries for every coherence condition. The critical area was
chosen to be the only word at which the conditions differ, and which resolves the interpretation of the discourse
relation expressed by but / although. That is, the word
pizza vs. cake in (9) disambiguates whether the text segment she desired to have something sweet with her drink
relates to the first segment by a violated expectation
or contrast discourse relation.
Reading times on the critical region are consistent
with corpus statistics and the offline study: but has a
bias towards a contrast inference, hence the continuation consistent with this interpretation is processed faster
than one confirming a violated expectation interpretation. For although, the critical word is read at a similar
speed independent of whether it disambiguates in favour
of a contrast or violated expectation relation.
We fitted a linear mixed effects regression model for
total reading times on the critical region. While a complete model with random slopes for item and participant did not converge, the simpler model (excluding random slopes but including random intercepts) reveals an
marginally significant interaction between discourse connective and discourse relation in total reading time of
the critical area (p < 0.1). There is also a significant
effect for this interaction in regressions out of this area
to the preceding context (p < 0.05). This effect is consistent with the experimental result from the coherence
judgment study. The two but conditions also differ in
terms of the total reading time (p < 0.1) and regressionin (p < 0.05) at the area preceding the critical phrase in
Arg2. Increased regression-in is also observed at the onset of Arg1 for the less coherent but condition (p < 0.1).
Regressions from the final sentence to the previous context indicate that the subjects re-read the areas triggering
the relational inference, after they encountered the unexpected continuation. The equivalent complete models to
fit first-pass and second-pass duration measures did not
converge.

Data treatment
We had to discard data from 7 subjects because of frequent head movement, blinks or longer track losses during the experiment. The below results are thus based on a
final set of 32 subjects. Standard outlier removal process
was performed on the fixations before the RT analysis.

Results
Question answering correctness: Participants’ question
answering accuracies varied between 50% to 100% correct answers with mean and median of 82%. We observed
that subjects with larger memory span size had better
question answering performance (p < 0.05). Table 2
shows the proportion of correct answers to the comprehension questions across coherence conditions. A trend
compatible with the results of the offline study can be observed. However, fitting a mixed-effect regression with
all factors (connective, context and participant’s memory
span) as fixed effects plus participant and item as random effects only revealed a significant main effect of the
memory span size. The best fit obtained through a forward model selection procedure showed only a marginal
effect of the coherence condition for the subset of data
including but (p < 0.1). This suggests that the coherence
of the story as a whole (in terms of the congruence of the
final sentence with the interpretation of the middle part)
only slightly affected people’s recall of the story. Total
reading times of the stories and the questions did not correlate with correctness of the answers.
Interest area RT: Table 3 compares the total reading
time of the critical area in the final sentence of the sto-

Conclusion
We examined the very fine-grained inferences triggered
by two discourse connectives but and although. Our
findings show that these connectives trigger linguistic
inferences (despite not being truth-conditional). Each
connective in our experiment had a different bias for a
specific semantic interpretation tested by a disambiguat-

370

ing statement in the final sentence, which would sound
more or less coherent depending on that interpretation.
Our results put into question the traditional perspective
that generalizes an effect to a category of connectives,
e.g., causal/additive/adversative in previous experimental studies. The probability distribution of a connective
in the natural occurrences of various discourse relations
(as we took from PDTB) seems to be a more accurate
meaning representation for approximation of its effect on
offline and online comprehension. This finding motivates
future research on comprehension and production of discourse connectives as probability sensitive processes and
the interaction between the two. Relevant open questions
are why and how different distributional profiles emerge
in a given language for closely related discourse connectives, and how such diversities can be explained from a
cognitive perspective across languages.

Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). A theory of
reading: from eye fixations to comprehension. Psychological review, 87(4), 329.
Kintsch, W., & Van Dijk, T. (1978). Toward a model
of text comprehension and production. Psychological
review, 85(5), 363.
Köhne, J., & Demberg, V. (2013). The time-course of
processing discourse connectives. In Proceedings of
the 35th annual meeting of the cognitive science society.
König, E. (1991). Concessive relations as the dual of
causal relations. Semantic Universals and Universal
Semantics. Groningen-Amsterdam Studies in Semantics, 12, 190–209.
Millis, K., Golding, J., & Barker, G. (1995). Causal
connectives increase inference generation. Discourse
Processes, 20(1), 29–49.
Millis, K., & Just, M. (1994). The influence of connectives on sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory
and Language.
Murray, J. (1995). Logical connectives and local coherence. Sources of Coherence in Reading, 107–125.
Murray, J. (1997). Connectives and narrative text: The
role of continuity. Memory and Cognition, 25(2), 227–
236.
Noordman, L. G., & Vonk, W. (1992). Readers’ knowledge and the control of inferences in reading. Language and Cognitive Processes, 7(3-4), 373–391.
Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo,
L., Joshi, A., & Webber, B. (2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on language resources and evaluation (pp. 2961–2968).
Rohde, H., & Horton, W. S. (2014). Anticipatory looks
reveal expectations about discourse relations. Cognition, 133(3), 667–691.
Sanders, T. J., & Noordman, L. G. (2000). The role of
coherence relations and their linguistic markers in text
processing. Discourse processes, 29(1), 37–60.
Traxler, M., Sanford, A., Aked, J., & Moxey, L. (1997).
Processing causal and diagnostic statements in discourse. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(1), 88.
Xiang, M., & Kuperberg, G. (2014). Reversing expectations during discourse comprehension. Language,
Cognition and Neuroscience, 1–25.

References
Asr, F. T., & Demberg, V. (2012). Measuring the strength
of linguistic cues for discourse relations. In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Advances in Discourse
Analysis and its Computational Aspects.
Asr, F. T., & Demberg, V. (2013). On the information
conveyed by discourse markers. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Annual Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and
Computational Linguistics (pp. 84–93).
Bach, K. (2006). The top 10 misconceptions about implicature. Drawing the boundaries of meaning: NeoGricean studies in pragmatics and semantics in honor
of Laurence R. Horn, 21–30.
Blakemore, D. (2002). Relevance and linguistic meaning: The semantics and pragmatics of discourse markers. Cambridge University Press.
Blühdorn, H. (2008). Subordination and coordination in
syntax, semantics and discourse. Subordination versus
Coordination in Sentence and Text. A Cross-Linguistic
Perspective, Amsterdam, 59–85.
Drenhaus, H., Demberg, V., Köhne, J., & Delogu, F.
(2014). Incremental and predictive discourse processing based on causal and concessive discourse markers:
ERP studies on German and English. In Proceedings
of the annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Fraser, B. (1998). Contrastive discourse markers in english. Pragmatics and Beyound New Series, 301–326.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. Reprinted
in Studies in the Way of Words 1985, 2240.
Hall, A. (2004). The meaning of but: A procedural reanalysis. UCL Working Papers in Linguistics, 16, 199–
236.
Iten, C. (2000). Although revisited. Working Papers in
Linguistics, 12.

371

