Causal Reasoning in Infants and Adults: Revisiting backwards-blocking
Deon T. Benton (dtbenton@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1098 Morewood Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232 USA

David H. Rakison (rakison@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1098 Morewood Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232 USA

objects moves after a brief delay upon contact from the first
object. The launching-without-collision event is also similar
to the direct-launching event except that a small spatial gap
is inserted between when the first object stops moving and
when the second object begins to move. Finally, in the
delayed-plus-no-collision event, the second object begins to
move after a brief delay and in the presence of a spatial gap.

Abstract
Causal learning is a fundamental ability that enables human
reasoners to learn about the complex interactions in the world
around them. The available evidence with children and adults,
however, suggests that the mechanism or set of mechanisms
that underpins causal perception and causal reasoning are not
well understood; that is, it is unclear whether causal
perception and causal reasoning are underpinned by a
Bayesian mechanism, associative mechanism, or both. It has
been suggested that a Bayesian mechanism, rather than an
associative mechanism, underpins causal reasoning because
such a mechanism can better explain the putative backwardblocking finding in children and adults (e.g., Sobel,
Tenenbaum, & Gopnik, 2004). In this paper, we report two
experiments to examine to what extent infants and adults
exhibit backward blocking and whether humans’ ability to
reason about causal events is underpinned by an associative
mechanism, a Bayesian mechanism, or both.
Keywords: causality; infants; adults; causal reasoning; causal
learning; causal perception; infant and child development

Figure 1: Launching events

Introduction

Research that has employed launching-event sequences
has established that causal perception emerges in
development between 4½ and 10 months of age (e.g., Cohen
et al., 1998; Rakison & Krogh, 2012). In a classic study on
infants’ ability to perceive causality in launching-event
sequences, for example, Leslie and Keeble (1987) found
that 6½-month-old infants who were habituated to a directlaunching sequence—in which a red cube caused a green
cube to move through contact—dishabituated to the reversal
of the event—in which the green cube now caused the red
cube to move. Subsequent work by Cohen and Amsel
(1998) showed that causal perception undergoes a
developmental transition, whereby 4- and 5½-month-olds
responded to the continuity of motion and spatiotemporal
relations between the objects in the events, whereas 6¼month-olds responded on the basis of causality. In a
separate study, Schlottman and Surian (1999) found that 9month-olds will perceive causality in launching events that
incorporate a gap only when the objects involved in those
events are imbued with animacy cues. Finally, Oakes and
Cohen (1990) found that 10-month-olds, but not 6½-montholds, responded on the basis of causality when realistic
stimuli were used instead of simple geometric figures, and
Rakison and Krogh (2012) found that 4½-month-olds
showed evidence of causal perception when provided with
real-world causal-action experience using Velcro-covered

The emergence of causal perception
Of the skills that enable humans to understand the events
they experience in the world, perhaps few are as important
as the ability to learn about causality in the world. This is a
key cognitive ability that enables infants, children, and
adults to perceive and encode cause-and-effect relationships
and reason about the effects of interventions on those
relationships. However, before humans can reason explicitly
about causal events through interventions, they must be able
first as infants to perceive simple cause-and-effect relations
between objects in the world. The ability to perceive causeand-effect relations has been studied most extensively using
Michottian launching events. The reason Michottian
launching events have been used in particular is because
they are among the simplest events in which to observe the
causal relationship between two objects.
In studies that use these sequences, infants typically are
habituated to and tested on either a direct-launching, a
delayed-launching, launching-without-collision, or a
delayed-plus-no-collision event (Figure 1). In the directlaunching event, one object travels across a stage, ostensibly
makes contact with a second, stationary object located midscreen, at which point the first object stops moving and the
second object begins to move. The delayed-launching event
is similar to the direct-launching event except the second

830

mittens. Taken together, this research suggests that causal
perception emerges between 4½ and 10 months of age.

account for base rates and why object B is not treated
equivalently across the BB and IS conditions. Indeed, in
terms of the RW model (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972), object
B should be treated equivalently across both the IS and the
BB trials because the associative strength between B and the
activation of the detector is the same in both cases. Given
the failure of contemporary associative models to account
for the BB finding, some researchers have proposed that
causal learning is underpinned by a Bayesian-inference
mechanism (discussed below). Putting this debate aside, the
research on causal reasoning suggests that it emerges
between 18 months (cf., Sobel & Kirkham, 2006) and 4
years of age.

The emergence of causal reasoning
In contrast to causal perception, the ability to reason about
causal events emerges later in development. Although
developmental researchers have used a variety of tasks to
study causal reasoning (for a review see Bullock, Gelman,
& Baillargeon, 1982), we restrict our focus to research that
has used the blicket-detector design. This is because (1) the
blicket-detector task has been used most frequently to study
causal reasoning in young children, and (2) an ultimate aim
of ours is to examine to what extent the abilities to perceive
causality in launching-event sequences and distinguish
blickets from non-blickets in a blicket-detector task are
underpinned by the same or different mechanisms (e.g.,
Gopnik et al., 2004; McClelland & Thompson, 2007).
In a typical blicket-detector study, children are introduced
to a machine called the “blicket detector” and told that the
machine lights up and plays music only when objects
labeled blickets are placed on its surface. Children are then
asked to determine which objects are blickets and which are
not and to intervene to make the machine go. Research that
has used this design has shown that 3- to 5-year-olds can
make causal inferences with blicket-like objects that span
the biological and psychological domains (Schulz &
Gopnik, 2004) and that 18- to 30-month-olds can use
higher-order relations between objects to make causal
inferences (Walker & Gopnik, 2014). Of these findings,
perhaps the most relevant from the perspective of the
present experiments is the finding that children 2 years and
older can use screening-off and backward-blocking
reasoning (hereafter BB) to make inferences and generate
interventions about the causal status of blicket objects (e.g.,
Gopnik et al., 2001; Sobel et al., 2004). For example,
Gopnik et al. (2001) showed that when 2-, 3-, and 4-yearolds were shown an indirect screening-off (hereafter IS)
event—in which together two objects, objects A and B,
caused the detector to activate (i.e., AB+) and then an event
in which object A alone fails to activate the detector (i.e., A)—they categorized only object B as the cause. This ability
to use IS reasoning—which children ostensibly share with
adults—is a hallmark of causal reasoning that enables
human learners to distinguish objects associated with an
effect from those that produce an effect.
In addition, previous research showed that children use
BB reasoning and base rates to reason about blickets. For
example, Sobel et al. (2004) found that 4-year-old children
who are shown a BB event—in which together objects A
and B produce the effect (i.e., AB+) and then an event in
which object A produces the effect (i.e., A+)—are less
likely to categorize object B as a blicket compared to sameage children who are shown the IS test event if blickets are
rare than common. Together, the BB and IS findings are
important abilities because it has been suggested that
contemporary associative models such as the RescorlaWagner model (henceforth, the RW model) fail naturally to

Development gap and theoretical debates
Despite extensive work on causal perception and causal
reasoning, little is known about the relation between these
two abilities. For instance, it is unclear whether causal
perception and causal reasoning are underpinned by the
same or different mechanisms. That is, is causal perception
underpinned by one mechanism and causal reasoning,
another? Or, is causal perception and causal reasoning
underpinned by the same mechanism? According to
proponents of the domain-general view of causal learning—
where the same all-purpose mechanisms govern learning—
early causal perception and later causal reasoning are (1) the
emergent consequences of continually enriching perceptual
and cognitive systems and (2) are abilities that are
underpinned by an associative learning mechanism. This
position garners support from behavioral and computational
research that showed that infants, young children, and
computational (PDP) models use the correlational structure
and the predictive statistics of causal events to process and
encode their causal relations and that this ability develops
over time (e.g., Cohen et al., 1998; McClelland &
Thompson, 2007).
In contrast, according to proponents of the domainspecific position—where specific mechanisms process
specific kinds of inputs—humans possess specialized
modules or mechanisms that are designed specifically to
process causal events (Leslie, 1995; Gopnik et al., 2001).
For example, within the domain-specific position, some
have posited that humans use a simple form of Bayes’ rule
to reason about the conditional probabilities in causal events
and that this ability may be present from birth or shortly
thereafter (e.g., Gopnik & Wellman, 2012). This argument
is ostensibly supported by research by Sobel and Kirkham
(2006, 2007) that showed (1) that infants 5 months of age
and older use IS and BB reasoning in a modified habituation
version of the blicket detector study, and (2) by research by
Griffiths et al. (2011) that showed that adults engage in BB
reasoning to reason about super pencils. However, these
findings should be considered cautiously because (1) the
evidence was mixed about whether infants in Sobel and
Kirkham (2006, 2007) processed the events associatively or
based on BB and IS reasoning, (2) the habituation task itself
failed to preserve the conditional probabilities of previous

831

blicket studies, and (3) BB reasoning was observed only in
one condition of four in Griffiths et al. (2011).
Based on the above limitations, a primary goal of the
current set of experiments was to examine causal reasoning
in infants and adults and examine to what extent 6-montholds (Experiment 1) and adults (Experiment 2) use BB and
IS reasoning to process causal events. We chose 6-montholds because this is the age at which they begin to process
launching-events causally. Experiment 1 used a novel task
design—where the conditional probabilities between this
and previous blicket-detector studies were identical—in
which infants were habituated to an AB+ A+ event and then
tested on A+, B+, A-, B- events (Figure 2). This design
choice was important in two ways: (1) it bore closer
resemblance to, and allowed direct comparisons with, the
conditions presented in the blicket detector studies with
children and (2) enabled us to test whether infants were
processing the events associatively—in line with predictions
made by the RW model—or according to BB reasoning
(Figure 2). These predictions derive from previous research
that examines infants’ use of Bayesian inference (Sobel &
Kirkham, 2006, 2007). Note that although the RW model
has been ruled out as an informative model of causal
reasoning in adults, it is still possible that it can predict the
performance of young infants in a habituation task in which
there are multiple trials. The specific aims of Experiment 2
were (1) to replicate with adults the conditions presented to
children in previous blicket studies and (2) to examine to
what extent adults engage in BB and IS reasoning. An
additional aim of Experiment 2 was to explore whether
adults process the causal events along a causal gradient (see
the Conclusion section) in which some adults might process
the events associatively, whereas others might process the
events according to BB reasoning. An important strength of
Experiment 2 was that the design enabled us to assess to
what extent adults engage in BB reasoning by comparing
pre- and post-ratings of B. With the exception of one study
(Griffiths et al., 2011), most compare children’s ratings of B
in the BB and IS conditions; and the one study that
conducted pre- and post-comparisons, a drop in the rating of
B was observed in only 1 of 4 conditions.

moved horizontally across the stage. Following the
habituation phase, infants were shown 4 test events (Figure
3).
Procedure. Each infant sat on their caretaker’s lap facing
the television monitor. The parent was instructed to abstain
from any form of communication with the infant and to
remain neutral to avoid biasing the infants’ natural response
to the habituation and test events. The caregiver was also
naïve to the hypotheses and predictions of the experiments
to eliminate the chance that the caregiver could reliably
influence the infant’s looking behavior during the
experiment.
AB+
B-

Associative (RW model)
Longer looking
Equal looking
Longer looking

Bayes (BB reasoning)
Longer looking
Longer looking
Equal looking

Figure 2: Looking-time predictions to the A-, B+, and Btest events relative to the A+ habituation event.
During the habituation phase of the experiment, infants
were presented with the two habituation events, as outlined
in the previous section. In other words, infants were
presented with the AB+ event, in which objects A and B
caused the sun to appear from the box, and the A+ event, in
which object A singly caused the sun to appear from the
box. Whether the object (A or B) entered the stage from the
right or from the left was counterbalanced across infants.

Figure 3: The habituation and test movies
When the habituation criterion was reached or when 16
trials had been presented, the four-trial test phase began.
Infants were excluded from the final analyses if they did not
reach the criterion within 16 trials. Two infants were
excluded for this reason. The test events (i.e., A+, A-, B+,
B-) were presented using a Latin square to ensure that event
presentation was counterbalanced.

Experiment 1
Methods
Subjects. Nineteen 6-month-old (M = 6 months; range: 5
months 15 days to 6 months 24 days) infants participated in
the experiment.
Stimuli and Design. The habituation and test stimuli were
computer-animated events that were presented on a
computer-generated stage (Figure 2). In each of the two
habituation movies, the red and blue circles entered the
stage from the right and left (counterbalanced) and moved
horizontally across the stage until they abutted a square that
was located mid-screen at which point a sun appeared from
the square. The second habituation movie was identical to
the first except that only one of the two objects (object A)

Results
The first analyses compared log10 looking times to the last
three habituation trials to log10 looking times to the familiar
A+ test event. The rationale for this analysis was to examine
whether infants had, in fact, habituated to the familiar (A+)
habitation event. Infants' fixation times were entered into a
one-way between-subjects ANOVA, which revealed that
infants' looking times to the familiar (A+) test event (M =

832

Mean looking time
(seconds)

0.81 , SD = 0.39) did not reliably differ from their looking
times to the last three habituation events (M = 0.87, SD =
0.06), F(1, 36) = 0.35, p = 0.56. This analysis revealed that
infants had indeed habituated to the familiar event (A+).
The second analysis examined whether there was an
effect of sex on looking time to the four test events. In
particular, We examined whether male or female infants
differed in the amount of time they looked at the four test
events. Thus, looking times were entered into a 2 (Sex: male
vs. female) x 4 (Test type: A+, A-, B+, B-) mixed-design
ANOVA, with sex as the between-subjects variable and test
type as the within-subjects variable. Neither the main effects
for sex, F(1, 17) = 0.14, p = 0.71, or test type, F(3, 51) =
0.71, p = 0.55, nor the interaction (sex × test type) was
significant, F(3, 51) = 1.55, p = 0.21. The data for sex was
subsequently collapsed.

test trials revealed that infants looked equally long at the B+
test trial (M = 9.58 s, SD = 5.45 s) and B- test trial (M =
11.17 s, SD = 7.22 s), t(5) = 0.39, p = 0.72. Considered
together, this set of analyses reveals that infants were not
processing the events based on associative learning or
Bayesian inference.

Discussion
The null results from Experiment 1 indicated that it is
unclear whether infants processed the events associatively
or according to previous BB findings; that is, the results
neither showed that infants looked longer at the A- and Btest events relative to the A+ and B+ test events as would be
predicted from an associative (PDP) model nor did they
show that infants looked longer at the A- relative to the
remaining three test events as would be predicted from a
Bayesian perspective. One possible explanation for this
finding is that the events may have been too complex for
infants to process compared to those in previous causalperception studies. Indeed, standard Michottian launching
events are typically simpler and involve far less dynamic
cues—which can be difficult for 6-month-olds to process,
much less according to BB reasoning—than the events used
in the present experiment.
Nonetheless, the results from Experiment 1 suggest
tentatively that 6-month-olds in the current design cannot
solve (or reason) about BB events in associative or Bayesian
way despite previous research by Sobel and Kirkham (2006,
2007) that suggests that Bayesian inference is present by at
least 5 months (c.f., Shultz, 2007). Despite the fact that the
results from Experiment 1 provided inconclusive evidence
about whether 6-month-olds used BB reasoning to process
the causal events, it is still possible that in the context of a
standard blicket-detector study, adults will use BB and IS
reasoning to process causal events. This was the goal of
Experiment 2.

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

A+

A-

B+

B-

Figure 4: Results from Experiment 1: Infants’ mean
looking times as a function of test trial.
The primary analysis examined whether infants differed
in their looking times to the four test events. The rationale
for this analysis was that if infants showed differential
looking to the four test events, then it would be possible to
examine whether infants were processing the events
associatively or according to Bayesian inference (as outlined
in the Introduction). A repeated measures ANOVA with test
type (A+, A-, B+, B-) as the within-subjects factor revealed
that infants did not differ reliably in their looking times to
the four test events, F(3, 54) = 0.28, p = 0.84. This analysis
suggests that infants were processing the events neither
associatively nor in a way that is consistent with previous
BB findings.
Despite the fact that the main analysis failed to yield a
significant finding, it is possible that infants processed the
events based on associative learning or Bayesian inference.
In particular, by comparing looking times to the A+ and the
A- test trials for infants who received these two trials first
and looking times to the B+ and B- test trials for infants
who received these trials first, it is possible to determine
whether infants processed the events based on Bayesian
inference or associative learning. Thus, separate pairedsample t-tests were used to compare infants' looking times
to the A+ and A- test trials and looking times to the B+ and
B- test trials. The analysis that compared looking times to
the A+ and A- test trials revealed that infants looked equally
long at the A+ test trial (M = 15.64 s, SD = 11.84 s) and Atest trial (M = 12.72 s, SD = 5.81 s), t(4) = 0.44, p = 0.68.
The analysis that compared looking time to the B+ and B-

Experiment 2
Methods
Subjects. Sixty college students were recruited from
Carnegie Mellon University to participate in Experiment 2.
Stimuli and Design. A device similar to the blicket detector
in previous studies was used in this study. The device was
5” x 7” x 3” and was made of wood (painted black) with a
white lucite top. The machine operated via a remote control
that was attached to the end of an electric wire that was
attached to the side of the machine. When the button was
depressed and the object predetermined to be the “blicket”
was placed on the surface of the detector, the music and the
lights began to play and flash. The button was not pressed,
and hence the music and lights did not play or flash, when
the object predetermined not to be the blicket was placed on
the detector’s surface.
Eight cube and cylinder objects, each of different color
and approximately 1” in diameter, were used. No objects of

833

the same shape were used to demonstrate the effect of
blicketness and the object that was designated as the blicket
was counterbalanced across subjects. Two unrelated objects
were used in the pretest phase of the experiment.

The second paired-samples t-test for the 2C test trial
revealed that the post-rating of A (M = 94.75, SD = 11.33)
increased significantly from the pre-rating of A (M = 50.60,
SD = 18.25), t(59) = -15.78, p < .006. Likewise, post-rating
of B (M = 79.10, SD = 19.42 significantly increased from
the pre-rating of B (M = 48.75, SD = 16.46), t(59) = -10.79,
p < .006. These results also replicate previous 2C results.
The third paired-samples t-test for the IS test trial
revealed that participants’ post-rating of A (M = 12.03, SD
= 27.06) decreased significantly from their pre-rating of A
(M = 55.77, SD = 18.39), t(59) = 10.20, p < .006. In
contrast, the post-rating of B (M = 89.48, SD = 16.60)
increased significantly from the pre-rating of B (M = 49.83,
SD = 17.32), t(59) = -12.12, p < .006. This result suggests
that adults used IS reasoning.

Procedure. Participants were tested in a quiet testing room.
Participants were introduced to the machine and told that it
was called a blicket detector that activated only when
blickets were placed on it at the beginning of the
experiment. They were instructed also that their job was to
determine which objects were blickets and which were not.
Participants were then given two pretest trials to ensure that
they understood the purpose of the experiment. In one of the
pretest trials, one of the two unrelated objects activated the
machine and was labeled the blicket, and the other of the
two objects (both randomly determined) did not activate the
machine.
Following this pretest phase, participants were then given
four test trials (counterbalanced). These test trials paralleled
those in previous blicket-detector studies and included the
one-cause (1C), two-cause (2C), indirect screening-off (IS),
and backward-blocking (BB) trials. The 1C and 2C trials
served as the controls to ensure that participants understood
the test events. Participants were instructed to rate on a scale
of 0 (definitely not) – 100 (definitely is) that each object in
the pair was a blicket both before and after a trial. In the 1C
trial, object A activated the machine when placed alone on
the detector but object B did not when placed on the
detector alone. Both objects were then placed on the
machine twice, which activated. In the 2C trial, object A
activated the detector 3 of the 3 times it was placed alone on
the detector, whereas object B activated the machine 2 of
the 3 times it was placed alone on the detector. In the BB
trial, both objects A and B were placed on the detector
twice, which activated both times. Object A was then placed
on the detector by itself and the detector activated. The IS
trial was identical to the backward-blocking trial except that
object A did not activate the detector.

100

*

*

*

*

80

*

60

*

A Pre
A Post

*

40

B Pre

20

B Post

0
BB

IS

1C

2C

Figure 5: Results of Experiment 2: Participants pre- and
post-ratings of objects A and B as a function of condition.
Asterisks indicate significance at p < .05 between A pre and
A post and B pre and B post pairs.
The final paired-samples t-test for the backward-blocking
test trial revealed that participants’ post-rating of A (M =
96.25, SD = 11.07) increased significantly from their preratings of A (M = 50.83, SD = 13.38), t(59) = -19.73, p <
.006. The pre-rating of B (M = 46.92, SD = 11.28),
however, did not differ from the post-rating of B (M =
42.67, SD = 18.14), t(59) = 1.84, p = .07, demonstrating the
absence of BB.
Given the absence of the BB effect, we conducted an
additional analysis to examine whether the effect was
moderated by a tendency for some participants to use BB
reasoning and others to use associative reasoning. A
repeated-measures ANOVA revealed that pre-ratings of B
that varied between 0 and 50 (M = 42, SD = 1.87) did not
differ reliably from post-ratings of B (M = 46.83, SD =
3.25), whereas pre-ratings of B that varied between 50 and
100 (M = 51.83, SD = 1.87) were significantly higher than
post-ratings of B (M = 38.5, SD = 3.25), F(1, 58) = 20.52, p
< .001. These same participants did not differ in their use of
IS reasoning. This provides preliminary (but speculative)
evidence that participants processed the causal events along
a causal gradient; that is, not all participants showed BB
reasoning. This is an important finding because, in contrast
to our finding, previous research suggests that BB reasoning
is a fundamental human ability.

Results
To analyze whether adults’ ratings of objects A and B
differed for the BB, IS, 1C and 2C test trials, a repeatedmeasures ANOVA with ratings of objects A and B for each
test trial as the within-subjects factor revealed that
participants’ ratings of both objects differed between each
test trial, F(7, 413) = 69.58, p < .001. To examine whether
the pre-ratings of A and B differed from the post-ratings of
A and B for each test trial, paired samples t tests with
Bonferroni corrections were conducted
The first paired-samples t-test for the 1C test trial
revealed that the post-rating of A (M = 94.92, SD = 15.58)
increased significantly from the pre-rating of A (M = 49.62 ,
SD = 16.96), t(59) = -15.34, p < .006. In contrast, the postrating of B (M = 10.33, SD = 21.68) decreased significantly
from the pre-rating of B (M = 50.08, SD = 15.66), t(59) =
11.03, p < .006. These results replicate the 1C condition in
previous blicket-detector studies.

834

Discussion

Acknowledgments

The results from Experiment 2 indicated that participants’
post-ratings of objects A and B differed reliably from their
pre-ratings of objects A and B in all test trials except for the
BB test trial where no significant difference was observed.
This BB result is particularly interesting because it
contravenes the prediction about BB made by the Bayesian
perspective; that is, if participants engaged in BB reasoning,
then a significant decrease in the rating of B between the
pre- and post-rating phases should have been observed
according to this view. However, associative models (e.g.,
the RW model) make no such prediction about a drop in the
rating of B as a blicket. The results of Experiment 2 seemed
to support both perspectives in which some adults engaged
in BB reasoning whereas others engaged in associative
reasoning. In general, the results from Experiment 2
replicated those with children in previous blicket-detector
studies.

This research is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship under
Grant No. DGE-1252522 to Deon T. Benton.

References
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The
development of causal reasoning. The developmental
psychology of time, 209-254.
Cohen, L. B., & Amsel, G. (1998). Precursors to infants'
perception of the causality of a simple event. Infant
behavior and development, 21(4), 713-731.
Cohen, L. B., Amsel, G., Redford, M. A., & Casasola, M.
(1998).
The
development
of
infant
causal
perception. Perceptual development: Visual, auditory,
and speech perception in infancy, 167-209.
Gopnik, A., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E., & Glymour, C.
(2001). Causal learning mechanisms in very young
children: two-, three-, and four-year-olds infer causal
relations from patterns of variation and covariation.
Developmental psychology, 37(5), 620.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
learning in children: causal maps and Bayes
nets. Psychological review, 111(1), 3.
Griffiths, T. L., Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gopnik,
A. (2011). Bayes and blickets: Effects of knowledge on
causal induction in children and adults. Cognitive
Science, 35(8), 1407-1455.
Leslie, A. M., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old
infants perceive causality?. Cognition, 25(3), 265-288.
McClelland, J. L., & Thompson, R. M. (2007). Using
domain‐general principles to explain children's causal
reasoning abilities. Developmental Science, 10(3), 333356.
Oakes, L. M., & Cohen, L. B. (1990). Infant perception of a
causal event.Cognitive Development, 5(2), 193-207.
Rakison, D. H., & Krogh, L. (2012). Does causal action
facilitate causal perception in infants younger than 6
months of age?. Developmental science, 15(1), 43-53.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. InClassical
conditioning: Current research and theory.
Schlottmann, A., & Surian, L. (1999). Do 9-month-olds
perceive
causation-at-a-distance?. Perception-London, 28, 1105-1114.
Schulz, L. E., & Gopnik, A. (2004). Causal learning across
domains.Developmental psychology, 40(2), 162.
Sobel, D. M., & Kirkham, N. Z. (2006). Blickets and babies:
the development of causal reasoning in toddlers and
infants. Developmental psychology,42(6), 1103.
Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gopnik, A. (2004).
Children’s causal inferences from indirect evidence:
Backwards blocking and Bayesian reasoning in
preschoolers. Cognitive science, 28(3), 303-333.

Conclusions
The null results from Experiment 1 indicated that the 6month-olds processed causal events neither associatively or
in terms of BB. This result suggests that BB reasoning and,
to a lesser extent the ability to use a simple form of Bayes’
rule as has been assumed, may not be present from birth or
shortly thereafter. Instead, this ability may develop as
infants learn about causal events in the world. For example,
infants 6 months of age and younger may process the
features of the objects or the paths that the objects take
independently, whereas older infants may process the
relations between the objects and begin to parse the events
in an associative- or Bayesian-like way. Ongoing research is
testing this hypothesis with older infants.
The results from Experiment 2 replicated three of the four
test-trials given to children and showed that adults use IS
reasoning to reason about blicket events. For the BB trial,
however, adults did not rate B differently between the preand post-rating phases. Note that we tested the same number
of adults in this study as in Griffiths et al. (2011).
Nonetheless, there was evidence that participants whose
pre-ratings of B varied between 0 and 50 appeared to
process the events associatively, whereas participants whose
pre-ratings of B varied between 50 and 100 appeared to use
BB reasoning. This effect also appeared to be restricted to
the BB trial, which suggests that the different modes of
reasoning apply only to BB trials. This result suggests that
adults may process causal events along a gradient; that is,
some adults may process the events associatively, others
may process the events according to Bayesian inference, and
still others may use a combination of both to process causal
events.
In summary, the results of the present experiments reveal
that (1) 6-month-olds processed BB events neither
associatively nor in terms of Bayesian inference and (2) that
adults may process causal events along a causal gradient
rather than in a strict Bayesian or associative way.

835

