Children’s Awareness of Authority to Change Rules in Various Social Contexts
Xin Zhao (xz437@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, Martha Van Rensselaer Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Tamar Kushnir (tk397@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, Martha Van Rensselaer Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Abstract
To investigate children’s awareness of authority to change
rules, we showed children (ages 4-7) videos of one child
playing a game alone or three children playing a game
together. In the group video, the game rule was initiated either:
by one of the children, by three children collaboratively or by
an adult. They then were asked whether the characters in the
videos could change the rules. Children believed that the
character could change the rule when playing alone. Their
responses to the group video depended on how the rule was
initiated. They attributed authority to change rules only to the
child who initiated the rule, unless the rule was created
collaboratively. We also asked children whether they could
change norms (school/moral/artifact norms) in daily life; and
found moral/artifact distinction in children’s endorsement of
norm changing. These results suggest that children recognize
flexibility in changing rules even in preschool years.
Keywords: cognitive development, social cognition,
normative reasoning, authority, moral development

Introduction
As adults, we recognize that rule following is important, but
can also reason about cases in which rules can (and may
need to) be changed. Interest in the origins of children’s
understanding of rules and norms dates back to Piaget, who
interviewed children about rules in marble games (Piaget,
1965). Based mainly on naturalistic observations and
interviews, Piaget argued that children’s understanding of
rules starts out rigid and then becomes flexible. Young
children start from viewing rules as eternal, fixed and
unalterable, while later (at around 10 years old) understand
that rules are alterable based on mutual agreement.
This idea that young children view rules as fixed has
some support from recent research showing how important
rule following and rule enforcing is to very young children.
For example, from the second year of life, children begin to
be aware of and respect various rules in their families (e.g.
Dunn & Munn, 1985, 1987). Observational studies of
family interactions have shown that toddlers talk about
permissibility of actions and use social rules to explain and
justify their behaviors in their conflicts with parents and
siblings (Dunn & Munn, 1985, 1987). A series of
experimental studies have shown that toddlers enforce
arbitrary rules even on strangers (Rakoczy, Warneken, &
Tomasello, 2008). Children spontaneously protest and
criticize rule violators, but do not criticize same act that
does not constitute a violation of a rule (Rakoczy, 2008;
Wyman, Rakoczy, & Tomasello, 2009).

Also, younger children are more likely than older children
to emphasize the role of rules and social norms in their
causal-explanatory reasoning about human behaviors. For
example, Kalish and his colleagues (Kalish & Lawson,
2008; Kalish & Shiverick, 2004) have found that four-yearolds are more likely to make predictions about people’s
future behaviors based on social norms over personal
preferences. It is not until age eight that children shift away
from norm-based explanations to explanations based on
personal preferences.
Paralleling the way preschoolers understand the norms
governing human behavior, they exhibit a “functional
fixedness” in their understanding of the norms governing
artifact usage. In some cases, when shown a function of an
artifact, they refused to use the object for alternative feasible
purposes or other objects for the same purpose (e.g. Casler
& Kelemen, 2005; Kelemen, 2004). In other cases, though
they allow multiple uses, they believe that only one is the
norm (e.g. Vredenburg, Kushnir & Casasola, 2014).
From a simple reading of these examples, it seems that
children are quite rigid in their beliefs about rules. But even
toddlers, and certainly preschoolers, show some flexibility
as well. For example, they show context-sensitivity:
distinguishing between moral rules, which pertain to
violations of common good, justice and others’ wellbeing
(e.g. harming and not sharing), and conventional rules,
which are arbitrarily decided by social groups. These
distinctions influence how young children judge rule
violations in terms of seriousness, contingency and
generalizability; they rate conventional transgressions as
less serious, more contingent on the presence or absence of
rules and less generalizable across different contexts than
moral transgressions (e.g. Nucci & Nucci, 1982; Smetana,
1981; Turiel, 1998).
There are other, more indirect indications that young
children may not be so rigid. For one thing, the success of
the “protest” paradigm rests on fact that children learn new
rules quickly and easily (e.g. Rakoczy, Brosche, Warneken,
& Tomasello, 2009; Rakoczy et al., 2008). Also, at five
years old, children spontaneously create their own rules to
coordinate themselves in games, and even negotiate rules
collaboratively with others in cases of conflict (Göckeritz,
Schmidt, & Tomasello, 2014; Köymen et al., 2014). Finally,
children often make up rules in make-believe games when
they play alone or with friends (Taylor, 1999).
We offer a proposal to resolve these conflicting findings:
our hypothesis is that children’s understanding of norms and
rules is flexible, and that fixedness arises due to

1877

considerations of authority that govern the formation and/or
enforcement of rules. Children’s considerations of authority
have been studied in cases of object ownership (e.g. Neary
& Friedman, 2014) and creator intent (e.g. Diesendruck,
Markson, & Bloom, 2003), and in such cases young
children consider authority when making decisions about
who can possess an object, determine its purpose, or
distribute resources. Thus, we propose that, as a guiding
principle, children consider the issue of authority over rules
(for example: were the rules made by an individual, by
collaborative agreement among members of a group, or by
some other means?) in deciding whether the rules are fixed
or flexible.
In order to test this idea in the present study, we ask
young children an important question about flexibility – that
is, whether rules can change and who can change them.
Importantly, we vary the way in which the rules are
introduced and examine whether children endorse rule
changes, under what conditions they do, and whether their
endorsements change with age. We choose to study children
ages 4 through 7, as this is a time in which children’s
normative reasoning undergoes important developments (e.g
Kalish & Shiverik, 2004)
Our main comparisons of interest come from the
manipulation of individual or collective authority. First, we
manipulated whether the game was solitary or social. Based
on prior work, children may be more rigid when rules apply
to a social context than to a solitary individual (where, for
example, the rule is indistinguishable from a personal
preference).
Second, we manipulated whether the rule was initiated by
an adult authority figure or by the children themselves.
Once again, based on prior work, children should be more
rigid when the rule comes from an adult authority figure.
Third, we manipulated whether the rule was initiated by
one of the children (i.e. a “leader” and his/her “followers”)
or by all of the children through a collaborative agreement.
Since there was no adult authority, it is an open question
whether children would view the authority of the “leader”
child as enough to warrant permission to change the rules.
Also, though past work has shown that children appreciate
and honor joint commitments (e.g. Warneken, Gräfenhain,
& Tomasello, 2012), it is still an open question whether
collaborative agreement could lead them to endorse any
child changing or of no child doing so.
Our task began with children viewing videos of other
children playing games. The solitary and group contexts
were presented within subjects. The different group contexts
were randomly assigned between subjects. The rule of the
game was initiated either: 1) by one of the children, 2) by
collaborative agreement of all the three children or 3) by an
adult. Children were then asked whether each character in
the videos could change the rules.
We also surveyed children regarding whether they
believed children could change norms in daily life (school
norm, moral norm, and artifact norm). We included this
additional measure for two reasons. One, we were interested

in whether children would ever endorse children changing
rules that are made by adults. Recent studies (Chernyak &
Kushnir, 2013; Chernyak, Kushnir, Sullivan, & Wang,
2013) have found that preschool children do not tend to
endorse the freedom to violate social and moral norms, but
that this changes with age. Also, consistent with social
domain theory (e.g. Turiel, 1998; Smetana, 1981), children
are more likely to say that they can choose to violate social
and artifact conventions (such as what to wear, where to eat,
etc) than moral norms (harm, fairness, helping). We expect
to see that if children endorse norm changing in our task at
all, it would be in accordance with this moral/conventional
distinction.
Importantly, too, we were interested in whether there was
any consistency in individual children’s beliefs about game
rule changing and norm changing. Thus, we explored the
question of whether children’s attitudes about the rules of
the games in our artificial lab task would be in accordance
with their beliefs about the types of moral and conventional
norms they encountered in their own daily lives.

Method
Participants
Sixty-nine children aged 4-7 years old (M = 5.57, SD=0.99)
participated. Participants were recruited from preschools,
afterschool programs and museums in a small university
town. Two additional children participated but were
replaced because of the experimenter’s mistakes.

Figure 1. Screenshots of the Videos Used in the Video
Task (Above: alone video; bottom: group video).

Materials
The materials included 8 videos showing children playing
games and a questionnaire with 3 vignettes. The videos
were filmed with children of around 9-10 years old who
were able to act consistently across videos. Half of the
videos were boys, the other half were girls. Two videos
were of a boy/girl playing a stacking game alone (Alone
Video), six videos of three boys/girls playing a sorting game
together (Child Rule, Collaborative Rule, Mom Rule). The
genders of the characters were counterbalanced across
participants; if participants saw the girls together, they saw
the boy alone, and vice versa. The alone videos were about
20 seconds each, and the group videos were about 34
seconds each.

1878

Procedure
All children were interviewed in a quiet corner or a separate
room at the local schools or the museum. The interview
consisted of two parts: a video task and a questionnaire. All
the participants completed the video task first, following by
the questionnaire.
Video task Each child was shown two videos (order
counterbalanced). Children were randomly assigned to view
one of the three group videos (Child Rule, Collaborative
Rule, Mom Rule) where three children were playing a
sorting game (sorting balls with different colored stickers
into baskets) together. Each child also saw the Alone Video
where one child was playing a stacking game (stacking
blocks of a certain color into a tower) alone.
Child Rule: Before showing the video, the experimenter
pointed to each of the characters in the video and introduced
their names, and said, “They are friends and they are going
to play a game together.” Then she pointed to the child in
the middle and said “John/Sophie has a rule for this game.
Let’s see what rule John/Sophie has for this game.” Then
the experimenter played the video. Figure 1 demonstrated
the screenshots of the videos. In the video, there were a
bunch of balls with either yellow or blue stickers on the
table. The three characters sat in a triangle facing each
other. The child sitting in the middle said, “I have a rule for
this game. Blue stickers, here; yellow stickers here. Let’s
play together.” Then the three children played together
following the rule and finished sorting the balls.
Collaborative Rule: The procedure was similar to the
Child rule condition except the experimenter introduced the
video by saying, “They are going to make up a rule
together.” In the video, the center child proposed the rule,
then looked at the other two children for agreement. One at
the time each of the other two children made eye contact
and nodded to the center child, indicating agreement, before
they began the game. We used this type of silent “assent,”
rather than having all three children converse and decide
collectively (e.g. Köymen et al., 2014) in order to keep the
videos as similar as possible.
Mom Rule: The participant was told, “John’s mom has a
rule for this game.” In the video, a woman walked in the
screen and made eye contact with the children and said, “I
have a rule for this game” then stated the same rule as in the
other two conditions, “blue stickers here; yellow stickers
here.” Immediately after the mom left, the children began
playing, in exactly the same way as the other two group
videos.
Dependent measures: After showing each video, the
experimenter asked the participants if they remembered the
rule mentioned in the video to make sure that they were
paying attention and understood the video. If the participant
didn’t answer it correctly, the video was shown again.
Children correctly answered the rule of the game 93.5% of
the times when shown the video for the first time.
Remaining participants correctly answered the rule after
being shown twice. After that, the participants were asked
two critical questions (order counterbalanced). One about

the center child “Now John/Sophie wants to change the rule
of this game. He wants the rule to be that yellow stickers
here and blue stickers here (switching the places putting the
color of the stickers), Can John/Sophie just change the
rule?” The other question is about one of the other two
children (non-center child): “Now Andy/Julia wants to
change the rule of this game. Can he/she just change the
rule?” In the mom rule condition, in addition to the two
questions about the center child and one of the non-center
children, the experimenter also asked whether the mom
could change the rule if she wanted. The participants were
also asked “why” after the yes/no responses.
Alone Video: In the Alone Video, the experimenter first
said, “This is John/Sophie. John/Sophie is playing alone.
He/She has a rule for this game. Let’s see what rule he/she
has for this game.” In the video, there were a bunch of either
red or green blocks on the table. The child said, “I have a
rule for this game. Red ones make a tower, green ones stay
flat.” Then the child finished playing with the blocks
following the rule. After being shown the video, the
participants were asked the same rule-changing question as
in the group video (but the rule change was to stack the
other colored blocks).
Questionnaire After the video task, all participants were
also read a questionnaire. The questionnaire consisted of 3
items in the following general format:
“There is a rule at Lily’s school. The rule is that kids sit in
red chairs during lunch. Lily always follows this rule and
sits in the red chair during lunch. But now, Lily wants to
change the rule. She wants the rule to be that kids sit in
green chairs during lunch. Can Lily just change the rule?
Why?”
We included three items: school norm, moral norm,
artifact norm. In School norm, the character in the story
wants to change an arbitrary rule at school (sitting in red
chairs during lunch). In Moral norm, the character in the
story wants to change a moral norm (sharing with siblings).
In Artifact norm, the character in the story wants to change a
known artifact convention (using umbrella when it’s
raining). The participants were also asked “Why” to explain
their responses. The orders of the three items were fully
counterbalanced across participants.

Coding
For each question, participants were given a score of “0” if
they answered “no” and “1” if they answered “yes”. The
first author and a research assistant coded participants’
responses. Reliability between coders was 99.08%.

Results
We first checked if there were any order effects or gender
effects and found no effects of order or gender in any of the
questions (Fisher’s exact test, p’s > .05). So we combined
the data of different orders and genders together in the
following analysis.

Video task
Figure 2 demonstrated the proportion of “yes” responses to
the rule changing questions in each condition.

1879

Child Rule In the child rule condition, the significant
majority (77%) of the children answered that the child who
made up the rule (center child) can change the rule,
Binomial p = .017. About half of those who answered “yes”
(47%) gave the explanations “he made up the rule” or “it’s
his game.” In contrast, only a few children (36%) answered
that the child who did not make up the rule (non-center
child) could change the rule, Binomial p = .286. Out of
those who answered “no,” half gave the explanations “he
didn’t make up the rule” or “he’s not the boss.” A
McNemar’s test showed that significantly more children
attributed an ability of changing the rule to the child who
made up the rule than the children who didn’t make up the
rule, p = .012. There was no correlation with age in this
condition (p’s > .05).
Collaborative Rule In the collaborative rule condition, the
majority (75%) of the children answered that both the center
child and the non-center child could change the rule of the
game, Binomial p’s < .023. McNemar’s test showed no
significant difference between the number of participants
who said the center child could change the rule and the
number of participants who said the non-center child could
change the rule (p = 1.0). We then added up each
participant’s “yes” responses to the center child and noncenter child together, and found that this score was
negatively correlated with age in months (r = -.406 p =
.049). This suggested that young children were more likely
to say that both children could change the rule, while older
children were more likely to say that neither could do so.
Mom Rule In the mom rule condition, 39% of children
answered that the center child could change the rule, and
35% answered that the non-center child could change the
rule, Binomial p’s > .05. A significant majority (87%) of
the children answered that the mom could change the rule,
Binomial p < .001. The most frequent explanations they
gave referred to the fact that the mom made up the rule
(25%) and that the mom was the authority figure (e.g.
“Because she’s the boss”, 15%). McNemar’s tests showed
that children were more likely to think that mom could
change the rule than either the center child (p = .001) or the
non-center child (p < .001), but there was no significant
difference in proportion of “yes” responses to questions
about the center child and the non-center child (p = 1.0),
Also, no age effect was found in this condition (p’s > .05).

Figure 2. Proportion of “Yes” Responses to the Rule
Changing Questions in Each Condition (bars represent 95%

confidence intervals for each mean; asterisks indicate a
significant difference from chance: (*) p<.05, (**) p<.01,
(***) p<.001, using Binomial tests).
We also compared children’s responses to the rulechanging questions in the three different conditions.
Compared to the Mom Rule condition, participants in the
Child Rule and Collaborative Rule conditions were
significantly more likely to answer that the center child
could change the rule (Fisher’s exact test, p’s < .05).
Participants in the Collaborative Rule condition were
significantly more likely to respond that the non-center child
could change the rule compared to the participants in the
Child Rule condition (Fisher’s exact test, p = .016) and the
Mom Rule condition (Fisher’s exact test, p = .008).
Alone Video We also looked at children’s responses to the
alone video, where one child was playing alone. An
overwhelming majority of the participants answered that the
child in the video could just change the rule, Binomial p’s <
.05. The most frequent explanations they gave referred to
the fact that the child made up the rule (e.g. “Because it’s
her game”, 36.2%) or that the child was by herself (e.g.
“Because she’s playing alone”, 13.8%). McNemar’s tests
showed that children were more likely to say that the center
child could change the rule when he/she was playing alone
than playing in group when the rule was made by mom (p =
.008). The difference was marginally significant in the
Collaborative Rule condition (p = .063) and not significant
in the Child Rule condition (p = 1.0). There was no
correlation with age in Alone Video (p’s > .05).

Questionnaire
The questionnaire consisted of three questions respectively
referring to school norm (sitting in the red or green chairs
during lunch), moral norm (sharing or not sharing with
brothers) and artifact norm (holding an umbrella or holding
a bucket in the rain). Figure 3 showed the proportion of
“yes” responses the participants gave in each of the stories.
Binomial tests showed that the significant majority of the
children (65%) answered that the character in the story was
not able to change the rule at school (p = .015). A
significant majority of the children (74%) answered that the
character in the story was not able to change the moral rule,
(p < .001). However, about half of the children (49%) said
that the character in the story could change artifact rule (p =
1.0). McNemar’s tests also revealed that significantly more
children answered that the child in the stories could change
the artifact rule than the school rule (p = .013) or the moral
rule (p < .001). No correlation with age was found in any of
the three stories (p’s > .05).
We then examined the relationship between children’s
responses to the rule-changing questions in the games and
their responses to rule-changing questions about everyday
life. We added up each participant’s “yes” responses to the
three norm questions and found that this score was
significantly positively correlated to their responses to the
rule-changing question of the center child in the Child rule
condition and the Mom Rule condition, even when age was

1880

controlled (Child Rule: r = .473, p = .03; Mom Rule: r =
.821 p < .001). The correlation was marginally positive in
the Collaborative Rule condition (r = .377, p = .076). This
score was also positively correlated to children’s responses
to the non-center child in all the three group games, when
age was controlled (p’s < .05). Thus, children who thought
that the everyday norms could be changed also tended to
endorse rule changing in the video task.
In a second analysis, we gave children a “1” for every
response consistent with the distinction between artifact
norm from moral or school norm (i.e. a “1” for “no” to
moral and school and a “1” for “yes” to artifact). We found
that this score was marginally negatively correlated with
their responses to the non-center child changing rules in the
Mom Rule game (r = -.49, p = .021), while not significantly
correlated with the responses to the center child or any child
in the Collaborative Rule or the Child Rule game (p’s >
.05). This suggests that those children who make stronger
distinction between the moral/school and artifact norms
endorsed less authority for the children to change rules
created by adults.

Figure 3. Proportion of “Yes” Responses to the Rule
Changing Questions for the School Norm, Moral Norm and
Artifact Norm Items (asterisks indicate a significant
difference from chance: (*) p<.05, (**) p<.01, (***) p<.001,
using Binomial tests).

General Discussion
Our results reveal that young children’s beliefs about who
can and cannot change rules are sensitive to considerations
of the authority over the formation of the rules. Children
recognized that game rules could be changed when a child
had made up the rule for his/her own solitary play. But
when the rules were made for playing with a group, children
took into account how the rules were initiated even though
all the other information (e.g. the content of the rule, the
participants of the game) were kept the same across
contexts. When the rule was initiated by a single player,
children believed only that player had the authority to
change the rule, and not his/her playmates. When the rule
was made through a collaborative agreement among all
three players, children said that any could change the rule.
When the rule was initiated by an adult (mom of one of the

children), children said that only the adult had the authority
to change the rule of the game, and not any of the players.
Our results complement prior work focused on children’s
respect and enforcement of rules by showing that children
recognize that there is flexibility in changing rules, provided
the agent of change has some authority to do so. The
recognition of who has that authority aligns well with
existing knowledge in several different areas of research,
including children’s understanding of authority, of
ownership and creator intent, and of the norms of
collaboration. For example, children’s responses that rules
which comes from mom cannot be changed by children is
consistent with the evidence shown in previous research that
young children recognize parents as important authority
figures (Laupa, 1995). Children’s belief that a rule initiated
by a single child for group play can only be changed by that
child is consistent with previous work on children’s
understanding of ownership of objects (e.g. Neary &
Friedman, 2014) and creator intent (e.g. Diesendruck,
Markson, & Bloom, 2003). Just like with objects, young
children may develop awareness of ownership and/or
creation of rules: they understand that the person who
“owns” the rule (in the sense that they created it) has the
authority to change the rule, while other people do not have
the authority.
Children’s response that any group members has the same
authority to change a collaborative rule is consistent with
prior work on children’s understanding of joint
commitments to collaborate (e.g. Warneken et al., 2012). It
is noteworthy, however, that there were age differences,
where young children were more likely to say that both
children could change the rule and older children were more
likely to say that neither could do so. This may have been a
difference in the way children interpreted this one instance
of agreement. Younger children may have taken the set up
to imply agreement in general: that is, that if one member of
the group changed the rule the other members would agree.
Older children, on the other hand, may require more
evidence to assume that children who agree once will
always agree with their playmates.
This would be
consistent with the fact that, with age, children accumulate
experiences in which friends do not necessarily agree. It
would be interesting to explore this hypothesis directly. For
example, we could examine how children’s changing beliefs
about friendship relate to their responses to our task. We
could also explicitly manipulate whether or not other
players always agree on the rule across games, only
sometimes agree, or never agree.
Finally, it was interesting to find that, in some cases,
children said that they could change the norms in their
everyday lives. Consistent with prior work on freedom on
choice (Chernyak et al, 2013) and with the predictions of
social domain theory (e.g. Turiel, 1998; Smetana, 1981),
children were more likely to say that they could change
artifact norms than moral norms.
The tendency to say “yes” to game rule changing and also
“yes” to norm changing, however, suggests that perhaps

1881

children didn’t distinguish between moral norms,
conventional norms, and game rules initiated by children.
This is less of a worry, however, when combined with the
result that children whose responses were most consistent
with this moral/conventional distinction were most likely to
endorse the mom’s authority in the game scenario, but no
more likely to endorse the child’s. This final result indicates
that children do distinguish between children’s rules for
their own game and rules set by an authority figure, but
leaves open questions about the nature and extent of this
distinction.
In summary, our results demonstrate that belief in
flexibility in changing rules is present even in the preschool
period. Young children understand the importance of
following and enforcing rules and norms, but at the same
time can also reason about how rules can be changed and
how advances take place in human activities. Critically, this
study shows that children consider the issue of authority
over rules in deciding whether rules can change and who
can change them. Taken together, this study suggests that
the important feature of human thinking - that we make
rational and flexible reasoning about human activities - is
present in young children’ beliefs about rules and norms.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully thank the members of the Early Childhood
Cognition Lab, and especially Cindy Wu, Sammi Wong and
Mona Chen for assistance with recruitment and coding. We
thank the staff of the Sciencenter and preschools, and the
children and parents who participated in this research.

References
Casler, K., & Kelemen, D. (2005). Young children’s rapid
learning about artifacts. Developmental Science, 8, 472–
480.
Chernyak, N., & Kushnir, T. (2013). The Self as a Moral
Agent: Preschoolers Behave Morally but Believe in the
Freedom to Do Otherwise. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 15, 453–464.
Chernyak, N., Kushnir, T., Sullivan, K. M., & Wang, Q.
(2013). A Comparison of American and Nepalese
Children’s Concepts of Freedom of Choice and Social
Constraint. Cognitive Science, 37, 1343–1355.
Diesendruck, G., Markson, L., & Bloom, P. (2003).
Children’s Reliance on Creator’s Intent in Extending
Names for Artifacts. Psychological Science, 14, 164–168.
Dunn, J., & Munn, P. (1985). Becoming a Family Member:
Family Conflict and the Development of Social
Understanding in the Second Year. Child Development,
56, 480–492.
Dunn, J., & Munn, P. (1987). Development of justification
in disputes with mother and sibling. Developmental
Psychology, 23, 791–798.
Göckeritz, S., Schmidt, M. F., & Tomasello, M. (2014).
Young children's creation and transmission of social
norms. Cognitive Development, 30, 81-95.

Kalish, C. W., & Lawson, C. A. (2008). Development of
Social Category Representations: Early Appreciation of
Roles and Deontic Relations. Child Development, 79,
577–593.
Kalish, C. W., & Shiverick, S. M. (2004). Children’s
reasoning about norms and traits as motives for behavior.
Cognitive Development, 19, 401–416.
Kelemen, D. (2004). Are Children “Intuitive Theists”?
Reasoning About Purpose and Design in Nature.
Psychological Science, 15, 295–301.
Köymen, B., Lieven, E., Engemann, D. A., Rakoczy, H.,
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2014). Children’s Norm
Enforcement in Their Interactions With Peers. Child
Development, 85, 1108–1122.
Laupa, M. (1995). Children’s reasoning about authority in
home and school contexts. Social Development, 4, 1–16.
Neary, K. R., & Friedman, O. (2014). Young Children Give
Priority to Ownership When Judging Who Should Use an
Object. Child Development, 85, 326–337.
Nucci, L. P., & Nucci, M. S. (1982). Children’s Social
Interactions in the Context of Moral and Conventional
Transgressions. Child Development, 53, 403–412.
Piaget, J. (1965). The moral judgment of the child (1932).
New York: The Free.
Rakoczy, H. (2008). Taking fiction seriously: Young
children understand the normative structure of joint
pretence games. Developmental Psychology, 44, 1195–
1201.
Rakoczy, H., Brosche, N., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M.
(2009). Young children’s understanding of the contextrelativity of normative rules in conventional games.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 27, 445–
456.
Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008). The
sources of normativity: Young children’s awareness of
the normative structure of games. Developmental
Psychology, 44, 875–881.
Smetana, J. G. (1981). Preschool Children’s Conceptions of
Moral and Social Rules. Child Development, 52, 1333–
1336.
Taylor, M. (1999). Imaginary companions and the children
who create them. Oxford University Press.
Turiel, E. (1998). The development of morality. Handbook
of child psychology.
Vredenburgh, C., Kushnir, T., & Casasola, M. (2015).
Pedagogical cues encourage toddlers' transmission of
recently demonstrated functions to unfamiliar adults.
Developmental science, 18, 645-654.
Warneken, F., Gräfenhain, M., & Tomasello, M. (2012).
Collaborative partner or social tool? New evidence for
young children’s understanding of joint intentions in
collaborative activities. Developmental Science,15,54–61.
Wyman, E., Rakoczy, H., & Tomasello, M. (2009).
Normativity and context in young children’s pretend play.
Cognitive Development, 24, 146–155.

1882

