Cognitive biases and social coordination in the emergence of temporal language
Tessa Verhoef (tverhoef@ucsd.edu)
University of California, SD, Center for Research in Language

Esther Walker (e1walker@ucsd.edu)
University of California, SD, Cognitive Science

Tyler Marghetis (tmarghet@indiana.edu)
Indiana University, Bloomington, Psychological and Brain Sciences
Abstract
Humans spatialize time. This occurs within individual minds
and also in larger, shared cultural systems like language.
Understanding the origins of space-time mappings requires
analyses at multiple levels, from initial individual biases to
cultural evolution. Here we present a laboratory experiment
that simulates the cultural emergence of space-time
mappings. Dyads had to communicate about temporal
concepts using only a novel, spatial signaling device. Over
the course of their interactions, participants rapidly
established semiotic systems that mapped systematically
between time and space. These semiotic systems exhibited a
number of similarities, but also striking idiosyncrasies. By
foregrounding the interaction of mechanisms that operate on
disparate timescales, laboratory experiments can shed light on
the commonalities and variety found in space-time mappings
in languages around the world.
Keywords: language evolution; space and time; abstract
concepts; social coordination; cultural evolution

Introduction
Human language stands out for its capacity to refer to
things that are elsewhere in space or time: “How was the
movie?”. Beyond this capacity for “displaced” reference
(Hockett, 1960) to concrete objects, we can also talk about
entities that are entirely abstract: the future, the number five,
and so on. Indeed, natural languages deploy nuanced,
systematic strategies to refer to concepts for which there are
no stable perceptual referents. What are the origins of the
linguistic structure that allows us to communicate about the
abstract? Here, we present a novel experiment to help
answer this question, focused on the language of time.

A test domain: Time
The conceptual domain of Time is a critical test case for
theories of language evolution because, while temporal
concepts are entirely divorced from perception, they are also
highly structured. The concepts next week and yesterday
cannot be distinguished perceptually; the events of next
week will, soon enough, be those of yesterday. Temporal
concepts lack stable perceptual referents. And yet our

conceptualization of time is highly structured, consisting of
at least three distinct facets: duration, order, and deixis (for
a review: Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013). Temporal duration
refers to amount of time. In English, we have a rich lexicon
of duration terms (second, hour, year, etc.). Temporal order
refers to the sequence in which events occurred. Pregnancy
occurs before birth; celebrations come after victories.
Temporal deixis refers to the placement of events in relation
to now: past, present, or future. A celebration can be
occurring now, have occurred in the past, or occur in the
future. All three facets can be combined during temporal
reference, so that we can speak of a day-long party
happening before your next birthday (i.e., in the future).
Across a number of languages, a recurring strategy is to
use spatial words to communicate about time (e.g.,
Haspelmath, 1997; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). For instance,
in English you can say “back in the ‘50s” or “look forward
to the weekend,” mapping past to back and future to front.
How do such systems of conventionalized space-time
mappings emerge? Some argue that we have an innate bias
to associate space, time, and number (e.g., Walsh, 2003). On
this view, cross-domain associations in language arise from
neural resources that are shared across space, time, and
number. Others argue that a variety of abstract domains
(including time) share structural and relational features with
space and thus can easily be aligned (e.g., Gentner, 1983).
Once aligned, structure from the domain of space—and its
associated language—is projected to the domain of time. A
third view is that regularities in experience create crossdomain associations in the minds of individuals, so-called
“conceptual metaphors” that, in turn, influence how we
think and talk (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). While each of
these mechanisms may play a role, none on their own can
account for the combination of universality and variability
that we find in the languages of the world. To understand
the emergence of conventionalized space-time mappings in
communication, we need to consider the interplay of
mechanisms that operated at various timescales (c.f., Núñez
& Cooperrider, 2013).

2615

Duration Sequence

Deictic

about temporal concepts using a novel signaling device, a
vertical touch bar that recorded finger movement sequences.
Since communication was restricted to these novel signals,
successful communication required the negotiation of novel
conventions for representing temporal concepts in vertical
space. Undergraduate students (n = 16) at the University of
California, San Diego participated for partial course credit.

Moments

‘second’

‘now’

Time concepts

Days

‘day’

‘day before’
‘day after’

‘yesterday’
‘today’
‘tomorrow’

Year

‘year’

‘year before’
'year after’

‘last year’
‘this year’
‘next year’

Table 1: The full set of meanings used in the experiment.
Meanings ranged in duration from brief moments (‘now’)
to limitless periods (‘future’), and included durations
(‘day’), sequential relations (‘day before’), and deictic
periods defined relative to the present (‘yesterday’).

Periods

‘before’ ‘after’ ‘past’ ‘future’

Sources of structure
Our approach adopts a view of language as a complex
adaptive dynamical system (Steels, 1997; Beckner et al.,
2009), which foregrounds the complex links between the
level of the individual (language users in a community and
their individual cognitive biases) and the level of the
population (languages as dynamic systems). The field of
language evolution has developed experimental methods
that help to isolate some of the relevant mechanisms that
play a role in these links (Scott-Phillips & Kirby, 2010).
These methods help explain how cognitive biases and
cultural evolution together may account for some of the
structures we see in language (Christiansen & Chater, 2008;
Kirby, Griffiths & Smith, 2014). For instance, past work has
shown that linguistic structure can emerge from pressures
induced by transmission and social coordination (Kirby,
Cornish & Smith, 2008; Caldwell & Smith, 2012; Verhoef,
2012; Kirby et al., 2014). Transmission of a language causes
signals to be filtered through the cognitive constraints of
new learners; only signals and structures that are easily
learned and remembered will be reproduced and passed on.
In addition, as people interact repeatedly, they have to align
their signals to communicate expressively (Garrod, Fay,
Lee, Oberlander & MacLeod, 2007; Fay, Garrod & Roberts,
2008; Fusaroli & Tylén, 2012; Caldwell & Smith, 2012).
Signals in this case originate as conventions on the basis of
social coordination and shared communication history.
Here, using methods that simulate language evolution in
the lab, we study the interaction between initial biases and
cultural evolution in the emergence of space-time mappings
in communication.

Methods
Inspired by work in which novel semiotic systems emerged
through interaction, we used a dyadic communication game
paradigm in which pairs of participants communicated

The time concepts to be communicated fell into three broad
categories: Duration (e.g. ‘day’), Sequence (e.g. ‘before’)
and Deictic (e.g. ‘tomorrow’), as shown in Table 1.
Meanings in one category often had closely related
meanings in others. Some meanings were distinguished only
by whether they involved a tenseless sequential relation
rather than being placed specifically in the past, present, or
future (e.g., ‘year before’ vs. ‘last year’). Others involved
specific durations (e.g., ‘day’) that are located relative to
now (e.g., ‘today’). While natural
languages have evolved ways to
encode these subtle distinctions, it is
not trivial to develop a novel system
of signals that is simple enough to
learn but complex enough to
communicate successfully about all
concepts.

Signals
Pairs of participants communicated
using a vertical bar on a touch screen
(Fig. 1), which recorded and replayed
brief signals. Signals consisted of
exactly 5 seconds of vertical
movements of a bubble within the
bar. The bubble moved continuously,
following the location of the
participant’s index finger. If the
finger was lifted during recording,
the bubble would stay in the same
location until the bar was touched
again or the 5 second limit was
Figure 1: Signalling
reached. A vertical signalling system
with a vertical bar
was chosen because English does not
on a touch screen
make conventional use of verticality
1
to describe time .

Procedure
Participants were seated in separate testing rooms. They sat
in front of touch screen computers that were connected
1

Cultural artifacts sometimes associate time with vertical location,
but experience with such artifacts is unlikely to generate strong,
reliable associations, since artifacts vary considerably in how they
map time to space. Calendars place earlier events above later ones.
Many internet blogs place earlier posts below the most recent ones.
Facebook combines both conventions: earlier Timeline posts are
below more recent ones, but earlier comments are placed above.

2616

through a local network. Communication was thus limited
to spatial signals displayed on the vertical touch bar.
The design of the interaction game followed Verhoef,
Roberts & Dingemanse (2015). On each trial, a participant
was either the ‘signaller’ or the ‘recipient’, switching roles
after each trial. Trials began when a meaning was displayed
on the signaller’s screen. The signaller then had to record a
signal for this meaning using the vertical bar. Once they
were happy with their signal, it was sent to the recipient,
who could replay the signal on their own screen. On the
basis of this signal, the recipient had to guess the intended
meaning; they indicated their selection by touching the
meaning on a panel that showed all meanings. Players
received feedback after each trial, including both the
intended target meaning given to the signaller, and the
guessed meaning selected by the recipient.
Each dyad completed four rounds of eighteen trials. Each
meaning appeared once per round in a random order, but
such that, over the course of the experiment, each
participant took the role of signaller for each meaning twice.

Results
Communicative success
We first asked whether participants could successfully
communicate about these temporal concepts using the
vertical signaling device. From the very first round,
accuracy was above chance and improved throughout the
experiment, increasing monotonically with each round: M1:
20.1%, M2: 21.5%, M3: 45.1%, M4: 47.9%. We analyzed
this improvement using a mixed-logit model of accuracy on
each trial, with a fixed effect of round, random effects of
Dyad and Meaning, and by-dyad and by-meaning random
intercepts and slopes for Round. The fixed effect of Round
was centered to reduce colinearity. This model confirmed
that accuracy increased significantly over the four rounds, β
= .699, SE= .167, p< .001. Thus, despite the novelty of the
task, participants quickly negotiated a set of signals that
allowed them to communicate successfully.

Duration and Spatial Extent
Participants could produce a wide range of possible signals,
and there was considerable between-dyad signal variability.
However, there were also consistent patterns across dyads.
Signals made consistent use of spatial length to
communicate relative temporal duration (Fig. 2). Signals for
‘second’, a relatively “short” duration, typically involved
very little motion and were restricted to the centre of the
bar. By contrast, ‘day’ was signalled using repeated vertical
movements that took up half the bar, while signals for ‘year’
typically covered the entire bar. Thus, longer durations
appeared to elicit signals that occupied more space along the
vertical axis. No dyads used the opposite strategy,
associating longer durations with shorter spatial extents. To
quantify this pattern, meanings with a definite duration were
grouped into three categories by temporal duration: Short,
which included ‘second’ and ‘now’; Day, which included

Figure 2: Duration signals used by three dyads. Each
signal is shown as a timeseries (y-axis = vertical location).
‘today’, ‘day after’, etc.; and Year (we excluded ‘before,’
‘after,’ ‘past,’ and ‘future’ from this analysis). For each
signal, we calculated the maximal space used (MSU) as the
distance between the highest and lowest points of the signal.
Was there a mapping between duration and spatial extent
that was consistent across dyads? We analyzed the MSU of
each signal using a linear mixed-effects model, with a fixed
effect of Temporal Duration, random effects of Dyad and
Meaning, and by-dyad random slopes for temporal extent.
As predicted, there was a systematic relation between
temporal duration and MSU, with long temporal durations
(e.g. ‘year’) associated with more space (full model
compared to reduced model without temporal extent, χ2 =
23.76, p < 0.0001).

More complex signal-meaning structure
If social interaction and coordination resulted in more
complex, systematic conventions, then we should be able to
observe patterns in the relations between signals and
meanings. Dyads typically settled on a consistent location or
movement direction to distinguish meanings that were in the
past from those in the future, but differed in how they
mapped past/future to location. About half the pairs used
downward movements for future and upward movements
for past, while other pairs reversed this mapping, using
upward movements for future. There was also evidence of
sequential patterning, in which dyads combined signals that
had been used previously (e.g., ‘before,’ ‘after,’ ‘year’) to
create new composite signals (e.g., ‘year before,’ ‘year
after’; Fig. 3). Note, however, that these new conventions
governing compositionality did not merely reproduce the
conventions of English, but sometimes reversed the
sequential order (e.g., ‘after’ followed by ‘year’).
These internal systematicities can be quantified by relating
meaning similarity to signal similarity. Following Kirby,
Cornish & Smith (2008), we calculated the Pearson’s
correlation between pairwise distances in the meaning space
and corresponding distances in the signal space. For each
dyad, we thus computed two measures for each pair of
signals: Signal Distance, which captured the similarity of

2617

since ‘year after’ is sequence but ‘next year’ is deictic.
Semantic Distance summed these three components, and is
thus similar to an edit distance between two meanings,
accounting for duration, order, and semantic class.
Compositional structure is indicated by a positive
correlation between pairwise Signal Distance (Δsignal)
between all possible pairs of signals in a system and
pairwise Semantic Distance (Δsemantic) between the
associated target meanings (Kirby et al., 2008). This was
calculated for each dyad and each round. Structure increased
over the course of dyads’ interactions (Fig. 4). A linear
mixed-effects model of this measure of compositionality,
with Round as a fixed effect and Dyad as a random effect,
showed an increase of 0.37 (S.E. +/-0.13) each round.
Comparison to a reduced model without a fixed effect of
Round confirmed that structure increased significantly (χ2 =
6.36, p < 0.05). To compare this observed structure to the
structure we might observe by chance, the actual systems
produced by dyads in our experiment were compared to
1000 simulated systems, in which the signal values were
created randomly. The dotted line in Figure 4 indicates the
upper limit of the 95% confidence interval for random data;
values above this show a significant amount of internal
structure. While most systems were not significantly
structured in the first round, by the final round almost all
systems had significantly more structure than chance.

Figure 3: Compositional structure in the signals of a dyad.
the signals, and Semantic Distance, which captured the
similarity of the associated target meanings.
First, the Signal Distance (Δsignal) combines the total
amount of space used (i.e., MSU) with the focal location of
the signal, or Location of Maximal Density (LMD). The
former, MSU, is critical because, as described above, this
was used consistently to communicate temporal duration.
The second, focal location, appeared to be used to contrast
past/future or before/after. This was calculated as the point
of maximal touch density, between 0 (bottom) and 1 (top).
Each signal was thus associated with two values, MSU
(total space) and LMD (focal location), and the Signal
Distance between two signals (s1, s2) was the Euclidian
distance between these two points:
Δsignal =

(𝐿𝑀𝐷!! − 𝐿𝑀𝐷!!

)!

+ (𝑀𝑆𝑈!! − 𝑀𝑆𝑈!!

Sensitivity to regularities in the semiotic system

)!

Second, the measure of Semantic Distance (Δsemantic)
between two meanings combined three aspects of semantic
difference: Duration (Δdur), Order (Δord), and Class (Δclass).
We calculated Duration Difference (Δdur) by ordering each
meaning by its temporal extent, from short or instantaneous
durations (‘now,’ ‘second’), to days (‘today’), to years
(‘year after’), to unlimited ranges (e.g., ‘past,’ ‘future’). For
instance, for ‘second’ and ‘next year,’ the pairwise Duration
Difference would be:

Participants quickly became adept (Accuracy in Round 4, M
= 48%; chance < 6%). This could be because they were
simply memorizing each signal-meaning pair, without
having internalized any of the structure documented above.
However, if participants were sensitive to the systematic use
of space to represent different aspects of time, then we
should be able to find evidence of this in their errors:
incorrect guesses should be semantically related to target
meanings.
To quantify the systematicities in participants’ errors, we

Δdur = |instant – year| = |1 – 3| = 2.
Order Difference (Δord) captured differences in relative
temporal order. Sequence and deictic meanings were
categorized by relative order: past/before < now <
future/after. We collapsed ‘past’ with ‘before’, and ‘future’
with ‘after,’ based on the finding that English speakers
associate these concepts with the same spatial locations
(Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012). If both meanings were
sequence or deictic, Order Difference was defined as along
this ordinal scale; otherwise, if either of the meanings was a
duration, Order Difference was defined as 0. For instance,
for ‘today’ and ‘next year,’ Order Difference would be:
Δord = |after/future – now| = |3 – 2| = 1.
Lastly, we defined pairwise Class Difference (Δclass) as 1
if the meanings belonged to different semantic classes (i.e.,
duration, sequence, deictic), and 0 if they belonged to the
same class. Thus, for ‘year after’ and ‘next year’, Δclass = 1,

2618

Figure 4: System internal structure (y-axis) increased
with social interaction. Each point represents a system
deployed in a particular round by one dyad.

Figure 5: Dyads were more successful overall if their
incorrect guesses were semantically related to the correct
target meaning. Each dot represents one round.
used our measure of Semantic Distance (Δsemantic), described
above, to compare incorrect guesses to correct target
meanings. If dyads gradually learned the conventions of
their emerging semiotic system (e.g., compositional
structure), then errors should become gradually more
systematic, with incorrect guesses becoming systematically
closer to the correct target over time.
Indeed, Semantic Distance between target meanings and
incorrect guesses decreased monotonically over the course
of the interaction: M1 = 3.13, M2 = 2.79, M3 = 2.75, M4 =
2.61. To analyze this effect, we used a mixed effects model
with a cumulative logit link function, since Semantic
Distance is an ordered, categorical variable. The full model
had a fixed effect of Round, random effects of Dyad and
Target Meaning, and random intercepts and slopes.
Semantic Distance shrank significantly as the game
progressed, b = -0.55, z = -4.43, p < .001. This full model
was better than a model without a fixed effect of Round,
likelihood ratio = 10.5, p = .001.
A reduction in Semantic Distance, moreover, was
accompanied by an increase in communicative success:
Dyads were significantly more likely to guess correctly
overall if their incorrect guesses were semantically closer to
the target meanings. According to a linear mixed-effects
model of mean accuracy in each round, with a random effect
of Dyad, communicative success increased as the mean
semantic distance shrank between incorrect guesses and
correct targets, b = -0.21, t = - 2.24, p = .033. In other
words, if a dyad’s incorrect guesses were generally closer to
the correct target meaning, then they also made more correct
guesses overall (see Fig. 5).

Discussion
We investigated the emergence of structured semiotic
systems for communicating about an entirely abstract
domain, time. Despite the novelty of the signalling device,
and the restricted range of possible signals, dyads
established successful systems. Signal-meaning structure

increased over time, with the emergence of systematic
mappings between space and time. These mappings were
often combined productively, suggesting compositionality.
And with this increased structure came increased
communicative success. Thus, structure emerged,
participants used this structure when guessing, and this
improved communication.
The presence of early, shared regularities and later,
idiosyncratic structure sheds light on the role of individual
cognitive biases, social coordination, and interaction history
on the emergence of systematic mappings between space
and time. The mapping between temporal duration and
spatial extent, for instance, was established early in the first
round and followed the same direction in all dyads
(short=small). These results suggest that participants had
shared, strong initial biases about the relation between
spatial extent and temporal duration, perhaps due to innate
intuitions, systematic polysemy in language, or systematic
conflation of length and duration in our lived experience
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Walsh, 2003; Winter, Marghetis,
& Matlock, 2015). In contrast, although almost every dyad
eventually began to use location to distinguish past from
future concepts, the specific strategy was more variable
across dyads. This suggests that participants lacked strong,
shared biases, and shared interaction history was thus more
critical here. This finding also confirmed that our American
participants did not have a strong initial bias for associating
location or direction with past/future. The emerging
structures of these semiotic systems reflect an interplay
between individual biases and social coordination. We
suspect similar dynamics were likely at work in the
emergence of space-time mappings in natural language.
This combination of variability and universality mirrors
regularities in human cognition and natural language. On the
one hand, evidence from non-human animals and child
development suggests that spatial extent and temporal
duration are tightly linked, perhaps innately (for a review:
Winter, Marghetis, & Matlock, 2015). On the other hand,
for concepts other than magnitudes, there is considerable
cross-cultural variability in how time and space are
intertwined. For instance, while English associates the
future with the space ahead of the body, the Aymara of
Chile reverse this mapping, associating past with the space
behind, and the Yupno of Papua New Guinea associate the
future with uphill (Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013). Thus, the
interaction between cognitive biases and social coordination
during our communication game is a microcosm of a larger
network of biases and pressures. These mechanisms must be
considered together to account for the mix of universality
and variability that we find around the world.
While the semiotic systems in our study began to capture
the structure of the meaning space, no fully systematized
language emerged. As we saw, some of the more similar
meanings in the set (e.g. “tomorrow” vs. “day after”) were
still confused in the later rounds. What would be needed for
these systems to develop ways to distinguish even these
very similar sequence and deictic concepts? Our hypothesis

2619

is that these early-emerged patterns will evolve into more
regular systems once they are transmitted across multiple
generations of interacting users. Iterated learning studies
have found increasing regularization when languages are
transmitted over generations (e.g. Kirby et al., 2008). When
a system is transmitted from generation to generation it
adapts to become more learnable and more structured. We
are currently conducting a follow-up study using iterated
communication (Tamariz et al, 2012; Verhoef et al., 2015).
How specific are these results to the domains of time and
space? On the one hand, space and time may have a
privileged relation, tightly linked in thought, language, and
gesture (Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013; Winter et al, 2015).
On the other hand, the domain of time is not alone in relying
on space for its conceptual and linguistic structure. Abstract
domains as varied as number and morality make systematic
use of spatial language (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). For
number, at least, there are also strong early biases to
associate numerical magnitude with spatial extent. The
interaction between cognitive biases and cultural processes
has been identified as an important drive in the emergence
of structured semiotic systems before. What the domain of
space and time contributes is a clear identifiable distinction
between parts of structure that appear to be more rooted in
strong shared biases and parts that result from cultural
evolution, all within one emerging system. These findings
are likely generalizable to other such domains.
This study is limited by the extensive linguistic
experience of the participants, who already had words in
their native language (English) for the meanings to be
communicated. This may have influenced their ability to
create a new semiotic system. Indeed, the association
between length and duration is reflected in English
polysemy (“long time”, “long stick”). However, as we saw,
much of the new structure (e.g., associations between
up/down and past/future) consisted of mappings that are
absent entirely from English. Future research may explore
the negotiation of novel semiotic systems for concepts that
lack associated lexical items.

Conclusion
To explore the link between individual-level behaviors and
population-level communication systems, consideration of
different mechanisms is needed (Beckner et al, 2009). Here,
we focused on the interaction between initial individual
biases and cultural processes and how these may contribute
to the emergence of space-time mappings. By foregrounding
the interplay between such mechanisms that operate on
disparate timescales, laboratory experiments can shed light
on the commonalities and variety found in space-time
mappings in languages around the world.

References
Beckner, C., Blythe, R., Bybee, J., Christiansen, M. H.,
Croft, W., Ellis, N. C., et al. (2009) Language is a
complex adaptive system. Language learning, 59, 1-26.

Caldwell, C. A., & Smith, K. (2012). Cultural evolution and
the perpetuation of arbitrary communicative conventions
in experimental microsocieties. PLoS ONE, 7, e43807.
Christiansen, M. H. & Chater, N. (2008). Language as
shaped by the brain. BBS, 31(5), 489–509.
Fay, N., Garrod., S., & Roberts, L. (2008). The Fitness and
Functionality of Culturally Evolved Communication
Systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B-Biological Sciences, 363, 3553-3561.
Fusaroli, R., & Tylén, K. (2012). Carving language for
social coordination: A dynamic approach. Interaction
Studies, 13, 103–123.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T.
(2007). Foundations of Representation: Where Might
Graphical Symbol Systems Come From? Cognitive
Science, 31(6), 961-987.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Haspelmath, M. (1997). From space to time. Munich &
Newcastle: Lincom Europa.
Hockett, C. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific
American, 203, 88–96.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. (2008) Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
PNAS. 105(31), 10681-10686
Kirby, S., Griffiths, T., & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated
learning and the evolution of language. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 28C, 108-114.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Núñez, R. E., & Cooperrider, K. (2013). The tangle of space
and time in human cognition. TiCS, 17, 220–229.
Scott-Phillips, T. & Kirby, S. (2010). Language evolution in
the laboratory. TiCS, 14(9), 411–417.
Steels, L. (1997). The synthetic modeling of language
origins. Evolution of communication, 1(1), 1–34.
Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., Roberts, S. & Kirby, S. (2012)
The effect of generation turnover and interlocutor
negotiation on linguistic structure. In Proceedings of
EVOLANG9. World Scientific, (pp. 555-556).
Theisen, C., Oberlander, J. & Kirby, S. (2010) Systematicity
and arbitrariness in novel communication systems.
Interaction Studies, 11(1): 14-32.
Verhoef, T. (2012) The origins of duality of patterning in
artificial whistled languages. Language and Cognition,
4(4), 357-380.
Verhoef, T., Roberts, S. G., Dingemanse, M. (2015)
Emergence of systematic iconicity: Transmission,
interaction and analogy. 37th Annual CogSci Conference
(pp. 2481-2486) Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: Common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. TiCS, 7, 483–488.
Winter, B., Marghetis, T., & Matlock, T. (2015). Of
magnitudes and metaphors. Cortex, 64, 209-224.

2620

