Conflict-based regulation of control in language production
Michael Freund (freund@jhu.edu)
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University,
1629 Thames Street, Suite 350, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA

Barry Gordon (bgordon@jhmi.edu)
Department of Neurology, Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University,
1629 Thames Street, Suite 350, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA

Nazbanou Nozari (nozari@jhu.edu)
Department of Neurology, Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University,
1629 Thames Street, Suite 350, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA

Abstract
Is language production dynamically regulated by cognitive
control? If so, how domain-general is this process? In two
experiments, we studied conflict adaptation, or conflict-driven
adjustments of control, in two paradigms: Picture-Word
Interference (PWI), which induces linguistic conflict, and
Prime-Probe (PP), which induces visuospatial conflict. Exp. 1
tested within-task conflict adaptation separately in PWI and
PP. Exp. 2 tested cross-task adaptation by alternating the two
tasks in a task-switching paradigm. We found reliable withintask conflict adaptation in both PWI and PP, but neither an
analysis of individual differences (Exp. 1), nor a direct
manipulation of between-task conflict (Exp. 2) revealed crosstask adaptation. We further report a robust 2-back within-task
adaptation in Exp. 2 to refute alternative accounts of null crosstask adaptation. These findings support models of dynamic,
top-down control in language production that posit at least
some degree of domain-specificity.
Keywords: language production; cognitive control; domaingenerality; conflict adaptation; picture-word interference

Introduction
Much research has shed light on the nature and levels of
representation in language production, but less has explored
how language production is controlled. A recent theory posits
that language production is monitored via mechanisms
similar to those that monitor other cognitive operations
(Nozari, Dell, and Schwartz, 2011). Electrophysiological and
neuroimaging studies support this claim by showing a similar
ERP negativity (the Error-related Negativity, ERN) as well
as common cortical regions involved in monitoring of
linguistic and non-linguistic tasks (e.g. Gauvin, De Baene,
Brass, & Hartsuiker, 2016; Piai, Roelofs, Acheson, &
Takashima, 2013; Riès, et al., 2011). More specifically, this
account proposes that the amount of conflict generated
between target and competing representations in the
production system signals the need for increased control
(which, when following an error, often manifests as error
detection), and the subsequently-recruited control helps
resolve this conflict (see also Yeung, Botvinick, & Cohen,
2004).

While Nozari et al.’s (2011) conflict-based account is
domain-general in the sense that it proposes conflict as a
signal that is monitored in both linguistic and non-linguistic
systems, it does not commit to a unitary neural or cognitive
system that monitors for conflict regardless of domain. In
fact, the authors provided evidence from computational
modeling and individuals with brain damage, showing that
the consequences of conflict detection (e.g. detecting errors)
are specific to the source of conflict: the amount of conflict
between lexical representations (e.g. cat and dog) only
predicted the ability to detect semantic errors, while the
amount of conflict between phonological representations
(e.g. /k/ and /d/) only predicted detection of phonological
errors. Importantly, increased conflict at the lexical level did
not lead to better detection of phonological errors and vice
versa. This specificity arises because each layer of the
production system generates conflict independently of other
layers and presumably of other cognitive systems, and it is
the internal dynamics of these conflict generators that
determine the strength of the conflict signal. Thus, the model
poses a domain-specific component to the monitoring
process. This notion of domain-specificity has been
supported by ERP studies showing that while detection of
both linguistic and non-linguistic errors lead to ERNs, their
magnitudes are not correlated between the two error types at
the level of individuals (e.g. Acheson & Hagoort, 2014).
Ultimately, detection of conflict serves a purpose beyond
signaling for errors—it helps regulate cognitive control to
resolve future conflict and optimize task performance. This
regulatory loop has been tested using the “conflict adaptation
paradigm” (e.g. Weissman, Egner, Hawks, & Link, 2015). In
a typical conflict adaptation paradigm, performance on the
current trial is evaluated as a function of the level of conflict
on the previous trial. The canonical finding is an interaction
between the amount of conflict on the current and previous
trials, such that performance is better on current incongruent
(high conflict) trials if they are preceded by an incongruent
compared to a congruent trial. For current congruent (low
conflict) trials, performance is better when preceded by
another low conflict rather than high conflict trial. The effect
is explained in terms of online regulation of cognitive control:
when facing an incongruent trial, the control system increases

1625

engagement by biasing processing away from the distractor.
Thus, the next incongruent trial will be responded to more
easily. This biasing works against congruent trials, where
distractors aid performance.
A conflict adaptation paradigm is ideal for testing whether
a cognitive system such as language production is subject to
online regulatory control via top-down processes. This was
tested as the first question of the current study. More
importantly, a task-switching version of the conflict
adaptation paradigm has been used to test whether increased
conflict in one domain helps with recruitment of control that
resolves conflict in another domain (e.g. Egner, 2008; Kan et
al., 2013). For example, Kan et al. (2013) interleaved trials
from the color-word Stroop task with those of a task in which
participants passively viewed a Necker cube (a perceptually
bistable figure), which can induce visuospatial conflict.
These authors showed that a high-conflict Necker cube trial
improved performance on subsequent incongruent buttonpress Stroop, and interpreted this finding as evidence for a
domain-general control system that encompasses verbal and
visuospatial domains. Other studies, however, have found no
evidence of cross-domain adaptation (Egner, Delano, &
Hirsch, 2007; Forster & Cho, 2014; Wühr, Duthoo, &
Notebaert, 2015).
Three methodological issues make reconciliation of these
contradicting findings difficult. First, some of the studies
employed factorial combinations of the two tasks (e.g. Stroop
and Simon), where each stimulus is simultaneously
congruent or incongruent with respect to each task.
Participants always perform Stroop, but the position of the
button could be congruent or incongruent with the location of
stimulus presentation (Simon). While this design avoids a
switch cost, it potentially dilutes the effect of conflict, as an
incongruent Simon is paired with a congruent Stroop in a
single trial. This dilution could lead to a weaker recruitment
of control and thus a weaker adaptation effect (Kan et al.,
2013). Second, some of these studies did not control for lowlevel learning and memory confounds that can obscure the
adaptation effect (see Schmidt, 2013 for a review). Finally,
all but one of these studies used non-verbal Stroop tasks with
arbitrary response mappings, which poses additional
demands on working memory. The one study that did use
verbal Stroop (Wühr et al., 2015) was designed for a different
purpose and had an imbalanced design (i.e. a ratio of 8:2 of
task A to task B) that is known to obscure the adaptation
effect (Freitas & Clark, 2015). Our design addresses these
issues.
The current study was designed to answer two questions:
(1) is language production subject to dynamic, top-down
regulation? (2) Does conflict in language production serve to
regulate performance in a non-linguistic task and vice versa?
Conflict adaptation in language production was tested in the
well-established Picture-Word Interference (PWI) paradigm
(e.g. Schriefers, Meyer, & Levelt, 1990), which avoids
arbitrary stimulus-response associations and allows for much
more stimulus variability than Stroop. Conflict adaptation in
a non-linguistic domain was tested using the visuospatial

Prime-Probe task (PP), which uses an optimal design to avoid
low-level learning and memory confounds and employs
meaningful response mappings (see Weissman et al., 2015).
Exp. 1 tested whether each task in isolation showed evidence
of adaptation. Finding adaptation in PWI would support
models that claim language production is regulated online via
top-down control.
The second question was tested in two ways. In Exp. 1, we
conducted an analysis of individual differences that
investigated the correlation between the size of conflict
adaptation in PWI and PP tasks. A positive and reliable
correlation would support a domain-general control process.
This test, however, is subject to limitations of a correlational
analysis (e.g. Redick et al., 2013). Thus, in Exp. 2 we directly
tested whether conflict in one task regulated control in the
other task, by using a task-switching adaptation paradigm.
We alternated PWI and PP trials and assessed the response to
conflict in one task as a function of conflict in the other. If
PWI shows conflict adaptation as a function of PP conflict
(and vice versa), we can conclude a domain-general process
of control regulation. The absence of cross-task adaptation
would support some level of domain-specificity in the control
system.
Finally, Exp. 2 was designed to allow us to test conflict
adaptation as a function of conflict on two trials prior (2back; e.g. Forster & Cho, 2014). Given the alternating nature
of the design, the 2-back conflict adaptation provides a
second test of within-task conflict adaptation. Importantly,
this test also ensured that any potential null effects in the
cross-task adaptation were not due to other confounds.
Collectively, the results of the two experiments inform us
about whether language production is subject to dynamic
regulation and whether a fully domain-general model or a
partially domain-specific model (e.g. Nozari et al., 2011) is
better supported by the evidence.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants. Forty-eight native English speakers recruited
from the Johns Hopkins University community (32 women;
mean age = 21.2 years) participated for payment. All
participants gave informed consent under a protocol
approved by the Institutional Review Board of Johns Hopkins
Neurology.
Materials. For the PWI task, a list of 120 target-distractor
word pairs was compiled to form the incongruent PWI
stimuli. Target and distractor words were semantically
related (e.g. target = bus; distractor = car; as suggested by
norms on Mechanical Turk), were matched in length and
frequency, and had minimal phonological overlap. Then, 120
300x300 pixel black-and-white line drawings corresponding
to each target word were selected from Google images. The
word (the distractor for incongruent and the target for
congruent stimuli) was overlaid in the center of each image

1626

in black uppercase 36 point Helvetica, to create 120
congruent and 120 incongruent stimuli. Four experimental
conditions (cC, iC, iI, cI; N = 60 in each) were constructed,
where lowercase “c” and “i” denote the congruent and
incongruent status of the previous trial respectively, and
capital “C” and “I”, the congruent and incongruent status of
the current trial. To avoid cumulative semantic interference
(e.g. Schnur, 2014) semantically-related pictures were spaced
by at least 12 unrelated items. Each stimulus appeared in all
four conditions across participants. Final stimuli comprised
two blocks of 120 trials, prepared in four different orders to
avoid systematic order effects.
For the PP task, the materials were identical to Weissman
et al. (2015), and consisted of the outlines (in black, on white
background) of large arrows (primes) and small arrows
(probes, or targets; 75% smaller than the large arrows)
pointing in the four cardinal directions. Similar to PWI, four
conditions (cC, iC, iI, cI; N = 96 in each) were constructed,
with congruent trials having primes and probes pointing in
the same directions, and incongruent trials in opposite
directions. Final stimuli comprised four blocks of 96 trials,
prepared in four different orders to avoid systematic order
effects.
Procedures. The experiment was run in E-Prime 2.0
software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).
Stimuli were displayed at the center of a 15 x 12 inch Dell
monitor approximately 25 inches in front of the participants.
Response times (RTs) for PWI were registered using an
Audio-Technica microphone connected to the E-Prime’s
SRBOX. Responses were also recorded digitally and
transcribed offline for the identification of errors. RTs for the
PP were registered using a Dell keyboard.
First, participants silently reviewed a slideshow containing
labeled images of all PWI targets in the experiment. Next,
they completed a 10-item practice block of the PWI
paradigm, followed by the two experimental blocks in
counterbalanced order. Each trial began with a centrally
presented fixation for 900 ms followed by a 50 ms blank
screen. Stimuli were then presented for 3000 ms or until a
response was registered. The next trial started after a 50 ms
blank screen.
The PP task was conducted after PWI. Following a 48-item
practice block, participants completed four blocks of 96 items
in counterbalanced order. PP trials consisted of the
presentation of a prime of either horizontal or vertical
orientation, followed by a probe oriented along the same
dimension. Participants indicated the direction of the target
by pressing one of the four arrows on the keyboard
corresponding to the correct direction, with index and middle
fingers of left and right hands.

Results
Figure 1 shows the conflict adaptation pattern in RTs and
errors for PWI and PP tasks. As can be seen, the pattern of
RTs and errors in both tasks is compatible with conflict

adaptation. Due to the small number of errors, statistical
analyses focused on the RT data.
PWI. Erroneous responses (5%), microphone problems
(2%), and trials following these errors (to avoid post-error
slowing effects; 7%) were excluded from the RT analysis.
RTs were log-transformed prior to analysis in order to better
approximate a Gaussian distribution and outliers (<1%) were
removed using QQ Plots (e.g. Schmidt & Weissman, 2015).
Data were analyzed using linear mixed-effect models in R
v3.2.3 with the lmerTest package (e.g. Schmidt & Weissman,
2015). Fixed-effect structures included the main effects of
previous-trial congruency, current-trial congruency, and their
interaction (i.e. the canonical test of conflict adaptation). For
random effect grouping factors of subject and item, structures
included random intercepts as well as random slopes of
previous-trial congruency, current-trial congruency, and their
interaction.

Figure 1: Conflict adaptation in RT and errors in PWI
(upper panel) and PP (lower panel). Each bar reflects the
subtraction of current congruent from current incongruent
(I−C; means of participant means ± SE). Conflict adaptation
predicts that this difference should be larger for the
previous-congruent (left bars) than the previous-incongruent
(right bars), a pattern reflected in all four diagrams.
Analysis of log-transformed RTs revealed significant
conflict adaptation through an interaction between previoustrial congruency and current-trial congruency (β = −0.005, t
= −2.0, p = 0.049). Post-hoc tests revealed a reliable effect on
current congruent trials: RT was slower on iC trials (M = 760,
SE = 4.34 ms) relative to cC (M = 743, SE = 5.21; β = 0.02,
t = 4.35, p < 0.001), but iI (M = 937, SE = 5.9 ms) and cI (M
= 930, SE = 4.89 ms) trials were not significantly different (β
= 0.004, t = 0.53, p = 0.60).
PP. Response errors and subsequent trials each accounted for
3% of the data and were excluded. Mixed-level models were
specified using procedures analogous to those used in PWI
analysis. Analysis of log-transformed RT revealed a robust
effect of conflict adaptation (β = −0.09, t = −9.98, p < 0.001),
replicating previous results (Weissman et al., 2015). Pairwise

1627

comparisons indicated that this adaptation effect emerged in
both current congruent trials, as a slowing of reaction time in
iC trials (M = 301, SE = 1.91 ms) relative to cC (M = 283,
SE = 2.1 ms; β = 0.06, t = 9.27, p < 0.001) and in current
incongruent trials, as a speeding of reaction time in iI trials
(M = 347, SE = 2.08 ms) relative to cI (M = 356, SE = 2.04
ms; β = −0.02, t = −4.54, p = 0.01).
Cross-task Correlation of Adaptation. To probe whether
the size of conflict adaptation in one task was predictable
from the size of adaptation in the other task, we conducted an
analysis of individual differences. Each participant’s
adaptation effect was calculated as (cI − cC) − (iI − iC), once
for RTs and once for errors. Adaptation size in one task was
not predictive of adaptation size in the other 1 (R = 0.06, p =
0.7).

Discussion
When tested in isolation, conflict adaptation was found in
both PWI and PP, demonstrating that, similar to spatial tasks,
language production is subject to dynamic, top-down
regulation. While both congruent and incongruent trials
showed the effect in PP, the effect was only reliable on the
congruent trials in PWI. This pattern is not uncommon in
adaptation studies (Duthoo et al., 2014; Kan et al., 2013;
Weissman et al., 2015), but could also reflect a lack of power
in detecting a reliable effect in post-hoc tests that use only
half of the materials. To address this issue, we doubled the
number of trials in Exp. 2.
Additionally, we found no correlation between the size of
conflict adaptation in PWI and PP at the level of individuals.
This could imply that the two tasks indeed use different
regulatory mechanisms, but could also reflect the problems
associated with using the correlational method. Internal
consistency is known to be low for effects calculated as
subtractions (e.g. Redick et al., 2013), and when internal
consistency of measures is low (as was the case here),
correlations between measures are unreliable. Exp. 2
addressed this problem by directly manipulating cross-task
conflict adaptation by interleaving the two tasks.

Experiment 2

necessitated by the PP design, in which four targets were
balanced across four conditions). The design of Exp. 1 was
changed in two ways: (1) we interleaved PWI and PP trials
within each experimental block in an alternating ABAB
pattern to minimize switch costs. (2) We duplicated the
number of blocks, so that the same PWI target appeared in all
four conditions within each participant in counter-balanced
order. This change was made to increase the power to detect
conflict adaptation in PWI, as well as in a potential cross-task
adaptation effect. Each PWI target occurred once before each
PP condition for each participant, and each PP condition
occurred equally often before each PWI target for each
participant. This design ensured that any item-specific effects
of PWI on PP or vice versa would be balanced between our
conditions of interest. This also led to a balanced design for
analyzing the 2-back conflict-adaptation. The final materials
consisted of four blocks, each containing 256 experimental
trials prepared in four different orders to avoid systematic
order effects.
Procedures. Procedures were similar to those used in Exp. 1.
Following the familiarization of PWI stimuli, participants
completed three practice blocks. The first was a 10-trial PWI
block, the second was a 48-trial PP block, and the third was
a 20-trial task-switching block. They then completed the four
experimental blocks in counterbalanced order.

Figure 2: Performance in PWI (upper) and in PP (lower)
as a function of previous task congruency. Graphs depict
means of participant means for RTs and error rates (± SE).
No evidence for conflict adaptation was found. PP showed a
reliable anti-adaptation effect.

Methods
Participants. Thirty-two native English speakers recruited
from the Johns Hopkins University community (24 women;
mean age = 24.8 years) participated for payment. None had
participated in Exp. 1.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows the results of cross-task conflict adaptation
for PWI (as a function of PP conflict; upper panel) and PP (as
a function of PWI; lower panel) on RTs and errors. Neither
pattern is compatible with cross-task conflict adaptation. The
effects on RTs were tested using similar mixed-level models

Materials. The same materials as Exp. 1 were used with a
minor addition: we created eight new PWI stimuli to bring
the number of PWI trials to a multiple of 16 (as was
1 To ensure that outliers did not influence these results, we also
calculated non-parametric correlations, which returned similar
results to the parametric test (Spearman’s rho = 0.06; P = 0.7).

1628

as Exp. 1 with maximally specified random-effects. Fifteen
and 11% of responses were excluded from the PWI and PP
respectively, due to errors, post-error status, microphone
malfunction, or outlier status.
Cross-task Adaptation. In PWI, the congruency of the
previous PP trial did not interact with the congruency of PWI
(β = 0.006, t = 0.89, p = 0.38). In PP, the congruency of the
previous PWI trial interacted significantly with the
congruency of PP (β = 0.02, t = 2.8, p = 0.03), but the
direction of this interaction is the opposite of what conflict
adaptation predicts, that is, congruent PWI trials (compared
to incongruent ones) caused slightly longer RTs on
subsequent congruent PP trials (cC: M = 316, SE = 3.24; iC:
M = 309, SE = 2.72, while incongruent PP RTs were similar
regardless of previous-trial conflict (iI: M = 383, SE = 2.96;
cI: M = 382, SE = 2.75).

2-back Within-task Adaptation. Within-task adaptation
was assessed with the interaction between 2-back congruency
and current-trial congruency. This interaction was significant
for both PWI (β = −0.01, t = −5.77, p < 0.001), and for PP (β
= −0.09, t = −5.96, p < 0.001). Moreover, post-hoc tests in
PWI revealed significant effects on both current congruent
trials (iC: M = 742, SE = 4.28; cC: M = 722, SE = 3.96; β =
0.04, t = 5.69, p < 0.001) and current incongruent trials (iI: M
= 896, SE = 4.68; cI: M = 919, SE = 4.61; β = −0.02, t =
−2.41, p = 0.02). The same was true for PP: both current
congruent (iC: M = 320, SE = 2.58; cC: M = 307, SE = 3.53;
β = 0.05, t = 4.84, p = 0.001) and current incongruent trials
(iI: M = 375, SE = 2.52; cI: M = 391, SE = 3.49; β = −0.04, t
= −3.69, p = 0.02) showed a reliable adaptation effect in the
predicted direction. These analyses refuted low power and
limitations of working memory as alternative explanations
for the absence of cross-task adaptation between PWI and PP.

General Discussion

Figure 3: Performance in PWI (upper) and PP (lower) as a
function of the n-2 trial congruency. Graphs depict means of
participant means for RTs and error rates (± SE). Robust
evidence for within-task conflict adaptation was found.
These results suggest that the ability to resolve PWI
conflict was not improved by recent experience of PP conflict
(and vice versa), in line with predictions of domainspecificity. But, two alternative hypotheses must first be
refuted: (1) the null effect may simply reflect the lack of
statistical power to detect a significant effect. (2) More
theoretically-interesting, is the possibility that interference
between task representations in working memory prevented
sustained activation of those representations from one trial to
the next (Braem, Abrahamse, Duthoo, & Notebaert, 2014).
The latter could mask the operation of a domain-general
regulatory loop due to excessive task demands. To address
these concerns, we examined higher-order sequence effects
in our data, namely adaptation as a function of conflict
occurring two trials before. Due to the ABAB task-switch
pattern, the 2-back trial would allow for assessment of
within-task conflict adaptation. If robust adaptation is found
in PWI and PP as a function of conflict on two trials before,
we can reject these alternative hypotheses.

Our first question was whether language production is
regulated online through similar mechanisms that regulate
non-linguistic tasks. The sequence effects observed in PWI
in both experiments took the classic pattern of adaptation,
demonstrating dynamic, top-down regulation of language
production. While often discussed as “conflict adaptation,”
alternative accounts have been proposed (e.g. Lamers &
Roelofs, 2011). Importantly though, all accounts agree that
the pattern reflects online adjustments of top-down control
based on the bottom-up requirements of the task.
We then asked whether the conflict-monitoring and control
loop is shared between language production and a task that
does not involve linguistic representations (Exp. 2). The most
general view of conflict monitoring would predict that an
increase in conflict in any domain would lead to increased
control in other domains. To this end, we first replicated
conflict adaptation using the spatial PP task (Weissman et al.,
2015), then tested whether interleaving trials from PWI and
this task would lead to cross-task conflict adaptation. We
found no evidence in support of adaptation in one task as a
function of conflict in the other, in either analysis of
individual differences (Exp. 1) or in cross-task adaptation
(Exp. 2). Demonstration of robust 2-back (within-task)
adaptation in both PWI and PP allowed us to reject low
statistical power and limitations of working memory as
alternative explanations for the null cross-task adaptation
effect. Thus, the current results convincingly refute a fully
domain-general control system in which control is insensitive
to the nature of conflict.
Our results are in agreement with several other studies also
concluding at least some specificity in the process of control
regulation (Egner et al., 2007; Forster & Cho, 2014; Wühr et
al., 2015). One prominent exception is Kan et al. (2013),
which found evidence for cross-task adaptation in buttonpress Stroop and passive viewing of the Necker cube. One
difference between Kan et al.’s study and the current study is
response modality (button press vs. oral), but since Stroop
and PWI conflict most likely occur at a similar level (Piai,

1629

Roelofs, & Schriefers, 2014), this difference is unlikely to
have caused the discrepancy.
A more salient difference is the level of forced engagement
of control in the spatial tasks. In the PP task, a speeded
response is required on each trial, forcing the spatial control
system to engage in all participants. But, viewing a Necker
cube does not force engagement of control. Incidentally,
cross-task adaptation in Kan et al. (2013) was only found in
a subset of participants (N = 14) with a large number of
switches between the two percepts of the cube, while no
effect was found in other participants with fewer switches. It
is difficult to determine what characteristic of the participants
(e.g. motivation, effort, etc.) led to cross-task adaptation, but
the effect was limited to a select group.
The current findings, along with prior evidence for
domain-specificity in the monitoring-control system (Egner
et al., 2007; Forster & Cho, 2014; Wühr et al., 2015), invite
caution in interpreting the results of Kan et al. (2013) as
strong support for a fully domain-general control system.
Instead, our findings favor accounts that posit at least some
level of domain-specificity, even when allowing for
contribution of domain-general processes (e.g. Nozari et al.,
2011; Gauvin et al., 2016).

References
Acheson, D., & Hagoort, P. (2014). Twisting tongues to test
for conflict-monitoring in speech production. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 8.
Barr, D., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. (2013). Random
effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep
it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68(3), 255–
278.
Braem, S., Abrahamse, E., Duthoo, W., & Notebaert, W.
(2014). What determines the specificity of conflict
adaptation? A review, critical analysis, and proposed
synthesis. Frontiers in psychology, 5.
Duthoo, W., Abrahamse, E., Braem, S., Boehler, C., &
Notebaert, W. (2014). The Congruency Sequence Effect
3.0: A Critical Test of Conflict Adaptation: e110462. PLoS
One, 9(10), e110462.
Egner, T. (2008). Multiple conflict-driven control
mechanisms in the human brain. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12(10), 374–380.
Egner, T., Delano, M., & Hirsch, J. (2007). Separate conflictspecific cognitive control mechanisms in the human brain.
NeuroImage, 35(2), 940–948.
Freitas, A., & Clark, S. (2015). Generality and specificity in
cognitive control: conflict adaptation within and across
selective-attention tasks but not across selective-attention
and Simon tasks. Psychological research, 79(1), 143-162.
Forster, S., & Cho, R. (2014). Context Specificity of PostError and Post-Conflict Cognitive Control Adjustments.
PLoS ONE, 9(3).
Gauvin, H., De Baene, W., Brass, M., & Hartsuiker, R.
(2016). Conflict monitoring in speech processing: An
fMRI study of error detection in speech production and
perception. NeuroImage, 126, 96–105.

Kan, I., Teubner-Rhodes, S., Drummey, A., Nutile, L.,
Krupa, L., & Novick, J. (2013). To adapt or not to adapt:
The question of domain-general cognitive control.
Cognition, 129(3), 637–651.
Lamers, M., & Roelofs, A. (2011). Attentional control
adjustments in Eriksen and Stroop task performance can be
independent of response conflict. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 64(6), 1056-1081.
Nozari, N., Dell, G., & Schwartz, M. (2011). Is
comprehension necessary for error detection? A conflictbased account of monitoring in speech production.
Cognitive Psychology, 63(1), 1–33.
Piai, V., Roelofs, A., Acheson, D., & Takashima, A. (2013).
Attention for speaking: domain-general control from the
anterior cingulate cortex in spoken word production.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7.
Piai, V., Roelofs, A., & Schriefers, H. (2014). Locus of
semantic interference in picture naming: Evidence from
dual-task performance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40(1),
147.
Redick, T., Shipstead, Z., Harrison, T., Hicks, K., Fried, D.,
Hambrick, D., ... & Engle, R. (2013). No evidence of
intelligence improvement after working memory training:
a randomized, placebo-controlled study. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 142(2), 359.
Riès, S., Janssen, N., Dufau, S., Alario, F., & Burle, B.
(2011). General-purpose monitoring during speech
production. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(6),
1419–1436.
Schmidt, J. (2013). Questioning conflict adaptation:
proportion congruent and Gratton effects reconsidered.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20(4), 615–630.
Schmidt, J., & Weissman, D. (2015). Congruency sequence
effects and previous response times: conflict adaptation or
temporal learning? Psychological Research.
Schnur, T. (2014). The persistence of cumulative semantic
interference during naming. Journal of Memory and
Language, 75, 27–44.
Schriefers, H., Meyer, A., & Levelt, W. (1990). Exploring the
time course of lexical access in language production:
Picture-word interference studies. Journal of memory and
language, 29(1), 86-102.
Weissman, D., Egner, T., Hawks, Z., & Link, J. (2015). The
congruency sequence effect emerges when the distracter
precedes the target. Acta Psychologica, 156, 8-21.
Wühr, P., Duthoo, W., & Notebaert, W. (2015). Generalizing
attentional control across dimensions and tasks: Evidence
from transfer of proportion-congruent effects. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68(4),
779–801.
Yeung, N., Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (2004). The neural
basis of error detection: conflict monitoring and the errorrelated negativity. Psychological review, 111(4), 931.

1630

