Consistency and credibility in legal reasoning: A Bayesian network approach
Saoirse Connor Desai1 (saoirse.connor-desai@city.ac.uk), Stian Reimers1 (stian.reimers.1@city.ac.uk),
David Lagnado2 (d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk), 1Psychology, City University, London, EC1R 0JD UK, 2Experimental
Psychology, UCL,
London, WC1H 0AP UK
Abstract

appear more likely to lie under oath and/or more likely to
have committed the alleged crime (Lloyd-Bostock, 2000;
Wissler & Saks, 1985).
Empirical studies of how people reason about legal
evidence show that people reason about different types of
evidence in complex ways (Pennington & Hastie, 1992).
How people represent the credibility of witnesses and
reliability of their evidence is important for understanding
legal reasoning and determining what inferences are
permissible given these representations. This paper presents
a framework for analyzing the integration of testimonies
whose sources vary in credibility and reliability. This
approach builds on extant descriptive accounts of juror
decision-making and employs the Bayesian network
framework to model inferences about witness credibility and
evidential reliability. Though intended mainly as a
normative and prescriptive model of evidential reasoning
this paper will show that the framework also captures
peoples’ ability to draw probabilistic conclusions from
interrelated bodies of evidence.

Witness credibility is important for establishing testimonial value.
The story model posits that people construct narratives from
evidence but does not explain how credibility is assessed. Formal
approaches use Bayesian networks (BN) to represent legal
evidence. Recent empirical work suggests people might also
reason using qualitative causal networks. In two studies,
participants read a realistic trial transcript and judge guilt and
witness credibility. Study 1 varied testimonial consistency and
defendant character. Guilt and credibility assessments were
affected by consistency but not prior convictions. Study 2
constructed a BN to represent consistency issues. Individual
parameter estimates were elicited for the corresponding BN to
compute posterior predictions for guilt and credibility. The BN
provided a good model for overall and individual guilt and
credibility ratings. These results suggest people construct causal
models of the evidence and consider witness credibility. The BN
approach is a promising direction for future research in legal
reasoning.
Keywords: Legal reasoning, Evidential reasoning, Bayesian
networks, Evidence, Reliability, Credibility

Introduction

Legal reasoning The story model of juror decision making
is the leading cognitive model of how people reason about
legal evidence (Pennington and Hastie, 1986, 1992).
According to the story model, jurors organize and interpret
the mass of evidence presented during the trial by
constructing narrative explanations from the evidence. They
use causal schemas – such as scripts of typical human
thought and behavior – to fill gaps in the evidence and
develop a causal ‘situation’ model of what transpired. The
story ultimately adopted is the one that provides the best
‘fit’ for the evidence and is most plausible, complete and
coherent.
The story model has achieved broad empirical support
and has considerably advanced understanding of juror
decision making. It qualitatively describes the constructive
nature of people’s explanations and emphasizes the
interdependencies between trial evidence. One weakness of
the story model is that it does not model how people reason
about the credibility and reliability of different types of
evidence and how this affects their story evaluation. In
addition to reasoning about the crime itself, jurors (or factfinders in general) must also reason about how well the
evidence presented supports the arguments put forward by
the prosecution and defence (i.e., what is the evidential
support for a given story).
A further shortcoming of the story model is that it rejects
the idea that people reason probabilistically. Even if people
cannot estimate the precise probabilities of events, they can

Evaluating witness credibility is crucial to establishing the
inferential value of testimony in criminal trials. The juror’s
task is to assess the truthfulness, reliability, and accuracy of
the witnesses whose evidence is at issue, and evaluate how
well the evidence supports the claims of the prosecution and
defence in order to reach a verdict (Crown Court Bench
Book, 2010). Lawyers can use many strategies to undermine
the credibility of witnesses thereby challenging the
reliability of their evidence. Drawing out testimonial
inconsistencies under cross-examination, introducing
contradictory testimony by other witnesses, disclosing
information of previous convictions considered relevant to
issues of credibility, and evidence relevant to a witness’
reputation or truthfulness, are all important methods of
assessing credibility (Spellman & Tenney, 2010). Legal
reasoning studies confirm that people perceive inconsistent
prosecution eyewitnesses as less accurate and credible,
reducing the likelihood of conviction and increasing
defendant credibility (Berman & Cutler, 1996; Berman,
Cutler & Narby, 1995). Further, guilt judgments are
sensitive to whether evidence contradicting an alibi shows a
witness has been intentionally deceptive or made a genuine
error (Lagnado & Harvey, 2008; Lagnado, 2011; Lagnado,
Fenton & Neil, 2013). Mock juror studies also show that
disclosing similar previous convictions affect judgments
about the testifying defendant’s credibility making them

626

often draw probabilistic conclusions from the evidence they
hear in the courtroom (e.g. the presence of suspect at crime
scene increases the likelihood that he is guilty).
Causal models of witness evidence are constructed in a
similar way to causal models of the crime itself. Causal
schemas about the nature of witnesses are used to draw
inferences about the motivations and beliefs of people
giving testimony; these inferences can also modify beliefs
about the crime. Without a way to represent the relations
between different types of evidence and how they interact it
is difficult to elicit and test individual causal models
constructed from the evidence. Further, without a formal
analysis of how evidence items relate it is impossible to
ascertain which inferences are permissible given the
evidence.

qualitative causal networks (Lagnado, 2011; Lagnado,
Fenton & Neil, 2013).

Study 1
Study 1 investigates some of the conditions under which
witness credibility can be challenged, and how this impacts
assessment of guilt. In particular, we explored how the
consistency of the victim’s testimony with other key pieces
of evidence, and evidence disclosing the defendant’s
previous convictions, affected judgments of guilt and
credibility, and how these factors combine and interact.
Real trial dialogue (R v. Capel) including crossexamination of witnesses was used to accentuate issues of
credibility. These factors were specifically chosen because:
1) they address issues of witness credibility and reliability,
and were raised in closing arguments and judge’s directions,
and 2) could be subtly manipulated in order to maintain
ecological validity. The stimulus case has been used in
previous mock jury research and typically results in a hung
jury.
There were two main aims of Study 1: to establish
whether people’s judgments were affected by changes in
witness consistency and whether it is feasible to model these
changes using causal schemas of witness credibility and
reliability. Given the findings of previous legal decision
making research it was hypothesized: 1) that consistent
testimony would result in greater belief in guilt, weaken the
credibility of the defendant, and bolster the credibility of the
victim, relative to inconsistent testimony, and 2) that
disclosing a similar prior conviction to the current crime
would result in greater belief in guilt, weaken the
defendant’s credibility and bolster the victim’s credibility.

Modeling evidence reliability The Bayesian network
framework provides a potential solution to this problem.
This approach makes it possible to test people’s causal
models of the reliability and credibility of witnesses giving
testimony and compare inferences to a normative standard.
Bayesian networks (BN) use graph structures to represent
the probabilistic relations between hypotheses and uncertain
evidence, showing what inferences are rationally permitted
from a given model of the evidence (Pearl, 1988, 2000).
BNs have proved valuable for modeling relations in bodies
of uncertain evidence in forensic contexts (e.g., Garbolino &
Taroni, 2002) and have also been applied to legal contexts
(Fenton et al., 2014; Lagnado et al., 2013). Fenton et al.,
(2014) claim that fact-finders (e.g., jurors) could use smallscale causal building blocks (legal idioms corresponding to
common inference schemas) that make it possible to reason
about complex and interrelated bodies of evidence. These
idioms are customized to the legal context, capture generic
patterns of legal inference, and can be re-used to make
large-scale inferential problems tractable.
The basic idiom consists of the relation between a
hypothesis and an item of evidence, corresponding to the
relation between the legal proposition that needs to be
proved (e.g., the defendant is guilty) and the submitted
evidence. The evidence idiom can be supplemented with a
reliability idiom enabling the modeling of potential causes
of an evidence report that are vital for establishing the
reliability of evidence from human sources. Reliability can
be separated into issues of: i) observational sensitivity, ii)
objectivity, and iii) veracity (Schum, 1994). The graph can
be used to represent the fact that these different causes serve
to explain the evidence. For example, the victim’s testimony
in an assault case depends both on whether or not the
defendant assaulted the victim, and whether or not the
victim is trustworthy and/or inaccurate. These factors are
directly related to assessments of witness credibility.
Graphical models have been successfully applied to
research in a number of areas of causal cognition (for
review see Danks, 2014). Recent empirical work also
suggests that people may reason about testimonies using

Methods
Participants 126 U.S. and U.K. based participants (64
female, mean±SD age 29.12±10.80, randomly split between
six conditions) were recruited from https://www.prolific.ac/
a site for recruiting participants for web-based studies, and
were paid £2.40($3.49). Average completion time was 31
minutes.
Design, materials and procedure We investigated the
impact of prior character (three levels: no prior, different
prior, similar prior) and inconsistency (two levels:
consistent, inconsistent) on evidential reliability.
Participants read one of six versions of a realistic courtroom
transcript. Consistency was manipulated by varying the
consistency of key pieces of testimony with the victim’s
testimony (i.e., consistent or inconsistent). Prior conviction
evidence was manipulated by substituting evidence of good
character (i.e., revealing the fact that the defendant has no
prior convictions) with evidence of bad character (i.e.,
disclosure of a prior conviction).
The transcript was divided into 20 evidential statements
and judgments about the probability of guilt and credibility
of the victim and defendant were elicited after each

627

statement. All participants saw the evidential statements in
the following order: the charge and plea, the prosecution’s
opening statement, direct and cross-examinations of three
prosecution and three defence witnesses, prosecution and
defence closing arguments, the judge’s summary, and
instructions on the law. They read through the evidential
statements at their own pace and updated their ratings the
probability of guilt, and credibility of the victim and
defendant, in light of each statement. After reading all the
evidence, participants indicated their final judgments about
guilt, and credibility of the victim and defendant.

resulted in significantly diminished belief in guilt relative to
a consistent testimony (M = 72.20, SD = 26.49), F (1, 98) =
12.35, p < .001.

Table 1: Manipulation of Key Pieces of Evidence
Victim's
Friend

Police
Officer

Inconsistent

8 pints

Consistent

4 pints

JD drunk
JD not
drunk

Figure 1: Mean final probability of guilt judgments (±
standard error) for each condition of the study. Range from
0 -100.

Bartender
Saw push

Defendant credibility The defendant was considered to be
more credible after an inconsistent testimony (M = 44.69,
SD = 22.77), than a consistent one (M = 35.55, SD = 21.40),
but this difference was not significant, F (1, 98) = 1.94, p =
.17. Defendant credibility ratings were in the expected
direction, defendant appeared more credible when he had no
prior convictions (M = 43.59, SD = 21.20), than a prior
conviction for a different (M = 39.40, SD = 26.37), or
similar (M = 37.26, SD = 19.17) crime, but the differences
were not significant, F (2, 98) = .08, p = .92.

No push

Case summary and consistency manipulations The
defendant (SC) is charged with assaulting the victim (JD),
and pleads not guilty. The prosecution argues that SC
punched JD in an unprovoked attack and calls three
witnesses: JD, JD’s friend, and a police officer who was at
the scene. The defence argues that the punch was an act of
self-defence; JD was drunk, aggressive and had pushed SC
first. The defence also calls three witnesses: SC, SC’s
friend, and a local bartender who was also at the scene. JD
makes three important claims in his testimony: 1) that he
had only had 4 pints to drink, 2) he was not drunk, and 3) he
did not provoke SC first. In the inconsistent version, these
claims were contradicted by three witnesses: JD’s friend
testifies that JD drank 8 pints, the police officer testifies that
JD appeared drunk, and the bartender states he saw JD push
SC first. In the consistent version, these claims were not
contradicted: JD’s friend corroborates JD’s claim that he
only drank 4 pints; the police officer states that JD did not
appear drunk, and the bartender does not mention that he
saw the push (see Table 1). Inconsistencies between the
victim and subsequent testimonies regarding these key
issues could make the victim appear likely to have lied
about the incident because he was drunk and aggressive or
show that his recollection of events was inaccurate.

Figure 2: Mean victim credibility judgments at the end of
the trial (± standard error) for each condition of the study.
Range from 0 -100.
Victim credibility Mean victim credibility judgments
across the six conditions are shown in Fig. 2. The victim
appeared more credible when the defendant had a prior
conviction for a similar (M = 53.50, SD = 21.40), than
different (M = 51.81, SD = 26.60) offence, and rated least
credible when the defendant had no prior convictions (M =
50.12, SD = 22.26), but these differences were not
significant, F (2, 98) = .14, p = .87. The victim appeared
more credible when evidence was consistent with his
testimony (M = 61.81, SD = 22.31) than when it was
inconsistent (M = 41.52, SD = 19.93), F (1, 98) = 16.97, p <
.001. Evidence relating to the defendant’s credibility did not
influence the perceived credibility of the victim.

Study 1: Results
Probability of guilt Mean probability of guilt judgments
given at the end of the trial, across all six conditions, are
shown in Fig. 1. A prior conviction for a similar crime (M =
67.60, SD = 28.27) increased belief in guilt relative to prior
conviction for a different crime (M = 65.16, SD = 29.95), or
no prior convictions (M = 64.32, SD =27.58), but these
differences were not significant F (2, 98) = 1.90, p = .16.
Introducing key pieces of evidence that were inconsistent
with the victim’s testimony (M = 58.98, SD = 29.03)

628

Inconsistencies between the victim’s testimony evidence
mentioned in other witness testimonies substantially
undermined the victim’s credibility.

on the probability that JD was drunk, is a credible witness,
and provoked SC. Individual parameter estimates were
elicited for the corresponding CPT in the BN in order to
compute posterior predictions for each of the
aforementioned probabilities.

100
90

Methods

80

Participants 137 participants (65 female, mean ±SD age
32.52 ± 10.67, randomly split between two conditions) were
recruited from https://www.prolific.ac/ and completed the
study for monetary compensation (£2.40/$3.49). The
average completion time was 25 minutes.

Mean Probability of Guilt

70
60
50
40
30

Similar
Similar
Similar
Similar
Similar
Similar
Similar

20
10

Design, materials and procedure We manipulated the
consistency of key evidence with the victim’s testimony in
the same way as Study 1 (Table 1), thus the materials were
identical except character evidence (i.e., defendant prior
convictions not manipulated). In Study 2 we also took
participants’ estimates of the conditional probabilities to
complete individual parameterizations of the BN model,
after they provided posterior guilt and credibility ratings.
These questions were asked in the following format:

No Prior / Consistent
Different / Consistent
Similar / Consistent
No Prior / Inconsistent
Different / Inconsistent
Similar / Inconsistent
No Prior / Consistent

ct
er

H

i rs

ce

ra

C

ha

ef
en

D

D

AB

lf
Se

D

D
fri
en
Fr
d
ie
nd
X
Ba X
r
Ba ma
rm n
a
Pr nXX
os
C
lo
s
D
ef e
C
lo
se

D
ef
t
ef
tX
X
D

PC
PC
XX

C

ha

rg

O
pe e
ni
ng
Vi
ct
i
Vi m
ct
im
XX
Fr
ie
nd
Fr
ie
nd
XX

0

Statements across the trial

Figure 3: Mean probability of judgments across statements
for each condition of in Study 1. Range from 0 -100. The
graph shows that the bartender testimony is important for
establishing probability of guilt.

a) Suppose that JD had drunk 8 pints.
What’s the probability that the policeman would testify
that JD appeared drunk/did not appear drunk?
b) Suppose that JD had drunk 4 pints.
What’s the probability that the policeman would testify
that JD appeared drunk/did not appear drunk?

Discussion
The results suggest that people draw inferences about
witness credibility from subtle inconsistencies between their
testimony and the testimonies of other witnesses, which in
turn influence their beliefs in the defendant’s guilt. In this
study, there was no clear impact of evidence aimed at
undermining the defendant’s character, and therefore his
credibility, or inferences about guilt. One reason that
disclosing prior convictions had no impact on guilt in the
current study could be due to methodological differences
between current and previous studies. In previous studies
participants read descriptions of hypothetical cases in which
prior conviction evidence outweighed other evidence in the
case. In this study prior conviction information was
balanced with other issues in the case, which could account
for the lack of difference between conditions. These results
suggest that people do more than constructing a plausible
story from the evidence; also factoring in the consistency
and credibility of witnesses. The key effect of consistency
on people’s judgments of credibility and guilt was replicated
in a laboratory study too.

Conditional probability ratings were indicated using a slider
ranging from 0 = exceptionally unlikely to 100 = virtually
certain, and pre-set to the midpoint. Participants in both
Experimental groups completed these questions, however,
questions that related to specific details in the testimonies of
the three witnesses were adapted according to condition
(e.g., JD appeared OR JD did not appear drunk).

Study 2
Study 2 was designed to replicate the consistency effect and
to examine whether the idiom-based model provided a good
fit for participants’ guilt and credibility ratings. We
constructed a BN to represent the key pieces of testimony
that were varied in Study 1 (see Fig. 4). The BN captures
the impact of the three witness testimonies that were varied

Figure 4: A Bayesian network of R v. Capel using
evidence- reliability idiom to capture JD credibility.

629

Study 2: Results

of JD’s credibility, and higher ratings of SC’s credibility,
and vice versa.
The predictions derived from the BN were supported by
the data. The model predictions for provoke were negatively
correlated with observed posterior probability of guilt
ratings, r = -.37, p < .001, R2 = .14. Provoke was also
negatively correlated with victim credibility ratings r = -.40,
p < .001, R2 = .16, and positively correlated with defendant
credibility ratings r = .56, p < .001, R2 = .45. The model
predictions for JD credible were also positively correlated
with ratings for guilt and JD credibility and negatively
correlated with SC credibility. The model prediction for JD
drunk was positively correlated with SC credibility but was
not correlated with observed posteriors for guilt or JD
credibility.
These results show that the BN model provides a good fit
for individual participants (despite the simplicity of the BN
model). The model predicts that the more credible JD is
considered to be, the more unlikely it was that he was drunk
and provoked SC, and this was upheld by the data. The R2
value shows that the posterior predictions for provoke share
some of the variability in the guilt and credibility
judgments. The relatively small R2 is most likely due to
noisy participant’ judgments, because we used a rich set of
materials, and because provoke was used as a proxy for
guilt. In addition, we only predicted the impact of
consistency of selected pieces of evidence with the victim’s
testimony and did not model other elements of the case.
Other factors were identified in closing arguments (e.g., the
force of the punch) that might have been equally important
for reasoning about the defendant’s guilt. Nonetheless, the
results of Study 2 demonstrate that it is possible to construct
causal BNs to represent evidence that includes critical
aspects of witness credibility, and then compare the model
predictions with actual inferences.

Observed posterior probability judgments After
considering all the evidence, a consistent testimony resulted
in greater belief in guilt (M = 73.87, SD = 27.42) than an
inconsistent testimony (M = 68.34, SD = 29.13), but this
difference was not significant, t (135) = -1.41, p > .05.
When key pieces of evidence were inconsistent with the
victim’s testimony (M = 44.67, SD = 24.19), the defendant
appeared more credible than when evidence was consistent
(M = 35.58, SD = 22.98), t (135) = 2.52, p < .05. The victim
was also considered less credible after an inconsistent
testimony (M = 50.14, SD = 22.78) than a consistent one (M
= 64.58, SD = 24.83), t (135) = -3.55, p < .001. The results
almost replicate the effect of consistency in Study 1 and
were in the same direction. However, observed posterior
guilt judgments showed an overall stronger tendency toward
guilt than in Study 1, which could be explained by variation
in people’s prior expectations and assumptions about
criminal proceedings or defendants in general.
Modeling participants’ inferences using the BN To
test the BN model more formally, we analyzed model
predictions using the conditional probabilities provided by
participants. The conditional probabilities concerned key
issues relating to the reliability of JD’s testimony (shown in
Table 1)1.
First, participants’ mean probability judgments were used
to parameterize separate graphs for each condition. The
posteriors generated by the model showed that the
probability JD was drunk was higher for the inconsistent
(.79) than the consistent condition (.24), likewise the
probability that JD provoked SC was higher for the
inconsistent (.77) than the consistent (.17) condition, and the
probability that JD is a credible witness was lower for the
inconsistent (.42) than consistent condition (.70). This
shows that the BN provided a good model for participants’
judgments of guilt and credibility. The discrepancy between
the predicted probabilities estimates and observed posterior
probability judgments also suggest that participants are
reasoning about factors other than consistency.
To examine whether the BN captured participants’
judgments at an individual level, we used each participants’
unique conditional probabilities to parameterize the BN. We
then used this model to compute posteriors for JD
credibility, the probability JD provoked SC, and the
probability JD was drunk, and compared these model
predictions with participants’ actual posterior judgments of
guilt and credibility. Observed posterior judgments of guilt
and credibility were correlated with the model posterior
prediction for the probability that JD provoked SC. In this
instance, the model prediction for ‘JD Provoke’ served as a
proxy for the probability of guilt. More precisely, a higher
posterior probability that JD provoked SC, would be
associated with lower observed guilt ratings, lower ratings

1

General Discussion
The studies reported in this paper examined how the
consistency of testimony affects inferences about witness
credibility and judgments of guilt in a realistic legal
reasoning task. Our results suggest two main conclusions.
Firstly, that the consistency between key pieces of evidence
and the victim’s testimony, as identified in closing
arguments, affect judgments about witness credibility and
the degree of belief in the defendant’s guilt. More
specifically, belief in guilt was lower when key pieces of
evidence mentioned in the testimonies of subsequent
witnesses was inconsistent with details given in the victim’s
testimony. These inconsistencies damaged the credibility of
victim and strengthened the credibility of the defendant.
Secondly, the pattern predicted by the BN model captured
qualitative patterns of inference displayed by participants at
a general and individual level. In the consistent version of
the case, participants thought the victim was credible,
unlikely to be drunk, and unlikely to have provoked the
defendant. Inconsistent statements lead to the opposite

A prior of drunk =.50 was used for all the modeling.

630

pattern, the victim appeared less credible, more likely to be
drunk and more likely to have provoked the defendant.
Study 2 provides direct support for the reliability model
described earlier.
The results of this study strengthen the claim that people’s
reasoning is sensitive to interrelations between testimony,
credibility, and reliability that are predicted by the
qualitative aspects of Bayesian network models. The BN
captures people’s intuitions that credibility is related to
whether or not we think the victim’s testimony is caused by
the fact that he was indeed assaulted as he claimed or that he
was drunk and provoked the defendant into a fight. It is
therefore possible to model the strength of the links between
the different items of evidence using the Bayesian network
supplemented with legal idioms.
These results complement the story model and show that
in addition to constructing a causal model of the crime
people also construct causal models of the witnesses giving
evidence and this affects their story evaluation. The results
show that people do more than construct a plausible story to
explain the evidence, but also take into account issues of
credibility and reliability, such as the consistency of
testimony. These results suggest that it is possible to extend
the story model to include issues relating to credibility and
reliability of evidence (Lagnado et al., 2013). In fact, these
results strengthen Pennington and Hastie’s claim that
evidential reasoning is not a straightforward updating
process as has been proposed by belief-adjustment models
(Hogarth & Einhorn, 1992). This methodology fits with
previous Bayesian approaches to modeling belief updating
(e.g., Hahn & Harris, 2009) and by using Bayesian networks
adds a richer structural account of people’s reasoning.
The findings reported in this paper demonstrate that it is
possible to model testimony integration using BNs. One
potential shortcoming of the approach used here is that we
used the model posterior probability for whether the victim
provoked the defendant as a proxy for inferences about
guilt. This could explain why the correlations between the
model predictions and the observed posterior judgments
were not stronger. Another reason that the model was not
better able to capture people’s inferences is that we only
modeled some of the evidence in the case. More
specifically, the BN focused on issues relating to the
victim’s testimony and did not include critical evidence
relating to the defendant’s testimony (e.g., the defendant
was seen running away after the assault). Furthermore, the
observed posterior judgments showed that consistency also
influenced perceptions of the defendant’s credibility, which
was also not included in the BN. The BN model could
readily be extended to include these factors.

network-like structures to reason about evidence it is still
necessary to develop a fuller psychological model of how
people represent hypotheses and reason about uncertain
evidence. Building upon the story model, and the insight
that people use causal representations and inference, is a
promising direction for further research.

Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Cheryl Thomas who provided the
transcript used in these studies, and Jacob de Zoete who
assisted with modeling the data.

References
Berman, G. L., & Cutler, B. L. (1996). Effects of inconsistencies
in eyewitness testimony on mock-juror decision making. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 81 (2), 170.
Berman, G. L., Narby, D. J., & Cutler, B. L. (1995). Effects of
inconsistent eyewitness statements on mock-jurors' evaluations of
the eyewitness, perceptions of defendant culpability and
verdicts. Law and Human Behavior, 19 (1), 79.
Danks, D. (2014). Unifying the mind: Cognitive representations
as graphical models. MIT Press.
Fenton, N., Neil, M., & Lagnado, D. A. (2013). A general
structure for legal arguments about evidence using Bayesian
networks. Cognitive science, 37(1), 61-102.
Garbolino, P., & Taroni, F. (2002). Evaluation of scientific
evidence using Bayesian networks. Forensic Science
International, 125(2), 149-155.
Harris, A. J., & Hahn, U. (2009). Bayesian rationality in
evaluating multiple testimonies: Incorporating the role of
coherence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 35(5), 1366.
Hogarth, R. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1992). Order effects in belief
updating: The belief-adjustment model. Cognitive psychology,
24(1), 1-55.
Judicial Studies Board (2010). Crown Court Bench Book:
Directing the Jury, London, UK
Lagnado, D. (2011). Thinking about Evidence. In Proceedings
of the British Academy, 171, 183-223.
Lagnado, D. A., Fenton, N., & Neil, M. (2013). Legal idioms: a
framework
for
evidential
reasoning. Argument
&
Computation, 4(1), 46-63.
Lagnado, D. A., & Harvey, N. (2008). The impact of discredited
evidence. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 15(6), 1166-1173.
Pearl, J. (1988), Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems,
Palo Alto, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality. New York: Cambridge University
Press (2nd edition).
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1986). Evidence evaluation in
complex decision making. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51(2), 242.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1992). Explaining the evidence:
Tests of the Story Model for juror decision making. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 62(2), 189.
Schum, D.A. (1994), The Evidential Foundations of
Probabilistic Reasoning, Northwestern University Press.
Spellman, B. A., & Tenney, E. R. (2010). Credible testimony in
and out of court. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 17(2), 168-173.

Conclusions
In sum, this research shows that it is possible to model legal
arguments using the BN framework and that this approach
describes the qualitative patterns of inference exhibited in
legal reasoning. Although it appears that people use

631

