Context-dependent Processes and Engagement in Reading Literature
Miho Fuyama (miho02@sj9.so-net.ne.jp)
Graduate School of Media and Governance, Keio University
5322 Endo, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-0882, Japan

Shohei Hidaka (shhidaka@jaist.ac.jp)
School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
across different contextual structures of stories. Miall (1988)
analyzed the relationship between readers’ ratings and reading times of introductory sections of novels. He analyzed
readers’ responses by assuming two stages in the reading process. The first was called the “registration stage”, in which
readers form expectations about the likely meaning of narrative, and the second was called the “interpretation stage”,
in which readers use their expectations to comprehend the
narrative. Miall supposed shifts between these stages would
depend on both the context of the story and a reader’s background knowledge. From his analysis, he concluded that the
reading process form a cycle and repeatedly shifts between
the two stages in the reading of a narrative.
Taking as a working hypothesis that there are separable
stages in reading processes correlated to the contextual structure, as suggested by Miall, we investigate the stage-like
changes involved in reading an entire story, not just an introductory portion.
In this study, we investigate the “modes” of reading processes, which are supposedly correlated to the context of the
story or a reader’s background knowledge. The “modes” are
operationally defined by statistical properties of reading times
of each unit of text. We will further discuss these modes in
the next section.

Abstract
It does not do the act of reading literature any justice to describe it as simply processing text to acquire information or
knowledge. We enjoy reading stories, we become absorbed in
them. Our absorption into stories is related to their contextual
structure. We develop a statistical method for the analysis of
reading time distributions which allows us to assess the context of a story rather than merely its text. This analysis detects
statistically distinct distributions of reading times, with each
distribution representing a distinct process or mode of reading. Our experiments support the hypothesis that the temporal
change in these modes of reading are related to changes in the
degrees of absorption of the subjects and also in the contextual
structure of the stories being read.
Keywords: Reading; Literary; Reading-time analysis

Introduction
Reading literature is not just merely the process of attaching literal meaning to prose, but it also evokes various experiences and can affect the way the reader views the world
around them. Past studies have argued the potential effects of
literary works, and tried to empirically measure their effects
on readers (Miall & Kuiken, 1994; Iser, 1976, and see also
Miall 1999 for discussion about literariness).
In particular, it has been empirically shown that the context
or story plot has substantial impact on readers (Miall, 1988;
Rapp & Gerrig, 2006). This finding is related to an earlier
argument by Aristotelis (Kassel, 1965). The present study
follows this line of research, and investigates the effects of
context by analyzing temporal changes of readers’ responses
in reading.
In past studies, hypothetical constructs such as story grammar or script, which readers supposedly process while reading, were employed to capture the contextual structures of
stories (Thorndyke, 1977; Beaugrande, 1982). Introducing the concepts of story grammar and script, these studies
claimed that narratives have their own internal structure like
a grammar but at the discourse level, and these structures
can be expressed as combinations of elements such as setting, theme, characters, or goals. However, using such frameworks allows us to analyze only limited classes of stereotypical stories, such as folk tales(Miall, 1989; Beaugrande, 1982).
These limitations are due to the inflexibility of the constructed
frameworks. There have been other approaches to capture
the contextual structure of stories but none of them has yet
offered a satisfactory description.
In the present study, rather than assuming a specific story
grammar, we focus on temporal changes in reading process

Statistical analysis of reading time
We assume the reading processes is composed of several
qualitatively distinct subprocesses, and we call such a subprocess reading mode. The question is, given reading data,
how we can infer the number of reading modes reflected in
the data? In previous studies about short texts and more rapid
processes, differences in reading time alone have been interpreted as reflection of two qualitatively distinct processes
(Miall, 1988; Gernsbacher, 1997). However, reading time
may vary depending on multiple factors like frequency, familiarity, and the lengths of words (Inhoff & Rayner, 1986;
White, 2008). We cannot, therefore, naively interpret reading
time alone as an indicator of multiple reading modes.
This observation motivates the development of a new technique for the analysis of reading time. The analysis we
present as an alternative is based on a statistical theory of processing time (Hidaka, 2013). In this theory, the presence of
multiple different modes of processing can be detected by the
statistical distribution of the processing time. If the reading

283

Figure 2: (top) if one type of reading mode is repeated across
multiple pages, it would result in a gamma distribution.
(bottom) if both two types of reading modes, A and B, take
place across different pages, it would result in a mixture of
two gamma distributions.

Figure 1: Three hypothetical processing modes, A, B, and C,
which have different numbers of subprocesses with different
average rates. In each mode, all the subprocesses run in the
serial order, and its reading time follows a gamma distribution. Mode A: six subprocesses, each takes short time on average, Mode B: two subprocesses, each takes long time, and
Mode C: two subprocesses, each takes short time. The average of both Mode A and B is the same, but their distributions
(on the right hand side of the figure) are different.

tirely possible that their preoccupation could appear as distinct reading modes in our statistical analysis. To prevent the
detection of such false modes, it would be valuable to have
a measure of reading engagement independent from reading
time. We could then test the results of our statistical analysis
based on their correlation with that measure.
Since the analytic technique we will use is statistical in nature, it requires relatively large datasets in order to produce
meaningful results. To this end, and although this is not typical of existing studies of reading, we use entire novels as the
texts in our experiments.
Given the burden that reading such long texts places on the
subjects of our experiments, our first experiment consisted of
only one subject – Miho Fuyama, the first author of this paper.
She is an avid reader, which suggests that she is generally
easily engaged in reading as an activity. In Experiment 1,
we studied her reading time and the degree of engagement in
reading, in order to empirically establish the validity of our
analysis and test whether her reading process has a single or
multiple reading modes.
Having validated our statistical analysis, we adopted it in
our second experiment to a cross sectional study of multiple subjects. In Experiment 2, we asked ten subjects to read
a short novel. This experiment was designed to evaluate
whether our findings from Experiment 1 hold in general. We
also evaluated changes in reading modes could be related to
the semantic structure of the text itself. To do so, we analyze the consistency of the dynamics governing the change
of reading modes across subjects and treat the consistent dynamics as text-specific semantic effects in reading.

process consisted of n subprocesses with the same constant
processing rate over time, and finished only when all these
subprocesses have finished, the reading time would follow a
gamma distribution with shape parameter n. If, on the other
hand, the reading process consisted of one subprocess with
process rate t k as a function of the process time t, then the
process finished when at least one subprocess has finished,
reading time would follow a Weibull distribution with shape
parameter k.
This statistical analysis allows us to distinguish processes
which have a same average speed of processes but have different number of subprocesses (Figure 1, A and B), and to distinguish processes which have same number of subprocesses
but have different average speed of processes (Figure 1, B
and C). This subprocess estimation gives an advantage over
the previous studies analyzing differences in the reading time
alone.
We adopt this statistical account of processing time in evaluating the number of reading modes based on reading time. If
each observation in a reading time dataset follows essentially
the same distribution as the others, we would treat this as an
indicator of a single reading mode. If, on the other hand, the
data set appears to have been generated by sampling from a
mixture of distributions, we treat it as an indicator of multiple reading modes (Figure 2). Each dataset in question is
composed of observations about a single subject. This technique therefore removes overall reading speed as a factor in
the analysis.

Experiment 1
The first author was the sole subject of several high-load reading tasks. We asked her to read 20 Japanese novels. Each
session took one day including breaks. The set of samples
from these 20 sessions of 20 novels was submitted to statistical analysis using the scheme described in the previous section, and we estimated the statistical distribution of her reading time for each two pages. For two of the novels (novels 17
and 18 in Table 1), she evaluated her degrees of absorption

Approach
When reading, one is generally also engaged in many other
processes – eye movements, posture management, etc. If
one were only lightly engaged in reading and more heavily
preoccupied with a number of these other activities, it is en-

284

Table 1: The novels read in Experiment 1.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Title (Abbreviated)
Shikisai
Kamisama
Nameraka
Tenchi
Chinmoku
Hikari
Kuchi
Mizuumi
Kogoeru
Self-Reference
Shi no izumi
Kisetsu no kioku
Eien no deguchi
Hokanaranu hito he
Shorou tomurai dou
Kodoku no utagoe
Neko
Ruto 225
Yasashii uttae
Burahuman

Author
H. Murakami
H. Mori
H. Kawakami
T. Ubukata
Y. Ogawa
S. Miura
M. Banto
B. Yashimoto
A. Shino
T. Enjo
H, Minagawa
K. Hosaka
E. Mori
K. Shiraishi
N. Kyogoku
A, Tendo
Y. Ogawa
C. Fujino
Y. Ogawa
Y. Ogawa

Page length
370
314
189
474
308
297
309
206
401
308
427
316
313
295
498
312
359
282
260
146

Figure 3: The hazard function for the sample (dots) and for
the estimated probability distributions (lines) of reading time.

Analysis

The subject was the first author, Miho Fuyama, who was 30
years old when the experiment was conducted. She is a native
Japanese speaker, is a regular reader, and has normal vision.

From the videos, we transcribed the reading time for each
pair of pages. These reading times were measured as the
lengths of time between page turns, excluding time spent on
break. The statistical analysis is performed on these transcribed reading times. We analyzed the aggregate of the data
gathered across all the sessions of the experiment in order to
increase the statistical power of our analysis.
In our analysis, we fitted mixtures of exponential distributions, those of Weibull distributions, and those of gamma distributions to the aggregate data. For each mixture distribution,
ranging from 1 to 5 components, we estimated the parameters
by maximizing likelihood. As these statistical models have
different numbers of parameters, we chose the model with
the smallest Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (Schwarz,
1978) as the one which best explains the data.

Material

Results and discussion

We used 20 Japanese novels, which the first author read for
the first time in this experiment. The titles, authors, and page
lengths of books are listed in Table 1. We selected as texts
books written by authors who have won Japan’s prestigious
literature prizes, such as the Naoki Prize or Akutagawa Prize.

We found that a mixture of two gamma distributions provides
the best fit to the aggregate data amongst all the distributions considered. Figure 3 illustrates the differences between
these various classes of distributions in explaining our data.
It shows the hazard function H(t) of the page-turn interval t.
The hazard function H(t) is the probability (density) to finish
reading on condition of the reading being unfinited unitl t.
Weibull, gamma and exponential distributions show qualitatively different hazard curves.
The exponential distribution, with a constant hazard function, did not fit the data well in Figure 3 (BIC = 29421.71).
Likewise, the Weibull distribution has large deviation from
the data at the tails of distribution (t < 30 and 140 < t) (BIC
= 26146.06). The single gamma distribution fits better than
the exponential and Weibull distributions (BIC = 25722.64),
but the mixture of two gamma distributions provides the best
fit (BIC = 25655.29). In addition, mixtures of three gamma
distributions (BIC = 25677.24) or more did not provide better
fits than the two-component gamma distribution.
Figure 4 shows the probability density function of empirical reading intervals and the estimated probability density
function, which is a mixture of two gamma distributions.
One subcomponent, Distribution 1, has shape 13.80 and scale
4.24. The other subcomponent, Distribution 2, has shape 7.58

each two pages as an indicator of her engagement to reading.
Specifically we asked her how absorbed she was in reading
every pair of pages in these novels. These absorption ratings
were used to validate the statistical analysis.

Participant

Procedure
In each session of the experiment, the subject was asked to
read a novel. Each session lasted several hours (including
breaks), but was completed in one day. The subject reported
her degrees of absorption for every two pages read in novels
number 17 and 18. These reports were made approximately
100 days after the reading sessions. Her degree of absorption was measured on a five-level scale – “extremely bored”,
“bored”, “normal”, “absorbed”, and “deeply absorbed”. This
scale was coded using the numbers −2, −1, 0, 1, and 2 respectively for each of the states. As the experiment required her
to focus on and to become absorbed in such long texts, the
subject was allowed to perform her readings at her home in
order to minimize her tension. She was also allowed to have
breaks whenever she wanted. The breaks were typically 5 to
15 minutes long, but there were also several hour-long lunch
breaks. While reading, she sat at her desk and was videotaped
with two small web cameras.

285

Figure 4: Sample (dots) and estimated (solid) probability distribution of reading time. The two curves under the fitting
curve shows subcomponents of the gamma mixture distribution.

Figure 5: Page-based temporal profile of the statistical property (shape parameter) of reading time and the absorption ratings of the case No.17.
text, and the scale parameter can be interpreted simply as inverse of reading speed. Taking this theory into account, we
conclude that the two modes estimated in this analysis are
likely to represent a fast reading mode (Distribution 1) with a
larger number of subprocesses and a slow reading mode (Distribution 2) with a smaller number of subprocesses.

and scale 10.67. This result suggests that the subject shows of
two distinct modes in her reading, with each mode involving
different reading subprocesses.
Correlation to reading engagement We now address the
question of whether the two distinct modes identified in our
analysis are actually reflective of the text being read. In order
to test this, we analyzed the correlation between the temporal
change in mode and the degree of absorption reported by the
reader. We obtained the reader’s post-hoc report on engagement for each two pages of the books No. 17 and 18.
Taking the book No. 17 as a representative case, Figure 5
shows the temporal profile of the weighted-average of shape
parameters (black dots) and the reader’s degrees of absorption
(red dots). The weights was given by the mixture of the two
gamma distributions for each reading time of two pages. The
corresponding moving average of the two over 5 data points
are shown as black and red line, respectively.
We performed correlation analysis for a pair of the estimated shape parameters and the degrees of absorption. For
the book No. 17 across 141 pairs of pages, we had correlation -0.284 (p < 0.001). For the book No. 18 across 118 pairs
of pages, we had correlation -0.283 (p < 0.01).
In order to eliminate the possible effects of the number of
letters, we additionally performed regression analysis on the
book No. 17 with both the degrees of absorption and the number of letters as predictors. The results shown in the Table 2.
The degree of absorption was significant variable as well as
the number of letters to explain shape (both p <0.001). In
sum, these analyses suggest that the temporal changes in the
modes identified from our reading time analysis (Figure 5)
does indeed reflect changes in reading engagement.
(Intercept)
Absorption
Letters

Estimate
15.318
-0.515
-0.004

Std. Error
0.803
0.134
0.001

t value
19.07
-3.88
-4.94

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, our statistical analysis detected two different modes of behavior in the reading data generated by the
experiment. We further showed that the change in mode over
time had a statistically significant correlation to the degree of
absorption with the text reported by the subject. Our goal of
Experiment 2 is to establish whether or not these findings are
consistent across multiple subjects and, if so, to identify the
factors involved with the reading modes detected in Experiment 1.
In order to meet these goals, we design a short experiment
for multiple subjects. In our second experiment, we asked
different subjects to read a short novel or a introductory part
of long novel but kept the rest of the procedure the same as it
was in No.17 and No.18 of Experiment 1. Specifically, subjects were asked to read these short text, and then they were
asked to report their degrees of absorption for each two pages.
The novel itself took less than an hour to read.
By analyzing their degrees of absorption, we evaluate
the cross-experiment consistency, whether basic patterns in
readers in the two experiments were consistent. We expect
this analysis would reveal the significant factor of the reading modes, either/ both individual reading strategy or/ and
the contextual structure of each novel. If the reading modes
vary across readers but not within each reader, it would suggest that the reading modes depend on the readers’ strategies.
While, if the reading modes show similar time course in reading the same text across different readers, it would suggest
that the reading modes depend on the context of each novel.

Pr(>|t|)
<0.001**
<0.001**
<0.001**

Table 2: Summary of multi-regression analysis with data of
“Neko”.

Participants
In Experiment 2, we employed ten participants, five male
and five female undergraduate and graduate students at Keio
University. Most of these subjects were not regular readers.

Remember that the shape parameter can be interpreted as
the number of subprocesses involved in processing a given

286

show those of “Chinmoku”. We found the within-novel similarity in the shape parameter profile across pages: The readers
of “Kino” showed similar U-shape profiles in common, and
those of “ Chinmoku Hakubutsukan” did similar flat profiles
in common.
We performed correlation analysis on all the pairs of the
subjects in order to test whether the readers of the same novel
showed correlated temporal profiles of the shape parameters.
The average correlation across all the reader pairs of “Kino”
was 0.67 (from 0.46 to 0.87, p < 0.02 for every pair of readers), and that of “Chinmoku” was 0.51 (from 0.05 to 0.86,
p < 0.05 for 23 out of 36 paris of readers). Thus, this result
suggests that each novel showed the effects on the readingmode profiles, with which the readers showed similar profiles, while individual reader showed little effects on them.
To analyze the factors on the reading times for each story,
we performed a regression analysis on the shape parameters
across readers and pair of pages with the degree of absorption
and the number of letters as the predictors. The estimated
regression coefficients and related statistics are summarized
in Table 3. For the novel “Kino” on the top of Table 3, both
absorption ratings (p < 0.05) and the number of letters (p <
0.001) were significant. For the novel “Chinmoku” on the
bottom of Table 3, only the number of letters was significant
(p < 0.001), but not the absorption ratings (p = 0.404).

Figure 6: The page-based temporal profile of the estimated
shape parameters for each subject. Top panels: “Kino”, bottom ones: “Chinmoku”.

Procedure
Each participant went through two reading sessions in random order. The procedure of each session was the same except for the text and the environment in which the reading
took place. During each session, the participants read a 49page-long short story “Kino” or 39-page-long introductory
part of the story “Chinmoku Hakubutsukan” (“Chimoku” in
short). Right after the reading session, the participant was
asked to report their degrees of absorption in the same scale
as Experiment 1 for each two pages. Five participants read
the short story at first, the other five participants read the long
introductory part at first. The participant took part again with
more than two week interval, and read another text. The short
story they read was “Kino” authored by Haruki Murakami.
Another text is the introductory part of “Chinmoku” written
by Yoko Ogawa. As the introductory partof the second book
was chosen, it includes little change of context.

Kino
(Intercept)
Absorption
Letters
Chinmoku
(Intercept)
Absorption
Letters

Analysis
For consistent comparison, we analyzed the aggregate of
the reading time data across subjects by fitting to it a twocomponent mixture of gamma distributions. We fixed the
class of distributions, instead of identifying it from data. This
is due to the small sample size of our data at this point. Each
participant provides reading time data for only 23 or 18 pairs
of pages, and it did not sufficient statistical power to be conclusive even as its aggregation across subjects. Thus, we employed the statistical distribution estimated in Experiment 1.

Estimate
9.430
-0.0023
0.0001
Estimate
9.4501
0.0008
0.0001

Std. Error
0.012
0.001
<0.001
Std. Error
0.007
0.001
<0.001

t value
773.26
-2.04
7.06
t value
1327.48
0.84
6.40

Pr(>|t|)
<0.001**
0.042*
<0.001**
Pr(>|t|)
<0.001**
0.404
<0.001**

Table 3: Summary of the regression analysis on the data of
“Kino” and “Chinmoku”. The single and double asterisk indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively.

Discussion
The results above suggests that there is the novel-specific effect on the statistical properties of reading time, which we
can interpret mode switching profiles of reading process. As
the page-based temporal profiles within the same novel were
similar, it suggests that the contextual structure of each novel
has major impact on switching of the reading modes. In addition, the temporal profiles could be interpreted as reflection
of the semantic structure of each novel.
According to Miall’s theory, a full novel is expected involved with both formation and exploitation of anticipation.
Consistently with this theory, we found U-shaped patterns in
reading mode switching for “Kino” with its full story, but we
found flat patterns in for the introductory fraction of “Chinmoku”, which indicated no clear distinct modes. This finding, no clear modes in reading an introductory part, is not
well consistent with Miall’s theory, but we interpret this that
an introductory part of a full novel is likely to include only
the formation of anticipation.

Results
The data of two sessions were excluded from the analysis
due to the the readers’ irregular reading back and forth many
times. This makes the completed dataset of 18 sessions in
total.
Each panel of Figure 6 shows the page-based temporal profile of the modes estimated from reading time. In each panel,
a dot shows estimated shape parameter for each reading time
data point, and the line indicates its moving average.
The result shown in Figure 6 exhibit inter-subject consistency in temporal changes in reading modes. Each panel in
Figure 6 shows the estimated shape parameter for each reader.
The top panels show those of “Kino”, and the bottom ones

287

The regression analyses are consistent with this interpretation. The regression analysis of the novel “Kino”, but not of
“Chinmoku”, showed a similar trend with that of the novel
No. 17 analyzed in Experiment 1– for both cases, the absorption rating was significant predictor of the shape parameter.
What was common between the novel “Kino” and No. 17 in
Experiment 1, and different from “Chinmoku”? Two novels,
which both showed the significant effect of absorption, were
used as their full story, but the one, which did not show it,
was used as its introductory part. Thus, one possible interpretation is that the full stories, which are supposed to have
contextual coherence from the introduction to the end, may
be related to temporal changes of the reading modes and the
degree of absorption.
In sum, these findings could be treated as a supportive evidence that the temporal profiles in reading distributions relfect context-dependent reading modes.

has little knowledge on the story, as also discussed in (Miall,
1988), and they need to build knowledge on the characters
and stage where they play their roles. At the part approaching
to the end, this story has a “twist”, which is unexpected for
most of readers. This is another place, in which the reader
need to rebuild their knowledge on the story. Therefore, with
these two parts at the beginning and end, well-predictable part
in between them is considered to make the U-shaped temporal
profiled in the reading time distributions.

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Dr. Neeraj Kashyap for his proofreading of this manuscript. This study was supported by Keio
University Doctorate Student Grant-in-Aid Program, Mori
Grants, and Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research B KAKENHI No. 23300099.

References

General Discussion

Beaugrande, R. D. (1982). the story of grammars and the
grammar of stories. Jornal of Pragmatics, 6, 383–422.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1997). Two Decades of Structure Building. Discourse processes, 23(3), 265–304.
Hidaka, S. (2013). A computational model associating learning process, word attributes, and age of acquisition. PLOS
ONE, 8(10), e76242.
Inhoff, A. W., & Rayner, K. (1986). Parafoveal word processing during eye fixations in reading: Effects of word
frequency. Perception & psychophysics, 40(6), 431–439.
Iser, W. (1976). Der Akt des Lesens: Theorie ästhetischer
Wirkung. München: Wilhelm Fink.
Kassel, R. (1965). Aristotelis de arte poetica liber. Oxford
University Press.
Miall, D. S. (1988). Affect and Narrative: A Model of Response to Stories. Poetics, 17, 259–272.
Miall, D. S. (1989). Beyond the schema given: Affective
comprehension of literary narratives. Cognition and Emotion, 3(1), 55–78.
Miall, D. S., & Kuiken, D. (1994). Beyond Text Theory:
Understanding Literary Response. Discourse Processes,
17(3), 337–352.
Rapp, D. N., & Gerrig, R. J. (2006). Predilections for narrative outcomes: The impact of story contexts and reader
preferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 54(1), 54–
67.
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the Dimension of a Model.
The Annals of Statistics, 6(2), 461–464.
Thorndyke, P. W. (1977). Cognitive structures in comprehension and memory of narrative discourse. Cognitive Psychology, 9(1), 77–110.
White, S. J. (2008). Eye movement control during reading: Effects of word frequency and orthographic familiarity. Journal of experimental psychology: Human perception and performance, 34(1), 205–223.

Reading is an essentially mental and subjective experience.
Its cognitive underpinnings have been difficult to characterize directly, and reading time is a major tool for drawing inferences about the underlying cognitive mechanism behind
reading. This study offers a new approach to the analysis
of reading time, an approach capable of identifying different
modes of reading behavior from reading time data.
In Experiment 1, we collected an analyzed reading time
data generated by a single subject reading several full novels in a natural situation. We observed significant correlation
between subject’s report of her engagement in reading and
her reading modes inferred from the estimated reading time
distribution. This experiment has three major implications:
1. In contrast to conventional studies on controlled, short
readings, it is perhaps the first study on involving reading
entire books in a more natural situation.
2. It establishes a new analytical technique for reading time
data by associating the estimated modes with the subject’s
engagement in reading.
3. It provides a support evidence that there are at least two distinctive reading modes depended on the contexts in reading
of whole novels.
In Experiment 2, we once again observed two distinct
reading modes, and found that the mode switches across different subjects reading the same story were consistent with
each other. This suggests that, to a large extent, the reading modes are dictated by the contextual structure of the text
being read. This interpretation is also supported by the the
regression analyses.
What is the contextual structure? We hypothesize that it
is related to the predictability of the story. Perhaps, each
of which we found as two reading modes can be called lowand high- predictability mode. Considering with reading of
“Kino”, the major shifts between two modes took place at the
beginning and end of the story. At the beginning, any reader

288

