Cultural Evolution Across Domains: Language, Technology and Art
Monica Tamariz (monicatamariz@gmail.com)
Psychology, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK

Simon Kirby (simon@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Jon Carr (j.w.carr@ed.ac.uk)
Centre for Language Evolution,
The University of Edinburgh, 3 Charles Street,
Edinburgh EH9 1AD, UK

Abstract

& Smith, 2014), technology (Rogers, 2003; Fleming &
Sorenson, 2001; Mesoudi et al., 2013), the economy
(Nelson & Winters, 1982; Hodgson, 2004), social and
political systems (Fukuyama, 2011; Gintis & van Shaik,
2013) and art (Haddon, 1914; Morris-Kay, 2012), among
others. These and other studies indicate that culture is not a
monolithic, homogeneous phenomenon and that the relevant
cognitive mechanism --innovation to generate diversity and
imitation to preserve the developments of past generations
(Tomasello, 1996; Lewis & Laland 2012)-- interact in
different ways with the functions prevalent in distinct
cultural domains. A model comparing how cognitive biases
interact the functions of culture has not been formulated.
The present study represents the first attempt at
understanding the diversity and complexity of human
culture by comparing directly how cultural evolutionary
processes unfold across domains. We investigate whether
evolutionary mechanisms like inheritance, innovation and
adaptation vary across three domains with very different
cultural functions: language, technology and art.

The social and cognitive mechanisms of cultural evolution
have been studied in detail for different domains: language,
technology, the economy, art, etc. However, a model that
incorporates the function of a cultural tradition and that is
able to compare evolutionary dynamics across cultural
domains has not been formulated. By exploring the dynamics
of comparable linguistic, technological and artistic
experimental tasks, we test the effect of domain-specific
function on evolutionary mechanisms such as inheritance,
innovation and selection. We find evidence that cultural
domain shapes both the structure of the traditions and the way
the cultural-evolutionary mechanisms operate. The
simplifying effects of cultural transmission are noticeable in
language and technology, but not in art; innovation is highest
in art and lowest in language; and functional pressures lead to
different morphological adaptations across domains. This
speaks of a crucial role of function and domain in the
evolution of culture.
Keywords: cultural evolution; language; technology; art;
Lego; iterated learning; transmission chain; experiment

Introduction
Humans are distinct from all other species because of the
scale and diversity of our culture. Our behaviour is strongly
influenced by knowledge, beliefs, skills and values that are
socially learned, as opposed to genetically inherited (Boyd
& Richerson 1985, 2005). Cultural traditions such as
languages, social habits, technologies, religion or art change
over time, and this change has been characterized as an
evolutionary process of descent with modification
(Campbell, 1965; Durham, 1991; Whiten et al., 2011; Boyd
& Richerson, 1985, 2005; Mesoudi, 2011). Traditions are
often transmitted unchanged over the generations thanks to
faithful imitation (Tomasello, 1996) and teaching (Csibra &
Gergely, 2011). Mutated, or innovative, traits also appear in
a cultural tradition due to copying error, intentional
innovation or borrowing from other traditions. Cultural
traits spread and wane in populations as a result of random,
neutral evolutionary processes (Bentley et al., 2007) and of
selection pressures (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971; Boyd &
Richerson, 1985, 2005; Rogers, 2003).
Cultural evolutionary processes have been described in
detail for language (Croft, 2000; Ritt, 2004; Binder &
Smith, 2013; Kirby, Dowman & Griffiths; Kirby, Griffiths

Cultural evolutionary pressures derived from
transmission
Culture evolves under two main pressures: one related to
transmission, and one to usage. The first pressure requires
cultural patterns to be learnable and reproducible so they
can survive over generations. Under this pressure, patterns
that are simple and compressible are selected for (Kirby,
Cornish & Smith, 2008; Tamariz & Kirby, 2015). The
second pressure requires cultural traditions to be useful for
their relevant function. Under this pressure, traditions that
are functional and useful --which may imply diversity or
complexity or both-- are selected for (Regier, Kemp & Kay,
2015; Kirby et al., 2015).
An example of the kind of solution that evolve in the face
of these two opposed forces is the systematic, regular
structure of languages. Cross-linguistic studies have looked
at the distribution of structure in lexical domains such as
colour or kinship terms across world languages, and found
that world languages simultaneously optimize simplicity
and informativeness (Regier et al. 2015).
Iterated learning experiments and computer models help
understand the social and cognitive mechanisms that may

2759

have led to this distribution. Using miniature artificial
languages made up of words associated to objects, Kirby et
al. (2008, 2015) modeled the effects of transmission and of
usage. In transmission experiments, a participant is trained
on a language, and then she is tested on it. Her output is
used to train the next participant, forming a transmission
chain. After several generations, the languages have very
few distinct words left: they have become highly
compressible, and therefore easy to learn. But they cannot
name all the meanings (Kirby et al., 2008). Kirby et al.
(2015) ran a communication condition in which two
participants are trained on a language and then use it to play
communication games with each other; after many
interactions, the languages stay expressive: they maintain a
distinct word for each object. They also ran a condition that
included both transmission and communication: a pair
learns a language and then play communicative games with
it; the words they produce at the end of the game are used to
train the next pair in a transmission chain. Here, under
pressure for transmission and for utility, the languages
developed regular systematicity over generations to become
simultaneously easy to learn, and also fully expressive, with
a distinct word for each object.
The conclusions of the studies reviewed above lead us to
predict an increase in compressibility, or simplicity, in
response to cultural transmission in the three domains. In
the language domain, we should also expect a pressure for
expressivity arising from communicative function, which
puts a limit to how simple linguistic patterns can get. This
raises the question whether other domains have similar
breaks on simplicity. The following section explores this
question and justifies our predictions for the effects of
function in each of our cultural domains.

Domain-related predictions
Art is produced for the purposes of self-expression and
evaluated by criteria like beauty or artistic value, making it a
highly subjective domain of culture. Each individual may
have his or her own expressive biases and ideas about
artistic value. The functional pressures guiding the evolution
of art may thus vary across individuals, and the artistic
tradition, therefore, might not show the signature of
directional selection for specific features over several
generations. Additionally, we might expect innovation to
have some functional benefit in art. We therefore predict
low transmission accuracy and also a reduction in the
evolution of simplicity in this domain.
The goals of technology are usually objective and clearly
defined, which leads us to predict high transmission
accuracy of adaptive traits which contribute to achieving the
goal at hand, combined with the predicted pressure for
simplicity.
Unlike technological solutions, which are strongly
constrained by the structure of the problem they have to
solve, linguistic signals are not constrained by the structure
of their referents. Most signals in human languages are
arbitrary, that is, they do not resemble or are caused by their

referent meaning (de Saussure, 1983 [1916]). In order to be
communicatively functional, however, signals must be
shared conventionally by the interlocutors. An innovation in
the signal has the potential to disrupt a convention, as the
listener might not be able to recognize it. For these reasons,
and also based on the studies reviewed above, we predict
low innovation of signals, in addition to the predicted
selection for simplicity caused by transmission.

Experimental Testing of the Effects of Cultural
Domain on Evolutionary Dynamics
In order to test these predictions we compare the evolution
of cultural traditions pertaining to the three domains in a
transmission chain experiment where participants use
similar materials in a similar task (making Lego
constructions), but with different functions, corresponding
to each of the domains.

Methods
Participants. Ninety-nine participants (66 were female;
ages ranged from 18 to 35, mean = 21.2, SD=3.54), took
part in this study. The results from three of them were
excluded because of non-adherence to the instructions. They
were recruited through the University of Edinburgh
employment service and also in the Psychology building.
The experiment lasted 6 to 7 minutes in total, for which
each participant could choose to be rewarded with between
£1 or a snack (a can drink and a chocolate bar).
Materials. Participants come into the lab to find on the table
45 identical 2x4 orange loose Lego bricks, a number of
objects (see next section for details) and a Lego construction
standing next to each object (see e.g. Fig. 1). The objects
were a tennis ball, a flower made of fabric and plastic, a £1
coin, a wooden spoon and a mesh bag containing pebbles.

2760

Figure 1: Experimental setup in one of the trials in the Art
condition.

Procedure. After signing a consent form, participants
were instructed to make one construction for each of the
objects using the Lego bricks. In the Art condition three
objects were present (the ball, the flower and the coin) and
the participants were told to use the loose bricks to produce
'original' works of art that would be 'judged for their artistic
value'. In the Technology condition, the same three objects
were present and the participants were asked to make a
stand out of Lego to support each of them so that the sum of
heights measured from the table to the top of each objects
was maximized. In the Language condition, all five objects
were present, as was an interlocutor (another participant),
sitting across the table. Participants had to make signals
with the Lego bricks to communicate the objects to the
interlocutor during a series of naming games: the
experimenter showed a photograph of one of the objects to
the participant, he made a Lego signal in view of the
interlocutor, who had to guess which of the five objects the
signal referred to. They were both told they scored a point
for each correct answer, and their goal was to score as many
points as possible in the time available. The experimenter
showed pictures of the objects in random order, and told the
interlocutor and noted down whether each response was
correct. In all domain conditions, the maximum time
allocated for the task was 5 minutes. Each participant was
tested on only one condition.
Transmission chains. Participants were organized in
transmission chains, so that the 'example' Lego
constructions seen by one participant (or pair of participants
in the Language condition) were the constructions produced
by the participant in the previous generation in the chain.
The first participant in each chain, therefore, saw no
examples. They were not told what to do with the examples;
they could copy them, draw inspiration from them or ignore
them.
Data analysis. The 216 Lego constructions related to the
three objects common to all conditions (the ball, the flower
and the coin) were manually coded: we recorded the number
of pieces, overall height, width and depth, volume (of the
smallest cuboid box that could contain the construction),
and area of the faces that were external or visible (long
sides, short sides, top and bottom). Using these data, we
estimated complexity using a 3D version of perimetric
complexity, equal to the squared total external and any
internal areas in mm2 divided by the volume contained
within those areas in mm3 (yielding units mm-1). This
measure is an extension of standard 2D perimetric
complexity, equal to the squared length of the inside plus
outside perimeters of a drawing divided by the ink area
contained within those perimeters, and known to be a good
estimate of processing effort for a graphic (Pelli et al. 2006).
In order to estimate the level of innovation during
transmission, each pair of constructions for the same object
in consecutive generations (e.g. the construction inspired by
the ball in the art condition, chain 1, produced at generations

1 and 2) was rated for difference (a proxy of innovation) on
a scale of 0 to 9 points (0 if they were identical, 9 if they
were completely different) by three independent coders. The
inter-coder agreement was very high (Pearson's r values
ranged between 0.821 and 0.831, N=180, p<0.001).
We measured functional success in two of the domains. In
technology, the height in cm from the table to the top of the
object. In Language, the number of successful
communicative interactions in five minutes.
We used R (R Core Team, 2012) and lme4	   (Bates,
Maechler & Bolker, 2012) to perform linear mixed effects
analyses of the effects of Lego figure innovation and
morphological features (complexity, width, length and
heigth) on cultural domain. As fixed effects, we entered
Domain (Art, Tech and Language), Object (Ball, Flower,
Coin) and Generation (1–6 for Complexity, 1-5 for
Innovation) (without interaction term) into the model. As
random effects, we had an intercept for Chain (1-12), as
well as by-Chain random slope for the effect of Domain,
Object and Generation. Visual inspection of residual plots
did not reveal any obvious deviations from homoscedasticity
or normality. P-values were obtained by likelihood ratio
tests of the full model with the effect in question against the
model without the effect in question (Winter, 2013).

Results
Cultural domain had a significant effect on complexity
(χ2(2)=13.39, p=.0012). The least complex constructions
were produced in the language domain (average 2.50mm-1 ±
0.68 S.E.); in the technology domain, complexity increased
by 3.37mm-1 ± 0.74 S.E. and in the art domain, by 2.94mm-1
± 0.74 S.E. (Fig. 2).

Figure 2: Complexity in the three domains over generations
(95% C.I. shown throughout).
There was an interaction between domain and generation
(χ2(10)=18.573, p=0.046) due to the complexity of in the art
domain increasing and in the technology domain condition
decreasing over generations (Fig. 2).
Object also affected complexity (χ2(2)=52.83, p=3.4x1012
). Here, the least complex constructions were associated

2761

with the coin (average 0.61mm-1 ± 0.68 S.E.); for the
flower, complexity increased by 3.16mm-1± 0.40 S.E. and
for the ball, by 1.68mm-1 ± 0.40 S.E.

Figure 3: Innovation in the three domains over
generations.
Regarding innovation, there was a significant effect of
Domain (χ2(2)=11.65, p=0.003). Innovation was greatest in
the art domain (average 5.11 points ± 0.57 S.E.), with a drop
of 2.60 points ± 0.61 S.E. in the language domain and a
drop of 2.00 points ± 0.61 S.E. in the technology domain
(Fig. 3).
There was also a significant effect of object on innovation
(χ2(2)=19.80, p=5x10-5). Innovation was greatest for the
flower (average 5.42 points ± 0.57 S.E.),, with a drop of
0.32 points ± 0.36 S.E. for the ball and a drop of 1.56 points
± 0.36 S.E. for the coin.

Technology condition were significantly taller (on average
123.06mm ± 9.14 S.E.) than the artworks (80.72mm ± 8.78
S.E. shorter) and the linguistic signals (95.3mm ± 8.78 S.E.
shorter). Fig. 4 shows height versus horizontal dimensions
width and depth in the three domains.
The number of Lego pieces and the volume also showed
an effect of domain. For number of pieces, χ2(2)=34.46,
p=3.3x10-8; technology had the most pieces, with 15.35 ±
1.44 S.E. pieces, with a drop of 2.66 ± 0.88 S.E. pieces in
art and a drop of 9.59 ± 0.88 S.E. in language. For volume,
χ2(2)=17.84, p=1.3x10-4; here, art had the largest volume,
226cm3, with a drop of 109 cm3 ± 40 S.E. pieces in
technology and a drop of 195 cm3 ± 40 S.E. in language.
Functional success in the language and technology
domains did not change significantly over generations: there
was no effect of generation on height of tower plus object in
the technology domain constructions (χ2(1)=0.012, p=0.91).
The effect of generation on communicative success in the
language domain was not significant either (χ2(1)=3.021,
p=0.082), although success in the last four generations
visibly increases with respect to the first two (Fig. 5).

Figure 5: Success over generations in the language
domain.

Discussion

Figure 4: Height of the Lego constructions in the different
domains against horizontal dimensions
As far as the morphological features are concerned there
was an effect domain on Lego construction height
(χ2(2)=30.161, p=2.8x10-7), with the towers in the

Summary of results. First, for language, we predicted
simplifications (or reduction in complexity) over
generations and low levels of innovation. We found no
evidence for the first prediction: Lego figures in the
linguistic task are significantly simpler than in the other two
domains (Fig. 2), but complexity does not change over
generations. The second prediction is reflected in the results:
out of the three domains, language shows the lowest
innovation levels (Fig. 3). Second, for art, our predicted
absence of simplification is clear from the results: we
actually saw an increase in complexity over generations for
art (Fig. 2); we also predicted high levels of innovation,
which, again, are found in the results (Fig. 3). Thirdly, for
technology, we found evidence for the predicted
simplification of constructions (Fig. 2) and for selection of
traits related to the function: Lego constructions in this

2762

domain are clearly taller and narrower than those in art or
language (Fig. 4).
Simplification. Our results clearly show that cultural
domain has an effect on simplification. The absence of the
expected simplification in language could be explained by
the fact that the initial items were already at floor in terms
of complexity. In the other domains, we see an interaction
between simplicity and domain over generations. A bias in
favour of innovation may have been sufficient to drive an
increase in complexity in the art domain, whereas in the
technology domain, we observe some evidence for the
decrease in complexity predicted by previous work.
The floor effect in the language domain may be explained
by the details of experimental design. In previous iterated
learning experiments, the first participant in each chain was
trained on random items. In our chains, in contrast, the first
participant of each chain improvised signals in the absence
of examples. These chain-initial signals already had very
low levels of complexity.
Innovation. Cultural domain also modulates the rate of
innovation (mutation) that takes place during transmission
(Fig. 3). The high innovation level in the art condition may
be explained by the perception that originality increases
artistic value; selection for novelty thus affects the
transmission accuracy. Low innovation in language may
respond to the fact that conventional signals, which we
share with our interlocutors, are more likely to be effective
in the short term than innovative signals, even if these have
other desirable properties.
The effects of selective pressures on fundamental
evolutionary mechanisms like inheritance of or mutation are
specific characteristics of cultural evolution that have no
equivalent in the paradigmatic case of evolution, biology,
where selection affects traits, not the mechanisms of
inheritance or mutation. Our results show that the
mechanisms of inheritance and mutation in culture can
adapt to the functional domain of a tradition.
Adaptation. Domain also seems to pose selective
pressures on the morphological traits of the Lego
constructions. Significant increases in functional success
(number of successful communicative interactions, tower
height and artistic value) would have constituted evidence
for adaptation: traits that increase functionality are more
likely to be copied by the next generation, resulting in
increased performance. We have not found such cumulative
effect over time, but nevertheless there are clear differences
in size and shape between the constructions across domains
to indicate adaptation of the constructions to the domainspecific task. In the technology condition, the vertical
dimension of the Lego stands is significantly larger in the
works of art or linguistic signals (Fig. 4), a clear fit to the
task of maximizing height. The art constructions are the
largest in volume (even with fewer pieces than the
technology ones), which we may interpret as an adaptation
to creativity. As for the linguistic signals, they have the least
pieces, volume, as well as horizontal and vertical
dimensions. Communicative success showed a marginally

significant upward trend over generations (p=0.08, Fig. 5),
indicating selection for traits that adapted to the
communicative task.
Object. The reported effect of object (flower, ball, coin) is
also relevant to our question, because each object poses
functional constraints on the Lego constructions in addition
to those posed by cultural domain. Across conditions, the
constructions associated with the coin had lowest
complexity and innovation, those with the flower, highest
complexity and innovation, with those for the ball in
between in both measures. This can be explained by
iconicity and size: the constructions mirrored the object
size: fewest Lego bricks for coin and most for flower; the
number of bricks may constrain possible innovations, with
more bricks affording more changes. The analysis returned
no significant interactions between object and domain for
either complexity or innovation, indicating that the objects
behaved similarly across domains.

Conclusion
The study reported here represents the first direct
comparison of cultural evolution across cultural domains.
We have found that the affordances and constraints of a
linguistic, a technological and an artistic task have
significant effects on the evolution of the cultural traditions,
and also on key evolutionary mechanisms such as
transmission fidelity and innovation. The mechanisms and
pressures that operate in cultural evolution unfold
differently across domain: the simplification driven by
transmission is visible in the linguistic, but not in the artistic
domain; and the rate of innovation is greater in art than in
technology or language. This is an important step towards
understanding the huge diversity of traditions found in
culture. Furthermore, our study pioneers exciting
possibilities of using lab techniques to test hypotheses
regarding the mechanisms of cultural evolution across
domains.

Acknowledgments
This research benefitted from funding from a University of
Edinburgh PPLS Pilot grant.

References
Bates D, Maechler M, Bolker BM and Walker S (2015).
“Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models using lme4.”
ArXiv e-print; in press, Journal of Statistical Software,
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.5823.
Bentley, R.A., Lipo, C.P., Herzog, H.A. & Hahn, M. (2007).
Regular rates of popular culture change reflect random
copying. Evolution and Human Behavior 28: 151–158.
Binder, P.M. & Smith, K. (eds.) (2013). The language
phenomenon: Human communication from milliseconds
to millennia. Springer Press.
Boyd, R. & Richerson, P.J. (1985). Culture and the
Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

2763

Boyd, R. & Richerson, P.J. (2005). Not by genes alone.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Campbell, D.T. (1965). Variation and selective retention in
socio-cultural evolution. In: Barringer, H.R., Blanksten,
G.I. & Mack, W. (eds.) Social change in developing
areas: A reinterpretation of evolutionary theory, 19-49.
Cambridge: Schenkman.
Christiansen, M.H. & Kirby, S. (eds.) (2003). Language
evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Croft, W. (2000). Exploring language change: An
evolutionary approach. Harlow: Longman.
Csibra, G. & Gergely, G. (2011). Natural pedagogy as
evolutionary adaptation. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B, 366: 1149-1157.
de Saussure, F. (1983 [1916]). Course in general linguistics.
London: Duckworth.
Durham, W.H. (1991). Co-evolution: Genes, culture and
human diversity. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Fleming, L. & Sorenson, O. (2001). Technology as a
complex adaptive system: evidence from patent data.
Research	  Policy, 30: 1019-1039.
Fukuyama, F. (2011). The origins of political order: From
prehuman times to the French Revolution. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Gintis, Herbert; van Schaik, Carel (2013). Zoon Politicon:
The evolutionary roots of human sociopolitical systems.
In: Richerson, P. J. & Christiansen, M.H. (eds.) Cultural
evolution: Society, technology, language, and religion,
25-44. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haddon, A.C. (1914). Evolution in art. London: Walter
Scott Ltd.
Hodgson, G. (2004). The evolution of institutional
economics: Agency, structure and Darwinism in
American institutionalism. London: Routledge
Kirby, S., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. (2008) Cumulative
Cultural Evolution in the Laboratory: An Experimental
Approach to the Origins of Structure in Human Language.
PNAS, 105: 10681-10686.
Kirby, S., Dowman & M., Griffiths, T.L. (2007). Innateness
and culture in the evolution of language. PNAS, 104:
5241-5245.
Kirby, S., Griffiths, T. L. & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated
learning and the evolution of language. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 28, 108-114.
Kirby, S., Griffiths, T. L. & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated
learning and the evolution of language. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 28, 108-114.
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. (2015)
Compression and Communication Drive the Evolution of
Language. Cognition, 141: 87-102.
Lewis, H. & Laland, K.N. (2012). Transmission fidelity is
the key to the build-up of cumulative culture.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,	   367:
2171-2180.
Mesoudi, A., Laland, K.N., Boye, R., Buchanan, B., Flynn,
E., McCauley, R., Renn, J., Reyes-Garcia, V., Shennah, S.
Stout, D & Tennie, C. (2013). The cultural evolution of

technology and science. In Richerson, P.J. &
Christiansen, M.H. (eds.), Cultural evolution: Society,
technology, language, and religion, 193-218. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Mesoudi, A. (2011). Cultural evolution: How Darwinian
theory can explain human culture and synthesize the
social sciences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Morris-Kay, G.M. (2010). The evolution of human artistic
creativity. Jounal of Anatomy, 216: 158-176.
Nelson, R.R. & Winters, S.G. (1982). An evolutionary
theory of economic change. Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press.
Pelli, D. G., Burns, C.W., Farrell, B., & Moore, D. C.
(2006). Identifying letters. Vision Research, 46: 46464674.
R Core Team (2015). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL http://www.Rproject.org/.
Regier, T., Kemp, C. & Kay, R. (2015). Word meanings
across languages support efficient communication. In B.
MacWhinney & W. O'Grady (eds.), The handbook of
language emergence, 237-263. Hoboken, NJ: WileyBlackwell.
Ritt. N. (2004). Selfish sounds. A Darwinian approach to
language change. Cambridge: University Press.
Rogers, E.M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations. 5th edition.
New York: Free Press.
Rogers, E.M. & Shoemaker, F.F. (1971). Communication of
innovations: a cross-cultural approach. New York: Free
Press.
Tamariz, M. & Kirby, S. (2015). Culture: Copying,
compression and conventionality. Cognitive Science, 39:
171-183.
Tomasello M. (1996). Do Apes Ape? In Social learning in
animals: the roots of culture, Heyes, C.M. & Galef, B.G.
(eds.), 319-346. London, UK: Academic Press.
Whiten, A., Hinde, R.A., Laland, K.N. & Stringer, C.B.
(2011). Culture evolves. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B. 366, 1567: 938-948.
Winter, B. (2013). Linear models and linear mixed effects
models in R with linguistic applications. arXiv:
1308.5499. URL: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1308.5499.pdf

2764

