Deconstructing tomorrow: How children learn the semantics of time
Katharine A. Tillman1, Tyler Marghetis2, David Barner1, & Mahesh Srinivasan3
1

U. California, San Diego
Department of Psychology
{katillman, barner}@ucsd.edu

2

Indiana University, Bloomington
Psychological & Brain Sciences
tmarghet@indiana.edu

Abstract
Deictic time words (e.g., “tomorrow,” “yesterday”) refer to
time periods relative to the present moment. While children
produce these words by age 2-3, they use them incorrectly for
several more years. Here, as a case study in abstract word
learning, we explored what children know about these words
during this delay. Specifically, we probed children’s
knowledge of three aspects of meaning: deictic (past/future)
status, sequential ordering (e.g., “tomorrow” is after
“yesterday”), and remoteness from now. We asked 3- to 8year-olds to place these words on a timeline extending from
the past (left) to the future (right). Even 4-year-olds could
meaningfully represent the words’ deictic status and order,
and by 6, the majority displayed adult-like performance.
Adult-like knowledge of remoteness, however, emerged
independently, after age 7. Thus, even while children use
these terms incorrectly, they are gradually constructing a
structured semantic domain, including information about the
deictic, sequential, and metric relations among terms.
Keywords: time; word learning; development; abstract
concepts; timeline

1. Introduction
When learning a new word, children face an inductive
problem: How broadly should this new word be extended?
This problem is especially challenging in cases where a
word’s semantic boundaries cannot be inferred from
perception of the world. For instance, deictic time words
like “yesterday” and “tomorrow”, which label periods of
time relative to the present, lack perceptible referents and
are used to refer to a changing set of experiences.
Tomorrow’s events, for instance, will soon become
yesterday’s. To make inferences about word meanings in
such cases, children could rely on the structure of language
itself—e.g., using linguistic cues to learn how these words
are related to one another within a common semantic
class—and thus construct partial meanings on the way to
adult-like semantics (e.g., Carey, 2009; Gleitman et al.,
2005). However, while previous studies indicate a long gap
between when children initially produce deictic time words
and eventual adult-like usage (Ames, 1946; Busby Grant &
Suddendorf, 2011; Harner, 1975; 1981), we know relatively
little about the inductive process through which they are
acquired. Here, as a case study of abstract word learning, we
explore children’s gradual construction of deictic time word
meanings between ages 3 and 8.
Although many children use words like “yesterday” and
“tomorrow” as early as age 2 or 3, they make frequent errors
in both their use and comprehension for several subsequent

3

U. California, Berkeley
Department of Psychology
srinivasan@berkeley.edu

years (Ames, 1946; Busby Grant, & Suddendorf, 2011;
Harner, 1975). According to parental report, while two
thirds of 3-year-olds produce the word “yesterday”, fewer
than 20% use the word correctly; by age 5, more than 80%
of children produce “yesterday”, but still, fewer than 60%
use it correctly (Busby Grant & Suddendorf, 2011). When
asked to name an event that occurred “yesterday” or one
that will occur “tomorrow,” only about a quarter of 3-yearolds can provide reasonable answers, and less than 70% of
5-year-olds can do so (Busby & Suddendorf, 2005).
However, while such studies suggest that children struggle
with deictic time words for years, they tell us little about
what children do and do not know about these words, or
about how they are learned.
While there has not been systematic study of children’s
partial knowledge of deictic time words during the delay
between initial production and adult-like usage, there are
hints that children may independently acquire information
about different facets of their meaning. These facets include
a word’s deictic status (e.g., “yesterday” is in the past;
“tomorrow” is in the future), its sequential order relative to
other time words (e.g., “yesterday” is a time after “last
week”), and its remoteness from the present (e.g.,
“yesterday” is one day from today). In one study, 3-year-old
English speakers appeared to have partial knowledge of the
deictic status of “yesterday” and “tomorrow”, understanding
that these terms refer to a non-present time, without
knowing whether they refer specifically to the past and
future, respectively (Harner, 1975). Children’s spontaneous
speech errors also suggest partial meanings. For example,
children overextend deictic time words within either the past
or future (e.g., Harner, 1981; Nelson, 1996), suggesting that
children may acquire deictic status prior to remoteness.
Understanding the nature of children’s errors – and the
partial word meanings they implicate – could provide
critical insight into the inductive hypotheses children make
about the meanings of deictic time words and the cues
children use to guide them. Here we will consider three
potential word learning strategies, which are not mutually
exclusive. One possibility is that children make inferences
about time word meaning based on grammatical cues in the
sentence, i.e., using syntactic bootstrapping (Gleitman et al.,
2005). In this case, we would expect native-Englishspeaking children to have early knowledge of deictic status,
which is expressed by the English tense system. A second
possibility is that children use linguistic cues to group terms
into a common semantic class (e.g., terms referring to the
past) and use lexical contrast to learn their relations within it

2381

(“last week” is before “yesterday”; see Carey, 2009; Shatz
et al, 2010; Tillman & Barner, 2015) This account predicts
early knowledge of order. A third possibility is that
children use associations between time words and
experienced events, i.e., event mappings, to estimate the
distance from the present indicated by each word, predicting
early knowledge of remoteness. In order to test these
accounts, the present study aimed to separately characterize
children’s knowledge of these different facets of these
terms’ meanings. To do so, we asked children to map these
words onto a nonverbal representation: a spatial timeline.
Several studies suggest that by age 4 or 5, children can
use spatial scales to differentiate the times of events (Busby
Grant & Suddendorf, 2009; Friedman, 2002; Friedman &
Kemp, 1989; Hudson & Mayhew, 2011). However, no
studies have probed children’s knowledge using a
conventional horizontal timeline, and most have explicitly
avoided deictic time words. Further, previous timeline
studies were limited in their ability to tease apart children’s
understanding of the different semantic facets of these
terms. For instance, they used timelines depicting either the
past or the future, but not both, making it impossible to
gauge children’s knowledge of deictic status, and they were
categorical, e.g., “a short time ago” vs. “a long time ago,”
making it difficult to probe children’s knowledge of
sequential order or remoteness precisely, because children
could place multiple terms within the same category (e.g.
Busby Grant & Suddendorf, 2009; Friedman, 2002;
Friedman & Kemp, 1998).
Here, we assessed children’s comprehension of different
facets of the meaning of deictic time words using a new
timeline task. We tested adults, and children over a wide age
range (age 3 to 8), in order to probe for possible partial
knowledge of terms during the long gap between initial
production and adult-like usage. Participants used colored
pencils to mark where deictic time words (e.g., “yesterday”)
and events (e.g., the participant’s last birthday) should go on
horizontal timelines that extended continuously from the
past (“when you were a baby”) on the left, to the future
(“when you’ll be a grown-up”) on the right. Importantly, the
present moment (“right now”) was also marked, dividing the
line into the past and future.
Critically, this paradigm allowed us to independently
assess children’s knowledge of a deictic time word’s deictic
status (i.e., past vs. future), sequential order, and remoteness
from the present. Knowledge of the deictic status of a word
was indexed by its correct placement to the left or right of
the midpoint, regardless of its placement relative to other
words. Knowledge of sequential order was indexed by the
ordering of words along the line — for example, whether
“last week” was placed before (i.e., to the left of)
“yesterday,” ignoring either term’s relation to the present or
the distances between them. And knowledge of remoteness
from the present was indexed by the spacing of terms along
the line — for example, by looking at how far “last week” is
placed from “now”, compared to the placement of
“yesterday” relative to “now.”

Our paradigm thus probed children’s developing
understanding of deictic time words, including the sequence
by which they acquire different aspects of mature, adult-like
meanings. For example, if a child acquires deictic status
prior to the other facets, as predicted by a syntactic
bootstrapping account, we would expect them to correctly
assign all past terms to the past but perhaps to fail to respect
their ordering or distance from the present, e.g., by placing
“yesterday” much further in the past than “last year”.

2. Methods
2.1 Participants
Participants included 109 children between 3;0 and 8;11
years of age, recruited from the San Diego, CA and
Berkeley, CA areas. Additionally, we tested 37 adult
controls from the UCSD Psychology Department subject
pool. Children were tested in lab or at local daycares,
schools, and museums, and adults were tested in lab.
Informed consent was obtained from adults and parents of
participating children. Adults were given course credit;
children were given a small prize.

2.2 Materials and procedure
Participants responded by drawing on three 13.5cm left-toright timelines, printed down the center of a 8.5” × 11”
sheet of paper. On each timeline, a vertical tick at the
midpoint indicated the present; an icon of a baby indicated
the past; an icon of an adult indicated the future (Fig. 1).
To begin, the experimenter [E] gave the paper and some
colored pencils to the child. While gesturing to the
appropriate sections of the top line, E stated: “Look, this is
a timeline. It shows when different things happen. The line
starts in the past and it goes to the future. So, it goes from
when you were a baby all the way to when you’re going to
be a grown up. And here in the middle is right now. Each
time has its own place on the line. You're going to show me
when different things happen by showing me where they go
on the line. Look, when you were a baby goes here [E draws
a vertical line on the left end point to demonstrate the
procedure] and when you are going to be a grown up goes
here [E draws a vertical line at right endpoint]. And right
now goes here [E draws line at midpoint]. I’m going to give
you a pencil, and your job will be to draw an up-and-down
line to show me where each thing goes. Ready?” At this
point, E introduced the first item, “When [did you] [eat
breakfast today]? Think about when you [ate breakfast
today]? Draw a line for when you [ate breakfast today].”
The child then marked the line.

Figure 1: Timeline used by participants to indicate the
relative locations of deictic time words and events.

2382

1.0

0.9

Time Condition
deictic terms
life events

0.8

0.7

Item 4
Last
birthday
This
morning
Last
year

2.3 Coding. For each timeline, the distance in centimeters
from the left endpoint of the line to each color-coded mark
was measured, as well as its distance, positive (right) or
negative (left), from the midpoint of the line

0.6

0.5
3

4

5

6

7

8

adult

age (years)
Figure 2: Deictic Status Knowledge. Accuracy improved

with age, for both time words (e.g., “tomorrow”, circles)
and events (e.g., “last birthday,” triangles). Error lines =
SEM; dashed line = chance performance.
3.1.2 Order. We assessed knowledge of relative
sequential order—independent of deictic status—in two
ways. The first method examined the rank ordering of all
four items on a timeline. The second, designed to minimize
concerns about working memory demands, evaluated
knowledge of sequential order on a trial-by-trial basis, by
comparing the placement of each item to the placement of
the immediately preceding trial (e.g., if “last week” is tested
just after “tomorrow,” it should be placed to the left of
“tomorrow”). Both analyses yielded the same pattern of
results. Here we report only the latter analysis.

3. Results
To characterize children’s knowledge of deictic time
words, we undertook the following analyses: First, we
assessed comprehension of the deictic status, order, and
remoteness of the deictic time words (and, by way of
comparison, the life events). Second, we determined the
ages of acquisition of these facets of meaning, pinpointing
the age at which the majority of children displayed adultlike comprehension. Finally, we calculated the
contingencies between adult-like knowledge of these facets
of meaning: i.e., the degree to which adult-like knowledge
of deictic status, order, and temporal remoteness predicted
one another.

1.0

Order accuracy (1−back)

Table 1: Target items used in timeline tasks
Timeline Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Events
Breakfast
Next
Dinner
birthday
Time
Last week
Tomorrow Tonight
words 1
Time
Next week Next year
Yesterday
words 2

monotonically from 3- to 7-years-old, M3 = .50 < M4 = .67 <
M5 = .77 < M6 = .84 < M7 = .94 at which point mean
performance was no longer distinguishable from adults
(Madults = .94), t56 = -0.1, p > .9.

Deictic Status accuracy

After all four events were placed on the top timeline, the
procedure was repeated for the remaining two timelines,
with trials in the form, “Now you’re going to show me
where [last week] goes. Where does [last week] go? Can
you draw a line for [last week]?” Each child placed 8 deictic
time words and 4 events on three timelines (Table 1).
Participants always received the Events line first but the
order of the other two lines was counterbalanced between
subjects. For each line, half of the subjects received the
items in the order shown in Table 1, and the other half
received the reverse order.

3.1 Facets of meaning
3.1.1 Deictic status. For each timeline and subject, we
calculated the mean accuracy for all items’ placement
relative to “now” (e.g., “tomorrow” should be in the future),
and then calculated mean deictic status accuracy for each
subject and each type of timeline (i.e., Deictic vs. Event).
We then analyzed Deictic Status accuracy with a mixed
ANOVA, with Time Type (Deictic vs. Event) as a withinsubjects factor and Age (3 through 8 years old, and adults)
as a between-subjects factor.
There was no effect of Time Type, suggesting that
children were equally able to represent the past/future status
of time words and events. The only effect to approach
significance was the main effect of Age, F(6, 138) = 26.3, p
<< .001 (Fig. 2). While 3-year-olds performed at chance
overall, t14 = .14, p > .8, 4-year-olds were better than
chance, t16 = 4.7, p << .01. Mean accuracy improved

Time Condition
deictic terms
life events

0.8

0.6

0.4
3

4

5

6

7

8

adult

age (years)
Figure 3: Order Knowledge. Performance improved with

age, for both deictic time words and events. Error lines =
SEM; dashed line = chance performance.

2383

probability

Deictic Status

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
3

4

5

3

4

5

Temporal Remoteness

3

0.4

0.2

3

4

5

6

7

age (years)

8

adult

Figure 4: Remoteness Knowledge. Children improved gradually
but did not reach adult-like performance. Error lines = SEM.

3.2 Order of acquisition
Having characterized children’s developing understanding
of deictic status, order, and remoteness, we next investigated

7

8

9

6

Age

7

8

9

7

8

9

Remoteness

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

0.6

6

Age

Order

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

probability

3.1.3 Remoteness. We next evaluated knowledge of the
temporal remoteness of each item from “now.” In essence,
we wanted to know to how well children used spatial
distance to represent temporal remoteness. Since we were
interested in the use of relative and not absolute space, we
first standardized the total amount of the line used by each
child by dividing each distance from zero by the maximum
distance at which any item was placed by that child.
Distances thus ranged from 0 to 1. This approach
acknowledges that the absolute location of, e.g., “last year”,
relative to the line’s endpoint (infancy) is likely to differ
with age, letting us focus on whether participants
differentiated how much closer e.g., “yesterday” is to the
present, relative to wherever they assigned “last year.”
To characterize the maturity of children’s representations
of remoteness, for each child, we used multiple regression to
see whether each item's distance was predicted by (1) the
item's correct order, relative to the midpoint, and (2) the
mean distance, from the midpoint, where adults placed that
item. As a measure of each child’s knowledge of temporal
remoteness, we used the strength of the relationship between
the child’s placements and adult-like placements, after
factoring out the children’s knowledge of order (i.e., semipartial correlation squared). Mean remoteness knowledge
for each age group is shown in Fig 4. Children’s knowledge
of remoteness improved gradually across our entire agerange, with even 8-year-olds performing significantly
differently from adults.

the order in which these facets of the meaning of deictic
time words are learned. We used a threshold approach,
comparing the ages at which the majority (50%) of children
had made the transition from partial to adult-like
understanding of each facet of meaning.
First, based on the continuous measures of their
knowledge of deictic status, order, and remoteness, each
participant was characterized, via k-means clustering, as a
“knower” vs. “non-knower” of that domain (Fig. 5, black
dots). “Knowers” included all of the adult participants and
the children who clustered with them. Then, for each facet
of meaning, we modeled the transition to adult-like
knowledge using a Weibull function, where age predicted
whether or not a child exhibited adult-like knowledge. This
allowed us to estimate the age at which the majority of
children acquire adult-like knowledge of each facet,
independently of the other two.
The age at which the majority of children transitioned to
adult-like knowledge of deictic status and order was the
same, around age 6 (Deictic Status: 6.0, 95% bootstrapped
confidence interval: [5.45, 6.39]; Order: 5.9 years, [5.42,
6.37]). By contrast, most children did not transition to adultlike knowledge of temporal remoteness until more than a
year later, at 7.30 years ([6.81, 7.66]). Since the confidence
interval for remoteness does not overlap with the other
confidence intervals, this delay is statistically significant.

probability

For each child and Time Type, we calculated mean
accuracy on this 1-back measure of order knowledge. Once
again, there was only a main effect of Age, F(6, 138) =
33.1, p << .01 (Fig. 3). Just as with Deictic Status, fouryear-olds were significantly better than chance, t16 = 4.1, p
<< .01, while three-year-olds were not, t14 = -0.6, p > .5.
Compared to adults, seven-year-olds were significantly
worse, t56 = -2.8, p < .01, but eight-year-olds were
indistinguishable, t52 = -1.7, p > .1.

4

5

6

Age

Figure 5: Age of acquisition for three facets of time word
meaning. Each black dot is an individual child, categorized
as either a “knower” (top) or “non-knower” (bottom) of that
dimension. Blue dots indicate the mean probability of being
a knower in that age group. Red dotted lines indicate agethresholds for p = 0.5; black horizontal error bars indicate
bootstrapped confidence intervals on those age-thresholds.
3.3 Learning contingencies
The previous analysis revealed that on their sixth
birthday, only a quarter of children exhibit an adult-like
grasp of the remoteness of deictic time words, while half of

2384

children know their deictic status, and half know their
relative order. But this analysis does not tell us whether the
very same children who understand one facet of deictic
terms’ meanings also understand other facets.
To address this, we calculated the conditional probability
of being each type of “knower,” given one’s “knower”
status on each other facet of meaning (Fig. 6). Deictic status
and order were highly linked: children who knew one of
them almost always knew the other as well. However, while
it was extremely uncommon for a child to be a remotenessknower without also being an order knower (97%) and
deictic-status knower (88%), the reverse was not true. The
average deictic-status-knower had only a 53% chance of
being a remoteness-knower, while the average order-knower
had only a 57% chance of being a remoteness-knower. This
is exemplified by the top timeline in Fig. 6b, produced by a
5-year-old who knows both deictic status and order, but is
far from adult-like in her representation of remoteness.
Compare this to the bottom timeline, from an adult, where
items are placed based not only on their deictic status and
order, but also their relative remoteness (i.e., yesterday is
close to now; next week is farther away; and next year even
farther). Together with the cross-sample age-of-acquisition
data, these results reveal a clear developmental trajectory in
which both deictic status and order emerge early and in
synchrony, while knowledge of temporal remoteness is
developed independently and often much later.
A.
adult−like
Remoteness

0.53

0.97
0.56
adult−like
Order

0.9

0.85

adult−like
Deictic Status

0.82

B.
5YO

Adult

Figure 6: A. Contingencies among facets of meaning. Arrows
from A to B denote direction of influence. Line width
indicates conditional probability of knowing facet B, given
knowledge of facet A (scaled from .5 to 1). B. Example
timeline data from a 5-year-old and an adult. The child exhibits
knowledge of deictic status and order, but not remoteness.

4. Discussion
Here, as a case study in abstract word learning, we
explored the prolonged trajectory over which deictic time

words, like “yesterday,” are learned. Prior studies have
shown that children produce their first deictic time words at
age 2 or 3, but make errors in their use until age 5 or older
(e.g., Busby Grant & Suddendorf, 2011). The current study
further investigated this delay between production and
comprehension, by independently assessing children’s
knowledge of three facets of the meanings of these words:
deictic status, order, and remoteness. Despite their speech
errors, we found that even 4-year-olds have partial
understanding of the words’ deictic status (e.g., that
“yesterday” was in the past) and order (e.g., that “yesterday”
was before “this morning”), and that most children master
these elements of meaning by their 6th birthday. However,
our results suggest that fully adult-like mastery of deictic
time words, including knowledge of temporal remoteness
(and the ability to represent it spatially), may be achieved
even later than prior work has revealed. While the majority
of children showed evidence of mastery of all three facets of
word meaning between their 7th and 8th birthdays, some
were not adult-like on our task even shortly before age 9.
What can the present findings tell us about how deictic
time words are acquired? Unlike most terms in the early
lexicon, their meanings cannot be constrained simply by
observing the perceptual structure of the world and
performing simple “word-to-world” mappings. In particular,
constraints like the whole-object bias and the principle of
mutual exclusivity, which can explain much about how
toddlers rapidly acquire hundreds of new nouns, are
counterproductive in this case (see Markman, 1994 for
discussion of word learning biases). Not only are the
referents of deictic time words non-objects, but to the extent
that these words do denote perceptual experiences (i.e.,
lived or anticipated events), those associations are transient.
There are many-to-many relations between deictic time
words and events—any number of events could occur
tomorrow, and each one of them will cease to be tomorrow,
and become yesterday.
It has been proposed that, to acquire “hard words” such as
these, children may rely on structure of language itself (e.g.,
Gleitman et al., 2005). We posited two potential
mechanisms by which linguistic cues could support time
word learning -- syntactic bootstrapping and lexical
ordering -- and the present findings provide support for
both. In particular, the early acquisition of deictic status
supports a syntactic bootstrapping hypothesis, because
deictic status is indicated by the morphological tense system
of English. Long before they use deictic time words
accurately, children comprehend the distinction between
past and future tenses (e.g., Weist et al., 1991). For instance,
they understand that adding -ed to a regular verb indicates
that the action has already occurred, and could use this cue
to infer the deictic status of a term like “yesterday” if it
appears in the same sentence. However, tense alone is
insufficient to acquire either order or remoteness -- the tense
cues in, e.g., “she played yesterday and worked last week”,
can’t tell us which event happened first, or how long ago
either event was.

2385

The fact that order is learned simultaneously with deictic
status indicates that other inferential processes are also at
work. Under the lexical ordering account, other linguistic
cues might help children place time words in a common
semantic category (e.g. all past words) and then learn their
relative order within it. For instance, children might infer
that time words form a common class from their appearance
in similar sentence frames, and direct contrast could support
learning their order (e.g., “That party wasn’t yesterday, it
was all the way last week”). Prior work on the acquisition of
duration words, such as ‘week’ and ‘year,’ also supports this
account: at 4, children grasp that duration terms comprise a
category (Shatz et al., 2010), and by 5 they begin to work
out their ordering (i.e., year > week > hour > minute;
Tillman & Barner, 2015).
Understanding the temporal remoteness of deictic time
words trails knowledge of the other facets of time-word
meaning by over a year. Unlike deictic status and order,
which could plausibly be inferred from language alone, it is
difficult to imagine how children might learn the remoteness
of time words from speech input without relying on
considerable lived experience. Under the event mapping
account, after developing a sense of how long ago their last
birthday was, a child might be able to associate a deictic
term like “last year” with the remoteness of an event, like a
party, said to occur then (i.e., by abstracting the time of the
event, relative to its time of utterance, as the relevant
dimension). However, the finding that remoteness is
acquired so late suggests that such mappings are an
inefficient means of learning the set of deictic time words,
perhaps due to the pitfalls of standard word-to-world
mappings described above.
Interestingly, the transition to mature knowledge of
remoteness occurs around the same time that clock reading
becomes a major focus in standard elementary school
curricula, in Grade 2 (Common Core State Standards
Initiative, 2012). This raises the possibility that adult-like
representations of remoteness depend upon exact definitions
for time words. In the case of duration words, children have
little understanding of the absolute duration of each word
(e.g., hour=minute×60; year=day×365) until around age 7,
when they are taught definitions. If adult-like
representations of remoteness also rely on this
understanding, we would expect children to fail until the
same age, as we observe. In both cases, children infer early
on that time words are inter-defined, but often cannot use
them accurately to reference events until much later.
Here, we leveraged the spatial timeline as a tool to
characterize children’s knowledge of time words more
precisely than prior methods. However, this method
necessarily conflates children’s semantic understanding of
the target items with their ability to express that knowledge
spatially. Confusion about timelines could potentially mask
semantic knowledge of time words. Though evidence
suggests children as young as 3 can comprehend continuous
spatial number-lines (e.g. Bartelleti et al., 2010), future
research will be needed to directly test the possibility that

this timeline method underestimates children’s knowledge
of deictic time words.
Strikingly, we have mapped out a developmental
trajectory for time-word learning that can take children five
years or more. Arguably, this process represents a profound
conceptual breakthrough. In order to use deictic time words
like adults do, a child must have the idea that there is
dimension of time that is separate from the events that
occupy it. While this might challenge the child’s early
assumptions about what words can label, mastering this
insight may provide a transformational framework for
interpreting the past and planning for the future.

References
Ames, L. B. (1946). The development of the sense of time in the
young child. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 68, 97–125.
Berteletti, I., Lucangeli, D., Piazza, M., Dehaene, S., & Zorzi, M.
(2010). Numerical estimation in preschoolers. Developmental
psychology, 46(2), 545.
Busby, J., & Suddendorf, T. (2005). Recalling yesterday and
predicting tomorrow. Cognitive Development, 20(3), 362-372.
Busby Grant, J., & Suddendorf, T. (2009). Preschoolers begin to
differentiate the times of events from throughout the
lifespan. European Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6(6),
746-762.
Busby Grant, J., & Suddendorf, T. (2011). Production of temporal
terms by 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children. Early Childhood
Research Quarterly, 26(1), 87-95.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford University Press.
Common Core State Standards Initiative (2012). Common core
state standards for mathematics.
Friedman, W. J. (2002). Children's knowledge of the future
distances of daily activities and annual events. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 3(3), 333-356.
Friedman, W. J., & Kemp, S. (1998). The effects of elapsed time
and retrieval on young children's judgments of the temporal
distances of past events.Cognitive Development, 13(3), 335-367.
Gleitman, L. R., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafragou, A., &
Trueswell, J. C. (2005). Hard words. Language Learning and
Development, 1, 23–64.
Harner, L. (1975). Yesterday and tomorrow: Development of early
understanding of the terms. Developmental Psychology, 11(6),
864–865
Harner, L. (1981). Children's understanding of time. Topics in
language disorders, 2(1),51-66.
Shatz, M., Tare, M., Nguyen, S. P., & Young, T. (2010). Acquiring
non-object terms: The case for time words. Journal of Cognition
and Development,11(1), 16-36.
Hudson, J. A., & Mayhew, E. M. (2011). Children's temporal
judgments for autobiographical past and future events. Cognitive
Development, 26(4), 331-342.
Markman, E. M. (1994). Constraints on word meaning in early
language acquisition. Lingua, 92, 199-227.
Nelson, K. (1998). Language in cognitive development: The
emergence of the mediated mind. Cambridge University Press.
Tillman, K. A., & Barner, D. (2015). Learning the language of
time: Children’s acquisition of duration words. Cognitive
psychology, 78, 57-77.
Weist, R. M., Wysocka, H., & Lyytinen, P. (1991). A crosslinguistic perspective on the development of temporal
systems. Journal of child language, 18(01), 67-92.

2386

