Design from Zeroth Principles
Jordan W. Suchow (suchow@berkeley.edu)
Michael D. Pacer (mpacer@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom_griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology,
University of California, Berkeley, USA

Abstract
A successful design accounts for the structure of the problem
it is aimed at solving. When it is a human-directed design,
this includes the expectations of its users. How do we arrive
at such a design? One approach starts from first principles
(e.g., simplicity, unity, symmetry, balance) to evaluate the
quality of proposed designs. Here, we introduce design from
zeroth principles, a form of human-in-the-loop computation
that synthesizes a design that conforms to its users’ expectations. The technique begins by constructing a transmission
chain seeded with a random design. Each user in the chain is
exposed to the design and then recreates it, passing along
their recreation to the next user, who does the same. Through
this iterative process, the users’ perceptual, inductive, and reconstructive biases directly transform the initial design into
one that is better fit to human cognition. Such designs are easier to learn and harder to forget. We evaluated the approach in
three domains — stimulus–response mappings, vanity phone
numbers, and letter placement in typeset words — and show
that it produces a good design in each.
Keywords: design, cognitive ergonomics, inductive bias,
transmission chain, user interface

Introduction
Successful design in the rationalist tradition begins by evaluating the problem that a designed object or system aims to
solve: the goals, any constraints imposed by the environment or by human factors, and the surrounding context,
broadly construed (Simon, 1996). Another tradition appeals
to principles that are purported to be universal — simplicity,
balance, unity, order, liveliness — rather than to direct considerations of function (Lidwell, Holden, & Butler, 2010;
White, 2002). Following these principles will, in theory,
lead to successful designs.
But what makes a design successful? Certainly, in cases
where the design acts as the interface between a user and a
system, the success of the design hinges in part on the user’s
experience in working with the design. Users have expectations about how to interact with the world to accomplish
their goals, and a good design conforms to those expectations — i.e., when humans are the users, good designs fit the
human mind. Practices have developed around ensuring this,
including techniques to compare variants of a design
through statistical hypothesis testing (e.g., A/B testing), to
measure performance under user-focused metrics (e.g., usability research), and to elicit feedback from potential users
(e.g., focus groups).

In cognitive science, a person’s expectations can be described as perceptual, inductive, and reconstructive biases,
as they pertain to perception, learning, and memory, respectively. Bias in this sense means merely that the distribution
of expected designs is not uniform — some match expectations better than others. Tools and techniques from the domain of cognitive science that identify, extract, and amplify
these biases can thus aid designers in their quest to find
cognitively fit forms.
Transmission chains are one such technique for extracting
and amplifying biases in memory and learning. Originating
in early experiments by Frederic Bartlett, transmission
chains pass information from one person to the next (Bartlett, 1932). At each step of the chain, the transmitted information is transformed. So long as a few technical conditions
hold, repeated application of a transformation leads to erasure of the information contained in the input, leaving behind
a signature of the transformation process itself.
In this paper, we introduce a method that uses transmission chains to synthesize a design. Our technique begins by
constructing a transmission chain seeded with a random design. Each user in the chain is exposed to the design and
then recreates it, passing along their recreation to the next
user, who does the same. Through this iterative process, the
users’ inductive and reconstructive biases directly transform
the initial design into one that is better ﬁt to human cognition. No formal design principles are assumed. Thus, we call
this process design from zeroth principles.
The plan for the paper is as follows. We begin with a
technical description of the transmission chain technique
and its ability to amplify biases in perception, learning, and
memory. Next, we apply the technique in three domains:
stimulus–response mappings, vanity numbers, and letter
placement in typeset words. We conclude with a discussion
of how our method can be extended and elaborated, some
criteria for design problems that might benefit from the
technique, and possible modifications to the transmissionbased scheme that relate to other forms of human-in-theloop computation.

Transmission chains reveal biases
In a transmission chain, information is passed from one person to the next. In the children’s game Telephone, for example, a child invents a sentence and whispers it to the next
child in line, who then does the same. By the time the sen-

1505

tence reaches the end of the chain, it has changed. Hilarity
ensues.
This kind of system can be formally modeled as a Markov
chain, a stochastic process in which transformations are defined by a transition matrix specifying the probability of going from one given state to any other state (Kalish, Griffiths,
& Lewandowsky, 2007). In Telephone, for example, the
transition matrix defines the probability that a given sentence will transform into a given another (e.g., that “laid him
on the green” becomes “Lady Mondegreen”).
If a Markov chain obeys certain requirements,1 it can be
proven that it will eventually converge to a stationary distribution, a distribution of states unchanged by the transformation. This means that even if we seed a chain with a
random state, after enough steps, the information contained
in the input will be lost, leaving behind a signature of the
transformation process itself. Identifying the stationary distribution of a Markov chain requires having a model for the
probability with which it transitions from one state to another. In the case of transmission chains, one such model is
provided by assuming that perception, learning, and
memory follow the principles of Bayesian inference. Given
an observed stimulus d, people consider hypotheses h about
its nature, and then produce a reconstruction d′. The Bayesian analysis of transmission chains assumes hypotheses are
sampled from the posterior distribution p(h|d) ∝ p(d|h)p(h),
where p(d|h) gives the probability of seeing d if it were generated from h (known as the likelihood) and p(h) is the prior
distribution over hypotheses and encodes people’s expectations about the prevalence of different hypotheses. If d′ is
generated by sampling from the likelihood, then the stationary distribution of this Markov chain is the prior predictive
distribution p(d) = Σh p(d|h)p(h). Consequently, we should
expect the outcome of transmission to reflect people’s expectations, as expressed in the form of this prior predictive
distribution.
Cognitive scientists have used transmission chains in
studies of serial reproduction and iterated learning to study
reconstructive biases in memory and inductive biases in
learning. For example, in Kalish, Griffiths & Lewandowsky
(2007), participants first learned a functional relationship
between two magnitudes (the length of a rectangular bar and
the width of another) by observing pairs. Notably, participants were then tested on some examples that they had never directly observed. Responding to these novel stimuli requires generalization beyond what they have observed. The
authors found that the functional form passed in these
transmission chains gradually reverts to a linear relationship
regardless of the data that seeds the chain. From this, they
concluded that this functional form is what people expect.

1

The condition that needs to be met is that the Markov chain must
be ergodic, which is to say that starting from any state, one can
eventually reach any another state; that the expected number of
steps needed to reach each other state is finite in expectation; and
that returning to any one state does not occur only as a multiple of
some k > 1).

If a good design is one that fits the expectations of its users, then any difficulty in perceiving, learning, or remembering a design indicates that it may be inconsistent with the
user’s cognitive biases. By passing the design through a
transmission chain, the users’ perceptual, inductive, and reconstructive biases will transform the initial design into one
that is better ﬁt to human cognition. In this way, it becomes
possible to improve a design without appealing to first principles — thus we call it design from zeroth principles.

Experiment 1: Stimulus–response mappings
In which direction should a screw be turned in order to drive
it further into wood? Which light switch should be flipped
to turn off the patio light? And which knob should be turned
to light the front left stove burner? Assigning these mappings are design decisions, and some mappings are better
than others. Designs with stimulus–response compatibility
offer a simple and clear mapping between an action and a
response, leading to shorter reaction times and lower rates
of error (Fitts & Seeger, 1953; Proctor & Reeve, 1989;
Kornblum, Hasbroucq, & Osman, 1990).
In Experiment 1A, we applied design from zeroth principles to stimulus–response mappings between light switches
and lights. Experiment 1B evaluated the resulting mappings.

Methods, 1A
Experiment 1A constructed a transmission chain where participants passed along a mapping between light switches and
lights. The chain was seeded with a random mapping.
Participants. We recruited 100 participants on Amazon
Mechanical Turk, an online crowdsourcing platform. Each
participant was paid $0.25 for a few minutes of work.
Stimulus. The stimulus was a depiction of a set of six light
switches and six lights (Fig. 1). When pressed, the switch
turned on one of the lights for 1000 ms.

Figure 1. A set of six light switches and lights. Which
switch maps to which light?
Procedure. Procedure. First, the participant learned the
mapping. On each trial, one of the switches was highlighted
in green. The participant was instructed to press the switch
and observe what happened. Each switch was highlighted
once over the course of training, such that the participant
observed the entire mapping. Then the participant was tested
on what they had learned. On each of six trials, one of lights
was highlighted with a bounding box. The participant was
instructed to turn on the highlighted light by pressing the
corresponding switch. Once pressed, the switch became dis-

1506

abled and could not be reselected. There was no feedback.
The order in which the pairings were learned and tested was
random. Together, the participant’s six responses define a
new mapping that was then passed along to the next participant in the chain. There were 10 chains of 10 participants.

Results & Discussion, 1A
Over time, mappings in the chain became more regular, by
the tenth generation coming to resemble the solution where
all the switches are mapped to the light directly above them
(average Kendall rank correlation coefficient τ = 0.96 between light position and switch position; Fig. 2). In fact, 6
of 10 chains converged to exactly this solution.

A

B
Percent correct

1
0.8
0.6

random mappings drawn from the beginning of the chains in
Experiment 1A; the other half learned the stopping states of
the chains.

Results, 1B
Performance was better for designs from the stopping state
of the chain than for designs from its starting state (proportion correct of 0.70 vs. 0.38; independent samples t-test,
t (198) = 7.1, p < 0.0001; Fig. 2B).

Experiment 2: Vanity numbers
A vanity number is a telephone number with an easily remembered sequence of digits — e.g., 1 (212) 222-2222,
1 (800) 800-8000, or 1 (202) 456-1111. There is an active
market for these numbers, where their pricing depends in
part on intuitions for how easily they can be held in mind
(Haucap, 2003). Valuable vanity numbers are highly sought
after and are sold for prices that are orders of magnitude
higher than those without an obvious pattern. Reasons for
buying vanity numbers are idiosyncratic. Apple co-founder
Steven Wozniak, for example, collected telephone numbers
as a hobby, acquiring 888-8888 soon after the 888 exchange
went on the market2. Businesses often use them in radio and
television advertisements, and occasionally, as in the case of
1-800-Flowers.com, Inc., incorporate them.
In Experiment 2, we applied design from zeroth principles
to choose memorable vanity phone numbers. We then evaluated the resulting numbers by measuring their memorability and predicting their market value.

0.4

Methods

0.2
0

5

10

15
Trial

20

25

30

Figure 2. Designing an intuitive mapping between switches
and lights from zeroth principles. (A) Two chains that began
with random mappings converged to the same design (B).
The designs from the chain’s first generation (black) are
considerably harder to learn than those from the last generation (blue).

Methods, 1B
Experiment 1B evaluated the designs synthesized through
Experiment 1A by comparing the performance characteristics of designs from the beginnings and ends of the chains.
Participants. We recruited 200 participants on Amazon
Mechanical Turk, an online crowdsourcing platform. Each
participant was paid $0.50 for a few minutes of work.
Stimulus. The stimulus was the same as in Experiment 1A.
Procedure. Participants learned a mapping. On each of 30
trials, one of the lights was highlighted with a bounding
box. The participant was instructed to select and press the
switch that would turn on the highlighted light. When
pressed, the corresponding light turned on, providing the
participant with feedback. Half the participants learned the

In Experiment 2, we constructed a transmission chain where
participants passed along 10-digit phone numbers. Each
chain was seeded with a random phone number. There were
20 such chains.
Participants. We recruited 40 participants on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Stimulus. Phone numbers were 10-digit strings formatted as
(XXX) XXX-XXXX. All telephone numbers were sampled randomly from those following the North American Numbering Plan format.
Procedure. First, the participant viewed the phone number
for 2 seconds. Then there was a retention interval of 4 seconds. Finally, the participant recreated the phone number
by typing it on a keyboard. Twenty phone numbers were
remembered and tested in this way.
Estimating a telephone number’s value. We collected
16,000 telephone numbers and their associated prices from
phonenumberguy.com, an online marketplace for vanity
numbers. The numbers vary widely in price, from $199 to
2

Not only are telephone numbers with strings of repeated digits
memorable — they are also easy to press. Wozniak’s 888-8888 was
soon swamped by calls from children mashing 8 on their family’s
home phone (Wolf, 1998).

1507

$199,999. We also collected 34,000 telephone numbers
from Twilio, a communications company. We set the value
of a Twilio number to be $99, midway between $0 and one
dollar less than lowest vanity number, under the logic that
any telephone number worth at least the minimum listed
market price would not be available for less. To estimate the
value of telephone numbers in the transmission chain, none
of which were present in the collected data, we constructed
a model of telephone number prices. From each listed number we extracted a set of binary features (Table 1). To simplify the analysis, the features considered only the number’s
digital representation, ignoring value derived from the
phonewords. We then regressed log price on these features.
The R2 of the resulting model was 0.53.
Table 1. Features used to predict telephone number pricing
and their weight in the model.
Feature

Example

Millions
Seven in a row
Six in a row
Hundred thousands
Thousands
Hundred–thousands
Double repeater A
Double repeater B
Mid repeater
№ of unique digits
Eight 9s in a row
Repeated sequences

1 (415) 700–0000
1 (415) 777–7777
1 (415) 877–7777
1 (415) 870–0000
1 (415) 626–8000
1 (415) 500–6000
1 (415) 888–7777
1 (415) 866–7777
1 (415) 888–2465
1 (415) 326–9087
1 (419) 999–9999
1 (415) 670–7070

β (log USD)
1.67
3.48
1.16
1.69
0.60
1.20
1.96
0.49
0.65
–4.27
3.70
–0.17

Results & Discussion
Over time, telephone numbers in the chain became more
memorable and more valuable. Table 2 shows the telephone
numbers from one of the chains and their estimated value.
The average number of correctly reported digits per number increased from 6.95 across the first five generations to
9.29 across the final five. Note, however, the unforgiving
nature of telephone numbers — with even a single misremembered digit, a call is unlikely to reach its intended target. Thus we also computed performance under a 0–1 loss
function, counting only perfectly recalled numbers as having been remembered at all. The proportion of correctly reported numbers rose from 0.29 across the first five generations to 0.76 across the last five.
The average value of a number in the first generation of
the chain was $119, slightly more than the assigned value of
a non-vanity number. By the end of the chain, the average
value was higher, rising to $548 (two sample t-test on the
log values, t(38) = 4.76, p = 1.75 × 10–4; Mann–Whitney
U(38) = 40.5, p = 6.44 × 10–6).

Table 2. Change points from a randomly seeded telephone
number transmission chain and estimated values in USD.
The first column is the index of the generation.
i
0
1
2
8
9
10
20
24

Number
(603) 639-5026
(603) 639-7843
(603) 639-0000
(603) 693-1234
(603) 693-1294
(603) 693-0000
(800) 963-0000
(800) 936-0000

$
91
90
214
91
91
216
218
217

Experiment 3: Letter Placement
In typography, the shapes of characters are represented by
glyphs with dark and light values spread over space. In sequence, these characters can be formed into words. Many
typographic factors contribute to the final location of letters
— we refer to the total contribution of these factors as letter
placement.
The success of printed text depends in part on its ability to
be read. Letter placement plays a major role in determining
that success. If characters are placed too close together, this
hurts the text’s legibility, the ease of distinguishing between
letters. If placed too far apart, readability, the ease of recognizing groupings of letters into words, sentences, and paragraphs, is worsened. With enough spacing, words become
hard to distinguish from each other, particularly when the
spaces between letters rival that between words.
When typesetters would manually set metal type to design
a page for print, they had to decide not only which typeface
to use, but with what spacing modifications to lay type out
on the page. Each glyph had a default width, but the spacing
between characters could be controlled further through
tracking, an adjustment of spacing between all letters, and
kerning, adjustments of the spacing between specific pairs
of letters (e.g., the “T” and “y” in “Type” look better when
brought closer together than what is specified by their default widths)3.
In today’s digital typefaces, default glyph width and kerning information is built into font files and generally does not
require manual adjustment by typesetters. Because tracking
modifies a font’s general spacing, it still requires manual adjustment. However, the difference between a good and a
poor digital typeface or font family can often boil down to
the decisions the type designer made when considering (or
failing to consider) each font’s kerning pairs.
Over a lifetime, someone reading an hour a day will see
hundreds of millions of typeset words. We argue that, with
so much exposure to printed text, people will come to have
strong expectations about the letter placement in printed
3

Whereas tracking was accomplished by adding space between
every letter, kerning reduced space between letters. Positive kerns
were also possible, but those cases were more often dealt with using ligatures or a new single character that played the role of both
(“fi” → “ﬁ”). We do not address ligatures here.

1508

text. In Experiment 3, we use these expectations to derive
letter placements through design from zeroth principles.

Methods
Experiment 3 constructed a transmission chain where participants passed along typeset words. The chain was seeded
with randomly spaced words.
Participants. We recruited 200 participants on Amazon
Mechanical Turk.
Stimulus. Fifteen words set in Helvetica were used for the
experiments: Typical, frogs, vacuum, hunchback, Chicago,
Year, Egypt, the, eye, kiln, milk, WAVE, fjord, Bring, and
Pile. These words were chosen because each has at least one
pair of adjacent letters that benefit from kerning (e.g. the W
and A in WAVE). The position of the final letter was determined by its position when set in Helvetica (Linotype,
v10.0d4e1) at 100 points. In the randomly spaced words
used to seed the chain, each letter’s position was chosen uniformly over the interval between the first and final letter,
with the constraint that the letters are correctly ordered. We
defined the space between two letters as the center-to-center
distance (in pixels) between the letters’ minimum bounding
boxes.
Procedure. The word was presented for 2 s. After a 4 s retention interval, the first and last letters of the word reappeared in their original position. To the left of the first letter
was a repository of the letters not yet placed, starting with
the second letter of the word. The participant was asked to
place the letter into its displayed position in the word. Once
moved, the next letter appeared. This continued until all the
letters had been placed. The participant was able to readjust
the letters as much necessary before submitting a response.
The participant was able to submit a response only if all the
word’s letters were arranged in the correct order.
Task Error. To measure the fidelity of a participant’s recreated word, we measured the space between pairs of adjacent letters4 and then computed the mean squared error between these spacings and those specified by the font file.
We also computed two benchmarks of error — random spacing and equal spacing. Random spacings were drawn in the
same manner as the starting states, as described above.
Equal spacings were defined with respect to the center of
the letters’ minimum bounding box.

Figure 3. Placing letters in typeset words from zeroth principles. Confidence intervals, indicated by the shaded areas,
are ±1 and ±2 SE. DZP1 uses the most recent state of a single chain; DZP2 averages over chains and across time.

Results & Discussion
The benchmark methods of random spacing and equal spacing produced errors of 120 pixel/word and 24 pixel/word,
respectively (Fig. 3, yellow and purple dashes lines). Because the transmission chains are seeded with a random design, the initial performance is identical to that of random
spacing. The results soon diverge, however, with design
from zeroth principles (blue solid line) outperforming random spacing and approaching the performance of equal
spacing. Because the spacing between letters is metric, the
method can be improved by aggregating across chains and
time. In DZP2, then, the final design is arrived at by averaging the states visited across all the chains. We found that
DZP2 outperforms equal spacing, with designs more closely
resembling those recommended by the Linotype font file.
In addition to the methods reported here, we considered a
second approach of framing the problem of the letter placement. In this, the goal was not to position letters correctly
between fixed endpoints of the first and last letters, but rather to position each letter, including the last, in sequence.
This allowed the length of the word to vary widely. We
found that this method did not converge to a good design. In
general, letter placements that result from this process were
too long. This is counteracted by the fixed-length task that
we describe above. Modifications to the method may be
able to counteract this lengthening influence.

General Discussion
4

We took the ground truth letter placement to be the centroid of a
letter’s bounding box when typeset in Adobe Illustrator and transformed into outlines, rounding to the nearest pixel.

These experiments demonstrate that design from zeroth
principles can recover good designs without explicit designing. In a series of three experiments, we constructed transmission chains seeded with a random design. Each user in
the chain was exposed to the design and then recreated it,

1509

passing along their re-creation to the next user, who did the
same. Through this iterative process, the users’ inductive
and reconstructive biases directly transformed the initial design into one that is better ﬁt to human cognition. We
demonstrated the technique in three domains: stimulus–
response mappings, vanity phone numbers, and letter
placement in typeset words.
Our method can be extended in ways inspired by its computational basis in Markov chains. Rather than estimating
the prior predictive distribution over states, one can estimate
the full transition matrix. This helps compensate for failures
of convergence that can occur with short chains. Another
method for avoiding undue influence from the starting states
is to exclude the burn in trials, a standard procedure for discarding initial samples in Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulations (Murphy, 2012). Convergence can be detected using
standard diagnostic tools for estimating whether an MCMC
sampler has converged (Cowles & Carlin, 1996).
A second direction in which the current method can be
extended is to combine the technique with other forms of
human-in-the-loop computation. For example, by including
an explicit selection layer in which participants evaluate a
design and determine whether a solution persists until the
next generation, the process can be made more robust to the
kinds of errors introduced by various experimental designs.
Such an approach would bring the method closer to other
forms of human-in-the-loop computation such as interactive
evolutionary computation (Takagi, 2001)
Design from zeroth principles can be used on other design
problems, too. Consider for example collation, which requires choosing a rule for how a set of items will be ordered.
Often a well-established convention makes the choice an
easy one. For example, alphabetical order is used widely,
dictating the arrangement of words in a dictionary, topics in
a reference book’s index, and quotes in a newspaper’s stock
table. Other collation methods are conventional in other
domains. The New York Times’ NFL sports standings, for example, are arranged first by division and then by win–loss
record, because these features are important to fans who attend to pennant races. U.S. News & World Report ranks colleges according to their own quantitative metric of institutional quality, best first, because their readers care about
who came out on top. A collation method can be synthesized through by having participants search for items in a
list and then try to recall their order, passing along their collation to the next participant.
Some domains of design are unlikely to benefit from design from zeroth principles. One might imagine, for example, that given people’s notorious difficulty in estimating
their own understanding of the mechanism of helicopter
flight and other complex phenomena (Rozenblit &
Keil, 2002), a helicopter engine and rotor would be unwise
to design in this way. First, the engine and rotor are not subject to much in the way of direct human interaction during
use, so there is no reason for its design to be governed by
human cognitive biases instead of the laws of aerodynamics,
the materials in use, and the atmosphere. (The flight controls

and their mapping to the movement of the rotor, however,
are a different story.) In addition, we acknowledge that in
domains requiring extensive training, there may be different
memory biases that manifest in experts and novices5. A possible solution is to run separate transmission chains that synthesize a different design for each group.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by National Science Foundation grant SPRF-IBSS-1408652 to T.L.G. and J.W.S. and a
Berkeley Graduate Fellowship to M.D.P.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: An experimental and social study. Cambridge: Cambridge University.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in
chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4(1), 55–81.
Cowles, M. K., & Carlin, B. P. (1996). Markov chain Monte
Carlo convergence diagnostics: a comparative review. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434), 883–904.
Fitts, P. M., & Seeger, C. M. (1953). SR compatibility: spatial
characteristics of stimulus and response codes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46(3), 199–210.
Haucap, J. (2003). Telephone number allocation: A property
rights approach. European Journal of Law and Economics,
15(2), 91–109.
Kalish, M. L., Griffiths, T. L., & Lewandowsky, S. (2007). Iterated learning: Intergenerational knowledge transmission
reveals inductive biases. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
14(2), 288–294.
Kornblum, S., Hasbroucq, T., & Osman, A. (1990). Dimensional overlap: cognitive basis for stimulus–response compatibility — a model and taxonomy. Psychological Review, 97(2), 253–270.
Lidwell, W., Holden, K., & Butler, J. (2010). Universal principles of design, revised and updated. Rockport Pub.
Murphy, K. P. (2012). Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective. MIT Press.
Proctor, R. W., & Reeve, T. G. (Eds.). (1989). Stimulusresponse compatibility: An integrated perspective. North–
Holland.
Rozenblit, L.R. and Keil, F.C. (2002) The misunderstood limits
of folk science: an illusion of explanatory depth. Cognitive
Science, 26, 521–562
Simon, H. A. (1996). The sciences of the artificial. MIT press.
Takagi, H. (2001). Interactive evolutionary computation: Fusion of the capabilities of EC optimization and human evaluation. Proceedings of the IEEE, 89(9), 1275-1296.
White, A. W. (2002). The elements of graphic design: space,
unity, page architecture, and type. Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.
Wolf, G. (1998, September 1). The World According to Woz.
Wired Magazine. Retrieved February 1, 2016, from
http://www.wired.com/1998/09/woz/

1510

5

See, e.g., Chase and Simon (1973) regarding chess expertise.

