Discourse Analysis as a Solution to Interpretive Problems in Cognitive Development
Research
Patrick Byers (Patrick.d.byers@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 365 Fifth Ave.
New York, NY 10016 USA

Abstract

children know are justified, negotiated and contested in
research articles on early number concepts.

Cognitive development researchers have drawn conclusions
about young children’s developing knowledge of number by
studying their behavior, while at the same time
acknowledging that behavior is an imperfect index of
knowledge, e.g., it may be disputed whether a given
behavioral task accurately measures, overestimates, or
underestimates children’s knowledge. The texts of published
research articles from these investigations are the focus of a
discourse analysis described in the present article. The results
of the discourse analysis suggest that claims about what a
person knows are actually generalized descriptions of
behavior. Therefore, in studying behavior on tasks to draw
conclusions about participants’ conceptual knowledge,
researchers are merely making behavioral generalizations, not
investigating hidden cognitive or epistemic content.

Knowledge and Behavior in Research on
Cardinality

Keywords: conceptual knowledge; discourse; epistemology;
performance and competence; conceptual and procedural
knowledge

Introduction
Cognitive development researchers have drawn
conclusions about young children’s developing knowledge
of number by studying their behavior, while at the same
time acknowledging that behavior is an imperfect index of
knowledge. For example, researchers may dispute whether a
given behavioral task accurately measures, overestimates, or
underestimates children’s knowledge, all while tacitly
accepting that behavior is what provides proof of
knowledge. This ambivalent relationship between
knowledge and behavior—knowledge is neither perfectly
reflected in behavior, but behavior is the only clue we have
as to what children know—has made the distinction
between them central to investigations of children’s
knowledge of number. In fact, many of these investigations
are as much concerned with determining valid behavioral
indices of that knowledge as with the knowledge itself
(Briars and Siegler, 1984; Gelman and Meck, 1983; Greeno,
Riley and Gelman, 1984; Rittle-Johnson, Schneider and
Star, 2015; Sarnecka and Carey, 2008; Wynn, 1990).
The current paper argues that the distinction between
knowledge and behavior as pursued in this research is
illusory, and that descriptions of what children know are, in
fact, descriptions of behavioral capacities rather than
descriptions of some hidden, epistemic content. This
conclusion is supported by the results of a qualitative
discourse analysis of the ways that claims about what

Research on developing number concepts in children has
focused extensively on their understanding of the cardinal
meanings of number words and counting, or cardinality.
Cardinality refers to the way that number words denote
entire sets of items, rather than merely the individual
members of those sets. Part of the reason for this focus on
cardinality is that children are inconsistent in performing the
behaviors indicative of understanding cardinality. Children
who are otherwise able to use numbers in various ways
(e.g., in counting) often fail to demonstrate an understanding
of cardinality in certain contexts. For example, Fuson
(1988) describes preschool children who, after accurately
counting a set of five items, and responding to the question
“how many are there” with the last counted word (a
behavior ostensibly indicative of understanding cardinality),
respond to the request for the five items by picking up only
the fifth counted item. Other studies report similar findings.
For example, when asked to create a set of a requested
number of items from a larger pile, preschool-aged children
who were otherwise proficient counters responded by
grabbing a random (numerically unrelated) number of items
(Fuson, 1988; Sarnecka & Carey, 2007; Wynn, 1990).
Researchers interpret these types of inconsistent displays
of competence by recourse to two acknowledgements about
the relation between knowledge and behavior: (1) First, it
may be claimed that competence precedes performance, i.e.,
young children may understand cardinality but have
difficulty planning and/or executing actions that reflect this
understanding (e.g., Gelman and Gallistel, 1978). (2)
Alternately, it is claimed that performance may precede
competence, i.e., young children’s apparent competence in
some contexts may reflect their carrying out rote-learned or
imitated behavioral routines that they do not yet fully
understand on a conceptual level (e.g., Wynn, 1990).
These interpretations allow researchers to provide stable
accounts of children’s developing conceptual knowledge of
number, despite inconsistent and unpredictable behavioral
performances. Yet, as has been explained in more detail
elsewhere (Allen & Bickhard, 2013; Byers, 2016), the
flexibility that these explanations provide is inherently
problematic. If we accept that (1) knowledge can be present
despite the absence of corresponding behavior, and (2)

1128

behavioral performances ostensibly indicative of knowledge
may be performed in the absence of that knowledge, this
means that essentially any behavioral evidence can be
consistent with any underlying conceptual knowledge. This
is especially problematic because, in the previously cited
research, behavior is the only available predictor of
knowledge. It is not clear how the additional study of
children’s behavior could produce more definitive
conclusions about children’s knowledge of cardinality.
The current paper proposes that the fundamental issue
here is not one that can be resolved by further study of
children’s behavior. Instead, the crucial issue is that the
distinction between behavior and knowledge—and
specifically the attempt to draw conclusions about
knowledge on the basis of behavioral evidence, while
simultaneously treating behavior as an ambiguous indicator
of that knowledge—undermines the discursive practices
through which conclusions about knowledge are
normatively reached. These arguments are elaborated in the
following sections, which describe a discourse analysis of
the texts of research articles that report conclusions about
children’s knowledge of cardinality.

Discourse Analysis of Knowledge Claims
The discourse analysis focused on the ways that conclusions
about what children know are asserted, justified and
contested in research articles on children’s knowledge of
number. The aim of this analysis is to develop a general
model of how this occurs that can shed light on what it
means to claim that the child knows or understands
something about cardinality or number, and why certain
types of evidence provide grounds for asserting or
contesting these claims. These issues are important since,
insofar as problems in reaching conclusions about children’s
knowledge of number stem from (or can be understood in
terms of) the discursive practices themselves, the most
relevant aspect of these practices are the conclusions about
knowledge, and their justification.

Sampling of Texts
The discourse analysis was conducted on a sample of ten
published research articles,1 each of which was focused on
children’s conceptual knowledge of number. In each of
these articles, claims are made about what children do/don’t
know, which are justified with evidence and other
arguments. The decision to focus only on articles on
numerical knowledge was intended to reduce the scope of
analysis for purposes of simplicity. While some of the
articles have the same authors, and are therefore not
discursively independent of each other, the intention of this
1
The selected articles include Briars and Siegler (1984),
Brooks, Audet and Barner (2012) Davidson, Eng and Barner
(2012), Frye, Braisby, Lowe, Maroudas and Nicholls (1989),
Gelman (1972), Gelman and Meck (1983), Nikoloska (2009),
Sarnecka and Carey (2007), Sarnecka and Wright (2013),
Sophian (1988), and Wynn (1990).

study was not to construct a representative sample of all
published research in this area, but to understand, in depth,
the
way
that
knowledge
claims
may
be
asserted/contested/justified in a specific discursive context,
with the hope that this may yield findings applicable to
other discursive contexts. While it is possible that the
current results will not be generalizable due to idiosyncratic
features of the sample, this kind of high density sampling
allows for a comprehensive analysis that would be unwieldy
with a broader sample (in a similar way, a historian might
claim that an in-depth study of a particular war (from a few
extensive accounts) might yield in-depth knowledge about
war that would not be possible from a more brief study of
many accounts). Consequently, while the current results
must be taken as only potentially generalizable, the hope is
that they may illustrate general insights about how
conclusions about knowledge are reached.

Process of Analysis
As a starting point for the analysis, a preliminary distinction
was made between two types of statements to be identified
in each of the texts: knowledge claims, and the statements
that justify them—justifications (both are described in detail
below in Table 1). These initial categories were necessary as
a starting point for the analysis, which after all, cannot come
from nowhere. In the remainder of this article, examples of
knowledge claims will be italicized and justifications will be
underlined.
Knowledge Claims Knowledge claims are assertions of
what a person knows. They are not just any claims about
knowledge, but rather claims that describe what is known.
Knowledge claims most commonly involve the verbs to
know or to understand, but may also use others such as
realize, recognize, or phrases such as the claim that a person
has a concept of something. A basic example of a
knowledge claim is the following: s/he understands the
cardinal meaning of the number six. Knowledge claims may
also be assertions that a person does not know something,
e.g., s.he does not understand the cardinal meaning of the
number six.
Justifications Justifications are the most directly given
reason used to support or contest a given knowledge claim.
Continuing from the example above, the justification would
be the reason or proof given for the assertion of the previous
statement. For example if it is claimed that s/he understands
the cardinal meaning of the number six because s/he
correctly gives out six items from a larger pile when
requested, the latter underlined portion would be a
justification. As this description implies, justifications can
only be identified relative to a knowledge claim, rather than
in terms of the intrinsic characteristics of the justifying
statement itself.

1129

Table 1: Composite statements containing knowledge
claims (italicized) and justifications (underlined).

S/he doesn’t understand how counting works because
when asked for “four toys” from a larger pile, she
responded by grabbing a random number of toys.
The concept of cardinality is measured by performance on
the Give-N task.
After an experimenter removed an item from a previously
counted set, the child correctly responded when asked how
many items it now contained, suggesting that s/he knows
the subtraction of an item from a counted set means that
the number of items in the set decreases by one.

Identification of Knowledge Claims and
Justifications in the Analyzed Texts
While Table 1 shows knowledge claims and justifications as
relatively discrete features in the text, it was recognized that
instances of each may only be interpretable as a distributed
network of connected statements across a text (e.g.
descriptions of a task performance elaborated in multiple
separate sections). In addition, the analysis focused on
explicitly-, implicitly- and conditionally-asserted knowledge
claims/justifications. Finally, care was taken to ensure that
knowledge claims/justifications were identified in cases
where, due to the flexibility of language, they may not have
been apparent as such. For example, although the phrase
children’s invariance schemes contain rules for reversing
operations (Gelman, 1972, p. 84) is not immediately
apparent as a knowledge claim, it was classified as such
because, in context, it clearly meant children know that
addition and subtraction (but not displacement) change the
numerosity of a set and they also know which operation is
needed to reverse the effects of addition/subtraction to
return a set to its original numerosity.

Refinement of Analytical Categories
The analysis proceeded by first reading each text and
identifying paired exemplars of knowledge claims and
justifications therein. These paired exemplars were then
juxtaposed, revealing common characteristics of each type
of statement, as well as clues as to how and why each
member of a pair relates to the other. These features were
analyzed with the intention of addressing the following
questions: What is it about a knowledge claim and its
accompanying justification that allows the latter to provide
valid grounds for the assertion of the former? In cases where
a justification is brought in to contest an asserted claim,
what is it about the justification/claim that makes it possible
for this to be done? More generally, under what
circumstances can previously-justified knowledge claims be
contested, and how is this done? Tentative answers to these
questions were scrutinized by assessing the extent to which

they were consistent with the broader use of knowledge
claims throughout the sampled texts.

Results
The analysis of the selected texts in terms of the above
categories (knowledge claim and justification) produced a
variety of results. A full presentation of all of these is
beyond the scope of the present paper. For the current
purposes, the following two results are the basis for the
most significant findings of the study.

Similarity of Knowledge Claims and Justifications
The distinction between knowledge claims and justifications
was readily apparent in the analyzed texts. However, this
distinction appeared to be a relative one, rather than
something that could be defined in terms of the intrinsic
characteristics of statements exemplifying either category.
While this was assumed from the beginning to be true for
justifications, the discourse analysis showed it to be true for
knowledge claims as well (i.e., a statement is only a
knowledge claim relative to the surrounding text).
While certain types of statements were found to be more
typical of either knowledge claims or justifications
(statements using verbs like know or understand versus
descriptions
of
behavioral
performances),
these
characteristics did not reliably characterize statements of
either type because there was no type of statement that was
exclusively found in only one category or the other. So,
while assertions that a person knows X or has a concept of X
were more typical of knowledge claims, statements like
these were occasionally used as justifications. This is
evident in the following quote from Frye et al. (1989), in
which a description of what a child knows (first sentence) is
presented as the possible justification for two alternative
knowledge claims:
…[the child’s knowledge] that the cardinal value
reached on the second trick trial ought to be the same as
on the first correct trial. That knowledge could be
evidence of [an understanding of] cardinality, or of a
less specific understanding that if nothing about the
array changes, the puppet’s response shouldn’t change
either. (p. 1168)
Similarly, although descriptions of a person’s behavior were
more typically associated with justifications, these sorts of
statements were occasionally used in essentially the same
way as knowledge claims, insofar as their assertion was
justified by other statements. (Despite not involving words
like know, understand, etc., for reasons that will become
clear, these statements can still be considered to be
knowledge claims.)
There were also cases in which a statement appeared to
simultaneously function as a knowledge claim and
justification. This is evident in the following quote from
Gelman (1972)
Together, the reactions to Phase III indicate the children
treated subtraction as an operation that was relevant and
displacement as one that was irrelevant to number. This

1130

indicates they had the ability to treat number (at least
small ones) as invariant. ...
Reactions to the surreptitious changes introduced in
Phase III indicate that Ss treated addition as relevant and
displacement as irrelevant to number. ...The means of
1.5 and 0.3 reflect the fact that 15 addition and only four
displacement Ss were surprised by the changes. All
addition Ss noted the change as opposed to only six
displacement Ss. (Gelman, 1972, p. 8)
In the quote, the phrase children treated subtraction as an
operation that was relevant and displacement as one that
was irrelevant functions as a justification for the claim that
children had the ability to treat number as invariant. It also
functions as a knowledge claim that is justified by the final
two sentences of the quote.
The absence of a clear distinction between the intrinsic
characteristics of statements serving as knowledge claims as
opposed to justifications becomes even more apparent if we
juxtapose a variety of examples of knowledge claims and
justifications. In the place of clear boundaries between the
two categories, a continuum emerges. As a demonstration of
this, consider the following list of quoted knowledge claims
and justifications, culled from the Davidson, Eng and
Barner (2012, p. 162-162). Within those two pages, the
authors entertain whether children…
• …understand how counting represents cardinalities.
• …have the meanings for only a subset of the words in
their count list.
• … understand that…when a set beyond the child’s
counting range has an item removed and replaced with
a different item…it retains its cardinality and that the
same number word applies.
• …are able to distinguish one and two from each other
and from the rest of the numbers in their count list.
• …are more likely to respond correctly when asked if
there are now six or seven objects.
• can recite higher numbers (e.g., 5 or 10) [when
counting]
The list begins with statements classified as knowledge
claims and ends with justifications. While statements on
either extreme are clearly distinct, no clear demarcation
point between them is apparent. These findings will be
further addressed in the interpretation section below.

In the terminology of knowledge claims and justifications,
the above quote can be rephrased as saying ‘previous
researchers have found the same children’s behavior across
multiple tasks to constitute justifications for and against the
knowledge claim that children expect numerals to label
precise quantities.’ Brooks et al. (2012) resolve this
inconsistency by arguing that “some of children’s apparent
successes are best explained not by domain-specific
semantic understanding of number, but instead by languagegeneral pragmatic abilities” (p. 1066). This argument, like
others seen throughout the analyzed texts, resolves
inconsistent findings by re-describing some of the
knowledge claims made on the basis of observed behavior.
In this case, a behavioral performance ostensibly indicative
of conceptual knowledge of number is re-described as
indicative of general pragmatic abilities. Such arguments
appear to work by differentiating the conflicting evidence,
thereby removing the apparent inconsistency.

Interpretation of Results
The above findings suggest the following interpretations of
what knowledge claims and justifications are and how they
function:
1. Knowledge claims and justifications are both
descriptions of behavioral dispositions.
2. A justification is a more concrete description of
some aspect of the behavioral disposition that is
described more generally by the knowledge claim.
The ways that these conclusions were derived from the
previous two findings is explained in the following sections.

Knowledge Claims and Justifications are
Descriptions of Behavioral Dispositions

Researchers’ Responses to Inconsistent Evidence
The second relevant finding involved the fact that, at
various points in each of the analyzed texts, authors gave
reports of inconsistent evidence for a particular knowledge
claim. This inconsistency involved findings that the same
child would succeed and fail on two tasks that were
(ostensibly) measures of the same form of knowledge. One
example is summarized by Brooks, Audet and Barner
(2012):
Previous studies report conflicting evidence, and find
that children expect numerals to label precise quantities
in some tasks but not in others” (Sarnecka and
Gelman, 2004; Condry and Spelke, 2008). (p. 1066)

The idea that knowledge claims and justifications are both
descriptions of behavioral dispositions explains the
similarity between both types of statements, as well as they
ways they were used. This interpretation also makes
intuitive sense in the case of most justifications, insofar as
these were very often descriptions of behavioral
performances. It makes less intuitive sense in the case of
knowledge claims, which do not obviously appear to be
descriptions of dispositions. Nevertheless, the idea that
knowledge claims (including descriptions of very abstract
conceptual knowledge, e.g., understanding the cardinal
principle) are descriptions of behavioral dispositions is
strongly supported by a variety of findings. To illustrate
this, consider a typical case in which a knowledge claim is
justified by a description of some behavioral performance,
e.g., knowledge of the cardinal principle is justified by the
fact that a child was able to accurately create sets of a
requested number of items. (Although not all justifications
were self-evidently descriptions of behavior, this
explanation will account for those other cases as well.) If
knowledge claims are themselves descriptions of behavioral
dispositions, this explains (1) how researchers determine the
particular behavioral performance denoted by the
justification as relevant to the knowledge claim, and (2) why

1131

the performance of the behavior described by the
justification would be grounds for (or at least consistent
with) the assertion of the knowledge claim. For similar
reasons, this explanation also accounts for why descriptions
of behavioral performances were sometimes used in the
same way as knowledge claims, as well as cases in which
knowledge claims were justified by other claims about what
children know: Since—according to the current
interpretation—all knowledge claims and justifications are
descriptions of behavioral dispositions, these exceptional
cases are not fundamentally unique.
The fact that knowledge claims for conceptual knowledge
(e.g., knowing the cardinal principle) don’t often appear to
be descriptions of behavioral dispositions may be a
reflection of the generality of the described
disposition. While any disposition implies some range of
behavior, rather than only one specific behavioral
performance, this range may be more broad or narrow in
different cases. It is relatively narrow in the case of a
disposition such as knowing how to recite a particular
poem, and much more broad in the case of a disposition like
understanding that poem. In the former case, there would be
clear structural resemblances in the range of behavior
instantiating the described disposition. In the latter case, the
disposition would be instantiated by a broad variety of
behavioral forms whose similarity to each other may only be
very abstract.

Knowledge Claims and Justifications as Relative
Levels of Abstraction
Descriptions of behavioral dispositions do not describe
specific behaviors, but rather a potential for some variety of
related forms of behavior. Dispositions can be described at
varying levels of abstractness/concreteness, with more
concretely described dispositions denoting only highly
structurally similar forms of behavior, and more abstract
dispositions denoting forms that may share only a very
abstract similarity. For instance, the disposition of a person
to count in general is instantiated by a wider range of
behavior than is the disposition to count a set of five
marbles.
Descriptions of behavioral dispositions (knowledge
claims) at different levels of abstraction can be nested
hierarchically if the more abstract claim subsumes the
disposition described by the more concrete one. Within such
a hierarchically nested set of dispositions, the truth of a
more general claim can be used to deductively infer the
truth of a more concrete claim subsumed under it (e.g., if a
child knows how to count, they should be able to count these
marbles). Likewise, the truth of more concrete claims can be
used to inductively infer the truth of a more abstract one
(e.g., the fact that the child can count marbles suggests that
they may be able to count in general).
The possibility of nesting disposition descriptions, and the
inferential possibilities that are possible across different
levels of abstraction explains how certain statements justify
knowledge claims, and how a given knowledge claim

provides a basis for expectation of more concrete forms of
behavior. When researchers study children’s behavior to
make conclusions about what they know, they are in fact
assessing whether a general disposition can be inductively
inferred to be true as a function of whether the specific
behaviors (or sub-dispositions) that it entails are in fact
observed. Failure to observe these forms of behavior
provides grounds for the rejection of the knowledge claim.
The view being developed here also accounts for the
problems and solutions that emerged in cases of inconsistent
evidence (i.e., finding that a child can perform some but not
all of the forms of behavior implicated by a given
knowledge claim. If knowledge claims are descriptions of
more general dispositions (relative to their justifications),
then to assert them is to imply a variety of more concrete
dispositions subsumed under the asserted claim. The finding
of inconsistent performance of these subsumed behaviors is
problematic vis a vis a given knowledge claim, since this
permits neither assertion nor rejection of the more general
claim. Consequently, it is understandable that, in these
instances, researchers tended to re-describe one of the
inconsistent performances, since this had the effect of
removing it as an exemplar of an inconsistently supported,
knowledge claim, and resulting in a now-consistent body of
evidence for or against the assertion of the knowledge
claim.
This can be shown with the following example. If a child
passes all but one task measuring an understanding of the
cardinal principle, the researcher may claim that the failed
task (behavior X) was too difficult due to, e.g., memory
demands. In doing this, the researcher is effectively redescribing task X as not only a measure of the cardinal
principle, but additionally as a measure of memory ability.
The fact that the task has now been claimed to also measure
memory ability means that it is no longer a valid concrete
instantiation of understanding the cardinal principle.
Consequently, the child can now be claimed to understand
the cardinal principle because this no longer implies
passing task x, since the latter is now a justification for a
claim along the lines of: demonstrating knowledge of the
cardinality principle in a context that involves excessive
memory demands.

Conclusion
The present research analyzed the texts of published
research articles in order to explain how conclusions about
children’s knowledge of number are asserted, justified and
contested, as well as how these statements function and
what they indicate. The premise for this investigation was
the observed difficulty that researchers have faced in
drawing definitive conclusions about children’s knowledge
on the basis of their behavior. The results of the discourse
analysis suggest that descriptions of children’s knowledge
are in fact generalized descriptions of their disposition for
certain behavior, and that these knowledge claims are
asserted contingent on the observation of behavioral

1132

performances that concretely exemplify certain aspects of
the behavioral disposition in question.
These conclusions readily account for why cognitive
development researchers have been unable to disentangle
children’s conceptual knowledge from their performance
capabilities. From the perspective of the current findings,
such a differentiation is impossible. Conceptual knowledge
in some conceptual domain is not some cognitive or
epistemic entity that is reflected in—but separate from—
certain forms of behavior. Rather, it is a discursive
generalization of that behavior. Therefore, the perennial
discussion of whether children’s conceptual competence in
some domain chronologically precedes or follows their
behavioral ability in that domain is ultimately incoherent.
The centrality of the competence and performance
distinction in cognitive development (e.g., in seminal
writings such as Chomsky (1965) and Gelman and Gallistel,
(1978)), as well as in the use of related distinctions such as
that between procedural and conceptual knowledge (RittleJohnson & Schneider & Starr, 2015) likely reflects
researchers’ desire to distinguish between the hidden
potential for certain forms of nervous system functioning
and the potential for certain forms of overt behavioral
performance. While a distinction along these lines is
certainly useful for many purposes, the present results
suggest that the nervous system capacities in question
cannot usefully be characterized in terms of knowledge
claims, since insofar as the latter are descriptions of
behavior, they cannot realistically be distinguished from
behavioral performances.

Future Questions
It cannot be denied that the behavior of any typical person
entails actual, rather than just described, patterned
behavioral capacities (these might be described as attractor
states, such as the stable limit cycle seen in walking, or the
tendency towards walking as a solution to the desire to
move). Without a doubt, the quasi-predictability that such
patterns provide is a prerequisite for the utility of any
generalizations about behavior (e.g., knowledge claims). To
the extent that knowledge claims have predictive power, a
crucial question for future research is how and why the
dispositions described by knowledge claims correspond in
any isomorphic way to these actual dispositional capacities
of the typical human organism.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Joseph Glick for intellectual support in the
development of this project.

References

Briars, D., & Siegler, R. S. (1984). A featural analysis of
preschoolers’ counting knowledge. Developmental
Psychology, 20(4), 607.
Brooks, N., Audet, J., & Barner, D. (2012). Pragmatic
Inference, Not Semantic Competence, Guides 3-YearOlds’ Interpretation of Unknown Number Words.
Developmental Psychology, 49(6), 1066-75.
Byers, P. (2016). Knowledge claims in cognitive
development research: Problems and alternatives. New
Ideas
in
Psychology,
43,
16-27.
doi:10.1016/j.newideapsych.2016.03.004
Davidson, K., Eng, K., & Barner, D. (2012). Does learning
to count involve a semantic induction? Cognition, 123(1),
162–173. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2011.12.013
Frye, D., Braisby, N., Lowe, J., Maroudas, C., & Nicholls, J.
(1989). Young children’s understanding of counting and
cardinality. Child Development, 60(5), 1158–1171.
Fuson, K. C. (1988). Children’s counting and concepts of
number. Springer-Verlag.
Gelman, R. (1972). Logical Capacity of Very Young
Children: Number Invariance Rules. Child Development,
43(1), 75–90. http://doi.org/10.2307/1127873
Gelman, R., & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). The Child’s
Understanding of Number. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gelman, R., & Meck, E. (1983). Preschoolers’ Counting:
Principles Before Skill. Cognition, 13(3), 343–359.
Greeno, J. G., Riley, M. S., & Gelman, R. (1984).
Conceptual competence for children’s counting.
Cognitive Psychology, 16, 94-143.
Nikoloska, A. (2009). Development of the cardinality
principle in Macedonian preschool children. Psihologija,
42(4), 459–475. http://doi.org/10.2298/PSI0904459N
Rittle-Johnson, B., Schneider, M., & Star, J. R. (2015). Not
a One-Way Street: Bidirectional Relations Between
Procedural and Conceptual Knowledge of Mathematics.
Educational Psychology Review, 27 (4) 587-597.
Sarnecka, B. W., & Carey, S. (2008). How counting
represents number: What children must learn and when
they learn it. Cognition, 108(3), 662–674.
Sarnecka, B. W., & Wright, C. E. (2013). The Idea of an
Exact Number: Children’s Understanding of Cardinality
and Equinumerosity. Cognitive Science, 37(8), 1493–
1506. http://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12043
Sophian, C. (1988). Early Developments in Children’s
Understanding of Number: Inferences about Numerosity
and One-to-One Correspondence. Child Development,
59(5), 1397–1414. http://doi.org/10.2307/1130502
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36(2), 155–193. http://doi.org/10.1016/00100277(90)90003-3

Allen, J.W.P. & Bickhard, M. (2013). Stepping off the
Pendulum: Why Only an Action-Based Approach Can
Transcend the Nativist-Empiricist Debate. Cognitive
Development, 28(2), 96-133.

1133

