Distinguishing processing difficulties in inhibition, implicature, and negation
Ann E. Nordmeyer

Erica J. Yoon

Michael C. Frank

anordmey@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

ejyoon@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
Despite their considerable communicative abilities, young
children often have difficulty interpreting complex linguistic
structures in context. Two examples of this phenomenon are
negation and pragmatic implicature, both of which pose sometimes surprising difficulties for preschoolers. Both of these
structures require children to resist a more salient alternative
interpretation; since executive function abilities develop extensively during childhood, perhaps failures are due to problems in inhibition. To test this hypothesis, we designed tasks
to measure inhibitory control, negation, and implicature comprehension in children and adults. Using standard analyses as
well as drift diffusion models, we found different patterns of
processing on all three tasks, and no support for the hypothesis
that inhibitory control per se is playing a role in either adults’
or children’s negation or implicature processing. Instead, our
analyses reveal qualitatively different developmental trajectories, suggesting task-specific factors driving these changes.
Keywords: Inhibitory control; negation; implicature; drift diffusion model; cognitive development; pragmatics

Introduction
By ages 3–4, children are often quite proficient at general
communication, using language to tell stories, coordinate actions, and navigate the social world (E. V. Clark, 2009). Despite this proficiency, the same children often fail laboratory
language processing tasks that test important but complex linguistic constructions. For example, in tests of negation comprehension, children will often struggle to identify a character
who has “no apples,” instead choosing the character who does
have apples (Nordmeyer & Frank, 2014b). And while adults
easily make the ad-hoc pragmatic implicature that “My plate
has a carrot” refers to a plate with just a carrot (rather than
a plate with a carrot and a banana), children often fail (see
example stimuli in Figure 1; Yoon, Wu, & Frank, 2015).
Children’s difficulties with these tasks are surprising in
light of their other abilities in each domain. Children under
two years spontaneously produce negative utterances (Bloom,
1970; Pea, 1980, 1982), yet children as old as four years
consistently fail tests of negation comprehension (e.g. Kim,
1985; Nordmeyer & Frank, 2014b). And children demonstrate an understanding of pragmatic principles by age three
(E. V. Clark, 2009), adjusting the informativeness of their
own expressions depending on the difficulty of referent disambiguation (Matthews, Lieven, Theakston, & Tomasello,
2006) and the extent of listeners’ knowledge (Matthews,
Butcher, Lieven, & Tomasello, 2012). Yet they stuggle to
make ad-hoc implicatures before age four (Yoon et al., 2015;
Stiller, Goodman, & Frank, 2015) and scalar implicatures
with quantifiers beyond age five (Huang & Snedeker, 2009).
Why do children struggle on negation and implicature
when production data and past experiments suggest that they

have the requisite linguistic abilities? In both of these examples, children’s failures might occur not because they lack
linguistic understanding, but because the incorrect choice is
more salient or perceptually interesting. When children are
asked to “find the boy with no apples,” they must look away
from the character who is holding the labeled objects, and
look at some other, unlabeled object instead. Similarly, to
demonstrate comprehension of “my plate has a carrot,” children must look away from the more visually salient plate (the
one with two objects instead of one). In both cases, poor executive function might explain children’s difficulty selecting
the correct response on these comprehension tasks.
Executive function is a construct that encompasses a
wide variety of functions including response inhibition,
task-shifting, and working memory (Miyake et al., 2000).
These abilities change dramatically during early childhood
(Diamond & Taylor, 1996; Davidson, Amso, Anderson, &
Diamond, 2006), especially during the period of interest (ages
3–5), making them a possible candidate factor underlying
changes in language processing. The specific executive function construct most relevant to negation and implicature is
response inhibition, because classic tests of this construct require participants to override a prepotent response. Participants who react quickly often make the wrong choice, and
correct choices are typically slower. The presence of these
sorts of speed-accuracy tradeoffs in language comprehension
data might be a signal of inhibitory issues, but speed-accuracy
tradeoffs can be difficult to understand with traditional analyses, which examine reaction time and accuracy separately.
Drift diffusion models (DDMs) are an important tool for
addressing the speed-accuracy tradeoff that often arises in
response inhibition tasks. DDMs (e.g. Ratcliff, 1978) use
both accuracy and reaction time as measures of the decision making process in simple two-alternative forced choice
paradigms. The model can be imagined as a noisy accumulation of evidence over time, resulting in an eventual correct
or incorrect choice when the accumulated evidence reaches
a predetermined decision “boundary.” The model produces
four key parameters: boundary separation (the amount of evidence needed to reach a positive decision), bias (to what extent is the decision process biased towards one decision or
another), non-decision time (the time needed to encode basic
information about the stimuli, before embarking on the decision process), and drift rate (the rate at which evidence is
accumulated). Past work has shown that children typically
have longer non-decision times, higher separation boundaries, and slower drift rates, suggesting that children require
more time to process stimuli, more information to make a de-

2789

Inhibition

Negation

Implicature

“banana”
(after five trials of hearing “apple”)

“no apple”

“banana”

Figure 1: Example stimuli from each condition. Words identifying the target picture (left in each panel) are given at the bottom.
cision, and take longer to accumulate evidence compared to
adults (Ratcliff, Love, Thompson, & Opfer, 2012).
In the current work, we test the hypothesis that changes in
response inhibition underlie developmental changes in children’s processing of negation and implicature. We use a simple design with three separate subtasks to test adults’ and children’s inhibitory control, negation comprehension, and implicature comprehension. In order to explore how children’s
language processing changes across development, we collected data from 4–6-year-olds, as well as adults. Despite the
fact that the three tasks contained almost identical visual and
auditory stimuli, results of conventional and DDM analyses
suggest distinct patterns of information processing and developmental change across the three tasks. This suggests that,
contrary to our initial hypothesis, children’s undeveloped inhibitory control cannot entirely explain their difficulty with
negation and pragmatic implicatures. Instead, our data suggest that negation and implicature appear to follow different
developmental trajectories throughout early childhood.

Method
We created three simple “find the picture” tasks (stimuli pictured in Figure 1) to test inhibitory control, negation, and implicature in adults and children. Our initial version of this task
was implemented on an iPad tablet (and results were similar),
but in this version we used a computer to facilitate shorter reaction times and increase comparability between the children
and an online sample of adults (who used a computer).

Participants
We invited parents and children at the Children’s Discovery
Museum in San Jose, CA to play a computer game. Ten children were excluded from analysis because their parents indicated that they heard English at home 50% of the time or
less. An additional 24 children were excluded from analysis
for failing to complete at least half of the trials in each task.
These exclusions resulted in a final sample of 22 4-year-olds
(mean age 4;7), 19 5-year-olds (mean age 5;5), and 25 6-yearolds (mean age 6;5). We also recruited adult participants on
Amazon Mechanical Turk to play the computer version of the
task. Two adults were excluded for failing to complete at least
half of the trials, resulting in a final sample of 48.

Stimuli and design
The experiment consisted of three tasks: inhibition, negation,
and implicature. In each trial, two images were presented side
by side on the screen. Images were presented in yoked pairs,
cycling through the same twelve possible item pairs.
A pre-recorded voice said one or two words, and participants’ task was to select the correct referent as soon as they
could. We used words (instead of full sentences) both to keep
linguistic stimuli as similar as possible across the three tasks
and to keep trials very short, allowing us to collect many trials
per participant (a requirement of the planned DDM analyses).
On each task, participants were instructed to select the corresponding picture as quickly and accurately as possible.
For the inhibition task, in a set of 6–8 trials, the same two
pictures appeared side by side (e.g., a picture of a banana and
a picture of a apple). The target picture appeared on either
the left or the right side, with target side randomized across
all trials. For the first 5–7 trials (control trials), one of the two
objects was named (e.g., “apple”), then on the last trial (target
trials), the other object was named (“banana”). Children saw
a total of 12 sets of trials, and adults saw 24 sets.
For the negation task, the referents were named with or
without negation. For example, given two pictures of banana
and apple respectively, to refer to the banana the recorded
voice said “banana” (positive trials, the control for this task)
or “no apple” (negative trials, the target for this task). Children saw 60 trials, and adults saw 120 trials.
For the implicature task, in each trial there was a picture
with one object (e.g., banana) and another picture with the
same object as well as another (e.g., banana and apple). In
control trials, the unique object was named (“apple”) and in
target trials, the common object was named (“banana”), implying “banana but not apple” (an ad-hoc implicature). Children saw 60 trials, and adults saw 120 trials.

Procedure
Parents and children were recruited on the floor of the CDM
and were led to a small nearby research room. An experimenter first explained the task to children, who then went
through two practice trials, where they were asked to select
an obvious, unambiguous referent (e.g., “cow” as opposed to
“rabbit”). Children selected the picture on the left side of the
screen by pressing the ‘z’ key and selected by picture on the

2790

Trial Type: !

Control!

Target!

Age Group!

Age Group!

Figure 2: Adults’ and children’s mean proportion correct responses (left) and reaction time (right) for target and control trials
across the three tasks. Control trials are shown in red, target trials are shown in turquoise. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals.

right side of the screen by pressing the ‘/’ key; both keys were
covered by blue stickers to help children find them. Then they
went through the three tasks in a randomized order. Afterwards, the experimenter gave them a sticker as a gift. Adults
played the same game without practice trials.

Analysis and preprocessing
Because some children responded immediately without listening to the entire word and some children took an exceedingly long time to respond to some trials, we made a decision
to remove any trials with reaction times less than 200 milliseconds from the word onset, and longer than 15 seconds
from the word onset.1 After these initial exclusions, we followed our initial planned analysis by removing RTs outside
of three standard deviations from the log-transformed mean.
We fit diffusion models separately to each individual participant’s data using the RWiener package,2 using the NelderMead method to estimate optimal parameter values. We estimated parameters separately for each trial type (target vs.
control) within each task for every participant, and then calculated the mean and 95% C.I. across all participants within
each age group (4-year-olds, 5-year-olds, 6-year-olds, and
adults). We removed participants with any parameter value
outside of 3 standard deviations from the mean for that parameter within each game.
All regression results reported are based on linear (RT and
DDM parameters) or logistic (accuracy) mixed effect models,
fit using lme4 with the maximal convergent random effect
structure. Models of RT were fit using log-transformed RTs.

Results and Discussion
This experiment yielded a large data set that affords many
analyses. Participants’ accuracy and reaction times are
shown in Figure 2; DDM fits are shown in Figure 3.
1 Although this decision was made post-hoc based on some unexpectedly short and long reaction times, the decision did not affect
the key findings we present in this paper.
2 All analyses described in this paper were conducted using R
version 3.2.1

We organize the results reported here around those findings that speak most directly to our question of interest.
First we use traditional accuracy and reaction time measures to examine whether individual performance on the
inhibition task is correlated with individual performance
on the implicature and negation tasks. We then use the
drift diffusion model to explore differences in processing
across the three tasks, and examine the development of children’s processing in each task. Raw data are available
at https://github.com/anordmey/cogsci16, and a fuller
set of analyses can be viewed at http://anordmey.github
.io/cogsci16/analysis/neginhib cogsci16.html.

Inhibition task performance was not correlated with
negation or implicature performance
Our key hypothesis was that successful performance on the
negation and implicature tasks requires inhibitory control,
and hence performance on negation and implicature should
be correlated with performance on inhibition. To test this
hypothesis, we calculated standardized difference scores between target trials and control trials for each participant on
each task, using both accuracy and RT. For accuracy, we
found no significant correlations between individual accuracy on the inhibition task and the implicature task for adults
(r = .21, p = .16, 95% CI [-0.08, 0.46]) or kids (r = −.09,
p = .49, 95% CI [-0.32, 0.16]), nor between individual accuracy on the inhibition task and the negation task for adults
(r = −.11, p = .46, 95% CI [-0.38, 0.18]) or kids (r = −.08,
p = .51, 95% CI [-0.16, 0.32]). For RT, there was similarly
no relationship between individual RT on the inhibition task
and the implicature task for adults (r = −.004, p = .98, 95%
CI [-0.29, 0.28) or kids (r = .20, p = .11, 95% CI [-0.04,
0.42]), nor between individual RT on the inhibition task and
the negation task for adults (r = .17, p = .25, 95% CI [-0.12,
0.43]) or kids (r = −.01, p = .92, 95% CI [-0.24, 0.26]).
Consistent with past findings (e.g. Nordmeyer & Frank,
2014b; Yoon et al., 2015), we found a great deal of individual
variability in children’s performance on these tasks, with 4- to
6-year-olds struggling especially on the implicature and nega-

2791

tion tasks. Contrary to our hypothesis, however, performance
on these two tasks was not correlated with performance on the
inhibition task. One drawback to these traditional analyses is
that they separate reaction time and accuracy, obscuring any
potential interaction between the speed at which participants
make a decision and the accuracy of their decision. In the
next sections, we use the parameters of drift diffusion models
to compare participants’ decision-making processes.

Adults show different decision processes for
inhibition, implicature, and negation
Despite the surface similarities of the tasks, adults’ decision
processes for control vs. target trials were different across the
three tasks (Figure 3, right panels). In the inhibition task, the
most striking difference between control and target (inhibition) trials was the bias towards incorrect responses on target
trials. The bias parameter was significantly lower for target
trials compared to control (t(43) = 4.92, p < .001); target trials also had significantly longer non-decision times compared
to control trials (t(43) = −9.36, p < .001). The bias effect is
easily interpretable in the context of the task, because the repeated references to the control object were designed to create
such a bias.
In the implicatures task, the most noticeable difference between control and target trials was the higher boundary separation but faster drift rate for control trials compared to target trials (boundary separation: t(44) = 4.21, p < .001; drift:
t(44) = 7.15, p < .001). The slower drift rate for target trials
in the implicatures task might have arisen due to their ambiguity (either picture is technically correct): Participants might
have been slower to accumulate information to resolve this
ambiguity. The fact that the boundary separation is higher
for control trials in the implicatures task, combined with this
slower drift rate, explains why reaction times do not differ
between trial types on the implicatures task, despite lower accuracy for target trials.
Finally, in the negation task, there was no difference in
parameters between positive and negative trials. For example, there was no significant difference between drift rates
(t(43) = 0.80, p = .43). This was surprising in light of
past work suggesting that adults take longer to respond to
negative sentences compared to positive ones (H. Clark &
Chase, 1972), especially in context-free tasks such as this one
(Nordmeyer & Frank, 2014a). One possibility is that the large
number of repetitive trials, or the simplistic and child-friendly
stimuli, made this task easier for adults.

Information processing improves with age
Across all three tasks, children at all age groups had different
parameter values than adults: higher boundary separation (4year-olds: β = 1.09, p < .001; 5-year-olds: β = 1.15, p <
.001; 6-year-olds: β = .74, p < .001) and longer non-decision
times (4-year-olds, β = .18, p = .09; 5-year-olds: β = .18,
p < .001; 6-year-olds: β = .10, p < .001), suggesting that
children take longer to encode information and need more
information to make a decision compared to adults. Children

also had significantly slower drift rates compared to adults
(4-year-olds: β = −1.63, p < .001; 5-year-olds β = −1.22,
p < .001; 6-year-olds: β = −1.13, p < .001), suggesting that
children acquire evidence more slowly than adults.
To explore whether these parameters changed significantly
throughout these early years, we next focused just on children’s data and analyzed age group as a continuous variable. This analysis revealed a significant increase in drift rate
across these three years (β = .25, p < .001), as well as significant decreases in separation bias (β = −.18, p < .01) and
non-decision time (β = −.04, p < .05). These findings indicate that the speed at which children accumulate evidence
and the amount of information that children need to make a
decision changes rapidly across early childhood.

Children show different developmental trajectories
for inhibition, implicature, and negation
In addition to the general developmental changes in drift rate,
non decision time, and boundary separation described in the
previous section, children’s decision process for each task
showed a distinct pattern of development from four to six
years of age.
In the inhibition task, 4-year-olds were less likely to show
a bias towards the incorrect trial compared to adults; this
bias appears to get stronger by age 6. Linear models fit to
individual parameter values for each task revealed a significant positive interaction between age group and trial type for
four-year-olds’ bias parameter (β = .14, p < .05), indicating
that for four-year-olds the bias parameter for target trials in
the inhibition task is higher compared to adult participants.
There was no interaction between age group and trial type for
five-year-olds (β = .06, p = 37) or six-year-olds (β = −.06,
p = .31). These results collectively suggest that while four
year olds are less biased towards the incorrect response on
target trials compared to adults, by age five children are becoming more biased towards the incorrect response on target
trials.
In the implicature task, children’s drift rates increased developmentally, but the increase in drift rate occurred primarily in control trials. This pattern led to an increasing difference in drift rates between control and target trials across
development, driven primarily by an increase in control trial
drift rate. Drift rates for target trials remain low even in adulthood, presumably due to the ambiguous nature of these trials. Confirming these findings, linear models fit to individual
parameter values for each task resulted in significant positive interactions between age group and trial type at all ages
(four-year-olds: β = 0.63, p < .01; five-year-olds: β = 0.80,
p < .01; six-year-olds: β = 0.49, p < .05).
The negation task yielded the most striking difference between adults and children. Children had much lower drift
rates for target trials compared to control trials. Drift rates
on negation trials for four-year-olds were close to zero, suggesting a pattern of general uncertainty for young children on
this task. The primary developmental change for this task was
an increase in drift rate for target trials, with significant neg-

2792

4-year-olds!

5-year-olds!

6-year-olds!

Adults!

Negation!

Implicature!

Inhibition!

Trial Type: !

Figure 3: Visualization of the drift diffusion process across the three tasks. The process for control trials is shown in pink, and
the process for target trials is shown in green. The dotted black line at zero represents the threshold for making an incorrect
decision, and horizontal colored lines represent the boundary separation parameter (i.e., the threshold for making a correct
decision). Vertical colored lines represent the non-decision time parameter, and the slope of the decision process (angled
line) represents the drift rate parameter. The point where the decision process crosses the non-decision line represents bias ×
boundary separation. Ribbons around all lines represent 95% confidence intervals around each parameter.

ative interactions between age group and trial type for four,
five, and six-year-olds (4-year-olds, marginally significant:
β = −0.53, p = .07; 5-year-olds: β = −1.06, p < .001); 6year-olds (β = −0.83, p < .01).
Although children struggled on both negation and implicature tasks, children’s difficulty on the implicature task appeared to be due to general changes in information processing
across development, as indicated by improvement primarily
in the control trials of this task. In contrast, children’s difficulty on the negation task appeared to be due to unexpectedly low drift rates for negation trials compared to control trials, a difference that disappeared in adulthood. Why children
appear to struggle so much on the comprehension of negative sentences, despite producing similar sentences at a much
younger age, remains an open question.

General Discussion
We created a set of three tasks to explore children’s and
adults’ inhibitory control, implicature processing, and negation processing. Our experiment was designed to test the

hypothesis that negation and implicature processing require
inhibitory control, and that children’s poor performance on
these tasks is due to poor inhibitory control. Contrary to our
hypothesis, we did not find any evidence of a relationship between performance on the inhibition task and performance on
the negation or implicature tasks. Drift diffusion models revealed different patterns of processing on all three tasks, with
no evidence that adults or children are biased towards the incorrect answer (as in the inhibition task) on implicature or
negation tasks. Our analysis sheds light on the developmental trajectory of children’s inhibitory control, negation processing, and pragmatic inference, suggesting that children’s
low performance on negation and implicature comprehension
tasks may be caused by separate processing difficulties.
The current work used a unified procedure which allowed
us to directly compare different linguistic and non-linguistic
processes. Traditional analyses of reaction time and accuracy
can tell us that children struggle on these tasks, but not why
they struggle. The drift diffusion analysis, however, revealed

2793

important processing differences between the three tasks that
can help us understand the source of these difficulties. Although our three tasks were nearly identical in appearance—
they used the same few trial images and labels and had the
same basic instructions to select the correct picture—the decision process to choose the correct picture was very different
for each task. For example, the inhibition task was characterized by a bias towards the incorrect answer on target trials,
while the implicatures task was characterized by slower drift
rates for target trials.
Children’s difficulty on the negation and implicature games
appears to be due to slow accumulation of information on
these tasks. Past work suggests that children typically have
slower drift rates compared to adults (Ratcliff et al., 2012),
and our current work replicates that finding. In our tasks older
children had faster drift rates compared to younger children
on all tasks, but this developmental increase in drift rate occurred particularly for control trials on the implicature task
and target trials on the negation task. The fact that children’s
drift rates for negation trials were significantly slower compared to adults suggests that children find it particularly difficult to process the relevant information about negation above
and beyond a generally slower processing speed for children
compared to adults. Whether the source of this difficulty is
an undeveloped semantic understanding of truth-functional
negation, or poor phonological processing—for example, perhaps some children simply miss the word “no” entirely—is a
topic for future research.
A final novel aspect of this work is the use of the drift diffusion model with preschool children. Although some past
work has explored children’s information processing using
the drift diffusion model (Ratcliff et al., 2012), that work
tested second graders at the youngest. Here we expand on
that work by replicating their findings with a group of much
younger children. Our success using the drift diffusion model
with data from such young children opens doors for future
work exploring the development of children’s information
processing.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Stephen Powell, Veronica Cristiano, and
Rachel Walker for their help with data collection, and to the
parents, children, and staff at the San Jose Children’s Discovery Museum. This work was supported by NSF grant BCS
#1456077.

References
Bloom, L. (1970). Language development: Form and function in emerging grammars. New York, NY: MIT Research
Monograph, No 59.
Clark, E. V. (2009). First language acquisition. Cambridge
University Press.
Clark, H., & Chase, W. (1972). On the process of comparing
sentences against pictures. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 472–
517.

Davidson, M. C., Amso, D., Anderson, L. C., & Diamond,
A. (2006). Development of cognitive control and executive
functions from 4 to 13 years: Evidence from manipulations
of memory, inhibition, and task switching. Neuropsychologia, 44, 2037–2078.
Diamond, A., & Taylor, C. (1996). Development of an aspect of executive control: Development of the abilities to
remember what I said and to “do as I say, not as I do”.
Developmental Psychobiology, 29, 315–334.
Huang, Y. T., & Snedeker, J. (2009). Semantic meaning
and pragmatic interpretation in 5-year-olds: evidence from
real-time spoken language comprehension. Developmental
psychology, 45(6), 1723.
Kim, K. (1985). Development of the concept of truthfunctional negation. Developmental Psychology, 21, 462.
Matthews, D., Butcher, J., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M.
(2012). Two-and four-year-olds learn to adapt referring expressions to context: Effects of distracters and feedback
on referential communication. Topics in cognitive science,
4(2), 184–210.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M.
(2006). The effect of perceptual availability and prior discourse on young children’s use of referring expressions.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 27(03), 403–422.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H.,
Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. (2000). The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex frontal lobe tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49–100.
Nordmeyer, A. E., & Frank, M. C. (2014a). A pragmatic account of the processing of negative sentences. In Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting of the cognitive science
society.
Nordmeyer, A. E., & Frank, M. C. (2014b). The role of context in young children’s comprehension of negation. Journal of Memory and Language, 77, 25–39.
Pea, R. (1980). The development of negation in early child
language. In D. Olson (Ed.), The social foundations of language and thought (pp. 156–186). New York, NY: Norton
New York.
Pea, R. (1982). Origins of verbal logic: Spontaneous denials
by two-and three-year olds. Journal of Child Language, 9,
597-626.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological review, 85(2), 59.
Ratcliff, R., Love, J., Thompson, C. A., & Opfer, J. E. (2012).
Children are not like older adults: A diffusion model analysis of developmental changes in speeded responses. Child
development, 83(1), 367–381.
Stiller, A. J., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2015). Adhoc implicature in preschool children. Language Learning
and Development, 11(2), 176–190.
Yoon, E. J., Wu, Y. C., & Frank, M. C. (2015). Children’s
online processing of ad-hoc implicatures. In Proceedings
of the 37th annual meeting of the cognitive science society.

2794

