Document Cohesion Flow: Striving towards Coherence
Scott A. Crossley (scrossley@gsu.edu)
Department of Applied Linguistics/ESL, Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA, 30303 USA

Mihai Dascalu (mihai.dascalu@cs.pub.ro)
Stefan Trausan-Matu (stefan.trausan@cs.pub.ro)
Department of Computer Science, University Politehnica of Bucharest
Bucharest, 060042 Romania

Laura K. Allen (laurakallen@asu.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (dsmcnamara1@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, 85287-2111 USA
Abstract

students how to write (Collins, 1998). However, this
assumption is compounded by differences in cohesion types
(i.e. local and global cohesion). Local cohesion refers to text
features that link short text segments such as sentences
together, while global cohesion refers to text features that
link larger segments of texts (i.e., paragraphs). Previous
studies have indicated that local cohesion indices are
generally negatively associated with essay quality (Crossley
& McNamara, 2010, 2011) while global cohesion indices
are generally positively correlated with essay quality
(Crossley, Kyle, & McNamara, in press; Crossley &
McNamara, 2011).
The primary difference between local and global cohesion
indices is that global cohesion indices tap into text
coherence, while local cohesion does not (Crossley et al., in
press). The distinction between cohesion and coherence is
that cohesion refers to the presence or absence of explicit
textual cues that allow the reader to make connections
between the ideas in the text. On the other hand, coherence
refers to the understanding that the reader derives from the
text, which may be more or less coherent depending on a
number of factors, such as textual features, prior knowledge,
and reading skill (McNamara et al., 1996). Thus, coherence
plays a central role in terms of the sense that a text creates
while addressing a deeper function of discourse (i.e.,
illocutionary acts; Widdowson, 1978).
The goal of this study is to further research links between
global cohesion devices and both text coherence and essay
quality to better understand the cognitive underpinnings of
language comprehension. We do this by developing new
automated indices of global cohesion (termed cohesion flow
indices) and demonstrating how these indices can be used to
predict human judgments of text coherence and essay
quality. These indices are provided in the ReaderBench tool
(RB; Dascalu, Trausan-Matu, McNamara, & Dessus, 2015).

Text cohesion is an important element of discourse
processing. This paper presents a new approach to modeling,
quantifying, and visualizing text cohesion using automated
cohesion flow indices that capture semantic links among
paragraphs. Cohesion flow is calculated by applying
Cohesion Network Analysis, a combination of semantic
distances, Latent Semantic Analysis, and Latent Dirichlet
Allocation, as well as Social Network Analysis. Experiments
performed on 315 timed essays indicated that cohesion flow
indices are significantly correlated with human ratings of text
coherence and essay quality. Visualizations of the global
cohesion indices are also included to support a more facile
understanding of how cohesion flow impacts coherence in
terms of semantic dependencies between paragraphs.
Keywords: Cohesion Flow; Natural Language Processing,
Computational Models; Cohesion Network Analysis;
Coherence; Writing Quality

Introduction
Writing is an important aspect of communication because it
provides the opportunity to articulate ideas and synthesize
perspectives in a persuasive manner that is often
independent of time and space constraints (Crowhurst,
1990). Learning how to convey meaning competently in
written texts is a crucial skill for academic and professional
success. Indeed, the writing skills of college freshmen are
among the best predictors of academic success (Geiser &
Studley, 2001). Importantly, there are a number of attributes
of high-quality writing that are directly related to the
linguistic features of the written text.
One important element of writing quality is text cohesion.
Halliday and Hasan (1976) established this term to
characterize the cohesive links or ties between the sentences
from the same text or fragment of text. Cohesion is a crucial
element for easing the understanding of texts, particularly
for challenging texts that present knowledge demands to the
reader (McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996).
In addition, there is a general sense that essay quality is
highly related to the cohesion of a text, which is reflected in
the literature about writing as well as textbooks that teach

Cohesion and Cohesion Flow
Cohesion at both the local and global levels helps to develop
a text that is unified and connected as a result of individual
sentences and paragraphs “hanging” together and relating to

764

one another (Celce-Murcia & Olshtain, 2000). In addition to
text segments “hanging” together, a well structured
document should have a clear and logical movement of
ideas highlighted by the topic flow between sentences and
paragraphs (O’Rourke, Calvo, & McNamara, 2011).
Knowing that cohesion is a central element of a text’s
structure, we are interested in examining how flow and
cohesion might be structurally constructed in a text (i.e.,
derived from the proper sequencing of text elements). Thus,
we operationalize cohesion flow as a measure of a
document’s structure derived from the order of different
paragraphs and of the manner in which they combine to
hold the text together. A text that demonstrates strong
cohesion flow by linking ideas between paragraphs will
likely be a more coherent text. This would allow ideas to
bond together and flow smoothly from one paragraph to
another, creating a text that readers can more easily
comprehend. In addition, the ability to illustrate and
automatically assess cohesion flow would enable
researchers to observe how text segments in a document fit
together and examine how the sequencing of these segments
may affect readers’ comprehension.

cohesion indices that calculated overlap between initial,
middle, and final paragraphs. These global cohesion indices
were positively correlated with judgments of text coherence.
Two recent studies found that while local features of
cohesion were negatively related to text coherence, global
indices of cohesion were strongly and positively associated
with text coherence (Crossley et al., in press; Crossley &
McNamara, in press) and that modifications to structure of a
text in terms of global cohesion led to increased text
coherence scores (Crossley & McNamara, in press).
Overall, these studies provide support for the notion that
expert ratings of text coherence and essay quality are best
explained by global and not local cohesion devices.

Current Study
The current study develops and tests automated measures of
global cohesion flow based on the Cohesion Network
Analyses available within RB. We also demonstrate how
visualizations based on these network analyses can be used
to illustrate cohesion trends within a text. Our approach is
unlike previous operationalizations of global cohesion in
that prior studies (e.g., Crossley et al., in press) focused on
assessing lexical and semantic overlap between adjacent
paragraphs, and have not assessed the flow of cohesion
throughout a text. In this study, we apply automated indices
of cohesion flow to a corpus of essays written by college
level students and examine how well these measures predict
human scores of text coherence and overall writing quality.
Thus, our goals are to operationalize new measures of
cohesion flow and to use these measures to better
understand how these features relate to text coherence and
writing quality as judged by human raters. Such an approach
gives us insight into the textual properties that drive human
perceptions of coherence in language. In addition, we
examine how visualizations extracted the cohesion flow
indices can be used to illustrated text coherence.

Cohesion Features and Text Quality
Previous research has placed an emphasis on the
relationship between cohesive devices in text and human
judgments of that text’s overall quality and coherence. In
terms of essay quality, McNamara, Crossley, and McCarthy
(2010) reported that local cohesion indices did not
demonstrate significant differences between low and high
scored essays, nor did they correlate with essay scores. In a
second study, Crossley, Roscoe, et al. (2011) found that two
indices of global cohesion (semantic similarity between
initial and middle paragraphs, and semantic similarity
between initial and final paragraphs) significantly correlated
with essay quality. More recently, Crossley et al. (in press)
reported that while local features of cohesion (i.e., sentence
overlap indices) were negatively related to essay quality,
global indices of cohesion (i.e., paragraph overlap indices)
were strongly predictive of essay quality. In another study,
Crossley and McNamara (in press) found that modifying the
cohesion structure in a text at the global level led to
increased essay quality scores (as assigned by human
raters). They also reported strong links between global
cohesion features and the essay quality scores.
Similar findings have been reported in terms of text
coherence. In three recent studies, Crossley and colleagues
(Crossley et al., in press; Crossley & McNamara, 2010,
2011) examined the degree to which judgments of text
coherence were predicted by automated indices of local and
global cohesion reported by a number of computational
tools. Crossley and McNamara (2010) reported that
cohesion indices calculated at the local level demonstrated
significant but negative correlations with human ratings of
coherence. A follow up study (Crossley & McNamara,
2011) reported similar results for local cohesion devices.
However, this study also examined a number of global

Method
Quantifying cohesion flow
Measuring cohesion. In the current study, we limit the
perspective of coherence to semantic global cohesion that
captures text organization in terms of paragraph links
(Lapata & Barzilay, 2005). We focus on paragraph links
over sentence links because previous studies have reported
stronger associations between global cohesion and text
coherence and quality compared to local cohesion. We do
this by evaluating cohesion flow using three different
semantic models: a) semantic distances in ontologies (i.e.,
Wu-Palmer; Budanitsky & Hirst, 2006), b) cosine similarity
in Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) vector spaces
(Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998) and c) Jensen Shannen
dissimilarity of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic
distributions (Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003).
Building the cohesion flow graph. Our cohesion flow
evaluation relies on Cohesion Network Analysis (CNA)
(Dascalu et al., 2015), a computational model that uses a

765

cohesion-based representation of discourse. CNA combines
the semantic models discussed above with Social Network
Analysis (SNA) to build a multi-layered cohesion graph
(Dascalu et al., 2014). Starting from the general CNA
approach, a pruned graph consisting of cohesion[i, j] edges,
where i and j are paragraph indexes, is constructed at interparagraph level. This cohesion flow graph uses the
chronological indexing of text elements (in contrast to the
initial cohesion graph that uses undirected edges) and two
building criteria:
• maximum value: for each paragraph we determine, out
of the following paragraphs, which is the closest one in
terms of the selected similarity measure (maximum
cohesion to following text elements).
• above threshold: out of all possible links between
subsequent paragraphs, we select only those graph
edges that exceed the imposed threshold of average +
stdev of all inter-paragraph similarity measures.
Measuring cohesion flow. Based on the previous cohesion
graph, a topological sort (Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, &
Stein, 2009) is performed in order to observe the referential
sequencing of paragraphs. Afterwards, six cohesion flow
indices are calculated in order to evaluate cohesion flow at
the document level:
•
Absolute position accuracy: number of paragraphs
that, after performing the topological sort on the cohesion
flow graph, are in the correct position (the ordered
paragraph index is the same as the initial index).
•
Absolute distance accuracy: the absolute value of
the difference of ordered and initial paragraph indexes. A
value closer to 0 characterizes a more cohesive text in
terms of adjacency links.
•
Adjacency accuracy determines how many
paragraphs follow the idea of adjacency maximum flow:
sum of absolute values of (j-i-1) where cohesion[i, j]>0.
•
Average flow cohesion is determined as the average
cohesion in our cohesion flow graph, i.e., average of all
cohesion[i, j];
•
Spearman correlation between the ordered
paragraph index and the initial sequence index.
•
Max order sequence determines how many ordered
paragraph indices follow an increasing trend to determine
if flow moves forward in a document (i.e., what is the
longest sequence that follows an ascending trend).
All the above indices are normalized in [0; 1] by relating to
the overall size of the document. In total we developed 36
indices based on the six feature categories above with each
feature computed for topological sort and for LSA, LDA,
and Wu-Palmer (36 features in total). Documents having
fewer than three paragraphs cannot be not considered in our
cohesion flow analysis.
Visualizing cohesion flow. In addition to computing
automated indices of cohesion flow, we are able to visualize
the process in the ReaderBench (RB) tool. Starting from the
cohesion flow graph, we apply specific SNA metrics in
order to obtain an in-depth perspective of the paragraph
connectivity (i.e., the strength of paragraph associations).

This flow network visualization and modeling plays an
important role in understanding and interpreting the
obtained results. We have selected force-based layouts for
visual representation because they provide a comprehensive
view of the social network as a planar graph. In this layout,
paragraphs gravitate by having their own mass proportional
to their relatedness to other paragraphs. Edges are
proportional to the inverse semantic relatedness of
paragraphs, while elasticity coefficients are used to obtain a
more realistic visualization that minimizes edge crossings
and the overall network energy. The size of each paragraph
can be proportional to its betweenness centrality (i.e., the
number of times it acts as a bridge along all shortest paths
between pairs of two other paragraphs from the input text).

Validation Corpus
We used the corpus described in Crossley and McNamara
(2011), which comprises 315 timed essays collected from
undergraduate students at Mississippi State University.
During the collection process, students were given 25
minutes to write an essay and no outside referencing was
allowed. Such an environment better represents high stakes
testing (i.e., SAT writing tests). Two SAT prompts were
used and students were randomly assigned one prompt to
which they responded. All students were native speakers of
English and were in either Composition One or
Composition Two (i.e., freshmen composition courses).
Each essay was read and scored by two trained raters using
both an analytic and a holistic rubric.
The rubric used to score the essays contained one analytic
feature (organization: the body paragraphs follow the plan
set up in the introduction) that evaluated semantic based,
global cohesion (i.e., text coherence). A holistic grading
scale based on a standardized rubric commonly used in
assessing Scholastic Achievement Test (SAT) essays was
also included in the rating rubric. The holistic scale and all
of the rubric items had a minimum score of 1 and a
maximum score of 6. Details on the rubric used can be
found in Crossley et al. (in press).
Eight raters with advanced degrees in English and at least
3 years experience teaching university composition classes
rated the 315 essays. The raters were informed that the
distance between each score was equal. After the raters were
trained, each rater then evaluated a selection of the 315
essays. In all cases, each essay was scored by at least two
raters. Once final ratings were collected, differences
between the raters were calculated. If the difference in
ratings on a survey feature was less than 2, an average score
was computed. If the difference was greater than 2, a third
expert rater adjudicated the final rating. Correlations
between the raters (before adjudication) were acceptable
with the average correlations across all essay feature
judgments and raters at r = .72.

Statistical Analysis
We conducted correlation and regression analyses to
examine relations between our document flow indices and

766

human judgments of coherence and essay quality. We first
conducted correlational analyses to examine associations
between the indices and the human scores. Those indices
that demonstrated a statistical (p < .05) and meaningful (at
least a small effect size, r > .1) relation were then used in a
regression analysis. Indices that were highly collinear
(r > .899) were flagged, and the index with the strongest
correlation with human scores was retained while the other
indices were removed. The remaining indices were included
as predictor variables in a stepwise multiple regression to
predict both human scores of coherence and overall essay
quality. The model from the stepwise regression was then
used to assign scores for the essays in the test set using a
leave-one-out-cross-validation (LOOCV).

Table 2: Correlations between RB cohesion flow indices
and raters’ scores of essay quality
Variable
r value p value
Adjacency accuracy (Maximum
.356
< .001
value based on LSA)
Average document flow cohesion
(Above mean+stdev based on
.317
< .001
Aggregated score)
Absolute distance accuracy on
topological sort (Maximum value
.310
< .001
based on LDA)
A LOOCV linear regression analysis was conducted
including the three RB indices. These three variables were
regressed onto the raters’ essay score for the 315 writing
samples. Of these three variables, one was a significant
predictor in the regression: Adjacency accuracy (Maximum
value based on LSA). The linear regression using the
variable yielded a model that reported r = .334
(MAE = .763). The model accounted for 11% of the
variance in the human evaluations of essay quality.

Results
Organization Scores
Each of the 36 document flow indices demonstrated a
significant correlation with the organization scores.
However, after controlling for multicollinearity, only three
indices remained. These three indices demonstrated medium
effect sizes with human ratings of text coherence (see Table
1) and were used in the subsequent regression analysis.

Discussion and Conclusion
While text coherence can be influenced by a reader’s prior
knowledge and/or reading skill (McNamara et al., 1996), it
also depends on the features of the text. Understanding how
elements of the text can increase human judgments of
coherence is thus an important area of research in discourse
processing and in theories of writing because it can provide
us with information about the impact of linguistic features
on the cognitive processes involved in text comprehension.
Previous research has supported the notion that both text
coherence and essay quality are associated with global, but
not local cohesion features in the text. The findings from
this study further this previous research and extend it by
introducing new computational operationalizations of global
cohesion that are available in the ReaderBench (RB) tool.
These operationalizations, which are based on cohesion
flow, provide new evidence for how text features can
combine and interact to create more coherent text that leads
to stronger evaluations of writing quality. The findings
provide us with a more in-depth understanding about how
text cohesion can lead to text coherence and the effects such
cohesion has on essay quality.
The primary goal of this research was to develop and test
new indices of global cohesion. The indices developed are
based on cohesion flow (i.e., the hierarchical topic
progression among paragraphs in a text). The purpose of the
new indices was to allow for the examination of the unity
and connectedness of paragraphs in a text, but not simply
through assessing semantic or lexical overlap among the
paragraphs. Rather, our indices examine if paragraphs are
sequenced appropriately in reference to one another. Thus,
the indices do not measure lexical and semantic overlap
between paragraphs, but rather overlap among paragraphs.

Table 1: Correlations between RB cohesion flow indices
and raters’ organization scores
Variable
Adjacency accuracy (Maximum
value based on LDA)
Spearman correlation of flow versus
initial ordering (Above mean+stdev
based on LDA)
Absolute distance accuracy on
topological sort (Maximum value
based on Aggregated score)

r value

p value

.399

< .001

.382

< .001

.381

< .001

A LOOCV linear regression analysis was conducted
including the three RB indices. These three variables were
regressed onto the raters’ coherence evaluations for the 315
writing samples. Of these three variables, two were
significant predictors in the regression: Absolute distance
accuracy on topological sort (Maximum value based on
Aggregated score) and Adjacency accuracy (Maximum
value based on LDA). The linear regression using the two
variables yielded a model that reported r = .398
(MAE = .779). The model accounted for 16% of the
variance in the human evaluations of coherence.

Essay Quality Scores
Each of the 36 document flow indices demonstrated a
significant correlation with the essay quality scores.
However, after controlling for multicollinearity, only three
indices remained. These three indices demonstrated medium
effect sizes with human ratings of essay quality (see Table
2) and were used in the subsequent regression analysis.

767

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Differences between (a) an essay scored high in organization and (b) an essay scored low in organization.
To do this, we conducted a cohesion flow evaluation
derived from a multi-layered cohesion graph that afforded
chronological indexing of text elements. Using three
different semantic models (LSA, LDA, and Wu-Palmer), we
developed 36 indices of cohesion flow that calculated
referential sequencing among paragraphs. Our hypothesis
was that essays that contained strong cohesion flow among
paragraphs would be judged as more coherent and of higher
quality. We found this to be true in both cases, providing
additional support that automated indices that measure
global cohesion through cohesion flow are related to text
coherence and essay quality.
We found that each of the 36 indices correlated with
human ratings of text coherence and essay quality. Because
these indices were measuring a very similar construct, most
of the indices were multi-collinear. However, in both test
sets, measures based on adjacent accuracy were the
strongest predictors of human ratings. This result indicates
that texts with the greatest number of paragraphs that flowed
together were the most coherent and of the highest quality.
These indices were followed by Spearman correlations of
flow versus initial ordering, absolute distance accuracy on
topological sort, and average document flow cohesion.
These indices indicated that a) texts with paragraphs that
showed strong correlations or absolute values between the
ordered paragraph index and the initial sequence index
received higher ratings, and b) texts with high average flow
cohesion also received higher scores.

Beyond their predictive power in machine learning
models, an important component of the cohesion flow
indices is that they are able to be visualized in the RB. As an
example, Figure 1 depicts the cohesion flow of two sixparagraph essay (P0…P5) using LSA as semantic similarity
function and maximum value as building criteria. The
essays presented in this figure were scored 5.5 (essay a) and
2.0 (essay b) on the organization rating. The figure
demonstrates an SNA perspective of the cohesion flow
graph in which the paragraphs are the nodes, the edges
represent semantic similarity values (LSA) that meet the
building criteria, and the size of each node is proportional to
its betweenness centrality. A well-organized essay (a)
summarizes all previous ideas in the conclusions; therefore,
the visualized star shape links all paragraphs to the
conclusions. Moreover, it is expected that all nodes have a
size equal to 0 because we have only in-edges towards the
last paragraphs, so no shortest paths exist between pair of
nodes excluding the conclusion. In contrast, essay (b)
highlights an essay that lacks proper sequencing in that the
cohesion flow is disrupted by the ordering of paragraphs. In
short, the visualization process allows the complex
mathematical equations that underlie our cohesion flow
indices to illustrate how cohesion flow operates within a
text. Such a visualization is helpful in understanding trends
in global cohesion patterns within a text and how these
patterns are related to text coherence and writing quality.

768

In conclusion, we have developed new indices of global
cohesion that are based on cohesion flow. These indices
show significant correlations with human ratings of text
coherence and essay quality providing evidence that the
coherence of a reader’s mental representation is influenced
by links among the paragraphs in the text. However, these
indices predict only a small amount of the variance in
human ratings of text coherence (about 16%) and essay
quality ratings (about 11%). These numbers are on par with
previous studies examining global cohesion indices and
human ratings of text quality (Crossley & McNamara, 2011;
Crossley et al., in press), but do indicate that human ratings
of text coherence and essay quality are only partially
explained by cohesion flow among paragraphs. Future
iterations of this research will combine the cohesion flow
indices introduced in this study along with other global
indices of cohesion and indices related to characteristics of
writing such as lexical sophistication, fluency, spelling, and
syntactic complexity. Such analyses are beyond the scope of
the current study, but we expect them to provide a deeper
understanding of how linguistic and semantic elements are
collectively related to text coherence and text quality, both
crucial elements of discourse processing. In addition, we
will explore the degree to which the visualizations are useful
to practitioners and writers in order to improve document
structure. The overall aim is to provide users with data to
maximize cohesion flow between adjacent paragraphs and
to develop conclusions with coherent summaries.

CogSci'10 (pp. 984-989). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Crossley, S. A., & McNamara, D. S. (2011). Text coherence
and judgments of essay quality: Models of quality and
coherence. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T. F. Shipley
(Eds.), Proceedings of CogSci'11. (pp. 1236-1241).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Crossley, S. A., & McNamara, D. S. (in press). Say more
and be more coherent: How text elaboration and cohesion
can increase writing quality. Journal of Writing Research.
Crossley, S. A., Roscoe, R. D., McNamara, D. S., &
Graesser, A. (2011) Predicting human scores of essay
quality using computational indices of linguistic and
textual features. In G. Biswas et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of
AIED 2011. (pp. 438-440). New York: Springer.
Crowhurst, M. (1990). Reading/writing relationships: An
intervention study. Canadian Journal of Education, 15,
155-172.
Dascalu, M., Dessus, P., Bianco, M., Trausan-Matu, S., &
Nardy, A. (2014). Mining texts, learners productions and
strategies with ReaderBench. In A. Peña-Ayala (Ed.),
Educational Data Mining: Applications and Trends (pp.
335–377). Switzerland: Springer.
Dascalu, M., Trausan-Matu, S., McNamara, D.S., & Dessus,
P. (2015). ReaderBench – Automated Evaluation of
Collaboration based on Cohesion and Dialogism. ijCSCL,
10(4), 395–423. doi: 10.1007/s11412-015-9226-y
Geiser, S., & Studley, R. (2001). UC and SAT: Predictive
validity and differential impact of the SAT I and SAT II at
the University of California. Oakland: University of
California.
Halliday, M.A.K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion In
English. London: Longman.
Landauer, T.K., Foltz, P.W., & Laham, D. (1998). An
introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25(2/3), 259–284.
Lapata, M., & Barzilay, R. (2005). Automatic evaluation of
text coherence: models and representations. In 19th
international joint conference on Artificial intelligence
(pp. 1085–1090). Edinburgh, Scotland: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
McNamara, D. S., Crossley, S. A., & McCarthy, P. M.
(2010). The linguistic features of quality writing. Written
Communication, 27 (1), 57-86.
McNamara, D.S., Kintsch, E., Butler Songer, N., & Kintsch,
W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of
text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14(1), 1–43.
O'Rourke, S., Calvo, R. A., & McNamara, D. S. (2011).
Visualizing topic flow in students' essays. Journal of
Educational Technology & Society, 14, 4-15.
Widdowson, H.G. (1978). Teaching Language as
Communication. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wu, Z., & Palmer, M. (1994). Verb semantics and lexical
selection. In ACL '94 (pp. 133–138). New Mexico, USA:
ACL.

Acknowledgment
This research was partially supported by the EC H2020
project RAGE Grant agreement No 644187, as well as by
the Institute for Education Sciences (IES R305A080589 and
IES R305G20018-02) and NSF (1417997 and 1418378).

References
Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., & Jordan, M.I. (2003). Latent
Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3(4-5), 993–1022.
Budanitsky, A., & Hirst, G. (2006). Evaluating WordNetbased Measures of Lexical Semantic Relatedness.
Computational Linguistics, 32(1), 13–47.
Celce-Murcia, M., & Olshtain, E. (2000). Discourse and
Context in Language Teaching: a Guide for Language
Teachers. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Collins, J. L. (1998). Strategies for struggling writers. New
York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L., & Stein, C.
(Eds.). (2009). Introduction to Algorithms (3rd ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Crossley, S. A., Kyle, K., & McNamara, D. S. (in press).
The Tool for the Automatic Analysis of Text Cohesion
(TAACO): Automatic Assessment of Local, Global, and
Text Cohesion. Behavior Research Methods.
Crossley, S. A. & McNamara, D. S. (2010). Cohesion,
coherence, and expert evaluations of writing proficiency.
In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of

769

