Dual process theory of reasoning and recognition memory errors:
Individual differences in a memory prose task
Giorgio Gronchi (giorgio.gronchi@unifi.it)
Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child’s Health – Sect. Psychology
via di San Salvi 12, pad 26 - 50100 Firenze, Italy

Stefania Righi (srighi@unifi.it)
Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child’s Health – Sect. Psychology
via di San Salvi 12, pad 26 - 50100 Firenze, Italy

Giacomo Parrini (giacomoparrini@hotmail.com)
Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child’s Health – Sect. Psychology
via di San Salvi 12, pad 26 - 50100 Firenze, Italy

Lapo Pierguidi (lapo.pierguidi@gmail.com)
Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child’s Health – Sect. Psychology
via di San Salvi 12, pad 26 - 50100 Firenze, Italy

Maria Pia Viggiano (mariapia.viggiano@unifi.it)
Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child’s Health – Sect. Psychology
via di San Salvi 12, pad 26 - 50100 Firenze, Italy
Abstract

was actually in the list. Through such paradigm it is possible
to observe how a false memory (a memory for an event that
never occurred) can be created. This result is usually
explained in terms of an associative model of memory.
According to this perspective, the initial (and missing) word
is strongly activated because is highly semantically
correlated with the words presented in the list. However,
specific theories (such as the fuzzy trace theory or the
activation-monitoring theory) underlying false memory
dynamics are still under debate (Brainerd & Reyna, 2002;
Brainerd et al., 2001; Gallo & Roediger, 2002; Roediger,
Balota, & Watson, 2001).
Many studies have examined how individual differences
may influence the memory processes with regard to the false
memory phenomena (Baird, 2001; Watson et al., 2005;
Winograd, Peluso, & Glover, 1998). For example, a higher
rate of false memory is observed in people with higher
vividness of imagery (e.g. producing a photograph-like
mental picture, Winograd et al., 1998) or with a higher
expertise in the domain of the material to be learnt (Baird,
2001).
However, few studies have investigated individual
differences based on thought and reasoning processes.
Graham (2007) has investigated the role of the Need for
Cognition (NFC) construct (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982) on
false memories. The NFC consists of the tendency to engage
and enjoy effortful cognitive activities. Some individuals
consistently seek opportunities to engage in challenging
cognitive activities whereas other individuals have little
motivation and tend to avoid such tasks. Graham (2007)
found that the NFC mediates false memories where high
NFC individuals falsely recognized a greater amount of

Cognitive factors can mediate the tendency to create false
memory. We explored the role of the two systems of
reasoning in the production of false memories. Such
difference can be assessed through the Cognitive Reflection
Test (CRT), a measure of the propensity to reflect rather than
producing an intuitive response. By the use of a DRM-like
paradigm in a prose recognition memory task, we measured
CRT-related individual differences in producing false
memories. We observed that intuitive thinkers are more likely
to produce false memories.
Keywords: DRM, False memories, CRT, Dual process
theory of reasoning.

Introduction
A long tradition of cognitive research has observed how
people can develop false memories about past events
(Bartlett, 1932; Deese, 1959; Loftus, 1975). This is a
fundamental topic both from an applicative (e.g. eyewitness
memory) and theoretical point of view (e.g. the nature of
semantic knowledge, Collins & Loftus, 1975). The DeeseRoediger-McDermott paradigm (DRM) has become the
standard way to investigate this phenomenon (Roediger &
McDermott, 1995). In this paradigm, participants are
presented with a list of semantically-related words
constructed in a particular way. An initial word is chosen
(for example, hospital) and then other semantically related
words are selected (doctor, nurse, patient, etc). Such list of
words (with the exception of the initial word) is presented
for learning, followed by a recognition memory task. The
key observation is that in the recognition task participants
with high confidence report that the initial word “doctor”

331

semantic-related words than individuals with low NFC.
Such result is explained in terms of high NFC individuals’
tendency to greater elaboration of list resulting in stronger
interconnections in memory (and thus an increase in the
probability of activation of a word present in the same
semantic network).
The NFC is somewhat related to the dual process theory
of judgment (Epstein, 1994; Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman,
1996, 2014; Stanovich & West, 2000). Starting from the
influential Heuristics and biases research program, many
authors have sustained the distinction of two modalities of
reasoning; A fast, effortless, associative, nearly-automatic
reasoning process and a slow, resources-demanding, rulebase, controlled process. How to label those two processes
and specific differences about their characteristics is still
under debate. We will refer to the former as the intuitive
system (Sloman, 2014) and to the latter as the analytical
system. The Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT; Frederick
2005) is a predictive measure of the tendency to deliberate
about the outputs of intuitive processes before responding in
a cognitive task. The CRT is composed of three questions,
each one has an (incorrect) obvious intuitive answer and a
less accessible (correct) answer that needs some analytical
system deliberation. In Sloman’s (2014) view the slow and
effortful analytical process attempts to inhibit (sometimes
with success and sometimes not) the “obvious” response of
the effortless and fast intuitive process. For example, given
the Lily Pad problem of the CRT: In a lake, there is a patch
of lily pads. Every day, the patch doubles in size. If it takes
48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long
would it take for the patch to cover half of the lake? The
default, most obvious intuitive response that does not
require a particular effort is 24; If 48 days is the time
necessary for the patch to cover the entire lake,
consequently 24 days should be intuitively the time
necessary for half the surface. However, if the reader
reflects a little bit more about the problem, can easily see
that every day the patch doubles in size, so in the 47th day
the lake was half covered and in the 48th and final day the
lily pads finished to cover the entire surface. Such form of
reasoning inhibits the obvious, intuitive response.
When considering the relationship between individual
differences in CRT and the false memory phenomena, two
possible predictions can be made. On the one hand, it is
reasonable to predict that people who are more analytical on
the CRT problems will tend to produce more false
memories; people with high NFC tend to create more false
memories and NFC has a significant (albeit small – about
.22, Frederick, 2005) positive correlation with analytical
responses on the CRT. However, Frederick (2005) says that
CRT measures “the ability or disposition to resist reporting
the response that first comes to mind” whereas the NFC
measures the “tendency to engage in and enjoy thinking”
(Cacioppo & Petty, 1982). Following this line of thought, a
different prediction can be that high intuitive people on CRT
(due to their inability to resist reporting the first response
that comes to mind) will make more false memories because

they are less effective in the inhibition of semantic-related
words not present in the original list. Such prediction in a
memory recognition task is also supported by the fact that
high intuitive people on CRT can rely more on a familiaritybased judgment than an analytical more controlled strategy.

Experiment
We investigated individual CRT-related differences in a
DRM-like paradigm employing a memory prose task.
Participants read a brief story with ten target words and then
answered a series of questions unrelated to this experiment.
The filler tasks included the CRT. After ten minutes, the
material was removed and an incidental recognition memory
task was administered.

Method
Participants Two-hundred-fifty-three freshmen college
students enrolled in the University of Florence (97 male)
were recruited for course credits. The sample mean age (in
years) was 22.9 (sd = 7.4).
Stimuli and procedure Two brief cover stories (in
Italian) were developed on the basis of an Italian word
database (Burani, Barca, & Saskia Arduino, 2001) reporting
several measures (familiarity, imagery, concreteness,
frequency of use). Two sets of ten target words were chosen
(First Target Set: Mill, Magpie, Winter, Nun, Lead, Medal,
Carpet, Table Cloth, Compass; Second Target Set: Swamp,
Thrush, Autumn, Friar, Canvas, Novel, Tavern, Lamp,
Soap, Tray). Employing the First Target Set of words, we
wrote the text of Story A (target words are in bold): “Alex
passed through the mill pausing to watch a magpie. The
winter was near. He continued for another quarter of an
hour thinking about the nun met before and finally arrived.
The atmosphere was quiet and immediately noticed that the
lead was exactly where he had left it. Clutching the medal in
his hand, he realized that something was wrong, but could
not figure out what it was. He looked around for clues: The
lantern on his right, the carpet on the floor, the table cloth
fallen on the ground together with a shattered compass.
Someone was here... he turned and saw his wife. Her face
was worth a thousand words: It was then that he realized
that he had become a millionaire.”. Story B was exactly the
same (in particular from a syntactical and grammatical point
of view), but the target words were substituted with the
nouns from the Second Target Set in order to have a story
with a similar meaning. In a preliminary experiment, we
asked to a separate sample (n = 40) to rate the similarity of
the target words to other lists of words (matched for the
reported measures) in order to create two Related Sets of
nouns (First Related Set: Thief, Wind, Cold, Church, Metal,
Gold, Light, Dust, Lunch, North; Second Related Set: Mud,
Bird, Leaf, The Habit, Painting, Book, Room, Light,
Perfume, Silver). The Unrelated Sets of nouns were chosen

332

from the target words of the other scenario (Story B for
Story A words and vice versa) and we verified that such
words were judged dissimilar from the target words (a mean
value less than 2.5 in a similarity Likert scale from 1 to 5).
In the case of values higher than 2.5, we conducted another
preliminary experiment. We select the words presented in
the database that matched the Target words and we asked
another group (n = 30) to rate their similarity with the
Target words; the words with the least similarity values
were chosen. To sum up, the First Unrelated Set was:
Swamp, Dream, Music, Sandals, Canvas, Novel, Tavern,
Living Room, Soap, Tray; the Second Unrelated Set
comprised: Mill, Thief, Skis, School, Lead, Medal, Friend,
Carpet, Table Cloth, Compass.
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the two
Stories. After reading the story, participants were required
to respond to a series of questions about the emotional
valence of the story. After this series of questions,
participants were required to do other tasks for an unrelated
experiment. Those tasks also included the CRT (Frederick,
2005). The three problems were administered in a free
response format with a limit of two minutes to complete
each problem. The three problems were: 1) Bat and Ball
problem A bat and a ball cost 1.10 Euros in total. The bat
costs 1.00 Euro more than the ball. How much does the
ball cost? 2) Machine Problem If it takes 5 machines 5
minutes to make 5 widgets, how long would it take 100
machines to make 100 widgets? 3) Lilly Pad problem In a
lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Every day, the patch
doubles in size. If it takes 48 days for the patch to cover
the entire lake, how long would it take for the patch to
cover half of the lake?
After about ten minutes from the moment in which the
text with the story was taken away, participants were invited
to open a closed envelope and to complete the recognition
memory task inside it. The recognition memory task was
composed of 30 words (Target, Related and Unrelated
words associated to the corresponding Story, A or B)
arranged in a random order. For each word, participants
were required to say if they have read it in the story (yes or
not).

point for each intuitive response and 0 points for each
analytical response, resulting in a score ranging from 0 (all
three problems solved with the analytical strategy) and 3 (all
the problems solved with the intuitive strategies). On the
basis of the CRT score, four groups were created: The
Intuitive Group (participants with a total of 3 points in the
CRT score, n = 62), the Mild Intuitive Group (participants
with a total of 2 points in the CRT score, n = 61), the Mild
Analytical Group (participants with a total of 1 point in the
CRT score, n = 56), and the Analytical Group (participants
with a total of 0 points in the CRT score, n = 57).
Story-related differences for the three scores (Target,
Related and Unrelated) were compared by means of a
mixed-model two-way ANOVA with CRT as a 4-level
between-subjects variable (Intuitive, Mild Intuitive, Mild
Analytical, and Analytical Group), scores (Target, Related,
Unrelated) as a 3 level within-subjects variable and
recognition score (number of words) as dependent variable.
Given a significant result of the ANOVA, Fisher’s Least
Significant Difference post hoc tests were conducted to
compare measures among the groups.

Figure 1: Mean scores of recognized Target, Related and
Unrelated words of the four groups (Intuitive, Mild
Intuitive, Mild Analytical, and Analytical Group).

Results

Data Analysis For each participant, we computed three
scores. A Target Score, a Related Score and an Unrelated
Score were calculated giving one point for each word
recognized respectively in the Target, Related and Unrelated
set of words; each score had a minimum of 0 and a
maximum of 10 points. With regard to the CRT score, in a
first phase, each response was coded as an intuitive response
or a normative response. Following Frederick (2005), for
the Bat and Ball problem the intuitive response is 10 and the
analytical response is 5, for the Machine problem the
intuitive response is 100 and the analytical response is 5,
and for the Lilly Pad problem the intuitive response is 24
and the analytical response is 47. Participants that gave
other kinds of responses (or that left blank) were discarded
(17 participants). The CRT score was computed giving 1

No statistically significant differences between the two
Stories were found for Target Score, Related Score and
Unrelated Score, so data were collapsed across the two
texts.
The three scores were statistically different (χ2(1) = 7.76,
p = 009). In particular, the Target Score was significantly
higher than the Related Score (χ2(1) = 13.25, p < .001) and
the Unrelated Score (χ2(1) = 15.27, p < .001). Moreover, the
Related Score was statistically higher compared to the
Unrelated Score (χ2(1) = 10.22, p = .001). No CRT-related
differences were found for Target Score (χ2(1) = 1.25, p =
.264) and Unrelated Score (χ2(1) = 1.12, p = .291). With
regard to the Related Score, we found CRT-related

333

differences (χ2(1) = 4.32, p = .038). In particular, the
Related Score for the Intuitive Group was significantly
higher compared to the Normative Group (p = .023).
Moreover, the Mild Intuitive Group scored higher than the
Normative Group (p = .041).

judgments with a variable amount of thought effort. For
example, an individual with high NFC will incorporate the
intuition output together with other thoughts that are
generated (so, the final judgment will be the result of a
mediation between intuition and other thoughts). On the
contrary, an individual with a low NFC will use the intuition
output in a straightforward and direct way, where the final
judgment will be determined almost completely by intuition.
So, we can have false memories induced by the tendency to
do greater elaboration of the material and false memories
determined by the tendency to employ more intuitive
thinking. Future research should measure both the NFC
construct and the CRT in conjunction with a DRM task, in
order to assess if there is an interaction between these two
factors.
In conclusion, our work suggests that the ability to repress
an intuitive response (as defined by the dual process theory
of reasoning) is an important cognitive factor that may
influence false memories.

Discussion
The aim of the present study was to explore the CRTrelated individual differences on false memories. We found
that those who scored high on the CRT (individuals who
adopted an intuitive thinking style) created more false
memories than those who scored low (individuals who
adopted an analytical thinking style).
Given that the CRT measures mainly the ability to inhibit
the first response that comes to mind, our findings can be
explained in terms of a reduced tendency to inhibit the
obvious response of recognizing an absent semantic-related
word. Moreover, since the CRT intuitive responses are
strictly associated with the use of heuristic reasoning
(Toplak, West, & Stanovich, 2011), it can be hypothesized a
stronger tendency to employ a familiarity heuristic to decide
if a word was previously presented. Both interpretations can
account for observed data. Further manipulations are needed
to disambiguate these explanations. In particular, it may be
desirable to measure false memories in a recognition task as
well a free recall task and compare them with the CRT and
an impulsivity test, such as the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale
(BIS 11; Patton & Stanford, 1995). Following this
procedure, it could be possible to observe if there is an
interaction between the CRT individual differences and the
type of task (recognition or free recall) where the use of a
familiarity heuristic will induce more false memories only in
the recognition task. At the same time, it could be
interesting to explore the relationship between impulsivity,
dual process of reasoning and false memories.
Moreover, it’s important to note that the observed
relationship between false memories and CRT is rather
weak and it’s necessary to better assess the role of potential
confounding variables in future investigations. Indeed, an
alternative explanation of our results is that the relationship
between CRT and false memories is mediated by working
memory capacity (Watson et al., 2005). Working memory
capacity is correlated with analytical thinking and they
positively correlate with the use of recollection processes
(instead of familiarity) in memory retrieval. Thus it can be
hypothesized that individuals who adopt an analytical
thinking style may more rarely use familiarity processes
producing less false memories. So, future research must
include also a working memory capacity measure.
Contrary to the expectations based on the correlations
among NFC, CRT and false memories, we find that people
who adopted an analytical thinking style did not make more
false memories. Such result is in line with the idea that
individuals with both high and low NFC make use of their
intuition. Research suggests that intuitions can influence

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Giacomo Fini, Alessio Petroni, Alessia
Riela and Daniele Lari for collecting data. The English
language was reviewed by Michela Gronchi. We thank the
editor and three anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments, which helped us to improve the manuscript.

References
Baird, R. R. (2001). Experts sometimes show more false
recall than novices: A cost of knowing too much.
Learning and Individual Differences, 13(4), 349-355.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: An experimental and
social study. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burani, C., Barca, L., & Saskia Arduino, L. (2001). Una
base di dati sui valori di età di acquisizione, frequenza,
familiarità, immaginabilità, concretezza, e altre variabili
lessicali e sublessicali per 626 nomi dell'italiano.
Giornale Italiano di Psicologia, 28(4), 839-856.
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2002). Fuzzy-trace theory
and false memory. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 11(5), 164-169.
Brainerd, C. J., Wright, R., Reyna, V. F., & Mojardin, A. H.
(2001). Conjoint recognition and phantom recollection.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 27(2), 307.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for
cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42(1), 116.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82(6), 407-428.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 58(1), 17-22.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the
psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologist,
49, 709-724.

334

Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationally and
reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
Gallo, D. A., & Roediger, H. L. (2002). Variability among
word lists in eliciting memory illusions: Evidence for
associative activation and monitoring. Journal of
Memory and Language, 47 (3), 469-497.
Graham, L. M. (2007). Need for cognition and false
memory in the Deese–Roediger–McDermott paradigm.
Personality and Individual Differences, 42(3), 409-418.
Loftus, E. F. (1975). Leading questions and the eyewitness
report. Cognitive Psychology, 7(4), 560-572.
Patton, J. H., & Stanford, M. S. (1995). Factor structure of
the Barratt impulsiveness scale. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 51(6), 768-774.
Roediger, H. L., Balota, D. A., & Watson, J. M. (2001).
Spreading activation and the arousal of false memories.
In H. L. Roediger, J. S. Nairne, I. Neath, & A. M.
Surprenant (Eds.), The nature of remembering: Essays in
honor of Robert G. Crowder (pp. 95-115). Washington
DC: American Psychological Association.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21(4), 803-814.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two system of
reasoning. Psychological Bullettin, 119(1), 3-22.
Sloman, S. A. (2014). Two systems of reasoning, an update.
In J. Sherman, B. Gawronski, & Y. Trope (Eds.). Dual
process theories of the social mind. New York: Guilford
Press.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: implications for the rationality
debate. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The
Cognitive Reflection Test as a predictor of performance
on heuristics-and-biases tasks. Memory & Cognition,
39(7), 1275-1289.
Watson, J. M., Bunting, M. F., Poole, B. J., & Conway, A.
R. (2005). Individual differences in susceptibility to false
memory in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott paradigm.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 31(1), 76-85.
Winograd, E., Peluso, J. P., & Glover, T. A. (1998).
Individual differences in susceptibility to memory
illusions. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 12(7), 5-27.

335

