Dynamics of Strategy Adaptation in a Temporally Extended Monty Hall Dilemma
Stephanie Petrusz (stephanie.petrusz@gmail.com) & Joshua Shields (joshua.n.shields@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Franklin & Marshall College
Lancaster, PA, 17603 USA

Theo Rhodes (theo.rhodes@oswego.edu) & Abisha Munroe (amunroe@oswego.edu)
Department of Psychology, SUNY Oswego
Oswego, NY, 13126 USA
Abstract

reasons including the complexity of agents’ existing
commitments (see, for instance, the “web of belief” of
Quine and Ullian, 1978) and the difficulty of evaluating the
probability of some fact against an unenumerated backdrop
of possibilities.
In our view the mathematical considerations particular
to formal epistemological accounts of belief update are also
appropriate to psychological accounts. For our empirical
investigation we required sufficient data to construct a
model and a task where we could plausibly discuss what the
experimental participants believed about their actions.
Because of its simplicity of execution and its popularity, we
chose the Monty Hall Dilemma (e.g., vos Savant, 1990).
This paradigm satisfied several aims. First, we wanted a
task in which outcome probabilities were clear, though not
necessarily obvious to the participants. Second, we wanted a
task that involved beliefs as the basis for actions, not simply
evaluating propositions with degrees of assent. Third, we
wanted to offer participants the opportunity to vacillate
while still making a desired response—in effect to say, “I’m
responding this way but I don’t know if I should”, as a
measure of degree of belief. We hoped that by evaluating
participants’ approaches to the MHD we would be able to
address how people evaluate probabilities and choose
between competing strategies for dealing with situations in
which probabilities change. We hoped further to investigate
whether a separation existed between participants’ beliefs as
the basis for actions and their propositional beliefs about the
task.
The MHD is a good example of the difference between
incorporating probabilistic evidence and reasoning
probabilistically because it is an example of persistent
failure to act in accordance with the rules of probability. In
the classic version, a “contestant” is presented with three
doors. Behind one of the doors is a car, and behind the other
two are goats. The contestant chooses a door, and then one
of the two remaining unchosen doors is opened—always
revealing a goat. The contestant is then given the chance to
stick with their initially chosen door and receive whatever
lies behind it, or to switch to the remaining unchosen and
unopened door, receiving instead whatever prize lies behind
that door. Probabilistically, a contestant always maximizes
their chances of winning the car by switching their pick, yet
in practice people seldom choose to switch. In fact, many
people resist the logic of switching even after it is

We present the results of two temporally extended
experimental implementations of the Monty Hall dilemma in
order to examine the dynamics of belief. In the first
experiment, we used the standard three-door version of the
dilemma, but biased the probability of the winning door
positionally. Participants capitalized on the increased
probabilities but did not discover the optimal switch strategy.
In the second experiment, we increased the number of doors,
in each case removing all but two doors. As the number of
doors increased, participants converged on the optimal switch
strategy, as well as increasing their confidence in their
strategy. This suggests that the information relevant to the
MHD is not win frequencies but how the different elements of
the dilemma are related.
Keywords: Belief; Monty Hall Dilemma; Dynamical
Systems

Introduction
The conditions under which an agent may be said to
believe can be cashed out in different ways. Belief is
essentially an agent’s holding that a proposition or state of
affairs is the case, and as such is difficult to externally
assess. Two related but distinct ways suggest themselves: an
agent may assent to the truth or falsity of a proposition, or
an agent may be disposed to act as though a proposition is
true—or, if one wishes to avoid speaking as though
propositions are the contents of beliefs, to act as though a
state of affairs obtains. If we focus on the second type of
belief, that is, beliefs as underwriters of actions, two more
things make themselves clear. First, the ability of beliefs to
guide actions must be relatively robust to uncertainty.
Second, beliefs must change in response to new information
or evidence, so that actions may be adapted to a dynamic
environment.
Formal models of belief therefore often treat beliefs as
probabilities, and belief change or belief update as changes
in those probabilities and in the connections between the
beliefs they represent. Many of these models share certain
features: the beliefs in question are framed as propositions
and the dynamics are understood as state-to-state changes.
Many models further share a Bayesian basis. However, a
thread of argument in the epistemological literature claims
that a basic species of Bayesian revision is probably
inadequate to model belief change (see van Fraassen (1989),
cited in Arló-Costa, unpublished). Evaluating the
conditionals required by Bayesian update is problematic for

474

demonstrated or explained to them that switching is always
the better bet.
The classic formulation can be extended in a variety of
ways. Granberg (1999) tested a 4-door version of MHD
with unequal probabilities, where the optimal strategy is to
choose the lowest probability door initially and then switch
to the highest probability door remaining after the reveal
stage. Participants in Granberg’s study were explicitly
informed of the door probabilities on each trial, yet even so
no participants reliably used the optimal strategy. Baratgin
and Politzer (2010) showed that both the dilemma and the
resistance to the winning strategy are rooted in the manner
in which information is presented throughout the scenario.
They presented several versions of MHD and concluded that
when information is presented as being relevant only to the
unchosen doors, people do not commit the typical MHD
error. They argue that the opening of the “goat” door is
taken to be relevant to the overall probabilities, and that
players do not effectively isolate the new information to the
real space of outcomes, which includes only the unchosen
doors.
The MHD has been extensively studied in cognitive
science but a full review is beyond the scope of this paper.
Krauss and Wang (2003) discuss the psychological
mechanisms that might underpin successful MHD strategies
and suggest that correctly reasoning through the problem
depends on the way in which information is represented
throughout the scenario. Their treatment of the “natural
frequencies” approach suggests that the solution is more
apparent when the frequencies of win and loss events in the
aggregate are considered, rather than the probability of
winning or losing a single run. Saenen, Van Dooren, and
Onghena (2015) used feedback to improve participants’
performance on the MHD but noted that the increases in
performance did not come with associated improvement in
understanding of the dilemma. These results are of a piece
with our considerations: the information needed to identify a
correct strategy becomes available to be acted upon with
practice, but does not become available to conscious
knowledge in the same fashion.
We devised several variants of the MHD to explore
whether manipulation of some of the dilemma’s parameters
would affect participants’ exploration and adoption of
different strategies. If this is the case then we may say
participants are able to incorporate information that is
probabilistic (that is, not fully reliable) as a basis for action.
We also explored whether manipulations yielding more
successful performance than in the classic case would
translate to higher participant confidence (that is, explicitly
held beliefs about the value of the new information or about
the utility of an adopted strategy) in their attempts.

participants, and whether it would enhance or diminish their
discovery of the switching strategy.

Methods
Participants 20 undergraduate students (mean age = 19.9,
13 male, 7 female) from Franklin & Marshall College
participated in the experiment for course credit.
Design Experiment 1 used a 3-door MHD with color
(shades of red) serving as the property distinguishing the
“prize” (brighter shade) from the “goats” (darker shade).
We chose color as the target stimulus property because it is
both salient to participants and easy to program.
The experiment was divided into 8 blocks: an initial
100-trial block in which each of the three doors had an equal
chance of concealing the “prize”, followed by 4 100-trial
blocks with unequal probabilities of the “prize” being
behind each of the doors, and finally 3 50-trial blocks with
equal probabilities. In the unequal-probabilities blocks
either the leftmost or rightmost door had a higher chance of
concealing the “prize”. Participants were randomly assigned
to either the left-biased (Group L) or right-biased (Group R)
condition. Participants were asked both to select a door by
clicking on it, and also to register their confidence in their
choice, measured in how far from the center of the chosen
square in any direction they clicked, while still making the
response within the confines of the door. This lack of
directionality was included specifically to avoid laterality
effects, and also to simplify the verbal instructions to the
participants. The center represented the highest possible
confidence and the inside edge of the door represented the
lowest confidence. In all there were 650 trials and 1300
distinct responses for each participant.
Procedure Each individual trial consisted of an instance of
MHD, as follows: three “doors” (square boxes) were
displayed on screen, along with the text prompt “Select a
door”. A participant would click on one box, whereupon the
color behind a remaining non-prize door was revealed. The
participant would then be asked to stick or switch, via the
text prompt: “Switch your pick?” They would then either
switch (by clicking on the unopened door they did not
originally choose) or stick (by once again clicking on the
originally-chosen door). The color behind the door they
ultimately chose would then be revealed, along with text
telling them either “You win” or “You lose” depending on
the outcome of their final choice. At the end of the
experiment participants were asked to briefly describe any
strategy they might have employed in the course of the
experiment.

Results

Experiment 1

Because of the large number of data points, it is especially
important to consider results in terms of both significance
and effect size. We report only those results that meet both
criteria.

In experiment 1, we use the standard 3-door MHD, biasing
the probability of winner based on door position in order to
test whether this bias would in fact be apparent to

475

A 2 (Group) × 8 (Block) ANOVA was conducted on
the measures of door chosen, whether the correct door was
selected, confidence, and whether a trial was a “switch” or
“stick”. Group significantly affected all four measures, but
with a meaningful effect size only for door chosen, F(1,
25984) = 1828.63, p < .001, partial eta squared = .07. The
“door chosen” measure was significantly higher for Group
R (M = 2.19, SD = .83) than for Group L (M = 1.67, SD =
.77), with doors coded as 1 (left), 2 (middle), and 3 (right).
Block significantly affected all four measures, but with
meaningful effect sizes for confidence, F(7, 25984) = 83.65,
p < .001, partial eta squared = .02 and correct door, F(7,
25984) = 73.95, p < .001, partial eta squared = .02. Because
lower values of the confidence measure indicate higher
confidence (as measured in pixel distance from the center of
the chosen door), we report the negative of the values of
confidence. Confidence is lowest in Block 1 (M = -48.57,
SD = -31.97) before increasing steadily until its maximum
in Block 5 (M = -35.5, SD = -24.15) and then decreasing
again until Block 8 (M = -47.37, SD = -28.17). The
proportion of trials on which participants end up choosing
the winning door is lowest in Block 1 (M = .57, SD = .5)
and steadily increases until Block 5 (M = .85, SD = .36)
before decreasing sharply in Block 6 (M = .6, SD = .49) and
remaining relatively steady until the final block (M = .63,
SD = .48). There was a significant Group × Block
interaction for door chosen, F(7, 25984) = 296.41, p < . 001,
partial eta squared = .07.
Having characterized each trial as either a “switch” or
“stick” trial, we conducted a second ANOVA using this
strategy variable as an IV. Error degrees of freedom are
smaller because the analysis is in terms of trials rather than
responses. For the 2 (Group) × 2 (Strategy) × 8 (Block)
ANOVA, Group significantly affected door chosen, F(1,
12968) = 2710.61, p < .001, partial eta squared = .17.
Group R chose the right-most door (M = 2.32, SD = .85)
significantly more than Group L (M = 1.45, SD = .75).
Strategy significantly affected correct door, F(1, 12968) =
979.99, p < .001, partial eta squared = .07. Trials that ended
with a switch response had a higher proportion of correctly
chosen doors (M = .82, SD = .39) than trials that ended with
a “stick” (M = .58, SD = .49). Strategy also significantly
affected confidence, but with an effect size so small as to be
considered negligible. Block significantly affected door
chosen, F(7, 12968) = 20.33, p < .001, partial eta squared =
.01, confidence, F(7, 12969) = 42.08, p < .001, partial eta
squared = .02, and correct door, F(7, 12968) = 144.6, p <
.001, partial eta squared = .07. There were significant twoway interactions of Group × Block, Group × Strategy, and
Strategy × Block. The three-way interaction of Group,
Block, and Strategy was also significant.
Finally, we found that correct responses were only
weakly correlated with confidence, r = .31, p < .001.

or employ this strategy, but resist acknowledging that it is
better even after having it explained. This fact is often
leveraged as part of an argument about irrationality or about
the difficulty of reasoning probabilistically. As Granberg
(1999) reported, in an unequal-probabilities MHD the best
strategy is even less obvious: to optimize the chances of
winning a player should initially select a low-probability
door and then switch to the highest remaining probability
door after a “goat” has been revealed.
In Granberg’s 4-door unequal-probabilities study
participants were informed of the probabilities of finding the
prize behind each door. In the present experiment
participants were not informed of the probabilities at any
point, yet were able over the course of the unequalprobabilities blocks to hone in on the location of the
winning door (leftmost for Group L, rightmost for Group
R). We take this to be evidence of participants’ ability to
perceptually coordinate with the structure of the
experimental task, and believe this ability is conditioned on
the availability of very many trials as a basis for learning,
and on the fact that the unequal win probabilities made the
presence of a winner more salient than in the standard case.
We also believe that the availability of a tactic more obvious
than switching (which, as shown by the second ANOVA,
remains the better strategy) accounts in part for the strength
of the correlation between performance and confidence, a
subject to which we return in the general discussion.
In Experiment 1 we attempted to approach the Monty
Hall paradigm in a way more streamlined than the classic
case, but in a way that also allowed us to look at the effects
of making the probabilities involved more obvious, and of
how repeated exposures to the problem affected
participants’ approaches. However, further refinements were
required.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to not only manipulate the
number of doors and the associated win probabilities, but
also to further refine and streamline the experimental
design.

Methods
Participants Twenty-eight undergraduate students (6 male,
22 female) from SUNY Oswego participated in the
experiment for course credit.
Design In Experiment 2 we returned to an equal-probability
design for the doors, but manipulated the number of doors
in the Monty Hall scenario. Each block consisted of 30
MHD trials with between 3 and 11 doors, presented in
ascending (from 3 to 11 doors), descending (from 11 to 3
doors) or random increments across 8 blocks. We also
changed how we denoted the “prize” and “goat” doors,
using a check symbol for a winning door and an x symbol
for a losing door.

Discussion
The winning MHD strategy is switching, but as described
above, a preponderance of players not only fail to discover

476

Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1,
with the important exception that, after a participant made
their initial choice, all but one of the remaining doors was
opened, instead of a single door. This design was based on
an experiment suggested in Spivey (2008), and was
intended to approach the issue of making the winning
strategy as salient as the winning door had been in
Experiment 1.

10-door block had the highest number of switches (M =
27.14, SD = 3.96) while the 3-door block had the lowest (M
= 18.54, SD = 7.37).

Results
We conducted a 3 (Group) × 8 (Block) × 8 (Number of
Doors) ANOVA on the dependent measures of correct
responses, confidence (calculated for the second response in
a trial), and the total number of “switch” trials per
participant and block. As in Experiment 1, we report only
those results that achieved both significance and meaningful
effect size. Group significantly affected number of switches,
F(2, 7485) = 203.66, p < .001, partial eta squared = .05. On
average, the Descending group had the highest number of
switches per block (M = 27.21, SD = 2.74), followed by the
Ascending group (M = 24.23, SD = 7), with the random
group having the lowest average number of switches (M =
22.59, SD = 6.8). Block significantly affected total number
of switches (see Figure 1), F(8, 7485) = 24.15, p < .001,
partial eta squared = .025. Switching was on average highest
in Block 6 (M = 26,57, SD = 3.77) and lowest in Block 1 (M
= 19.64, SD = 6.99).

Figure 2: Mean correct choices made by participants by
number of doors and condition.
Having calculated the number of switches, we included
this variable in a second analysis. We regressed Condition,
Block, Number of Doors, and Total Switches on correct
responses. These predictors explained 12% of the variance
(R2 = .12, F(4, 7559) = 252.76, p < .001. The number of
doors significantly predicted correct responses, β = .09, p <
.001, as did total number of switches, β = .3, p < .001.
We then regressed Condition, Block, Number of Doors, and
Total Switches on confidence (registered on the second
response per trial). Confidence was normalized so that all
values fell between 0 and 1. We did this to account for the
fact that participants varied in their range of confidence
values, and we were primarily interested in how confidence
changed over the course of the experiment (see Figure 3).

Figure 1: Mean switches made by participants by number
of doors and condition.
Number of doors significantly affected correct responses
(see Figure 2), F(8, 7485) = 9.96, p < .001, partial eta
squared = .011 and total number of switches, F(8, 7485) =
68.06, p < .001, partial eta squared = .068. On average, the
10-door block had the highest proportion of correct
responses (M = 83.8%, SD = 36.9%), while the 3-door block
had the lowest (M = 56.7%, SD = 49.5%). On average, the

477

the 11-door block should have been even higher, the 11door block was also the first block presented for a third of
the participants, and therefore performance likely suffered
because of the novelty of the task.
We attempted to better isolate the effect that switching
has on performance and on confidence using linear
regression, with mixed results. In particular, all of our
independent variables together accounted for only 3% of the
variance in participants’ confidence. Taken together with
the weak correlation between performance and confidence,
it seems clear that we have not yet isolated a manipulation
that primarily affects confidence, though this might also be
a limitation of how confidence is measured.

General Discussion
The present set of experiments was designed to
investigate belief from an empirical standpoint. To this end,
a distinction was drawn between two different ways of
thinking about belief. There is belief-as-proposition, which
is perhaps the better-known way of considering belief, and
there is belief as a guide to action. Showing that one
possesses both species of belief but that they are not
equivalent, then, takes a step toward an understanding of
belief that is not beholden to its propositional character.
Allowing participants to provide an overt measure of
behavior (door choices) as well as a more covert measure of
their own state (confidence) lets us see belief’s different
guises separately.
Our other aim was to consider why it is that the MHD
presents such difficulty. We considered that participants
might assume the initial symmetry between doors held
throughout the scenario and attempted to introduce new
information via the introduction of the positional bias in
Experiment 1. We also considered that participants fail to
see that the doors remaining after a reveal constitute a
distinct subset of probabilities and attempted to make this
fact more salient by manipulating the number of doors
throughout Experiment 2.
The results of both Experiments 1 and 2 speak to the
distinction between a belief on which action (e.g. choosing a
door that might conceal a prize) is based and assent to the
propositional description of that belief (e.g. “I believe that
Door Number 3 is the winner”). Participants are able to
accomplish the former regardless of their degree of belief in
the latter. Performance and confidence hold together only
weakly even when performance is successful. As
acknowledged above, we do not feel that we have as yet hit
upon a way of really manipulating confidence, but we do
feel that we have demonstrated that successful action need
not be conditional on any particular degree of belief. This
finding is of a piece with the hypothesis that the aspects of
the task about which a participant might have
propositionally-construed beliefs are not necessarily the
aspects that are used to guide behavior (Anderson &
Runeson, 2008; Runeson, Juslin, & Olsson, 2000).
In Experiment 1 we hoped to shed light on the dynamics
of beliefs in the face of changing evidence, by altering the

Figure 3: Mean normalized confidence estimates for by
number of doors and condition.
These predictors explained only 3% of the variance in the
normalized confidence (R2 = .03, F(4, 7559) = 65.45, p <
.001. All four predictors significantly affected normalized
confidence: Condition (β = -.06, p < .001), Block (β = .05, p
< .001), number of doors (β = -.1, p < .001), and total
number of switches (β = -.11, p < .001).
Finally, we found that correct responses were only weakly
correlated with confidence, r = .24, p < .005.

Discussion
In Experiment 2 we varied the MHD by manipulating the
number of doors in each block. The presence of additional
doors alters the win probabilities, though not the fact that
switching still has a higher probability of winning than
sticking. In theory, the additional doors create a more
difficult problem of probabilistic reasoning than the 3-door
case, but the removal of all but one door changes those
calculations. As Spivey (2008) points out, seeing the subset
of possibilities reduced so drastically may actually make
switching a more obvious strategy. Our results bear this
hypothesis out.
The significant effect of Group on number of switch trials
means that the order of presentation of door numbers makes
a difference to how participants approach the task—in other
words, the task exhibits hysteresis. Here, the Descending
group had the highest number of switch trials: the presence
and subsequent removal of more doors makes it easier to see
that the original door has a lower probability of being a
winner than the one remaining out of all the rest, which
persists as the number of doors is reduced over the
following blocks. This interpretation is also supported by
the fact that the 10-door block had the highest numbers of
both switches and correct responses, while the 3-door block
had the lowest of both. Although a case could be made that

478

probabilities that a given door would be the winner. The
results show that participants are able to perceive that one
door is likelier to pay off and are able to adapt their strategy
accordingly. This result, coupled with the understanding
that the beliefs that guide actions are usually many more in
number than those considered here, led us to believe that
adaptation to changing information might be considered a
dynamical system. Experiment 2 was designed to
investigate this question more fully, by incorporating the
changing number of doors. This provided not only a
candidate control parameter for the MHD but also allowed
us to test the hypothesis that failure to separate the
probabilities associated with chosen doors versus unchosen
doors (or, to put it another way, improperly conditioning
beliefs about chosen doors on information about unchosen
doors) is responsible for the difficulty of discovering and
adopting the switching strategy.
The results of Experiment 2 support both contentions. The
different conditions show signs of hysteresis, a hallmark of
dynamical systems, and suggest further avenues of
exploration in future manipulations within this paradigm.
The results also support the hypothesis that information in
one part of the dilemma is taken to affect other parts is a
matter of framing. Additional manipulations regarding
numbers of choices, distributions of probabilities, and
physical versus virtual objects, are all natural extensions of
the work presented here.
Our paradigm needs refinement, but works at a first past.
Participants change their actions based on changing
information, and these changes persist in some fashion. The
actions are undertaken not wholly in keeping with degree of
assent to the correctness of the action. Finally, there are
large-scale dynamics with patterns of consistency that
provide theoretical and methodological insights into
investigating changes in belief.

Quine, W. V. O., & Ullian, J. S. (1978). The web of belief
(Vol. 2). R. M. Ohmann (Ed.). New York: Random
House.
Runeson, S., Juslin, P. and Olsson, H. (2000). Visual
perception of dynamic properties: cue heuristics versus
direct-perceptual competence. Psychological Review,
107: 525–555.
Saenen, L., Van Dooren, W., & Onghena, P. (2015). A
randomized Monty Hall experiment: The positive effect
of conditional frequency feedback. Thinking &
Reasoning, 21(2), 176-192.
Spivey, M. (2008). The continuity of mind. Oxford
University Press.
Van Fraassen, B. (1989). Laws and symmetry. Oxford
University Press.
Vos Savant, M. (1990). Ask Marilyn. Parade, 15.

References
Andersson, I. E., & Runeson, S. (2008). Realism of
confidence, modes of apprehension, and variable-use in
visual discrimination of relative mass. Ecological
Psychology, 20(1), 1-31.
Arló-Costa, H. (unpublished). Computational and
probabilistic models of abduction. Department of
Philosophy, Carnegie-Mellon University.
Baratgin, J., & Politzer, G. (2010). Updating: A
psychologically basic situation of probability revision.
Thinking & Reasoning, 16(4), 253-287.
Granberg, D. (1999). A new version of the Monty Hall
Dilemma with unequal probabilities. Behavioural
Processes, 48(1), 25-34.
Krauss, S., & Wang, X. T. (2003). The psychology of the
Monty Hall problem: discovering psychological
mechanisms for solving a tenacious brain teaser. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 132(1), 3-22.

479

