Dynamical systems modeling of the child–mother dyad:
Causality between child-directed language complexity and language development
Jeremy Irvin (jirvin@umail.ucsb.edu)

Daniel Spokoyny (dspoka@gmail.com)

College of Creative Studies
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA

Fermı́n Moscoso del Prado Martı́n (fmoscoso@linguistics.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
Abstract
We model the causal links between child language (CL) and
child-directed language (CDL). We take pairs of sequences of
linguistic measurements from a longitudinal study. Each childmother pair of sequences is considered as an instance of the
trajectory of a high-dimensional dynamical system. We then
use Multispatial Convergent Cross Mapping to ascertain the
directions of causality between the pairs of sequences, that is,
whether the complexity of CL drives that of CDL, the complexity of CDL drives that of CL, both, or neither. We find that
children are responsive to the amount of speech and the diversity of words produced by their mothers, but not vice-versa.
However, the syntactic diversities of the children’s utterances
drive the syntactic diversity of the mothers’ utterances. This is
evidence for fine-grained fine-tuning of CDL in response only
to the syntax of CL.
Keywords: Causality; Child-Directed Language; Convergent
Cross Mapping; Dynamical Systems; Fine-Tuning; Information Theory; Language Acquisition

Introduction
Child-directed language (CDL) –sometimes referred to as
“motherese”– is the pattern of language used by parents when
talking to young children. It is known to exhibit distinctive characteristics with respect to regular adult language (cf.,
Snow & Ferguson, 1977): It typically uses shorter utterances,
prosody is often exaggerated, redundancy and repetition are
higher than normal, and referential context tends to be linked
to very immediate contexts. It has been observed that the
lexical and syntactic complexity of CDL gradually increases
along a child’s development (Cross, 1977; Snow, 1989),
eventually converging to regular adult language. Whether the
simplicity of CDL relative to regular adult language plays a
functional role in facilitating language acquisition is a contentious issue in the literature. Some researchers argue that
“starting small” (Elman, 1993) is a fundamental aspect that
facilitates language acquisition (e.g., Dominey & Dodane,
2004). Others, however, claim that there is no facilitating
role played by such simplicity (e.g., Pinker, 1994). This latter group would claim that, to some degree, children might
exploit universal aspects of language structure, and their syntactic performance would be unrelated to the input to which
they have been exposed. Those researchers advocating for
a functional role of the simplified input refer to fine-tuning
(Snow, 1989, 1995; Sokolov, 1993) as the process by which
caregivers adjust the complexity of CDL as a function of the

level of complexity of the language produced or understood
by the child.
A weak and a strong version of the fine-tuning hypothesis compete in the literature. In the weak interpretation,
although parents gradually increase the complexity of their
CDL, they do not do so as a direct response to the specific
properties of the utterances produced by their children, but
rather they adjust to the children’s overall level of cognitive
development, irrespective of the specificities of the language
they produce and understand. In this line, several studies have
failed to find a direct link between the complexity of the parent’s language and that of the child’s (Newport, Gleitman,
& Gleitman, 1977; Scarborough & Wycoff, 1986; Valian,
1999). These findings suggest that –if anything– the complexity of CDL might increase as a function of the child’s
age or overall level of development, but not so much as a
direct response to the detailed properties of CL. In contrast,
other researchers have found evidence supporting a strong
version of the fine-tuning hypothesis: That parents adapt the
complexity of CDL in direct response to the specific properties of CL (Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva, Cymerman, & Levine,
2002; Kunert, Fernández, & Zuidema, 2011; Murray, Johnson, & Peters, 1990; Roy, Frank, & Roy, 2009; Snow, 1995;
Sokolov, 1993). The strong version of the fine-tuning hypothesis has become the dominant view in the field, considered a well-established fact by influential researchers (e.g.,
MacWhinney, 2014).
Dynamical systems offer powerful tools for modeling human development (e.g., Smith & Thelen, 2003; van Geert,
1991). These models provide a mathematical framework
for implementing the principle that development involves the
mutual and continuous interaction of multiple levels of the
developing system, which simultaneously unfold over many
time-scales. Typically, a dynamical system is described by a
system of coupled differential equations governing the temporal evolution of multiple parts of the system and their interrelations. In recent years, it has been noticed that, in human development, such systems extend beyond the individual. In particular, it has been found that the linguistic and behavioral interaction between parent-child dyads can be jointly
considered as part of a single dynamical sytem encompassing
both the child and the parent (Dale & Spivey, 2006; Steenbeek & van Geert, 2007). In this direction van Geert (1991)

2645

shows that the interaction of components within the childparent dyad can also be modeled on the time-scale of development itself. One difficulty that arises when trying to model
a dynamical system as complex as the joint development of
language in a parent–child dyad is that many factors that are
important for the evolution of the system might not be available or might not be easily measurable or –even worse– there
are additional variables relevant for the system of which the
modeler is not even aware. In this respect, a crucial development was the discovery that, in a deterministic coupled dynamical system –even in the presence of noise– the dynamics of the whole system can be satisfactorily recovered using
measurements of a single of the system’s variables (Takens’
Embedding Theorem; Takens, 1981).
The finding above opens an interesting avenue for understanding the processes involved in language acquisition
(perhaps more suitably termed language growth, following
van Geert, 1991). In the same way that systems of differential
equations can be used to model the evolution of ecosystems
(e.g., predator-prey systems), one could take measurements
of the detailed properties of CL and CDL, and build a detailed
system of equations capturing the macroscopic dynamics of
the process. However, in order to achieve this, it is necessary
to ascertain the ways in which different measured variables
in the system affect each other. This problem goes beyond
estimating correlations (as could be obtained, for instance,
using regression models), as one needs to detect asymmetrical causal relations between the variables of interest, so that
these causal influences can be incorporated into the models.
In this study, we investigate the causal relations between
measures describing CL (i.e., number of words produced, lexical diversity, and mean length of utterances) and the equivalent measures in CDL, using the longitudinal data provided
in the Manchester Corpus (Theakston, Lieven, Pine, & Rowland, 2001). In order to detect causal relations between the
different measures, we make use of state space reconstruction relying on Takens (1981)’s Embedding Theorem, and
recently developed techniques for assessing the strength of
causal relations in dynamical systems (Multispatial Convergent Cross Mapping; Clark et al., 2015). Our results provide
a detailed picture on the presence and effects of fine tuning
across different linguistic strata, and provide an important inroad into building a detailed dynamical system jointly considering the co-development of CDL and CL.

Causality Detection in Dynamical Systems
The commonly-held maxim that “correlation does not imply causation” is often misinterpreted to mean that one might
have correlated variables that are not involved in any causal
relations. Pearl (2000) clarifies that, whenever two variables
are correlated, there must exist some causal link between
them. Namely, if variables A and B are found to be correlated, then one of four possibilities must be true: (a) A causes
B, (b) B causes A, (c) A and B form a feedback loop, each
causing the other, or (d) there is a third variable C causing

both A and B. In order to ascertain a direct causal relation
between any two variables, one needs to discard possibility
(d) above, for which one requires knowledge of all other variables that might be of importance for the system in question.
Without knowledge of these possible intervening variables,
causal inference using these methods must remain strongly
suspect. This problem is, of course, particularly acute when
one is dealing with systems as complex as is human language.
The most common technique for assessing the presence
of causal relations between time series is Granger-causality
(Granger, 1981). It relies on the notion of separability, this
is, that the information contained by a causal source is unique
to it, so that just eliminating that variable from consideration
suffices for eliminating the information that it contributes.
Purely stochastic systems often exhibit separability. Unfortunately, however, separability is not a property that is exhibited
by deterministic non-linear dynamical systems. For studying the interactions of species within ecosystems, Sugihara et
al. (2012) introduced Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM), a
causality-detection technique that is valid for non-separable
systems, is capable of identifying weakly coupled variables
even in the presence of noise, and –crucially– can distinguish direct causal relations between variables from effects
of shared driving variables (i.e., in possibility (d) from the
previous paragraph, CCM would not find causality).

Figure 1: Reconstructed manifold for Lorenz’s system (M;
top), as well as the shadow manifolds reconstructed considering only X (MX ; bottom-left) and Y (MY ; bottom-right)
(reprinted with permission from Sugihara et al., 2012).
For instance, consider E. Lorenz’s often studied dynamical
system including three coupled variables X(t), Y (t), and Z(t)
whose co-evolution is described by the system of differential
equations

dX


= σ(Y − X)



dt


dY
(1)
= X(ρ − Z) −Y .

dt




dZ


= XY − βZ
dt
The first equation in this system indicates that there is a re-

2646

lation by which Y causes X, as the change in X (i.e., its
future value) depends on the value of Y (i.e., the future of
X depends on the past of Y even after the past of X itself has been considered), a causal relation whose strength
is indexed by parameter σ. The manifold defined by these
three variables (Lorenz’s famous strange attractor), which
we can denote by M, is plotted in the top of Fig. 1. In
many circumstances, however, not all variables of the system are available (some might be difficult to measure, or we
might not even be aware of their relevance). It is at this
point that Takens (1981)’s Embedding Theorem comes into
play. Informally speaking, the theorem states that the properties of a coupled dynamical system’s attractor can be recovered using only measurements from a single one of its variables. This is achieved by considering multiple versions of
the same variable lagged in time, that is, instead of plotting
(X[t],Y [t], Z[t]), when only measurements of X are available,
we can plot (X[t], X[t + τ], . . . , X[t + (E − 1)τ]). These reconstructed manifolds are termed “shadow” manifolds. MX denotes the shadow manifold of M reconstructed on the basis of
X alone. There are well-studied techniques for finding the appropriate values for the parameters for the lag τ and the number of dimensions E (c.f., Abarbanel, Brown, Sidorowich, &
Tsimring, 1993) so that the properties of the original manifold M are recovered by the shadow manifold MX . Fig. 1
illustrates this point by plotting the shadow manifolds MX
(bottom-left) and MY (bottom-right) for the Lorenz system.
Notice how both shadow manifolds recover much of the original’s structure, using only knowledge of one of its three variables.
Each point in the original manifold M maps onto points in
its shadow manifolds, as is illustrated by the points labelled
m(t), x(t), and y(t) in Fig. 1. The preservation of the topological properties of the original manifold in its shadow manifolds entails that points that are close-by in the original manifold will also be close-by in its shadow versions. This implies
that, for causally linked variables within the same dynamical
system, the state of one variable can identify the states of the
others. Sugihara et al. (2012) noticed that, when one variable X stochastically drives another variable Y , information
about the states of X can be recovered from Y , but not viceversa. This is the basic insight of the CCM method. To test
for causality from X to Y , CCM looks for the signature of
X in Y ’s time series by seeing whether the time indices of
nearby points on MY can be used to identify nearby points on
MX . Crucially, in order to distinguish causation from mere
correlation, CCM requires convergence, that is, that crossmapped estimates improve in estimation accuracy with the
sample size (i.e., “library size”) used for reconstructing the
manifolds. As the library size increases, the trajectories defining the manifolds fill in, resulting in closer nearest neighbors
and declining estimation error, which is reflected in a higher
correlation coefficient between the points in the neighborhoods of the shadow manifolds. Convergence then becomes
the necessary condition for inferring causation. Using both

artificial systems and ecological time-series with known dynamics, Sugihara and his colleagues demonstrated that this
technique successfully recovers true directional causal relations when these are present, and –crucially– is able to discard spurious causation in the case when both variables are
causally driven by a third, unknown, variable, but there is no
true direct causation between them.
An inconvenience of CCM, and in general of techniques
that rely on manifold reconstruction, is that they generally require that relatively long time-series of the behavior of the
system are available. Such long series are, however, very difficult, if not impossible, to obtain in many fields, including
of course language acquisition. One can however obtain multiple short time series from different instances of a similar
dynamical system. In ecology, for instance, one can obtain
short sequences of measurements of the population densities
of a group of species measured at different places and times.
In language acquisition, we might have multiple, relatively
short longitudinal sequences of measurements from different
children. With this in mind Clark et al. (2015) developed
Multispatial CCM (mCCM), an extension of CCM able to infer causal relations from multiple short time-series measured
at different sites, making use of dewdrop regression (Hsieh,
Anderson, & Sugihara, 2008) to take the additional heterogeneity into account.

Materials and Methods
We obtained from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney,
2000) the transcriptions contained in the Manchester Corpus (Theakston et al., 2001). This corpus contains annotated
transcripts of audio recordings from a longitudinal study of
12 British English-speaking children (6 girls and 6 boys) between the ages of approximately two and three years. The
children were recorded at their homes for an hour while they
engaged in normal play activities with their mothers. Each
child was recorded on two separate occasions in every threeweek period for one year. Each recording session is split into
two half-hour periods. The annotations include the lemmatized form of the words produced by both the children and
their mothers (incomplete words and small word-internal errors were manually corrected in the lemmatization).
In order to increase the sample size in each period, we used
a sliding window technique (akin to that used in Moscoso del
Prado Martı́n, 2014), by computing measures for the samples contained in overlapping windows of three consecutive
corpus files. In this way, at each point we obtained samples
originating from two files from the same recording session,
and a file from either the previous or the next recording session. For each child and mother, we recorded the total number of words they produced, the lexical diversity measured as
the entropy of the lemmas produced (following the estimation method of Moscoso del Prado Martı́n, in press, which
is demonstrated to be accurate and unbiased for these sample sizes), and the mean length of the utterances (MLU) they
produced. Instead of measuring MLU in morphemes (Brown,

2647

Figure 2: Evolution of the measures under consideration as a function of the children’s ages, for the children (top row) and their
mothers (bottom row). The total number of words produced are plotted in the left column, the lexical diversities in the middle
column, and the MLUs in the right column.
1973), we used the simpler, but equally accurate measure in
number of words (Parker & Brorson, 2005). In these ages,
MLUs are well known to provide an accurate measure of the
syntactic richness of the utterances produced (Brown, 1973),
and in fact correlate almost perfectly with explicit measurements of grammatical diversity (Moscoso del Prado Martı́n,
in press).1 Fig. 2 plots the temporal evolution of the three
measures for the children and their mothers.
Table 1: Values of the parameters used for shadow attractor
reconstruction.

τ
E

Number
of Words
3
3

Child
Lexical.
Diversity
2
3

MLU
3
4

Number
of Words
3
5

Mother
Lexical
Diversity
3
4

MLU
3
4

The optimal time-lags (τ) for constructing the shadow manifolds were estimated as the first local minimum of the lagged
self-information in each of the time series (c.f., Abarbanel et
al., 1993). The optimal embedding dimensionalities (E) were
estimated by optimizing next-step prediction accuracy. The
estimates were not found to differ significantly across children or mothers, and therefore for each measure, we used a
single estimate of (τ, E) for all children (see Table 1), and a
single estimate for all mothers. The time series were checked
to ensure that they contained non-linear signal not dominated
by noise using a prediction test, and the presence of directional causality between children’s and mothers’ measures
1 We also tested a measure of inflectional diversity (Moscoso del
Prado Martı́n, 2014, in press), which was not found to produce any
reliable causal effects, and is therefore not discussed further. However, the presence of these additional tests was nevertheless taken
into account when correcting for multiple comparisons.

was tested for each of the three variables using mCCM, with
1,000 bootstrapping iterations used to assess the p-values.2
Finally, to account for our lack of a priori predictions on the
causal directions to be tested, the p-values were adjusted for
multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate for correlated data (FDR; Benjamini & Yekutieli, 2001).

Results and Discussion
Fig. 3 plots the mCCM results for each pair of shadow manifolds. The curves plot how the correlations between nearest neighbours across shadow attractors evolve as one considers increasingly larger library sizes. The p-values report
whether these correlation values are significantly increasing
(the p-values are obtained by a Monte Carlo method with
1,000 resamplings, and further FDR-corrected for multiple
comparisons). Panel (a) shows that convergence indicates a
significant causal relation between the number of words produced by the mother, and the number of words produced by
her child (p < .001) which is not significantly present in the
opposite direction (p = .067). A similar picture arises in the
lexical diversities in panel (b): The richness of the vocabulary
produced by the mothers influences the richness of the vocabulary produced by their children (p = .014), but the richness
of the vocabulary used by children does not significantly affect that of their mothers (p = .481). In contrast, panel (c)
shows that, in terms of MLU, the language produced by children and their mothers form a feedback loop, with significant
causal relations in both directions (child to mother: p < .001;
mother to child: p = .005).
In terms of the amount of speech, or the richness of the vocabulary used, these results indicate that the mothers are not
increasing the complexity of CDL in response to the details
2 All computations, except for τ selection, we done using R package multispatialCCM (Clark et al., 2015).

2648

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: For each of the measures considered, the panels plot the evolution of Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) between
the predicted and predicting shadow manifolds. The dashed lines denotes the standard deviation of the estimates. The p-values
indicated in the legend were obtained by the bootstrapping procedure described by Clark et al. (2015). A value of ρ significantly
increasing with library length is mCCM’s indication of causality between two variables.
of CL, but the children’s performance still benefits from the
increased quantity and diversity of words. This is evidence
that weak lexical fine-tuning serves a functional role. In contrast, when it comes to MLUs, the bidirectional causality provides clear evidence for a strongly coupled system with feedback. As is shown in Moscoso del Prado Martı́n (in press),
MLUs are in fact almost perfectly correlated (i.e., Pearson’s
r ≈ .96) with an explicit measure of the diversity of the syntactic structures used in a sample (i.e., the syntactic diversity
of the sample). Mothers adjust the complexity of their syntactic structures as a direct response to the syntactic complexity
of the utterances produced by their children, as is advocated
by the strong version of the fine-tuning hypothesis.
Our results provide direct evidence for the fine-tuning hypothesis. For the first time, we have explicitly demonstrated
that, in all measures studied, the children benefit from the
gradual increase in complexity of CDL, as is indicated by the
directional causalities found between the measures in CDL
and those in CL. In addition, only for the case of syntax, we
find direct evidence for the strong version of the fine-tuning
hypothesis: The complexity of the syntactic structures produced by mothers are directly caused by those of the syntactic
structures produced by their children.
These findings are the first step in building a macroscopic
level dynamical system model of language acquisition explicitly considering children jointly with their environment. In
order to build such a model, one also needs to test for the
explicit causal components of complexity within an individual (e.g., what are the causal connections between increased
vocabulary and increased syntactic knowledge?), and those
present across individuals and linguistic strata; for instance,
it has been reported that the amount of speech produced by
parents influences the growth of both the vocabulary (e.g.,
Hurtado, Marchman, & Fernald, 2008; Weisleder & Fernald,
2013), and the MLUs in the children (Barnes, Gutfreund, Sat-

terly, & Wells, 1983). We anticipate further research in these
directions.

References
Abarbanel, H. D. I., Brown, R., Sidorowich, J. J., & Tsimring,
L. Sh. (1993). The analysis of observed chaotic data in
physical systems. Reviews of Modern Physics, 65, 1331–
1392.
Barnes, S., Gutfreund, M., Satterly, D., & Wells, G. (1983).
Characteristics of adult speech which predict children’s
language development. Journal of Child Language, 10, 65–
84.
Benjamini, Y., & Yekutieli, D. (2001). The control of the
false discovery rate in multiple testing under dependency.
Annals of Statistics, 29, 1165–1188.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: the early stages. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press.
Clark, A. T., Ye, H., Isbell, F., Deyle, E. R., Cowles, J.,
Tilman, G. D., & Sugihara, G. (2015). Spatial convergent
cross mapping to detect causal relationships from short
time series. Ecology, 96, 1174–1181.
Cross, T. G. (1977). Mothers’ speech adjustments: The contribution of selected child listener variables. In C. E. Snow
& C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), Talking to Children (pp. 151–
188). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Dale, R., & Spivey, M. J. (2006). Unraveling the dyad: Using
recurrence analysis to explore patterns of syntactic coordination between children and caregivers in conversation.
Language Learning, 391–430.
Dominey, P. F., & Dodane, C. (2004). Indeterminacy in
language acquisition: the role of child directed speech and
joint attention. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17, 121–145.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural
networks: the importance of starting small. Cognition, 48,
71–99.

2649

Granger, C. W. J. (1981). Testing for causality. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 2, 329–352.
Hsieh, C., Anderson, C., & Sugihara, G. (2008). Extending nonlinear analysis to short ecological time series. The
American Naturalist, 171, 71–80.
Hurtado, N., Marchman, V. A., & Fernald, A. (2008). Does
input influence uptake? Links between maternal talk processing speed and vocabulary size in Spanish-learning children. Developmental Science, 11, F31–F39.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymerman, E., & Levine, S.
(2002). Language input and child syntax. Cognitive Psychology, 45, 337–374.
Kunert, R., Fernández, R., & Zuidema, W. (2011). Adaptation in child-directed speech: Evidence from corpora. In
SemDial 2011: Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on the
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (pp. 112–119). Los
Angeles, CA.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk (3rd ed., Vol. 2: The database). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
MacWhinney, B. (2014). What we have learned. Journal of
Child Language, 41, 124–131.
Moscoso del Prado Martı́n, F. (2014). Grammatical change
begins within the word: Causal modeling of the coevolution of Icelandic morphology and syntax. In P. Bello,
M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scasselatti (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2657–2662). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Moscoso del Prado Martı́n, F. (in press). Vocabulary, grammar, sex, and aging. Cognitive Science.
Murray, A., Johnson, J., & Peters, J. (1990). Fine-tuning of
utterance length to preverbal infants: effects on later language development. Journal of Child Language, 17, 511–
525.
Newport, E., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. (1977). Mother,
I’d rather do it myself: Some effects and non-effects of maternal speech style. In C. E. Snow & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.),
Talking to Children (pp. 109–149). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Parker, M. D., & Brorson, K. (2005). A comparative study
between mean length of utterance in morphemes (MLUm)
and mean length of utterance in words (MLUw). First Language, 25, 365–376.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: models, Reasoning and Inference.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct: How the mind
creates language. New York, NY: Harper-Collins.
Roy, B. C., Frank, M. C., & Roy, D. (2009). Exploring word
learning in a high-density longitudinal corpus. In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, K. Schomaker, & J. Nerbonne (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 2106–2111). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Scarborough, H., & Wycoff, J. (1986). Mother, I’d still do it

myself: Some further non-effects of ‘motherese’. Journal
of Child Language, 13, 431–437.
Smith, L., & Thelen, E. (2003). Development as a dynamic
system. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 343–348.
Snow, C. E. (1989). Understanding social interaction
and language acquisition; sentences are not enough. In
M. H. Bornstein & J. S. Bruner (Eds.), Interaction in human development (pp. 83–103). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Snow, C. E. (1995). Issues in the study of input: Fine-tuning,
universality, individual and developmental differences, and
necessary causes. In P. Fletcher & B. MacWhinney (Eds.),
The Handbook of Child Language (pp. 180–193). Oxford,
England: Blackwell.
Snow, C. E., & Ferguson, C. A. (Eds.). (1977). Talking
to Children. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Sokolov, J. L. (1993). A local contingency analysis of the
fine-tuning hypothesis. Developmental Psychology, 29,
1008–1023.
Steenbeek, H. W., & van Geert, P. L. C. (2007). A theory and dynamic model of dyadic interaction: Concerns,
appraisals, and contagiousness in a developmental context.
Develpmental Review, 27, 1–40.
Sugihara, G., May, R., Ye, H., Hsieh, C., Deyle, E. R., Fogarty, M., & Munch, S. (2012). Detecting causality in complex ecosystems. Science, 338, 496–500.
Takens, F. (1981). Detecting strange attractors in turbulence.
In D. A. Rand & L.-S. Young (Eds.), Dynamical Systems
and Turbulence (pp. 366–381). Berlin, Germany: Springer
Verlag.
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M., & Rowland,
C. F. (2001). The role of performance limitations in the
acquisition of verb-argument structure: an alternative account. Journal of Child Language, 28, 127–152.
Valian, V. (1999). Input and language acquisition. In
W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhattia (Eds.), Handbook of child
language acquisition (pp. 497–530). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
van Geert, P. L. C. (1991). A dynamic systems model of
cognitive and language growth. Psychological Review, 98,
3–53.
Weisleder, A., & Fernald, A. (2013). Talking to children
matters: Early language experience strengthens processing
and builds vocabulary. Psychological Science, 24, 2143–
2152.

2650

