Effects of experience in a developmental model of reading
Ya-Ning Chang (y.chang5@lancaster.ac.uk)
Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK

Stephen Welbourne (stephen.welbourne@manchester.ac.uk)
Neuroscience and Aphasia Research Unit (NARU), University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK
Abstract

Lambon Ralph, 2000; Lewis, Gerhand, & Ellis, 2001;
Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005). One interpretation of the
AoA effect is that early learned words have been
encountered more times at the age that participants are
tested than later learned words. This has been termed the
cumulative frequency hypothesis (Lewis, 2001). On this
view, cumulative frequency can be considered as a
combined index by multiplying frequency and number of
years that a stimulus is known to participants (i.e., age AoA). However, most studies report additive effects of
frequency and AoA (Ghyselinck, Lewis, & Brysbaert,
2004), suggesting the effects are distinct. In addition, the
findings of the differential effect sizes of frequency and
AoA in multi-task comparison studies (Ghyselinck, Lewis,
& Brysbaert, 2004; Brysbaert & Ghyselinck, 2006) have
been taken as evidence against the cumulative frequency
hypothesis, because this theory would predict co-variance of
frequency and AoA effects.
Another theory accounting for the AoA effect is the
representation mapping theory (Ellis & Lambon Ralph,
2000). According to this computationally motivated
account, the AoA effect is due to the gradual reduction in
plasticity as more words are learned. Early learned words
are privileged to easily adjust weight connections in the
system; while later learned words can only cause small
weight changes because of the reduced plasticity. Thus, an
AoA effect is expected particularly when the mappings
between inputs and outputs are arbitrary, because they
require greater computational resources to resolve the
mapping (Zevin & Seidenberg, 2002). This is also supported
by behavioural data reported by Monaghan and Ellis (2002)
where the AoA effect was stronger for low consistency
words (e.g. break) than for high consistency words (e.g.
block) in a word naming task.
The AoA effect also has been suggested to result from
differences in semantic representations where early learned
words have richer semantic representations than later
learned words, termed the semantic locus theory (Brysbaert
et al., 2000). Steyvers and Tenenbaum (2005) developed a
semantic growth network to simulate the AoA effects in
terms of the connections of words with others. In their
network, early learned words have more connections with
others and thus they have a more central role in the system,
resulting in a faster access. The most direct evidence for the
semantic locus theory comes from the observations of larger
AoA effects in tasks that directly involve semantics, such as
word-associate generation, picture naming, picture matching,
and semantic categorisation (Brysbaert & Ghyselinck, 2006;
Brysbaert et al. 2000; Catling & Johnston, 2009). In

There is considerable evidence showing that age of
acquisition (AoA) is an important factor influencing lexical
processing. Early-learned words tend to be processed more
quickly compared to later-learned words. The effect could be
due to the gradual reduction in plasticity as more words are
learned. Alternatively, it could originate from differences
within semantic representations. We implemented the triangle
model of reading including orthographic, phonological and
semantic processing layers, and trained it according to
experience of a language learner to explore the AoA effects in
both naming and lexical decision. Regression analyses on the
model’s performance showed that AoA was a reliable
predictor of naming and lexical decision performance, and the
effect size was larger for lexical decision than for naming.
The modelling results demonstrate that AoA operates
differentially on concrete and abstract words, indicating that
both the mapping and the representation accounts of AoA
were contributing to the model’s performance.
Keywords: age of acquisition; language development;
reading; computational modelling; visual word recognition.

Introduction
Age of acquisition (AoA) effects refer to observations that
stimuli learned early in life are processed more quickly and
accurately than stimuli learned later in life. These AoA
effects have been observed in a variety of language tasks
including word naming, lexical decision, picture naming and
semantic related tasks (Brysbaert, Van Wijnendaele, De
Deyne, 2000; Cortese & Khanna, 2007; Ghyselinck, Lewis,
& Brysbaert, 2004; Monaghan & Ellis, 2002). When the
magnitude of AoA across tasks was compared in a review
by Juhasz (2005), the results showed that the effect size is
largest in picture naming (125 ms), followed by lexical
decision (56 ms) and naming (31 ms). These findings
indicate that AoA is a strong factor influencing lexical
processing across several domains.
However, there has been scepticism about AoA effects
because AoA is naturally confounded with other lexical
semantic variables such as frequency and concreteness (or
imageability) (Strain, Patterson, & Seidenberg, 2002; Zevin
& Seidenberg, 2004). Nevertheless, when all these variables
were considered in predicting large naming and lexical
decision datasets, Cortese and Khanna (2007) showed
unique AoA effects for both naming and lexical decision,
indicating the AoA effects are not spurious findings.

Theories of AoA Effects
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the
origin of AoA effects (Brysbaert et al., 2000; Ellis &

123

addition, the magnitude of AoA effects can be related to the
extent of involvement of semantics in the tasks (Ghyselinck,
Lewis, & Brysbaert, 2004; Brysbaert & Ghyselinck, 2006).
These arguments have contributed to an emerging view
that both the representation and semantic locus theories
might contribute to the AoA effects (Catling & Johnston,
2009). For instance, the stronger AoA effects observed for
low consistent words in naming might be explained by the
semantic locus theory if one considers that semantics is
differentially involved in naming according to the regularity
of the orthography to phonology mapping (Strain &
Seidenberg, 1995). On the other hand, the magnitude of
AoA effects in different tasks is also compatible with the
arbitrariness of the mappings between different
representations, such that more arbitrary mappings elicit
greater AoA effects. However, it remains unclear the extent
to which AoA effects in a model of reading are required to
be explained in terms of semantic locus or mapping effects.

AoA Models of Reading
Several computational models of reading have been
developed to explore AoA effects (Ellis & Lambon Ralph,
2000; Monaghan & Ellis, 2010; Zevin & Seidenberg, 2002).
Monaghan and Ellis (2010) developed a connectionist
model that demonstrated clear AoA effects in naming in
addition to cumulative frequency effects. The key for the
model to capturing the AoA effects was that it was trained
with a cumulative learning process. The model started to
learn to read a small set of words, akin to a child beginning
to learn to read, and gradually learned to build up an entire
adult vocabulary. The process mimics the natural reading
development that allows the model to capture the
characteristics of AoA. Their findings provided evidence for
the representation mapping theory. However, these models
did not include semantic representations so they were
limited in their ability to test the effect of the role of
semantics in the size of AoA effects.
The primary aim of this study was to develop a largescale developmental model of reading, trained cumulatively
to simulate chronological language experience. The model
comprised three key processing layers including
orthography, phonology and semantics, and it was trained
with a cumulative learning process to simulate different
stages of reading development. We used the model to
explore the AoA effects in both naming and lexical decision.
In particular we attempted to examine the competing
theories of AoA and investigate how semantic
representations might implicate the emergence of AoA
effects within the model.

Method

The current model consisted of three processing layers
including orthographic, phonological and semantic layers,
one context layer, two attractor layers and five hidden layers
for intermediation between the layers.
An attractor layer, which contained 50 units, was
connected to and from the phonological layers. Similarly,
there was a set of 50 attractor units for the semantic layer.
The use of attractors was to help the model to reduce noise
and develop stable phonological and semantic
representations of words. There were also four context units
connecting to the semantic layer via a set of ten hidden
units. The context units provided additional information
when presenting the model with homophones. One context
unit was active for each homophone. But for words within
the same homophone family, different context units were
randomly assigned. In this way, each context unit was
almost equally active across the training corpus. For non
homophones, none of the context units were active. The
semantic layer was connected to the phonological layer via a
set of 300 hidden units, and the phonological layer was
connected back to the semantic layer via another set of 300
hidden units. The orthographic layer was connected to both
the phonological and semantic layers via different sets of
500 hidden units

Representations
The
orthographic,
phonological
and
semantic
representations were similar to those used in Harm and
Seidenberg’s (2004) model. The training corpus contained
6229 monosyllabic words, which covered most
monosyllabic words, including their inflected forms, in
English. Frequency of each word was derived from the Wall
Street Journal corpus (Marcus, Santorini, & Marcinkiewicz,
1993), and the score was log-transformed. For orthography,
each word was represented by 14 letter slots and each slot
comprised 26 units with one for each 26 alphabetic letters.
Words were positioned with their first vowel aligned on the
fifth slot. For words having two vowels, the second vowel
was placed on the sixth slot; otherwise all the units in that
slot were not active. Consonants preceding or following the
vowel(s) were positioned in adjacent slots to the vowel(s)
(so yes was represented as _ _ _ y e _ s _ _ _ _ _ _ _, and
great as _ _ _ g r e a t _ _ _ _ _ _). For phonology, each
word was represented by eight phoneme slots, with each slot
consisting of a set of 25 phonological features. Each word
was positioned with its vowel at the fourth phoneme slot.
The first three slots were for onset consonants and the last
four slots were for coda consonants (so yes was _ _ y E s _ _
_ and great was _ g r eI t _ _ _). The method of representing
semantic knowledge for each word was adopted from that
used in Harm and Seidenberg (2004). The semantic
representation for each word consisted of 2446 semantic
features, derived from WordNet (Miller, 1990). The

presence of semantic features was encoded as 1 and
the absence of semantic features was encoded as 0.

Network Architecture
The architecture of the model is shown in Figure 1. The
model was based on the triangle model of reading
previously implemented by Harm and Seidenberg (2004).

124

Context
(4)

	  
	  

	  

Semantics
(2446)

Hidden
(500)

	  

	  

	  

Phonology
(200)
Hidden
(300)

Attractor
(50)

	  

	  

Hidden
(300)

	  	  

Hidden
(10)

Attractor
	  	  
(50)

Hidden
(500)

Orthography
(364)

Figure 1. The architecture of the developmental model of reading.
pretraining. The probability of a word being selected for
training was determined by its logarithmic frequency. The
model was trained with a learning rate of 0.05 using backpropagation through time algorithm. Error score was based
on the cross-entropy error computed between the target and
the actual activation of the output units. No error was
recorded if the output unit’s activation was within 0.1 of the
target.
In the reading development phase, the model was trained
on the reading task, which was to learn the mappings from
orthography to both semantics and phonology, along with
the four tasks in the pretraining phase. Following Monaghan
and Ellis (2010), the model was trained to read
cumulatively, to reflect 14 reading stages, one for each year.
The reading stage was based on the educator’s word
frequency guide (WFG) by Zeno et al. (1995). The words in
WFG were graded into 13 different grade levels by using
readability measures, corresponding to the age range from 518 in the American and British schooling systems and the
words appeared in adulthood were presented at the 14th stage.
The model started to learn a small set of words and
gradually more and more words were learned over time
course of learning. The details of the staged training
paradigm can be found in Monaghan and Ellis (2010) Table
1. For the reading task, the orthographic representation of a
word along with its context layer representation were
clamped and presented for 12 time steps, and for time steps
six to 12, the model was required to produce the
phonological and semantic representations for that word. All
the five tasks were interleaved during training, but the
training ratio for each task except the attractor tasks varied
as the training proceeded. The training ratios for both the
hearing task and speaking task gradually decreased from
40% to 20% in steps of 5%, while the training ratio for the
reading task gradually increased from 10% to 50% in steps

Training Procedures
The training process had two phases. In pretraining, the
model was trained with the mappings between phonology
and semantics. This phase of training was an attempt to
simulate the fact that children generally have developed
some language skills (e.g. speaking and comprehension)
before learning to read. In the reading development phase,
the full reading model was trained.
In pretraining, the model was trained on both a speaking
task
(mapping
from
semantic
to
phonological
representations) and a hearing task (mapping from
phonological to semantic representations). The model also
learned to develop a stable phonological attractor (mapping
from phonological to phonological representations), and a
stable semantic attractor (mapping from semantic to
semantic representations). For both the speaking and hearing
tasks, the input pattern of each word was clamped and
presented for eight time steps, and in the last two time steps,
the model was required to reproduce the target pattern of the
word. Similarly, for both the phonological and semantic
attractor training trials, the input pattern of each word was
clamped for the first time step and in the last two time steps,
the model had to reproduce the target pattern of the word.
The input of context units was supplied only for the hearing
task. During training, the four tasks were interleaved with
40% of trials for the speaking task, 40% of trails for the
hearing task, 10% of trials for the phonological attractor and
the remaining 10% for the semantic attractor.
During this stage of training, the model was trained on
2973 monosyllabic words, which were the most common
words occurring in reading materials before age 18. Note
that though several words in this set were unlikely to occur
often in young children’s language exposure, yet due to the
training by frequency these words were rare during

125

of 10% to simulate greater exposure to reading versus
listening and speaking with development. All the other
training procedures remained the same as in pretraining.

Multiple regression analyses were conducted on the
model’s phonological and semantic error scores to examine
the AoA effects in the model. The predictor variables
included: cumulative frequency (CF), orthographic
neighbourhood size (OrthN), word length (Len), consistency
(Cons), concreteness (Conc), and age of acquisition (AoA).
Orthographic neighbourhood size was based on the number
of words that can be made by changing one letter of the
target word Coltheart (1977). The score of consistency was
based on rime consistency, measuring the number of friends
(sharing the same rime and pronunciation) divided by the
total number of words sharing the same rime and weighted
by their frequency values. The consistency score for each
word was directly derived from the training corpus. The
concreteness score was taken from Brysbaert, Warriner, and
Kuperman (2014). AoA was taken as one of the 14 reading
stages during training derived from the WFG.
All items in the training set were tested. Error items and
outliers (3 standard deviations farther from the mean) were
discarded and this removed about 3.7% of the items. In
addition, words without measures for all psycholinguistic
variables were removed, leaving 5272 words for analysis.
Both the phonological and semantic error scores were log
transformed to reduce the skew of performance distribution
and all the predictor variables were centered in order to
more clearly explore interaction terms.

Testing Procedures
After pretraining, the model was tested on both the
speaking and hearing tasks. For the speaking task, the
semantic representation of each word in the training set was
presented and the activation of units at the phonological
layer at the end of the eight time steps was recorded. Error
score was measured by the sum of the squared differences
between the activation of each input unit and its target
activation. The accuracy of the model’s phonological
production was assessed by deciding whether for each
phoneme slot the closest phoneme to the model’s actual
production was the same as the target phoneme. For the
hearing task, the phonological representation of each word
was presented and the activation of units at the semantic
layer at the end of the eight time steps was recorded. Error
score was measured by the sum of squared differences over
the semantic layer. The semantic accuracy was measured by
computing the Euclidean distance between the model’s
actual semantic representation and the semantic
representation of each word in the training corpus. If the
smallest distance was for the target representation then the
model was correct.
After the reading training, the model’s reading
performance was tested. The orthographic representation of
each word was presented and the activation of units at both
the semantic layer and the phonological layer at the end of
the 12 time steps were recorded. The measurement of error
score and accuracy for both semantic and phonological
output were the same as in the pretraining phase.

Multiple Regression Results
Correlation analyses were conducted between the
predictors. As expected, CF and AoA had a strong negative
correlation, and AoA and Cons were positively correlated,
suggesting early learned words tend to be high in frequency
and inconsistent. OrthN was negatively correlated with Len,
indicating that long words tend to have few neighbours.
To examine the unique contribution made by AoA to the
model’s performance, hierarchical regression analyses were
conducted. For the word naming task, in step 1 all variables
were entered into the regression model except AoA. The
results showed CF, OrthN, Cons, and Len all made
significant contributions. When AoA was entered into the
regression model in step 2, it was a significant predictor (see
Table 1). Similar analyses were conducted for the lexical
decision task. In step 1, CF, Conc and Len were significant
predictors. Again, in step 2, AoA was a significant predictor.
These results showed that the AoA effects were found in
both naming and lexical decision. Also the standardized beta
value (β) was larger for the lexical decision than for the
naming task, replicating behavioural studies showing a
stronger AoA effect in tasks involving semantics than
phonology (Table 1). For all these regression models,
collinearity diagnostic analyses showed all variance
inflation factors (VIFs) smaller than 4, confirming no
serious multicollinearity problem.
Further regression analyses were conducted to examine
the interaction terms. Three interaction terms were created:
CF x Cons, to determine whether the model can replicate the
widely observed consistency by frequency interaction

Results
Pretraining was halted after 2 million epochs where the
model achieved an accuracy rate of 90.7% on the speaking
task and an accuracy rate of 91.7% on the hearing task.
After 0.8 million epochs of reading training, the model
accurately produced 99.4% of phonological representations
and 93.3% of semantic representations on the reading task.

Exploring AoA effects in the model
Behavioural naming data and lexical decision data
(Cortese & Khanna, 2007) were simulated by mappings
from orthographic to phonological representations (Chang,
Furber, & Welbourne, 2012; Monaghan & Ellis, 2010), and
by mappings from orthographic to semantic representations
(akin to polarity measure in Plaut, 1997), respectively.
According to the representation mapping theory, we would
expect to obtain a larger AoA effect in lexical decision
(semantics) than in naming (phonology) whereas the
semantic locus theory predicts an AoA effect mainly in
lexical decision (semantics), although if considering the role
of semantics in naming (Strain et al. 1995), we might obtain
a small AoA effect in naming (phonology) as well.

126

(Taraban & McClelland, 1987); AoA x Cons, to determine
whether the model could reproduce the consistency by AoA
effect (Monaghan & Ellis, 2002), thereby reflecting the
mapping theory of AoA; and AoA x Conc, to determine
whether AoA might have different effects depending on the
semantic richness of the representation, reflecting the
semantic locus theory of AoA.
In step 1, all the variables including AoA were entered
into the regression model, and in step 2, the interaction
terms were entered into the model separately. The results are
summarized in Table 2. For the naming task, both CF x
Cons and AoA x Cons were significant predictors,
reproducing key behavioural effects on word naming. For
lexical decision, only AoA x Conc was significant. Thus,
consistency effects were less pronounced for lexical
decision, consistent with the behavioural data. The AoA x
Conc interaction term indicated that the AoA effect is
modulated by the richness of the semantic representations,
as measured by concreteness of the word.

Step 1

β

CF

-0.185***

-0.158***

OrthN

-0.255**

0.019

***

-0.015

Cons

-0.247

Len

-0.071***

-0.126***

Conc

-0.001

-0.076***

R2(%)

21.94

24.14

AoA

0.194***
ΔR2 = 0.99%

0.406***
ΔR = 4.33%
2

p<.001; **p<.01; *p<.05; β is a standardized beta value

Table 2. Results from a two-block regression analyses for
the exploration on three interaction terms in predicting both
naming and lexical decision model performance.

22.93
0.194***

-0.067***
0.209***

-0.009
0.408***

Model 3:
AoA x Conc, β
AoA, β

0.004
0.192***

-0.036**
0.422***

This paper aimed to develop a large-scale computational
model of reading including orthographic, phonological and
semantic representations. Following Monaghan and Ellis
(2010), the model was trained with a cumulative learning
process. The model was able to produce correct
phonological and semantic patterns for hearing, speaking,
naming, and lexical decision tasks.
Multiple regression analyses on model performance
demonstrated that the model was able to account for a range
of standard word naming effects including cumulative
frequency, orthographic neighbourhood size, consistency,
concreteness and the interaction between cumulative
frequency and consistency. More importantly, the results
showed that AoA accounted for an additional 0.99% of
variance in naming and 4.33% of variance in lexical
decision, when other potentially confounding variables such
as cumulative frequency and concreteness had been
considered. Collectively, the regression results are
consistent with the findings of previous regression analyses
for behavioural (Cortese & Khanna, 2007) and
computational (Monaghan & Ellis, 2010) studies.
So where in the model do the AoA effects derive?
According to the representation mapping theory (Ellis &
Lambon Ralph, 2000), the AoA effect could be observed
when the mappings between input and output are more
arbitrary. The significant interaction between AoA and
consistency obtained in the regression analyses of naming in
the model is consistent with the finding of Monaghan and
Ellis (2002). In addition, the regression results also showed
that the effect size of AoA (indexed by β) was larger for
lexical decision than for naming (Table 1). This can be
explained by the representation mapping theory in terms of
different degrees of arbitrary mappings required for
generating semantic versus phonological representations
from orthography.
However, the current results cannot rule out the semantic
locus theory (Brysbaert et al., 2000). This is because the
semantic locus theory also predicts a larger AoA effect in
lexical decision than in naming because it involves a greater
role of the semantic representations themselves.
Interestingly, there was a significant interaction between
AoA and concreteness. This suggests that although the AoA
effect in the model is due to mapping for word naming, for
lexical decision it is likely a composite of effects in the

***

Step 1: Lexical
Variables, R2
AoA, β

Model 2:
AoA x Cons, β
AoA, β

General Discussion

Step 2

Naming

-0.009
0.403***

p<.001; **p<.01; *p<.05; β is a standardized beta value

Lexical Decision

β

0.05***
0.213***

***

Table 1. Results from a two-block regression analyses for
the exploration of AoA in predicting both naming and
lexical decision model performance.
Naming

CF x Cons, β
AoA, β

Lexical Decision
28.47
0.406***

Step 2:
Interactions
Model 1:

127

mappings between representations, and due to the semantic
richness of the representations. So the present results
provide evidence for the view that AoA effects arise from
different sources according to task requirements.
The role of AoA in the reading system is profound, and
effectively implementing these effects requires a
computational model that can take into account the life
history of the learner. We have shown that an
implementation of the triangle model, involving
orthographic, phonological, and semantic representations is
able to take the chronology of experience and produce
consequent effects in a mature reading system, resulting in
AoA effects. We have replicated key behavioural data
showing different sized effects of AoA depending on the
lexical task (word naming or lexical decision), and linked
this to the involvement of semantic representations in the
task. For tasks primarily involving phonological
representations, AoA effects are largely derived from the
influence of experience on mapping between representations.
For tasks that also involve semantics, the AoA effect is
multicomponential. Experience affects mappings between
representations but also the richness of the consequent
representations. Happily, our model suggests that theorists
with different views of the origin of effects of AoA are none
of them wrong, but rather correct to varying degrees
according to lexical task constraints.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ESRC grant RES-000-224049.

References
Brysbaert, M., Wijnendaele, I. V., & Deyne, S. D. (2000).
Age-of-acquisition effects in semantic processing tasks.
Acta Psychologica, 104(2), 215-226.
Brysbaert, M., & Ghyselinck, M. (2006). The effect of age
of acquisition: Partly frequency related, partly frequency
independent. Visual Cognition, 13(7-8), 992-1011.
Brysbaert, M., Warriner, A. B., & Kuperman, V. (2014).
Concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known
English word lemmas. Behav Res Methods, 46(3), 904-911.
Catling, J. C., & Johnston, R. A. (2009). The varying effects
of age of acquisition. Q J Exp Psychol, 62(1), 50-62.
Chang, Y. N., Furber, S., & Welbourne, S. (2012). "Serial"
effects in parallel models of reading. Cognitive
Psychology, 64(4), 267-291.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.),
Attention and Performance VI (pp. 535-555). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cortese, M. J., & Khanna, M. M. (2007). Age of acquisition
predicts naming and lexical-decision performance above
and beyond 22 other predictor variables: an analysis of
2,342 words. Q J Exp Psychol, 60(8), 1072-1082.
Ellis, A. W., & Ralph, M. A. L. (2000). Age of acquisition
effects in adult lexical processing reflect loss of plasticity
in maturing systems: Insights from connectionist

128

networks. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning
Memory and Cognition, 26(5), 1103-1123.
Ghyselinck, M., Lewis, M. B., & Brysbaert, M. (2004). Age
of acquisition and the cumulative-frequency hypothesis: A
review of the literature and a new multi-task investigation.
Acta Psychologica, 115(1), 43-67.	  
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Computing the
meanings of words in reading: Cooperative division of
labor between visual and phonological processes.
Psychological Review, 111(3), 662-720.
Juhasz, B. J. (2005). Age-of-Acquisition Effects in Word
and Picture Identification. Psychological Bulletin, 131(5),
684-712.
Lewis, M. B., Gerhand, S., & Ellis, H. D. (2001). Reevaluating age-of-acquisition effects: are they simply
cumulative-frequency effects? Cognition, 78(2), 189-205.
Marcus, M. P., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., & Santorini, B.
(1993). Building a large annotated corpus of English: the
penn treebank. Comput. Linguist., 19(2), 313-330.
Miller, G. A. (1990). WordNet: An on-line lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235-312.
Monaghan, J., & Ellis, A. W. (2002). What exactly interacts
with spelling--sound consistency in word naming? Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28(1), 183-206.
Monaghan, P., & Ellis, A. W. (2010). Modeling reading
development: Cumulative, incremental learning in a
computational model of word naming. Journal of Memory
and Language, 63(4), 506-525.
Plaut, D. C. (1997). Structure and function in the lexical
system: Insights from distributed models of word reading
and lexical decision. Language and Cognitive Processes,
12(5-6), 765-805.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The Large‐scale
structure of semantic networks: Statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive science, 29(1), 4178.
Strain, E., Patterson, K., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1995).
Semantic effects in single-word naming. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 21(5), 1140-1154.
Strain, E., Patterson, K., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2002).
Theories of word naming interact with spelling--sound
consistency. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(1), 207-214.
Taraban, R., & McClelland, J. L. (1987). Conspiracy effects
in word pronunciation. Journal of Memory and Language,
26(6), 608-631.
Zeno, S. (Ed.). (1995). The educator’ s word frequency
guide. Brewster, NJ: Touchstone.
Zevin, J. D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2002). Age of acquisition
effects in word reading and other tasks. Journal of
Memory and Language, 47(1), 1-29.
Zevin, J. D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Age-ofacquisition effects in reading aloud: Tests of cumulative
frequency and frequency trajectory. Memory & Cognition,
32(1), 31-38.

