Effects of Working Memory Training on L2 Proficiency and
Working Memory Capacity
Gregory Colflesh (gcolflesh@casl.umd.edu)
Valerie Karuzis (vkaruzis@casl.umd.edu)
Polly O’Rourke (porourke@casl.umd.edu)
Center for Advanced Study of Language
University of Maryland, 7005 52nd Avenue
College Park, MD 20742 USA

buffers, reduce interference from irrelevant sources of
information, and govern the engagement of domain-specific
strategies.” (Morrison & Chein, 2011, p. 47). These
domain-general mechanisms drive the connection between
WM and higher order cognition (Cowan et al., 2005;
Lépine, Barrouillet, & Camos, 2005; Morrison & Chein,
2011). Training-related improvements in domain-general
executive functions have been shown to be associated with
increased general fluid intelligence (Jaeggi, et al., 2008)
and language processing ability in the first language
(Morrison & Chein, 2011; Novick, et al., 2014). Given the
strong connection between WMC and second language
learning, improving domain-general attentional and
executive control abilities through training could also lead
to improvements in second language proficiency. In the
current study, we examined the impact of WM training on
online syntactic processing and sentence comprehension in
adult learners of Spanish. Additionally, in order to
maximize the benefits of the WM training, the training
tasks all contained Spanish language stimuli, thereby
providing participants with increased exposure to the target
language during training.
In the current study, the WM training consisted of
adaptive versions of four standard WM tasks (Reading
Span, n-back, Sorter, and Running Span). This multifaceted
“kitchen sink” approach was implemented as a means of
increasing the likelihood of achieving training-related gains
by engaging similar WM mechanisms in a variety of
different tasks (Morrison & Chein, 2011). In addition, the
inclusion of multiple tasks was intended to increase
participants’ likelihood of enjoying and completing the
training, as performing four tasks for 15 minutes each is
more engaging than performing the same (difficult) task for
60 minutes. This is in contrast to studies that used a more
targeted approach (Jaeggi, et al., 2008; Verhaeghen,
Cerella, & Basak, 2004).
The key innovation in our study, which is one of the first
to examine the impact of WMT on L2 proficiency, is that
the stimuli in our WM training tasks consist of Spanish
words and sentences. The motivation for this innovation is
to (1) increase individuals’ engagement in the training tasks
by making the stimuli relevant to their real world learning
goals and (2) to enhance the benefit of training on language
learning by requiring participants to interact with L2
materials while performing WM demanding tasks.

Abstract
The current study examined the effects of working
memory training on working memory capacity and
second language ability in adult learners of
Spanish. In order to maximize the effect of the training
for language learners, the stimuli for the training tasks
were Spanish words and sentences. While the training
group did not show greater improvements on working
memory assessments relative to controls, they did show
more native-like patterns in a Spanish self-paced reading
task. The combination of second language materials with
working memory training may be helping users learn to
cope with the increased processing demands associated
with learning a new language, even if they are not
necessarily improving their working memory.
Keywords: Working memory training, second language
acquisition, self-paced reading, n-back.

Introduction
Working memory (WM) plays a role in many higher order
cognitive functions, including the ability to learn a second
language (L2). Indeed, one prominent theory of the
acquisition of L2 morphosyntax proposes that the deficits
exhibited by learners are largely due to WM limitations,
given the high demand of operating in L2 (McDonald,
2006). Due to the importance of WM in a great many
everyday activities, exploring the efficacy of WM training
has been a very hot research topic in the last five to ten
years. In the current study we examined the impact of WM
training on second language processing ability.
Given the connection between working memory capacity
(WMC) and second language acquisition (Linck, Osthus,
Koeth & Bunting, 2014), the possibility of increasing
WMC, and thereby enhancing second language learning
outcomes, is an exciting prospect. Evidence from
experimental research suggests that it may be possible to
increase WMC with computer training in which individuals
repeatedly perform tasks that tax attentional and executive
control abilities (Baniqued et al., 2014; Holmes, Gathercole
& Dunning, 2009; Jaeggi, Buschkuehl, Jonides, & Perrig,
2008; Morrison & Chein, 2011; Novick et al., 2014;
Olesen, Westerberg & Klingberg, 2004). Training typically
targets domain-general mechanisms which “control
attention, gate the flow of information into and out of WM

289

appropriate). The n-back task indexes the ability to
maintain, update and monitor information in the short-term
store and resolve the conflict between what is familiar and
recollected. While it is a frequently used index of WM
ability, its cognitive underpinnings are distinct from those
of complex span tasks (Kane et al., 2007).

We predicted that participants who completed the
adaptive training tasks with a WM demand (i.e., WM
training) would have greater improvement from pretraining to post-training for Spanish language and WM
assessments compared to participants who completed the
adaptive training tasks with minimal WM demands (i.e.,
active control).

Reading Span
The automated version of the reading span task (Redick, et
al., 2012), a complex span task, was used to measure
WMC. Complex span tasks measure the ability to store and
recall information in the face of distracting information
from an unrelated processing task.

Method
Participants
62 adult learners of Spanish (51 female, age = 20.26 (SD =
2.11), years education = 14.31 (SD = 1.27)) completed this
study. Eligible participants were native English speakers
who did not learn any non-English languages at home or
during childhood, were currently or recently enrolled in a
200- or 300-level university Spanish class or similar
experience, and passed the Spanish proficiency
requirements. All participants were neurologically normal,
began studying Spanish after age 11, and had not had an
immersion experience in a Spanish-speaking country for
longer than 6 weeks. Participants were semi-randomly
assigned to the training and control groups; they were
matched on working memory capacity (as indexed by the
Shapebuilder task; see below) and comprehension accuracy
of grammatical sentences in the self-paced reading task (see
below). Post-hoc analyses confirmed that groups were
similar for age, gender, education, self-rated Spanish ability
(reading, writing, listening and speaking), and two other
measures of Spanish vocabulary knowledge.

Shapebuilder
For Shapebuilder (Atkins, et al., 2014) participants had to
remember the shape and color of items that appeared
sequentially on a 4x4 grid. Shapebuilder was used as an
additional measure of WMC that did not mimic the reading
span, which was also used as a training task.
Simon Task
Participants performed the Simon Task (Simon, 1990) as an
index of inhibition control. The Simon Task, while not a
WM assessment, was included because it indexes the
ability to control attention via the inhibition of a prepotent,
but goal-irrelevant response, which underpins the
performance of many of the WM tasks.

Training Tasks
Spanish Reading Span
As the name suggests, the Spanish reading span training
and control tasks were modeled off the standard reading
span task (Daneman & Carpenter, 1980; Kane et al.
(2004)). Participants were asked to recall a sequence of
letters which appeared one-at-a-time on the screen. In
between the presentation of each letter, they saw a sentence
in Spanish (e.g., El médico llegó para ayudar a la gente
herido.) and they had to decide if it was grammatical or not.
Participants had to decide among five possible choices, one
of which is “No Errors” and the remaining four were
possible error types: spelling, accent use, subject/verb
agreement, and gender agreement (gender error present in
the adjective portion of the example above).
In the training version of the task, participants were
presented with a sentence. They had 10 seconds to make a
judgment on the sentence. After they made a judgment on
the sentence (or did not make a response in the allotted
time), they received feedback regarding their selection.
Next, a letter was presented. The number of sentence-letter
items in a trial started at 1 and increased as participants
performed at or above leveling criteria. Leveling criteria
was based on sentence and memory performance across
four trials. Initially, the four trials were all set size 1. At the
next level, three trials were set size 1 and one trial was set
size 2. To level up, participants had to have 85% or greater
accuracy on the sentences and had to have recalled 85% or
greater of the letters presented for a later recall test in the
correct serial positions. Participants remained at the same

Pre-Post Assessment Tasks
Self-Paced Reading Task
In the self-paced reading task, participants read sentences,
in Spanish, word-by-word, advancing at their own speed.
Words appeared at the subject’s prompt within a sentence
frame with “-”s as place holders for each letter. Each word
reverted to “-”s when the subject advanced to the next
word. The sentence stimuli consisted of grammatical
sentences and sentences containing subject/verb agreement
errors (see sentence 1 below). There were 12 items in each
condition. In addition to those 24 sentences, there were 67
additional sentences including fillers and conditions not
reported herein. Half of the sentences were followed by a
yes/no comprehension question. The timing of the task was
based on Sagarra and Herschensohn (2010)’s methods.
1. La investigadora cree/*creen que la ciencia concreta es
más importante que la teoría.
The researcher [believes/believe] that concrete science
is more important than theory.
Working Memory and Executive Function Assessments
N-back
For the n-back task used in the current study (Kane,
Conway, Colflesh, & Miura, 2007), participants performed
blocks of 2-back and 3-back, with lures (±1 and ±2, where

290

English, participants saw a list of Spanish words – targets
and lures.
In the training version of the task, participants had to
drag the correct words and drop them into the correct
positions. In the control version of the task, participants
were given the translations of the last K words and only
needed to drag the correct words to the appropriate boxes.

level if they were between 70% and 85% on both, and they
went down a level if they were below 70% on either
component.
In the control version of the task, sentences and
memoranda were presented separately within a trial, instead
of being interleaved. All sentences presented for the
grammatical judgment task were in an uninterrupted
sequence. Memoranda letters were presented for the recall
task in randomly selected sequences of 2-6 letters,
independent of the sentence processing task. Participants
went up a level if they achieved 85% accuracy on the
sentences. As participants leveled up, there were more
sentences to be judged in each block.

Spanish Sorter
The Spanish sorter training and control tasks were modeled
off of the letter-number sequencing task used by Sprenger,
et al. (2013). In the Spanish sorter task, participants saw a
series of 2 words presented on the screen one-at–a-time,
accompanied by a simultaneous audio presentation of the
word. At the end of the presentation, participants had to
drag the words that had just been presented to the correct
semantic category, and the words within each category
needed to be recalled in serial order and the correct serial
position for that category. As participants leveled up, they
were presented with more words to recall and sort.
The Spanish sorter control task was the same as the
training task, except participants were provided with the
translation equivalent of the words in the categories and
they needed to drag the correct words to the correct
translations. As participants leveled up, they were presented
with more words.

Spanish n-back
The Spanish n-back training and control tasks were
modeled off of previous n-back tasks (Kane et al., 2007;
Novick, et al., 2014). In the Spanish n-back task,
participants saw a series of 20 + n words presented on the
screen one at a time, with each presentation accompanied
by an audio presentation of the word. The stimuli were
presented in a mix of Spanish and English, with
approximately 80% of the words in a list presented in
Spanish. Participants responded to each word as it was
presented. Participants pressed the “Yes” button if the
current word matched the word n items back, either exactly
(manzana – manzana; apple – apple), or by meaning
(manzana – apple). If the current word did not match the
word or translation of the word n items back, participants
pressed the “No” button.
In the training version of the task, n increased as
participants’ level increased throughout the task. To go
from 1-back to 2-back, participants had to meet leveling
criteria for two steps: 1) n without lures, and 2) n ± 2 lures.
Starting with 2-back, each level required three successful
steps to achieve the next level: 1) n without lures, 2) n ± 2
lures, and 3) n ± 1 lures.
In the control version of the task, participants performed
a 1-back task with the Spanish (and English) word stimuli.
Participants were given the appearance that they were
attaining different levels if they reached leveling up or
down criteria, but the task always remained a 1-back task.

Procedure
The study was comprised of 14 sessions. Sessions 1, 2, 13,
and 14 were pre- and post-training sessions (1-2 hours long
each), and sessions 3-12 were training sessions (45
minutes-1 hour long each). The pre-post sessions included
the tasks described above and additional measures not
reported herein. Participants completed pre- and posttraining tasks on PCs, and training tasks on iPads. All
participants completed the training sessions within 10-14
business days, completed session 13 1-5 days after training,
and completed session 14 1-2 days after session 13.
Multiple training sessions were not allowed to take place
within the same day. Participants were compensated
$5/session, with a balloon payment of $175 at the
completion of session 14. Participants were also entered
into raffles for 1 of 10 $200 gift cards following study
completion. In addition to the participants analyzed here, 5
participants attritted from the study (7%), and 4 were found
to be ineligible after session 1 (5.6%).

Spanish Running Span
The Spanish running span training and control tasks were
modeled off of the running span task (Anderson, 1960;
Bunting, Cowan & Saults, 2006; Pollack, Johnson, &
Knaff, 1959). In the Spanish running span task, participants
saw a series of 12 to 20 + K words, where K is the number
of items that needed to be recalled, presented on the screen
one at a time, accompanied by a simultaneous audio
presentation of the word. The stream of stimuli was
presented either entirely in Spanish or entirely in English.
At the end of the presentation, participants needed to
respond to what the last K words were. K started at 1 item
and increased as participants leveled up. If the word list
was presented in Spanish, participants saw a list of English
words – targets and lures. If the word list was presented in

Results
WM Assessments
Data points more than 2.5 SD from the sample mean were
excluded from analyses. Participants in the training group
did not show greater improvements at post-test than the
control group on the reading span or Shapebuilder tasks,
indicating that WM training did not improve WMC.
Similarly, there were no effects of training condition on the
Simon task.
The 3-back trials in the n-back task were analyzed using
overall d’, a measure of signal detection. A 2 (training

291

condition) x 2 (assessment time) mixed factor ANOVA
analysis of d’ for the 3-back trials showed no significant
effect of assessment time (F<1). There was, however, a
significant effect of training condition (F(1, 51)=5.41,
p<.05, ηp2=.10), where the training group performed better
than the control group. Simple comparisons at pre- and
post-test showed no significant difference between training
group and control group performance at pre-test (Ms = 1.97
& 1.28, respectively; t(57)=.44, p>.05) but at post-test, the
training group performed significantly better than the
control group, (Ms = 3.09 & 1.97, respectively; t(54)=2.11,
p<.05). This suggests that WM training may have improved
cognitive control ability, especially in the face of
interference.

Table 1: Mean Comprehension Accuracy (SD)
Control - Grammatical
Training - Grammatical
Control - Violation
Training - Violation

Pre
0.78 (.19)
0.81 (.15)
0.80 (.12)
0.80 (.16)

Post
0.78 (.15)
0.79 (.15)
0.74 (.16)
0.76 (.14)

Self-Paced Reading Task
Reading times exceeding 3 SD from a given subject’s mean
were excluded from analyses, and any subject with a mean
reading time over 800 ms per word was excluded from the
analysis. This resulted in an N of 46, with 23 participants
per training group. Separate 2 (assessment time) x 2
(training condition) x 2 (grammaticality) ANOVAs were
conducted on the reading times at each of the four positions
relative to the critical word: -1, 0 (critical word), +1, +2.
Figure 1 shows the reading time data for the two groups at
post.
At position -1, 0, +1 and +2 there were main effects of
assessment time (position -1: F(1,44)=51.1, p<.001,
ηp2=.54; position 0: F(1,44)=54.2, p<.001, ηp2=.54; position
+1: F(1,44)=32.6, p<.001, ηp2=.43; position +2:
F(1,44)=28.7, p<.001, ηp2=.40, respectively) such that
reading times were faster at post. At position +1, there was
also a three-way interaction of grammaticality, assessment
time, and training condition (F(1,44)=4.89, p<.05, ηp2=.10).
Splitting across training condition revealed a main effect of
assessment time (F(1,22)=8.83, p<.01, ηp2=.29) and no
effects of grammaticality in the control group. In the
training group, there was an effect of assessment time
(F(1,22)=27.4, p<.001, ηp2=.56) and an interaction of
assessment time and grammaticality (F(1,22)=6.60, p<.05,
ηp2=.23). This interaction was driven by increased reading
times in the ungrammatical condition at post, evidenced by
an effect of grammaticality at post (F(1,22)=5.38, p<.05,
ηp2=.20). There were no effects of grammaticality in the
training group at pre. At position +2, there was a significant
interaction of assessment time and grammaticality, driven
by an effect of grammaticality at post (F(1,44)=9.16, p<.01,
ηp2=.17). While there were no interactions involving
training condition at position +2, Figure 1 suggests the
grammaticality effect was larger for the control group.
Simple comparisons showed a significant effect of
grammaticality in the control group (F(1,22)=9.11, p<.01,
ηp2=.29) but not in the training group.
Similar ANOVAs performed on accuracy data for the
comprehension questions (Table 1) revealed no effects of
assessment time, training condition or grammaticality.

Figure 1. Mean reading times (ms) at post.

Discussion
Although many studies have examined the relationship
between WMC and L2 acquisition, and many other studies
have examined the impact of WM training on WM and
general cognition, there has not been much research
combining WM training with L2 acquisition. In this study,
we explored whether completing WM training in a target
language, Spanish in this case, would (1) improve
performance on WM measures and (2) improve
performance on an online processing task in the target
language.
The WM training did have the predicted impact on nback scores, such that the training group performed
significantly better than the control group. However, the
interaction between training condition and assessment time
was not significant, despite a moderate effect size. Thus,
further exploration may be warranted. It may be that the L2
WM training did improve some aspect of the WM system;
however, it might be that participants in the training group
developed better strategies to cope with the increased WM
demand of the L2 n-back training task.
WM training did not have the predicted impact on the
remainder of the battery of WM assessments, which
included Reading Span, Shapebuilder, and the Simon task.
Previous research found that complex span tasks and nback measure different aspects of the WM system (Kane et
al., 2007), so it is not surprising that n-back did not follow
the same pattern as reading span. The current findings
further support the distinction between n-back and complex
span tasks.
It is important to note that prior research using
assessment versions of complex span tasks in the first (L1)

292

WM demand context associated with the training may have
accelerated
the
development
of
participants’
morphosyntactic processing ability. Alternatively, the
performance of the WM training may have led to
improvement in underlying cognitive abilities other than
WM that are relevant to language processing. A final
possibility is that the training tasks were simply more
engaging and, thus, participants were more motivated with
respect to processing the Spanish training task stimuli.
In conclusion, working memory training in the second
language did not transfer to performance on all of the WM
tasks, yet it did lead to enhanced online morphosyntactic
processing of the target language. This suggests that
although WM training may not serve the laudable purpose
of enhancing WMC, it may be useful in improving second
language ability and/or other general cognitive abilities
which underpin second language processing.

and second language have shown strong correlations
between L1 and L2 span tasks (Alptekin & Erçetin, 2010;
Osaka & Osaka, 1992; Osaka, Osaka & Groner, 1993).
This indicates a strong overlap between L1 and L2 versions
of the tasks suggesting that the same resources are utilized.
The lack of transfer between the L2 reading span and
standard version in the current study, therefore, should not
be an artifact of task language.
The WM training outcomes in the current study mimic
what is generally found in the literature. The studies that
have found improvements in WM and a transfer to other
abilities tend to utilize the n-back task, or a variant of the nback task (Jaeggi, et al., 2008; Jaeggi, Studer-Luethi,
Buschkuehl, Su, Jonides, & Perrig, 2010). However, the
methodology and outcome of these studies have been
greatly scrutinized (Redick, et al., 2013; Shipstead, Redick,
& Engle, 2012), specifically the lack of a contact control
group. Redick and colleagues (2013) compared dual n-back
WM training to that of a contact control group, and they did
not find that WM training improved WM. It may be that the
n-back training task allows for the development of
strategies to circumvent the WM demands of the n-back
task and those strategies may transfer to the assessment
version of the n-back, but not the other assessments. If this
is the case, then WM training is not actually leading to
improvements in WM, but rather strategies to reduce the
reliance on the WM, suggesting that WM is a stable trait.
However, even if WM training does not train working
memory, it does not mean that the training is not useful.
Perhaps instead of calling it WM training, it should be
called cognitive training, as it appears training may
improve some cognitive processes, which in turn may
improve additional cognitive abilities, such as second
language processing.
One interesting effect emerged out of the SPR reading
time data: the training group showed an earlier sensitivity
(at position +1) to subject-verb agreement violations, while
the control group did not show an effect until the last
position (+2). In this respect, the training group looked
slightly more native-like, as native speakers (and higher
proficiency learners) would show effects at the 0 and +1
position (Sagarra & Hernschensohn, 2010). The training,
therefore, seemed to contribute toward enhanced online
syntactic processing ability. The decomposition of inflected
forms (i.e., utilization of morphological information) during
online processing is perhaps one of the greatest obstacles
for L2 learners. These difficulties are possibly due to
reduced ability to engage in combinatorial rule application
in L2 (Silva & Clahsen, 2008) or an inability to process the
information due to the increased WM demands associated
with operating in the L2 (McDonald, 2006). In McDonald
(2006)’s account, increasing WMC via training should
result in increased sensitivity to L2 morphosyntactic
information. The training related changes in L2
morphosyntactic processing that we observed did not
correspond to clear pre-post improvements in WMC, thus
the findings from the training manipulation do not provide
direct support McDonald (2006)’s account. Rather,
linguistic exposure and interaction in a speeded and high

References
Anderson, N. S. (1960). Poststimulus cuing in immediate
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60(4),
216.
Alptekin, C., & Erçetin, G. (2010). The role of L1 and L2
working memory in literal and inferential comprehension
in L2 reading. Journal of Research in Reading, 33(2),
206-219.
Atkins, S. M., Sprenger, A. M., Colflesh, G. J. H., Briner,
T. L., Buchanan, J. B., Chavis, S. E., . . . & Dougherty,
M. R. (2014). Measuring Working Memory Is All Fun
and Games. Experimental Psychology, 61(6), 417-438.
Baniqued, P. L., Kranz, M. B., Voss, M. W., Lee, H.,
Cosman, J. D., Severson, J., & Kramer, A. F. (2013).
Cognitive training with casual video games: points to
consider. Frontiers in Psychology, 4(1010), 1-19.
Bunting, M., Cowan, N., & Scott Saults, J. (2006). How
does running memory span work?. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59(10), 1691-1700.
Cowan, N., Elliott, E. M., Saults, J. S., Morey, C. C.,
Mattox, S., Hismjatullina, A., & Conway, A. R. A.
(2005). On the capacity of attention: Its estimation and its
role
in
working
memory
and
cognitive
aptitudes. Cognitive Psychology, 51, 42-100.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19(4), 450-466.
Holmes, J., Gathercole, S. E., & Dunning, D. L. (2009).
Adaptive training leads to sustained enhancement of poor
working
memory
in
children. Developmental
Science, 12(4), F9-F15.
Jaeggi, S. M., Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. J.
(2008). Improving fluid intelligence with training on
working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 105(19), 6829-6833.
Jaeggi, S. M., Studer-Luethi, B., Buschkuehl, M., Su, Y.-F.,
Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. J. (2010). The relationship
between n-back performance and matrix reasoning—

293

Implications for training and transfer. Intelligence, 38,
625–635.
Kane, M. J., Conway, A. R., Miura, T. K., & Colflesh, G. J.
(2007). Working memory, attention control, and the Nback task: a question of construct validity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33(3), 615-622.
Kane, M. J., Hambrick, D. Z., Tuholski, S. W., Wilhelm,
O., Payne, T. W., & Engle, R. W. (2004). The generality
of working memory capacity: a latent-variable approach
to verbal and visuospatial memory span and reasoning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(2),
189.
Lépine, R., Barrouillet, P., & Camos, V. (2005). What
makes working memory spans so predictive of high-level
cognition? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(1), 165–
170.
Linck, J. A., Osthus, P., Koeth, J. T., & Bunting, M. F.
(2014). Working memory and second language
comprehension and production: A meta-analysis.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(4), 861-883.
McDonald, J. L. (2006). Beyond the critical period:
Processing-based explanations for poor grammaticality
judgment performance by late second language
learners. Journal of Memory and Language, 55(3), 381401.
Morrison, A. B., & Chein, J. M. (2011). Does working
memory training work? The promise and challenges of
enhancing
cognition
by
training
working
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(1), 46-60.
Novick, J. M., Hussey, E., Teubner-Rhodes, S., Harbison,
J. I., & Bunting, M. F. (2014). Clearing the garden-path:
Improving sentence processing through cognitive control
training. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 29(2),
186-217.
Olesen, P. J., Westerberg, H., & Klingberg, T. (2004).
Increased prefrontal and parietal activity after training of
working memory. Nature Neuroscience, 7(1), 75–79.
Osaka, M. & Osaka, N. (1992). Language-independent
working memory as measured by Japanese and English
reading span tests. Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society, 30, 287–289.
Osaka, M., Osaka, N. & Groner, R. (1993). Languageindependent working memory: Evidence from German
and French reading span tests. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 31, 117–118.
Pollack, I., Johnson, L. B., & Knaff, P. R. (1959). Running
memory
span.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology, 57(3), 137-146.
Redick, T. S., Broadway, J. M., Meier, M. E., Kuriakose, P.
S., Unsworth, N., Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2012).
Measuring working memory capacity with automated
complex span tasks. European Journal of Psychological
Assessment, 28, 164-171.
Redick, T. S., Shipstead, Z., Harrison, T. L., Hicks, K. L.,
Fried, D. E., Hambrick, D. Z., . . . Engle, R. W. (2013).

No evidence of intelligence improvement after working
memory training: A randomized, placebo-controlled
study. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
142, 359–379.
Sagarra, N., & Herschensohn, J. (2010). The role of
proficiency and working memory in gender and number
agreement processing in L1 and L2 Spanish. Lingua,
120(8), 2022-2039.
Shipstead, Z., Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2012). Is
working memory training effective? Psychological
Bulletin, 138, 628-654.
Silva, R., & Clahsen, H. (2008). Morphologically complex
words in L1 and L2 processing: Evidence from masked
priming experiments in English. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 11(02), 245-260.
Simon, J. R. (1990). The effects of an irrelevant directional
cue on human information processing. In R. W. Proctor
& T. G. Reeve (Eds.). Stimulus-response compatibility:
An integrated perspective (pp. 31–88). Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: North Holland.
Sprenger, A. M., Atkins, S. M., Bolger, D. J., Harbison, J.
I., Novick, J. M., Chrabaszcz, J. S., . . . Dougherty, M. R.
(2013). Training working memory: Limits of transfer.
Intelligence, 41, 638-663.
Verhaeghen, P., Cerella, J., & Basak, C. (2004). A working
memory workout: how to expand the focus of serial
attention from one to four items in 10 hours or
less. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 30(6), 1322-1337.

Acknowledgements
This research is based upon work supported, in whole or in
part, with funding from the United States Government. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the University of
Maryland, College Park and/or any agency or entity of the
United States Government. Nothing in this article is
intended to be and shall not be treated or construed as an
endorsement or recommendation by the University of
Maryland, United States Government, or the author of the
product, process, or service that is the subject of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed
to Gregory Colflesh, Center for Advanced Study of
Language, University of Maryland, 7005 52ndAvenue,
College
Park,
MD
20742
(e-mail:
gcolflesh@casl.umd.edu). Special thanks to Mike Bunting
for supporting this line of research, and to Ashlyn Testut,
Grace Goff, Kenneth Mai, and Mari Sakai for their help in
setting up the lab for testing, running participants, and
cleaning data.

294

