Evolution of polysemous word senses from metaphorical mappings
Yang Xu (yang xu ch@berkeley.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Cognitive Science Program, UC Berkeley

Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University

Mahesh Srinivasan (srinivasan@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, UC Berkeley
Abstract
What forces have shaped the evolution of the lexicon? Languages evolve under the pressure of having to communicate
an unbounded set of ideas using a finite set of linguistic structures. This suggests why the transmission of ideas should be
compressed such that one word will develop multiple senses.
Previous theory also suggests how a word might develop new
senses: Abstract concepts may be construed in terms of more
concrete concepts. Here, we bring these two perspectives together to examine metaphorical extensions of English word
meanings over the past millennium, analyzing how senses
from a source domain are extended to new ones in a target domain. Using empirical and computational methods, we found
that metaphorical mappings are highly systematic and can be
explained in terms of a compact set of variables. Our work
shows how metaphor can provide a cognitive device for compressing emerging ideas into an existing lexicon.
Keywords: Word meaning; semantic change; polysemy;
metaphorical mapping; systematicity

Words are fundamental components of language, but their
meanings are not stable. For example, the English word grasp
originally conveyed a physical action, as in “grasp a fruit,”
but was later extended to express an abstract sense of understanding, as in “grasping of an idea.” The “physical action” sense first appeared around 1300, and the “understanding” sense emerged around AD 1600 (Christian, Roberts,
Samuels, Wotherspoon, & Alexande, 2015a). The synchronic
product of such historical sense extensions, known as polysemy - that a single word form can express multiple distinct
but related senses - is widespread in natural language (Lakoff
& Johnson, 1980; Brugman, 1988; Sweetser, 1991; Geeraerts, 1997). We investigate the extent to which historical polysemous patterns can be predicted by focusing on metaphorical mapping.
Metaphorical mapping is a key structuring force in sense
extension and and semantic change (e.g., Lakoff & Johnson,
1980; Sweetser, 1991). It operates by mapping an existing
sense of a word from its own source domain to another target domain based on structural similarities between the two
domains. For instance, the “physical action” sense of grasp
can be thought of as metaphorically extended to “understanding,” namely holding onto an idea. The historical process
through which polysemy develops raises the following question: Is the evolutionary path that metaphorical senses follow
unpredictable, or is there a systematicity in how new senses
develop from existing ones, driven by overarching evolutionary forces? We address this question by bringing together two

influential theories that were not previously in contact.
On the one hand, a prominent theory of the nature of
human cognition - Conceptual Metaphor Theory (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980; Reddy, 1979) - holds that thought is grounded
in metaphor. By this account, metaphorical mappings in
thought should occur in directions that are cognitively natural. For example, such a theory postulates that abstract
thought is facilitated by linkage to concrete concepts (e.g.,
“understanding” construed in terms of concepts that are more
concrete or directly related to human experience - a “physical
action” of holding onto something). This perspective implies
systematicity in the development of the lexicon, because it
suggests that mappings will tend to be from concrete to abstract and not vice versa. However, it suffers in two important
respects as an account of polysemy. First, variables proposed
to be cognitively priviledged in metaphorical mapping (discussed below) have not been assessed against the historical
record of lexical change, and therefore their explanatory powers and interrelations in accounting for empirical data with respect to the lexicon remain unknown. Second, the conceptual
theory itself does not motivate why metaphor should serve as
a key mechanism for the evolving lexicon, because its goal is
to explain thought, not word meanings per se.
On the other hand, a growing line of research on principles of language evolution provides clues for addressing the
why question. By this account, linguistic structures evolve
under the dual pressures of communicative needs and cognitive constraints (e.g., learnability), such that languages should
trade off between competing pressures of expressivity and
compressibility (Kirby, Tamariz, Cornish, & Smith, 2015).
Specifically, language evolution must allow for meaningful
and informative communication of ideas while providing sufficient compression of ideas into existing linguistic structures
(e.g., via compositional means) to ensure that languages do
not grow without bound and are therefore learnable. Although such theories have been applied to explain synchronic
features of language such as word length (Piantadosi, Tily,
& Gibson, 2011) and the structure of semantic domains
(e.g., Regier, Kemp, & Kay, 2015), they have not been
used to help understand the role of metaphorical mapping
(cf. Geeraerts, 1997; Blank & Koch, 1999) in the diachronic
development of lexicons.
We offer such a perspective on metaphorical mapping by
bringing together these perspectives. We propose that the

2213

unique nature of metaphor in lexical evolution is precisely
explained by functional needs for expressive communication and cognitive constraints for learnability. In one respect, metaphorical mapping facilitates meaningful communication of emerging ideas, such that when a speaker uses
a word in a novel sense metaphorically, the listener should
find it cognitively effortless to decode the intended meaning (cf., Traugott, 2003). In another respect, metaphorical mapping serves as a compression device that effectively
folds emerging meanings into existing words without requiring construction of word forms de novo. As such, it serves as
a strategic device that trades off between communicative and
cognitive constraints. Our proposal predicts that metaphorical sense mappings should occur in systematic ways by conforming to both communicative and cognitive constraints.
We critically assess this idea by analyzing a large set of
metaphorical mappings between source and target domains
and spanning 1300 years, dating from Anglo-Saxon English
to the present. We seek to predict the historical ordering of
sense extension by testing whether some domains are more
likely to be the starting point of an historical trajectory (the
source domain) while others are more likely to be the endpoint (target domain). To our knowledge, this is the first
large-scale study evaluating the predictability and directionality of polysemous metaphorical mappings against the record
of historical change in a lexicon.

Candidate variables
We identify six candidate variables for metaphorical mapping based on communicative and cognitive considerations.
Three of the variables we test are suggested by Conceptual
Metaphor Theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Reddy, 1979).
Applied to the development of word senses, meanings that
are easier to understand and more richly experienced - because they are more concrete and tied to bodily experience
- might develop earlier in historical time and might be especially accessible, well-structured, and conceptualized. As
such, they may lend themselves to extension via metaphorical processes because such extensions would provide a high
degree of efficiency and expressivity. These considerations
provide the following predictions:
Concrete → Abstract. Word senses that refer to things
perceived through the sensory systems should serve as a
source of metaphorical mappings, relative to ones labeling
less perceptible referents (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
Embodied → Disembodied. Word senses that refer
to things that are more directly and viscerally experienced
through our bodies should serve as a source of metaphorical
mappings, relative to senses that label referents less directly
experienced through our bodies (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
External → Internal. Word senses that refer to entities
in the external world should serve as a source of metaphorical mappings, relative to senses that label internal, mental entities (e.g., emotions or feelings). This would be predicted if internal entities are understood in terms of external things (Sweetser, 1991), and/or if external entities are

more easily lexicalized than internal entities (because external things are easier to indicate ostensively).
An additional three variables can be motivated based on
the proposal that metaphorical extensions tend to be communicatively efficient and expressive, which includes describing
target domains in vivid and emotionally-valenced ways.
Animate → Inanimate. Insofar as animate entities hold a
special status within our mental lives (Silverstein, 1976; Traugott, 2003), words referring to them may be more expressive
than those referring to less animate entities, and thus may be
recruited by speakers to vividly convey salient features of an
intended referent to addressees. Thus, words that refer to animate entities could serve as a source of metaphorical mappings, relative to words that label inanimate entities.
Less valenced → More valenced. If metaphoricallyderived senses arise in part because of their expressive power,
we might expect derived senses to be more emotionally valenced than originating senses. This predicts that when
word senses from source domains are extended, the resulting senses in the target domain will be more emotionally valenced (Ullmann, 1957).
More Intersubjective → Less intersubjective. Intersubjectivity refers to the degree to which people experience
something the same way and agree about the nature of that experience (Traugott, 2003). For example, most people would
agree about whether or not a chair is wooden (making it more
intersubjective) but not necessarily about whether it is beautiful (making it less intersubjective). Word meanings that are
more intersubjective can be easier to understand or establish
labels for;1 They would thus tend to serve as a source of
metaphorical mappings, relative to senses with less intersubjective meanings.
In sum, at least six potential variables are worthy of evaluation. Some of these variables are likely to be correlated
with one another—an important aspect that we address in our
analysis. For example, many of the same word meanings are
likely to be external, concrete, intersubjective, and embodied. Despite this fact, these variables are not identical and can
in principle be teased apart from one another. For example,
some highly concrete word meanings, like table and arm differ in how embodied they are: e.g., arms are more viscerally
and directly experienced than tables.

Materials and methods
To explore metaphorical sense mappings in history, we drew
on the corpus of metaphorical mappings of English provided
by the Mapping Metaphor project (2015). We describe this
database and the empirical methods for obtaining behavioral
ratings of the six variables.
Historical database We obtained data from the Metaphor
Map of English database (Christian, Roberts, Samuels,
Wotherspoon, & Alexande, 2015b), which identifies
metaphorical links among different semantic domains (as defined within the database) over more than a millennium. This

2214

1 Personal

communication via Eve Sweetser.

database provides metaphorical sense changes identified and
coded from 793,742 word forms and 225,131 semantic domains (e.g., some domains include “textiles,” “digestive organs,” “anger,” “pride,” etc.) in the Historical Thesaurus of
English project (Christian et al., 2015a), based on the Oxford
English Dictionary and A Thesaurus of Old English (Roberts,
Christian, & Grundy, 2015). Each semantic domain defines
a category of meaning that word senses can evolve from
(source domain) or towards (target domain). We used all domains having full date and word information 1) source domain, 2) target domain, 3) earliest of period of extension between these domains, and 4) some sample words that participated in this extension. In sum, this data set contains records
of historical metaphorical sense mappings among 400 semantic domains. The data set contains mappings spanning an
1100 year period, from the Old English period around AD
800 through to the present era, around AD 1950. Within the
database, the metaphorical mappings were summarized separately for the Old English period (i.e., before AD 1100), and
in 50-year steps for the subsequent 800 years, providing 18
unique historical time points for our analysis. In total, the
database lists over 5,000 pairs of domains, indicating the historical direction of sense extension among each pair of domains. Three types of directions were recorded: 1) A→B,
i.e. A is source and B is target; 2) A←B, i.e. A is target and
B is source; 3) A↔B, i.e. bidirectional. Our analysis in the
following section aims to predict these relationships among
domains based on the ratings described.
Ratings We gathered ratings of the 400 semantic domains
along the six target variables discussed above through an online survey. For each variable, participants rated each of the
400 domains on a 1-7 scale. Participants first read a definition of each domain (e.g., “Plant” - A living thing that grows
in the ground, usually has leaves or flowers, and needs sun
and water to survive). These definitions were assembled by
consulting the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. After reading
the definition of the domain, participants were asked to rate
the domain on one of six variables. For example, for concreteness, participants selected a number between 1 and 7,
where 1 represented “highly abstract,” 7, “highly concrete,”
and 4, “intermediate.” Similarly, for valence, 1 represented a
“highly negative” emotional response , 7 “highly positive,”
and 4, “intermediate” or neutral. Because a large number
(400 domains×6 variables) of ratings needed to be completed, each participant rated a block of 40 domains randomly
sampled from the 400 for a single variable. Data were collected from 1448 participants using the Qualtrics survey software,2 disseminated via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.3 Data
from participants whose native language was not English, and
from those who did not respond correctly to three “catch” trials assessing attention to the task, were discarded. We obtained on average 18 (SD=2) ratings for each of the domainvariable questions with a standard deviation of 1.6 (SD=0.32)
2 http://www.qualtrics.com/
3 https://www.mturk.com/mturk/

in inter-subject agreement.

Computational analyses and results
To investigate systematicity in metaphorical mapping, we
performed two analyses to account for 1) diachronic ordering and 2) synchronic asymmetry in metaphorical sense mappings recorded in the historical database. We describe each
of these analyses.
Diachronic ordering of metaphorical mappings. We
used a set of parameter-free models to predict directions of
metaphorical mappings among semantic domains. Specifically, for each of the variables described above, we created
a model that specified the predicted direction of mapping
between a pair of semantic domains by calculating the difference in average empirical ratings of these two domains
along the variable dimension. For example, for the animacy variable, we predicted the direction of mapping to be
Animate→Inanimate, such that the domain that was rated as
more animate on average should serve as the source, and the
domain that was rated less animate on average should serve as
the target. Our models also predicted bidirectional mappings
(accounting for 6.76% of the available mappings) if the average ratings of two domains were equal. Since the valence
predictor is polarized (i.e. a concept can be either positive
or negative), we calculated the absolute value of its ratings,
and for this model predicted the direction of mapping betwen
domains to follow Less valenced→More valenced. Thus, a
domain rated 7 (highly positive) would be treated as equallyvalenced as a domain rated 1 (highly negative). Table 1 specifies the predictions of each model along with example mappings that the models successfully predicted in the database.
Each model made a prediction about the direction of extension (the source-target relation) at different historical epochs
for a given pair of domains (e.g. A and B), out of three
possibilities: A→B, A←B, or A↔B. To establish a baseline, we considered a random model that predicted the direction of mappings arbitrarily. The results appear in Figure 1a. Overall, all models predicted directional change
above chance. In particular, externality (accuracy = 68.1%)
and concreteness (67.6%) were roughly equivalent to one another, with each exceeding chance-level accuracies (33.3%)
by twofold. These were followed by intersubjectivity, valence, and embodiment variables with accuracies all above
50%, while animacy (48.8%) explained the data the least. To
verify that the specific predictive directions we proposed for
these models were indeed more dominant than their opposite,
e.g. Abstract→Concrete, we ran these models by reversing
their predictive arrows. In each of these cases, we found that
the predictive accuracy was substantially worse and closer
to chance: animacy (44.2%), concreteness (25.4%), embodiment (40.5%), externality (25%), intersubjectivity (35.9%),
valence (37%). These results support the view that historical metaphorical mappings are systematic rather than arbitrary, such that words are more likely to be extended from
some domains toward other domains, compared to the re-

2215

Table 1: Model predictions and examples of model-predicted metaphorical sense mappings in English.
Model prediction
Existing sense (rating on dimension: 1-7) → New sense (rating)
Attested word Beginning of new sense
Animacy
Animate→Inanimate
Birds(6.7) → Night(1.7)
owl
1400-1450
Baby and young person(6.7) → Courage(2)
lad
1550-1600
Concreteness
Concrete→Abstract
Reflection (of light)(6) → Virtue(1.6)
clear
1350-1400
Plant(6.8) → Intellect(1.8)
vegetary
1550-1600
Embodiment
Embodied→Disembodied The human body(6.8) → Kinship and relationship(3.2) fleshly/flæsclic
Old English
Bodily tissue(6.1) → Individual colours(2.1)
incarnate
1500-1550
Externality
External→Internal
Light(6.4) → Thought(1.1)
reflect
1550-1600
Fireworks(6.7) → Esteem(1.4)
sky-rocket
1850-1900
Intersubjectivity
Agreeable→Disagreeable Place and position(5.2) → Supernatural(3.1)
presence
1650-1700
Mathematics(5.9) → Wisdom(3.5)
calculative
1750-1800
Valence
Neutral→Valenced
Relative position(4.1) → Excitement(6.4)
up
1300-1350
Granular texture(3.6) → Moral evil(1.3)
dusty
1600-1650

verse. The fact that the variables we considered helped predict the direction of metaphorical mappings also suggests that
the communicative and cognitive factors we described constrain metaphorical extension.
Next, we aimed to explore whether the variables we assessed act in complementary ways, and account for unique
variance in explaining directions of metaphorical extension. Specifically, we performed a correlation analysis and
a follow-up residual predictive analysis. Figure 1b shows
the inter-correlations between all pairs of variables. Externality and concreteness were most strongly correlated (Pearson
r = 0.84). We thus expected these variables to make similar predictions about mapping directions and for one to make
little independent contribution to explaining the directionality of metaphorical mappings over the other. Intersubjectivity
was most strongly correlated with both externality (r = 0.44)
and concreteness (r = 0.47) among the remaining pairwise
correlations. Animacy, embodiment and valence were generally less correlated with other variables.
To take into account these correlations, we applied a residual prediction procedure to analyze the total variance explained from all of these variables as follows. First, we found
the variable that best predicted the directions of all available metaphorical mappings. We then iteratively searched for
the variable that best predicted the remaining mappings until there existed no further variables. Figure 1c summarizes
the total variance explained via this procedure. Strikingly,
the variables together accounted for over 90% of all available
mappings. Externality stood out as the single most accurate
predictor, explaining 68% of mappings. Embodiment (14%)
and valence (5%) explained the majority of the remaining
data not predicted by externality, while animacy accounted
for 2.3%. Finally, concreteness and intersubjectivity both ex-

plained no more than 1% of data. This is not to suggest that
these latter variables play no role in explaining the data, but
only that their power in explaining the residual variance was
likely subsumed by the externality variable, with which they
were highly inter-correlated.
Together, our findings suggest that externality, embodiment, and valence define a relatively orthogonal space that
can help explain the directionality of the large majority of
metaphorical mappings in the historical dataset. These findings provide the first large-scale evidence for the idea that
metaphorical senses have been developed in systematic and
constrained ways.
Synchronic asymmetry in metaphorical mappings. Our
analysis so far has focused on metaphorical mappings at
different historical points, but the outcome of these diachronic changes should also be reflected in more global,
time-independent asymmetries as to which domains tend to
be the sources of metaphorical extension, and which the targets. To explore this further, we examined the extent to which
the variables we proposed would explain the asymmetry of
semantic domains. Namely, can we predict which domains
tend to be sources and which tend to be targets considering
all available metaphorical mappings across time points?
To address this question, we first needed to specify a quantifiable indicator of source-target asymmetry for each semantic domain. To do so, we created an asymmetry index (AI),
formally defined as the difference between two probabilities:
AI = p(source) − p(target)

(1)

Here p(source) is the probability of a domain serving as
a source of metaphorical mappings across all time points in
history (i.e. a synchronic summary of “source” strength), and

2216

a)

Animacy (48.8%)

800

Concreteness (67.6%)

#pairs
model
chance

b)

Embodiment (52.4%)

Variable correlations
Animacy

800

800

0.8
Concreteness

Count

600

600

0.6

600

Embodiment
400

400

0.4

400

Externality
200

200

0.2

200

0

Intersubjectivity
0

OE 1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

0

OE 1200

1400

1600

1800

0

2000

OE 1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Count

Externality (68.1%)

Intersubjectivity (56.5%)

c)

Valence (55.9%)

800

800

800

600

600

600

400

400

400

200

200

200

0

0

−0.2

Valence

Year

Anim. Conc. Embod. Exter. Intersub. Val.

Variance explained
Concreteness(0.3%)
Embod.
(14%)

Animacy(2.3%)
Other
(8.9%)

Valence(5%)
Intersub.(1%)

+Externality(68%)
OE 1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

OE 1200

1400

1600

1800

0

2000

OE 1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Year

Figure 1: Summary of results on predicting historical order of metaphorical sense mappings. a) Prediction from individual
variables. “OE” stands for Old English. b) Correlations among the variables. c) Variance explained by the variables.
p(target) is the probability of a domain being a target. A
high positive value of AI indicates a strong source domain,
whereas a low negative value of AI indicates a weak source
(or strong target) domain. We computed these probabilities
by summing all cases of metaphorical mapping where a domain served as a source or target respectively in history and
normalized them by the total number of mappings. Table 2
lists the strongest source and target domains in the dataset
based on this measure.
Having obtained the asymmetry indices, we then correlated the mean empirical ratings of each variable with the degree of source-target asymmetry in these domains. Figure 2a
summarizes the results. All variable ratings except for those
of animacy correlated significantly with the asymmetry indices (p < 0.01 for the five predictive variables). Specifically,
externality (Pearson r = 0.46) and concreteness (r = 0.42)
showed the highest strengths of correlation, similar to their
leading roles in predicting direction of metaphorical mappings. Intersubjectivity (r = 0.22) and embodiment (r = 0.13)
were moderately correlated with the AI. These results suggest that domains that are external, concrete, embodied, and
share a conceptualization across people, tend to serve as the
source of metaphorical mappings across history. Finally, valence negatively correlated (r = −0.19) with the asymmetry
index, suggesting that more valenced domains tend to be the
target, also consistent with our previous findings.
Again taking into account the intercorrelated nature of the
variables, we performed a multiple linear regression to examine the relative contributions of the six variables. We expected the most important (and orthogonal) predictor ratings
to be weighted the highest when regressed against the asymmetry index. Figure 2b shows the relative contributions of
these variables as reflected by their weights. The regression
fit has a Pearson r = 0.42 (p < 0.001). The candidate with the

Table 2: Listing of the strongest source and target domains
based on the source-target asymmetry index.
Strongest sources Strongest targets
Textiles
Excitement
Supernatural
Pride
Digestive organs
Anger
Hardness
Hatred & hostility
Bad
Softness
Ruminants
Behaviour & conduct
Cultivated plants
Money
Wetness
Literature
Darkness
Fear
Solidity & density Vigorous action & degrees of violence

largest absolute weight was externality (p < 0.001), followed
by embodiment (p < 0.09) and valence (p < 0.26) although
neither contributed significantly beyond externality. This result is largely consistent with the previous results where we
found that the same set of variables accounted for most of
the variance in in explaining metaphorical mapping directions
during different historical epochs.
Taken together, our diachronic and synchronic analyses
suggest that metaphorical sense extensions are highly systematic and support efficient compression of emerging senses
along a compact set of variable dimensions.

Conclusion
The present study focused on one of the principal mechanisms of polysemy generation: metaphorical sense mapping. We found that mappings recorded in a large historical database of English can be explained by a compact set
of variables. Our investigation lends convincing support that

2217

Asymmetry index

r=0.086; p<0.086

r=0.42; p<1.9e−018

r=0.13; p<0.0085

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.1

Targetful
Inanimate
Sourceful

Animate

Abstract

Externality

Concrete

0.1

0.08

Disembodied

Intersubjectivity

r=0.46; p<1.2e−022

Asymmetry index

Embodiment

Valence

r=0.22; p<1.4e−005

r=−0.19; p<0.00011

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.1

0.06

Embodied
Weight

Sourceful

Concreteness

ern
Em ality
bo
dim
Co
en
nc
t
ret
en
Int
ess
ers
ub
jec
An
t
im
acy ivity
Va
len
ce

b)
Animacy

Ext

a)

0.04

0.02

0

Targetful
Internal

External

Disagreeable

Agreeable

Neutral

Valenced

−0.02

Figure 2: Summary of results on predicting source-target asymmetry of domains. a) Prediction from individual variables. b).
Relative weighting of the variables in multiple linear regression.
the evolution of polysemy proceeds in systematic ways. It
also offers a novel perspective on the nature of metaphor that
bridges theories of conceptual metaphor and language evolution. That is, metaphor provides a cognitive device for compressing emerging concepts into existing words, hence facilitating a finite, learnable lexicon.
Our work also opens many questions for future research.
For example, we assumed sense change at the domain level,
whereas a full account should explain semantic change at the
word level. Future work can also explore cognitive machineries other than metaphor that support polysemous sense extensions, the socio-cultural factors that explain the rise or fall
in communicative needs for different semantic domains, and
the degree to which these findings generalize beyond English.
The current work has provided an empirical approach for indepth explorations into the nature of meaning.

Acknowledgments
We thank Eve Sweetser and George Lakoff for helpful input
and Jessie Salas and Elizabeth Kaplan for assistance with experiment development and data collection. This project was
funded by NSF award SBE-1041707 to the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC) and a University of California Faculty Startup Award to M. Srinivasan.

References
Blank, A., & Koch, P. (1999). Historical semantics and cognition. Walter de Gruyter.
Brugman, C. M. (1988). The story of over: Polysemy, semantics, and the structure of the lexicon. Taylor & Francis.
Christian, K., Roberts, J., Samuels, M., Wotherspoon, I.,
& Alexande, M. (2015a). The Historical Thesaurus of
English, version 4.2. Glasgow: University of Glasgow.
(http://historicalthesaurus.arts.gla.ac.uk/)

Christian, K., Roberts, J., Samuels, M., Wotherspoon,
I., & Alexande, M.
(2015b).
Metaphor Map of
English.
In Mapping Metaphor with the Historical Thesaurus.
Glasgow: University of Glasgow.
(http://mappingmetaphor.arts.gla.ac.uk)
Geeraerts, D. (1997). Diachronic prototype semantics. Oxford University Press.
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015).
Compression and communication in the cultural evolution
of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141, 87–102.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
The University of Chicago Press.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 108(9), 3526–3529.
Reddy, M. J. (1979). The conduit metaphor: A case of frame
conflict in our language about language. Metaphor and
Thought, 2, 164–201.
Regier, T., Kemp, C., & Kay, P. (2015). Word meanings
across languages support efficient communication. The
Handbook of Language Emergence, 87, 237.
Roberts, J., Christian, K., & Grundy, L. (2015). A Thesaurus of Old English. Glasgow: University of Glasgow.
(http://oldenglishthesaurus.arts.gla.ac.uk/)
Silverstein, M. (1976). Hierarchy of features and ergativity.
In R. Dixon (Ed.), Grammatical categories in Australian
languages.
Sweetser, E. (1991). From etymology to pragmatics:
Metaphorical and cultural aspects of semantic structure
(Vol. 54). Cambridge University Press.
Traugott, E. C. (2003). From subjectification to intersubjectification. Motives for Language Change, 124, 139.
Ullmann, S. (1957). The principle of semantics. Glasgow:
Jackson, Son & Co.

2218

