Exploring the Neural Mechanisms Supporting Structured Sequence Processing and
Language Using Event-Related Potentials: Some Preliminary Findings
Gretchen N.L. Smith (gsmith50@student.gsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 5010
Atlanta, GA 30302-5010 USA

Gerardo E. Valdez (gvaldez2@student.gsu.edu),
Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 5010
Atlanta, GA 30302-5010 USA

Anne M. Walk (amcclur3@illinois.edu)
Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois, 405 North Mathews Avenue
Urbana, Illinois 61801 USA

John D. Purdy (jdprdy@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Saint Louis University, 3700 Lindell Blvd.
St. Louis, MO 63108

Christopher M. Conway (cconway@gsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 5010
Atlanta, GA 30302-5010 USA
Abstract
Structured sequence processing (SSP) refers to the
neurocognitive mechanisms used to learn sequential patterns
in the environment. SSP ability seems to be important for
language (Conway, Bauernschmidt, Huang, & Pisoni, 2010);
however, there are few neural studies showing an empirical
connection between SSP and language. The purpose of this
study was to investigate the association between SSP and
language processing by comparing the underlying neural
components elicited during each type of task. Healthy adult
subjects completed a visual, non-linguistic SSP task
incorporating an artificial grammar and a visual morphosyntactic language task. Both tasks were designed to cause
violations in expectations of items occurring in a series.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were used to examine the
underlying neural mechanisms associated with these
expectancy violations. The results indicated the P3a
component elicited by the SSP task and the P600 component
elicited by the language task shared similarities in their
topographic distribution. These preliminary analyses suggest
that the P3a and P600 may reflect processes involving
detection of sequential violations in non-language and
language domains, which is consistent with the idea that
language processing relies on general-purpose SSP
mechanisms.
Keywords: Structured Sequence Processing; Sequence
Learning; Statistical Learning; Artificial Grammar Learning;
Language Processing; Syntax; Event Related Potentials; P3a;
P600

Introduction
Structured sequence processing (SSP), also termed
sequential learning or statistical learning, is a core cognitive

mechanism used to learn patterns of information from the
environment over time. SSP emerges early in development
(Aslin, Saffran, & Newport, 1998) and is largely automatic
and implicit (Cleeremans, Destrebecqz, & Boyer, 1998),
though explicit processes likely occur in parallel (Sun,
Slusarz, & Terry, 2005). SSP involves learning complex
embedded patterns in which each item that occurs next is
determined probabilistically based on what item occurred
previously (see Conway & Christiansen, 2001 for a more
detailed discussion on different types of sequential
learning).
A key facet of SSP is that it serves as a tool for making
predictions about which elements will occur next in a
sequence (Christiansen, Conway, & Onnis, 2012). When
sequential patterns are learned, this information can be used
not only to generate expectancies about upcoming stimuli in
the sequence, but also to detect when stimuli deviate from
expectation (Ferdinand, Mecklinger, & Kray, 2008). Bar
(2007) suggests that a “circular mechanism” occurs in
which the brain limits processing of stimuli that are
predictable, while allotting cognitive resources to stimuli
that are novel and/or unexpected. These “predictive
processing” operations are generally beneficial to many
aspects of cognition, including perception, movement,
decision-making (Bubic, von Cramon, & Schubotz, 2010)
and language (Federmeier, 2007).
SSP appears to be especially important in the domain of
language (Conway, Bauernschmidt, Huang, & Pisoni,
2010). In particular, SSP may support knowledge and use of
grammatical language, such as word order (Conway et al.,
2010), phonology (Saffran, 2003), morphology and syntax

1481

(Ullman, 2004). However, the association between SSP and
language has largely been assumed. Only recently have
behavioral studies demonstrated empirical links between
SSP and natural language processing (e.g., Conway et al.,
2010). Additionally, even fewer studies have empirically
compared these two mechanisms at a neural level (e.g.,
Patel, Gibson, Ratner, Besson, & Holcomb, 1998). In a
neural-based investigation using a within-subject design,
Christiansen et al. (2012) examined the electrophysiological
responses elicited during a visual SSP task and a visual
syntactic natural language processing task. The findings
indicated both the SSP task and the natural language task
elicited a late positive-going deflection in voltage
potential—a P600 component––that has been linked with
the processing of syntactic violations (Lelekov, Dominey, &
Garcia-Larrea, 2000). Furthermore, topographic maps of the
P600 effects showed similar distribution between conditions
(Christiansen et al., 2012). Overall, these results provided
some of the earliest direct, within-subject empirical
evidence that the same neural mechanisms may be used for
SSP and syntactic natural language processing (Christiansen
et al., 2012).
However, more direct neural evidence of a link between
SSP and natural language processing is needed, using
different types of SSP and language tasks. Therefore, the
purpose of this study was to investigate the relation between
SSP and natural language processing by comparing the
electrophysiological profiles elicited during each type of
task, using a within-subject design. The SSP task was
designed to resemble an artificial grammar learning (AGL)
paradigm (Reber, 1967), in which complex statistical
regularities are embedded in the sequences. One key aspect
of the SSP task used in this study is that it is more purely
non-linguistic in nature than previous SSP tasks using
language-like stimuli (e.g., Christiansen et al., 2012) or
stimuli that are readily verbalizable and easily mapped onto
vocalizations (e.g., Patel et al., 1998). Evidence showing
that similar neural responses are elicited during a more
fundamentally non-linguistic SSP task and a natural
language task would provide additional––and possibly more
compelling––support that language processing is based in
part on mechanisms utilized to extract and encode structured
sequential information in a general-purpose manner.
It is possible our visual non-linguistic SSP task and our
morpho-syntactic visual natural language processing task
would both elicit a P600, similar to the Christiansen et al.,
(2012) findings. The authors of that study hypothesized that
the P600 might reflect processing broadly involved with
making predictions about upcoming items in a series, which
is not confined solely to language (Christiansen et al.,
2012). It is also possible our SSP task might elicit ERP
components that have been associated with extraction and
encoding of non-linguistic structured sequential patterns.
Previous studies have suggested that the N200 [negativegoing deflection, occurring approximately 200 milliseconds

(ms) after stimulus onset] and P3b (positive-going
deflection occurring approximately 300 ms after stimulus
onset) components are elicited in sequential learning
paradigms and may reflect the processing of expectancy
violations (e.g, Carrión & Bly, 2007). Additionally, the P3a
(positive-going deflection occurring approximately 250 ms
after stimulus onset) has been evoked from “novel” stimulus
paradigms (Courchesne, Hillyard, & Galambos, 1975), has
been linked with the recognition of grammatical violations
in a second language (Jakoby, Goldstein, & Faust, 2011),
and has been associated with focused attention (Comerchero
& Polich, 1999).
Given the present study was exploratory, we expected to
observe any of the ERP components mentioned above.
Consequently, the central hypothesis was simply that
violations in a non-linguistic SSP task and violations in a
morpho-syntactic natural language task would elicit similar
electrophysiological response profiles.

Method
Subjects
Forty-three subjects (ages 18-22; 25 female) participated.
All subjects were recruited from Saint Louis University,
were native speakers of English, with normal to correctedto-normal vision and who, at time of testing, reported no
history of hearing loss, difficulty with speech, or history of
cognitive, perceptual, or motor disorder.

Experimental Paradigm
Measures of SSP and language were administered separately
in a single test session. All subjects performed the measure
of SSP first and the measure of language second.
Measure of SSP The measure of SSP was similar to the
“Simon” visual-spatial SSP task used in previously
published work (see Conway et al., 2010 for details). In this
measure, subjects viewed sequences of 4 black squares
appearing one at a time on a white background in 1 of 4
possible quadrants (upper left, upper right, lower left, lower
right) (See Figure 1 below). The task was to reproduce each
sequence immediately following presentation by touching
the squares in the correct order on a touchscreen. Unknown
to subjects, the measure of SSP consisted of two parts: a
learning phase and a test phase, which differed in the types
of sequences presented.

Figure 1: SSP Task (on left) with rule structure (on right).

1482

In the learning phase, sequence elements were generated
according to an underlying artificial grammar that specified
the probability of a particular element in a sequence
occurring given the preceding element (see Figure 1 above).
For each sequence, the starting element (1-4) was randomly
determined, and then the grammar was used to determine
each subsequent element, until the full sequence length was
reached. For example, given the starting element 3, the
element 2 had a zero probability of occurring next, while the
1 and 4 elements had an equal (50%) chance of occurring.
No element could follow itself in the sequence. The
mapping of the rules to the locations was randomly
determined for each subject; however, for each subject, the
mapping remained consistent across all trials. All sequences
were 5 elements long.
The learning phase consisted of 40 grammatical
sequences. The phase began with a blank screen that
appeared for 1 second. In the first part of the learning phase
(20 sequences), each element in the sequence was displayed
for 600 ms, followed by a 200 ms pause in which nothing
was displayed on the screen. The final element in the
sequence was followed by a 200 ms pause before the whole
2x2 grid of squares was displayed with a “Done” button in
the middle. Using the touch screen, the subject then
reproduced the sequence just presented, followed by
pressing the word “Done”. Immediate feedback was given
as to the correctness of each response. The second part of
the learning phase (20 sequences) was the same as the first
part, except each element in the sequence was displayed for
400ms, followed by a 200 ms pause.
The test phase consisted of 64 sequences. One fourth of
the sequences were “grammatical-trained” (i.e., the
sequences were identical to grammatical sequences
presented in the learning phase), one fourth were
“grammatical-untrained” (i.e, new sequences sharing the
same underlying structure as the other grammatical
sequences), and one half were “ungrammatical” (i.e., the
sequences violated the grammar). For the ungrammatical
sequences, the starting element (1-4) was randomly
determined, then any element could occur next in the
sequence except repeating elements were not allowed. The
timing of the test phase was identical to the timing used in
in the second half of the learning phase. The subjects were
not told that this was a test phase or that there were different
types of sequences (grammatical-trained, grammaticaluntrained, and ungrammatical). From the perspective of the
subject, the test phase was the same reproduction task they
had been doing all along.
Scoring for the Measure of SSP For the test phase, a
sequence was scored as correct if a subject correctly
reproduced it. A score of 5 was given for each correctly
reproduced sequence and was based on the length of each
sequence. As in previous studies (e.g., Conway et al., 2010)
a learning score was then obtained by subtracting the total

score for the ungrammatical sequences in the test phase
from the grammatical sequences in the test phase. A higher
learning score indicates better performance on structured
sequences compared to ones that violate the structure,
suggesting that successful SSP occurred.
Measure of Language Sixty-four sentences were presented
in the measure of language. These sentences varied
according to whether or not they contained grammar
violations. Thirty-two sentences were grammatically
correct, and 32 sentences contained morpho-syntactic
violations pertaining to verb agreement with the subject. For
example, “The famous singer walks onto the stage.” was a
grammatically correct sentence used in the task and “The
famous singer walk onto the stage.” was a sentence with a
violation. Each sentence began with a white fixation point
(+) and was presented 1 word at a time in white text on a
black screen. Each element (word or fixation point)
appeared for 400 ms and was followed by a blank screen for
400 ms. Thirty-two 7-word sentences and 32 8-word
sentences were presented. The 32 8-word sentences each
contained an auxiliary verb. The target words (grammatical
or violation) always occurred at the 4th word in the 7-word
sentences and at the 5th work in the 8-word sentences.
Target words were always verbs. The ratio of grammatically
correct sentences to sentences with morpho-syntactic
violations was 1:1, for each sentence length.
The phrase “Was that a good or a bad sentence? Press 1
for good, press 2 for bad.” appeared on the screen
immediately following presentation of the final word in the
sentence. The task was to make a keypad response on button
1 if the sentence was “good” and to respond on button 2 if
the sentence was “bad.” Subjects were not given explicit
instruction as to what “good” or “bad” meant (i.e., that
grammatical sentences were “good” and sentences with
violations were “bad), nor were they told that some
sentences were grammatical and some had violations. No
feedback was given. A 1-second pause was given between a
response and the presentation of the next sentence.
Scoring for the Measure of Language A sentence was
scored correct if the subject made the correct grammaticality
judgment for that sentence (i.e., a button press on “1”/
“good” for grammatical sentences; a button press on “2”/
“bad” for sentences with morpho-syntactic violations).

Expectancy Violations for Both the Measure of SSP
and the Measure of Language
Both measures were designed to cause violations in
expectations of items occurring in a series (i.e., a violation
of the learned sequence in the SL task and a violation of
grammar in the language task). Event-related potentials
(ERPs)––portions of ongoing electroencephalogram (EEG)
time-locked to cognitive events of interest––were used to
associated with these expectancy violations.

1483

EEG/ERP Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
EEG was recorded during the test phase of the measure of
SSP and throughout the measure of language using a 128channel high-density sensor net with vertex recording
reference (Electrical Geodesics, Eugene OR). Standard
sensor net application techniques were followed. Recordings
were made using NetStation acquisition software (Electrical
Geodesics, Inc.), with a 0.1–100Hz bandpass filter and
digitized at 250 Hz. Electrode impedances were kept below
50 kiloohms. Rest breaks were given as needed.
ERP for the measure of SSP was time-locked to the
presentation of a stimulus that violated the artificial
grammar and was compared to a stimulus in a similar
position in a sequence that was grammatical. ERP for the
measure of language was time-locked to the presentation of
a word in the sentence that violated the morpho-syntactic
grammar and was compared to a word in a similar position
in a sentence that was grammatical.
Data was preprocessed using Netstation (Electrical
Geodesics, Inc.). The continuous raw EEG recording was
filtered through a 0.1 Hz high pass filter and a 30 Hz low
pass filter. Channels were marked bad for a given trial if
blinks or eye movements were detected, if amplitudes >150
µV, if the channel was flat (had zero variance), or if manual
inspection suggested noise specific to that channel.
Channels marked bad were interpolated in the raw EEG
from data measured at nearby electrodes. After exclusion of
artifacts, the continuous EEG was segmented into epochs in
the interval -200 msec to +1000 msec with respect to the
onset of the target stimulus (i.e., violation of grammar, for
both the measure of SSP and the measure of language). Data
were not re-referenced from the vertex channel.
Data from 3 subjects was excluded from analysis due to
bad EEG channels that were either too high in number or
too clustered together. Data from 8 subjects was excluded
due to poor data quality or missing data. Therefore, data
from a total of 32 subjects was analyzed.

Regions of Interest
Nine regions of interest (ROI) were defined for data
analysis, with each containing 9 channels: frontal (FRz),
central (CNz), posterior (POz), left anterior (LAn), left
central (LCn), left posterior (LPo), right anterior (RAn),
right central (RCn), and right posterior (RPo) (see Figure 2
below).

Results

Behavioral Average Task Performance for the
Measure of SSP and the Measure of Language
Average accuracy given in percentage correct for
reproduction of the three sequence types presented in the
measure of SSP was as follows: 73% (grammaticaltrained), 71% (grammatical-untrained), and 70%
(ungrammatical). These three scores were not significantly
different from one another (p=.999). Average accuracy

Figure 2: 2-D layout of the 128-channel sensor net (top is
front). For data analysis, the channels were grouped into 9
regions of interest (outlined above), each consisting of 9
channels.
given in percentage correct for the grammaticality judgment
of the sentences presented in the measure of language was
93%.

Electrophysiological Response Elicited by the
Measure of SSP
Visual inspection indicated a P3a component for
ungrammatical sequences relative to both types of
grammatical sequences in several ROI. Paired samples ttests were conducted on the grand-averaged mean amplitude
waveforms associated with the P3a component 270-330ms
after the sequence violations, with significant effects in the
central (CNz) [t(31)=3.968, p<.001], frontal (Frz) [t
(31)=3.321, p=.002], and right anterior (RAn) [t(31)=2.303,
p=.028] regions [See Figure 3 below for an example of the
P3a effect in the frontal (FRz) region].
Correlations were computed between the grand-averaged
mean amplitude waveforms associated with the significant
P3a effects for ungrammatical sequences relative to both
types of grammatical sequences and the averaged learning
score on the measure of SSP (grammatical-ungrammatical).
Results showed that learning score was significantly
negatively correlated with the P3a effect in the frontal (FRz)
region [r(31)= -.300, p=.05].

Electrophysiological Response Elicited by the
Measure of Language
Visual inspection indicated a P600 component for
ungrammatical sentences relative to grammatical sentence
in several ROI. Paired samples t-tests were conducted on the
mean amplitude waveforms associated with the P600

1484

Figure 4: Topographic maps showing distribution of the P3a
and P600 components, measured at the scalp.

Figure 3: P3a component in the frontal region and P600
component in the central region.
component 525-925ms after the syntactic violations, with
significant effects in the central (CNz) [t(31)=6.616,
p<.001], right posterior (RPo) [t(31)=2.880, p=.007], left
posterior (LPo) [t(31)=5.360, p<.001], right anterior (RAn)
[t(31)=7.610, p<.001], left anterior (LAn) [t(31)=2.902,
p=.007], and left central (LCn) [t(31)=3.433, p=.002]
regions [See Figure 3 above for an example of the P600
effect in the central (CNz) region].

Comparison Between the Electrophysiological
Responses Underlying SSP and Language
Topographical maps were created from ungrammatical
minus grammatical difference waves associated with the
P3a and P600 described above, to compare the scalp
distribution of electrical activity for both components in the
two tasks (See Figure 4 below). Visual inspection showed
some similarities in the topographic profile for the two
components; specifically, the early phase of the P600 (525580ms) resembles the full P3a component. A correlation
was
computed
between
the
difference
waves
(ungrammatical-grammatical) between the early phase of
the P600 and the full P3a component. The results showed a
positive correlation in the right anterior (RAn) region
between the P3a (270-330ms) and the early P600 (525580ms) that approached significance [r(32)=.291, p=.106].

Discussion
The present study provided some initial analyses comparing
the electrophysiological responses elicited in a visual, nonlinguistic SSP task and a visual morpho-syntactic natural
language processing task. Following exposure to sequences
that followed an embedded artificial grammar, subjects
showed a P3a to violations of the grammar, while showing a
P600 to morpho-syntactic violations in a visual natural
language processing task. The P600 elicited in the language
task is consistent with findings from paradigms that involve
the processing of syntactic violations. The P3a elicited in

the SSP task is consistent with previous AGL ERP studies
showing a P300 component in response to violations of a
grammar (e.g., Opitz, Ferdinand, & Mecklinger, 2011). The
presence of the P3a could be due to violations of the
artificial grammar drawing attentional resources,
corresponding with Bar’s (2007) “circular mechanism” of
predictive processing previously described. The negative
correlation between the SSP learning score––an indication
of better performance on grammatical sequences––and the
P3a effect for ungrammatical sequences relative to
grammatical sequences supports this notion.
Although averaged behavior performance on the measure
of SSP showed no learning effect as a group, the correlation
between the SSP learning score and the ERP effect for the
ungrammatical sequences suggests that even though an
overall group learning effect was not observed, there is a
distribution of learning scores that seem meaningful, with
some individuals showing learning and others not showing
learning. Future work will investigate whether individual
differences in cognitive processes such as attention and
working modulate learning of structured sequences.
One interpretation of the topomaps findings is that the
P3a and P600 are distinct components, yet both reflect
processes involving the detection of sequential violations in
artificial and natural grammar processing tasks,
respectively. It has been previously suggested that P300 and
P600 components may both reflect the processing of
incongruent information in different types of tasks (e.g.,
Christiansen et al., 2012). A similar role for both types of
components, therefore, suggests some degree of overlap
between SSP and language processing mechanisms.
The early phase of the P600 showed a distribution similar
to the full P3a elicited in the SSP task, suggesting that they
may have a common neural origin. Although the
distribution of the full P3a is more confined than the full
P600, this could be due to the relative unfamiliarity and
limited exposure to the SSP task, whereas the wider scalp
distribution of the P600 might be the result of the extensive
and prolonged exposure humans have had with language.
With more exposure to non-linguistic SSP tasks, the P3a
elicited to violations in the artificial grammar might show

1485

robustness similar to the P600 elicited to violations in
natural language grammar. On the other hand, the
differences in the ERP correlates observed for the two tasks
could instead be due to differences in the types of violations
inherent to each (something akin to word order violations in
the AGL task but subject-verb agreement violations in the
natural language task).
Coulson, King, and Kutas (1998) noted similarities
between the P600 and P3b elicited by manipulations to
probability and saliency in an oddball paradigm. They
concluded the P600 might be a part of the P300 family of
components (Coulson et al., 1998). Still, similarity in
distribution may not reflect similarity in neural generators
[see Osterhout & Hagoort, 1999 (response to Coulson et al.,
1998) for a more detailed discussion on cautions of
attempting to determine similarity of neural mechanisms
from EEG recorded at the scalp]. To help address this
limitation, we are using source localization analyses to
examine whether the components elicited in our two tasks
share a common neural origin. Although preliminary, these
findings suggest the possibility that the neurocognitive
mechanisms involved in detecting sequential violations in a
non-linguistic AGL task are similar to those involved in
detecting morpho-syntactic violations in natural language,
with the P3a possibly being an earlier version of the P600 or
a reduced variant of it.

Acknowledgements
N. Buchholz, J. Daltrozzo, J. Deocampo, G. Frishkoff, E.
Hilvert, S. Pardasani, B. Rickles, K. Ross, G. Signiski, S.
Singh, and R. Town. Funding: NIH R01DC012037.

References
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by 8month-old infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321 324.
Bar, M. (2007). The proactive brain: Using analogies and
associations to generate predictions. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11, 280 289.
Bubic, A., von Cramon, D. Y. & Schubotz, R. I. (2010)
Prediction, cognition and the brain. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 4, 1-15.
Carrión, R.E. & Bly, B.M. (2007). Event-related potential
markers of expectation violation in an artificial grammar
learning task. NeuroReport, 18, 191-195.
Christiansen, M.H., Conway, C.M., & Onnis, L. (2012).
Similar neural correlates for language and sequential
learning: Evidence from event-related brain potentials.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 27, 231-256.
Cleeremans, A., Destrebecqz, A., & Boyer, M. (1998).
Implicit learning: News from the front. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 2, 406 416.
Comerchero, M.D. & Polich, J. (1999). P3a and P3b from
typical auditory and visual stimuli. Clinical
Neurophysiology 110(1), 24–30.

Conway, C.M., Bauernschmidt, A., Huang, S.S., & Pisoni,
D.B. (2010). Implicit statistical learning in language
processing: Word predictability is the key. Cognition,
114, 356-371.
Conway, C.M., & Christiansen, M.H. (2001). Sequential
learning in non-human primates. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5, 529-546.
Coulson, S., King, J.W., Kutas, M. (1998). Expect the
unexpected:
Event-related
brain
response
to
morphosyntactic violations. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 13(1), 21-58.
Courchesne, E., Hillyard, S.A., Galambos, R. (1975).
Stimulus novelty, task relevance and the visual evoked
potential in man. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 39(2), 131-43.
Federmeier, K. D. (2007). Thinking ahead: The role and
roots of prediction in language comprehension.
Psychophysiology, 44, 491-505.
Ferdinand, N. K., Mecklinger, A., & Kray, J. (2008). Error
deviance processing in implicit and explicit sequence
learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 629 642.
Jakoby, H., Goldstein, A., & Faust, M. (2011).
Electrophysiological correlates of speech perception
mechanisms and individual differences in second
language attainment. Psychophysiology, 48(11), 15171531.
Lelekov, T., Dominey, P. F., & Garcia-Larrea, L. (2000).
Dissociable ERP profiles for processing rules vs instances
in a cognitive sequencing task. NeuroReport, 11(5), 11291132.
Opitz, B., Ferdinand, N. K., & Mecklinger, A. (2011).
Timing matters: the impact of immediate and delayed
feedback on artificial language learning. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 5(8), 1-9.
Osterhout, L., & Hagoort, P. (1999). A superficial
resemblance does not necessarily mean you are part of the
family: Counterarguments to Coulson, King, and Kutas
(1998) in the P600/SPS-P300 debate. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 14, 1-14.
Patel, A. D., Gibson, E., Ratner, J., Besson, M., & Holcomb,
P. J. (1998). Processing syntactic relations in language
and music: An event-related potential study. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 717-733.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Behavior, 6, 855-863.
Saffran, J. R. (2003). Statistical learning: Mechanisms and
constraints. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
12(4), 110-114.
Sun, R., Slusarz, P., & Terry, C. (2005). The interaction of
the explicit and the implicit in skill learning: A dual
process approach. Psychological Review, 112(1), 159192.
Ullman, M. T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to
language: The declarative/procedural model. Cognition,
92, 231-270.

1486

