Exploring the Relationship between Adolescents’
Interest in Algebra and Procedural Declines
Natalie Corbett (Natalie.Corbett@temple.edu)
Temple University, College of Education, 1301 Cecil B. Moore Avenue,
Philadelphia, PA, 19122 USA

Julie L. Booth (Julie.Booth@temple.edu)
Temple University, College of Education, 1301 Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Christina Barbieri (Barbieri@udel.edu)
University of Delaware, College of Education and Human Development,
113 Willard Hall Education Building,
Newark, DE 19716 USA

Laura K. Young (Laura.Young@temple.edu)
Temple University, College of Education, 1301 Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA
Abstract

student’s attitude towards mathematics can affect their
performance in the classroom (Middleton & Spanias, 1999).
It has been well established that achievement and
motivation in mathematics are closely linked during
adolescence (Wang, 2013).
In early motivation research, being intrinsically
motivated, or motivated to engage in a task for the sake of
the task itself, was deemed more positive than being
extrinsically motivated, or motivated to engage in the task
for an external reward (Deci & Ryan, 1985). This line of
research also found that students whose motivational
orientations were more aligned with an intrinsic motivation
(e.g., mastery orientation, value, interest) tended to persist
and succeed more academically. However, the distinction
between and value given to intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation is not always accepted (Cameron & Pierce,
1994; Ryan & Deci, 1996). Researchers today tend to focus
on particular motivation constructs that may be more useful
in explaining students’ academic behavior than general
categories or dichotomies such as intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation.
Wang and Pomerantz (2009) found that students who
initially had more positive achievement motivation (e.g.,
mastery orientation) in the fall of the seventh grade had
better academic performance in the spring of eighth grade
than students whose motivation-orientation would
traditionally be considered less positive. They also found
that over time students in the United States showed general
declines in positive achievement motivation orientations,
such as becoming less mastery oriented and valuing
mathematics less. Ma (1997) suggests that there is a
reciprocal relationship between the development of attitudes
towards mathematics and the development of math ability.
Fisher, Dobbs-Oates, Doctoroff, and Arnold (2012) found
that high interest in mathematics coincided with strong math
skills in preschool aged children. However, Fisher and
colleagues did not examine adolescents, which makes it

Algebra I is considered a gatekeeper course for higher
education, high-paying jobs, and access to STEM careers, yet
many students find themselves struggling to learn algebra.
Prior research links intrinsic motivation for learning math
with mathematics achievement, particularly during
adolescence. The current study measured middle school
students’ interest in algebra and their procedural skills across
the span of an algebra unit to determine whether students who
show declines in algebraic problem-solving also show a
decline in a particular type of intrinsic motivation – interest in
algebra. Pre-test and post-test scores were used to categorize
participants into those who showed declines in problemsolving skills and those who did not. Of the overall sample (N
= 367), a group of 25 students showed declining skills over
the course of the unit. These students also showed significant
declines in interest in mathematics from pre- to post-test in
comparison to students who did not show procedural declines.
Our findings support the relationship between performance
and motivation in the classroom, particularly in algebra class.
Educational implications are discussed.
Keywords: algebra; motivation; achievement; procedural
skills; procedural skill decline; education

Introduction
Prior research has examined mathematical cognition and
problem solving in an attempt to understand and, thus,
improve students’ mathematics abilities. Problem solving
skills can be defined as using the cognitive tools needed to
solve a given mathematical problem (Schoenfeld, 1992).
These problem-solving abilities become more important as
students advance in mathematics, particularly when they are
in algebra classrooms (Mayfield & Glenn, 2008). An
understanding of how to apply procedural skills is also
known to contribute to mathematical performance (Star,
2005). Failure to develop these skills leads to poor
mathematics performance, specifically in middle school
(Lein et al., 2015). Prior research has also suggested that a

592

difficult to ascertain the applicability of these findings to the
relationship between adolescent student achievement and
interest in math. According to the 2012 Programme for
International Student Assessment (PISA), adolescents
across the United States struggle with mathematics, ranking
below average nationally in comparison to other
industrialized nations (Kelly, Nord, Jenkins, Chan, &
Kastberg, 2013). Further, this same data revealed that 50%
of students in the United States have low levels of interest in
mathematics. While we know that math achievement and
math motivation are related (e.g., Wang & Pomerantz,
2009), little research has assessed the relationship between
adolescents’ interest in mathematics and their mathematical
problem-solving abilities.
It is likely that interest in a particular topic or subject area
develops over time with experiences; for example, students’
various experiences with mathematics, over the course of
their schooling, may contribute to interest in mathematics. It
is also possible that struggling to develop skills important to
success in a particular domain, such as procedural skills in
mathematics, may relate to declines in interest in that
particular domain.
Achievement in mathematics is linked with success in
future employment (Lein et al., 2015). Algebra I in
particular is often considered a gatekeeper course for
higher-level math courses as well as select science courses
(Matthews & Farmer, 2008). When learning algebra,
mathematical problem-solving becomes particularly more
challenging than problem-solving with arithmetic. Not only
do concepts become more difficult (Booth, 2011) but
procedures do as well. Procedural knowledge is an
important component of mathematical cognition (Star,
2005). Being able to overcome this challenge and maintain
or fine-tune one’s problem-solving skills may be related to
maintaining or increasing levels of interest in mathematics.
Experiencing a loss or decrement in problem-solving skills
may be related to declines in interest in math as well.
The current study focuses on students who demonstrate
this depreciation in procedural problem-solving skills over
the course of an algebra unit. In particular, the current
analyses explore whether students who show declines in
algebraic problem-solving also show a decline in interest in
algebra.

classified as receiving special education, and 7% were
classified as Limited English Proficient by their districts.

Procedure
The current data comes from a larger experimental study
that assessed the effectiveness of a worked examples
intervention. However, for the purposes of the current
research question, the data was collapsed across conditions
to increase power due to the small sample size. It is
important to note that results were consistent when running
the same analyses by condition.
Each classroom completed the study over the course of
one of three possible math units. The unit was selected by
the teacher to coincide with their syllabus. These units
included pre-algebra (58.9%), properties of exponents
(15.3%), and solving quadratic equations (25.9%).
Students individually completed a 20-item motivation
survey using a seven point Likert scale. This survey
assessed various motivation constructs including interest in
algebra. Interest in algebra is defined as the intrinsic value
or enjoyment that one experiences when working on an
algebra task (see Simpkins, Davis-Kean, & Eccles, 2006 for
a similar interest in math measure). After completing the
motivation survey, students completed a unit pre-test. Unit
tests were created to reflect material students should have
learned within the unit regardless of condition; the problems
were based on items from standardized math tests used in
public schools. Students were given the entire math period
to finish the test. After the pre-test, students then completed
four worksheets that coincided with teacher instruction on
the particular unit. The motivation survey was readministered after completion of the unit, followed by a
post-test that was identical to the pre-test.
This data was collected to answer the following research
question:
Do students who show declines in algebraic problemsolving show a decline in interest in algebra as well?

Measures
Interest in Algebra Participants completed a survey that
measured several motivation constructs. The items for
interest in algebra asked students to answer using a seven
point Likert scale. One represented “Not at all” and seven
represented “Yes, definitely.” Interest in algebra was
measured with three items, which were: “(1) Do you enjoy
doing algebra very much?”, “(2) Do you think algebra is
fun?”, and “(3) Do you think algebra is boring? [reverse
scored]”. Higher means represent high levels of interest in
algebra.

Methods
Participants
Middle school students enrolled in Algebra I (N = 367) from
classrooms of eight different teachers across three public
school districts in the US Midwest participated in the
current study. One of the school districts could not release
demographics data; this school district made up 41.1% of
the sample (n = 151). Of the two school districts that did
provide demographic data 50.8% were female, 29.1% were
underrepresented minority (URM) students, 14.6% were

Decline in Procedural Skill Students were categorized into
two groups based upon whether they showed declines in
procedural skill or not. This was done using their
performance on the unit tests taken pre- and postinstruction. Procedural problem-solving skill was

593

demonstrated by knowing how to solve a problem, such as
solving a quadratic equation using graphing. Assessments
differed based upon whether students were currently
studying a pre-algebra unit, a quadratics unit, or a unit on
properties of exponents. Pre- and post-test scores were
computed by percent of problems solved correctly. Then, a
difference score was computed for each student based on
subtracting their pre-test score from their post-test score.
Most students maintained their skill or demonstrated
increases (n = 342). However, 25 students declined from
pre- to post-test; these students were categorized as the
Declining group. These two categories of students were then
compared on interest in algebra from pre- to post-test.

who did show declines in procedural skill also showed a
decline in math interest from pre- (M = 4.280, SD = 1.61) to
post-test (M = 3.827, SD = 1.74).

Interest by Group

Mean Interest in Algebra

4.7

Results
Table 1: Descriptives.

Pre-test Procedural
Post-test Procedural
Pre-test Interest
Post-test Interest

Declining
Skill Group
(n = 25)
Mean SD
.542
.291
.371
.265
4.28
1.61
3.83
1.74

Non-Declining
Skill Group
(n = 342)
Mean SD
.190
.191
.437
.249
4.03
1.52
4.14
1.52

4.5

Pre-test
Post-test

ns

ns

Declining Skill
Group

Non-Declining Skill
Group

4.3
4.1
3.9
3.7
3.5
3.3

Figure 1: Interest by group.
To test simple effects, two repeated-measures t-tests
comparing pre- and post-interest, one per group, were used.
The apparent decrease in interest from pre- (M = 4.28) to
post-test (M = 3.83) for students in the Declining Skills
group was trending toward significance (t [24] = 1.905, p =
.069). The apparent increase in interest from pre- (M = 4.03)
to post-test (M = 4.15) for students in the Non-Declining
Skills group was trending toward significance (t [341] = 1.851, p = .065). Figure 1 displays this finding.

Interest in algebra at pre-test was positively and
significantly correlated with procedural scores at pre- (r =
.258, p < .001) and post-test (r = .235, p < .001). Interest in
algebra at post-test was also positively and significantly
correlated with procedural scores at pre- (r = .142, p = .007)
and post-test (r = .211, p < .001). However, the purpose of
the current study was to examine differences in interest for
students who showed declines in procedural skills rather
than the normative learning pattern. Thus, to answer our
research question, each participant was first classified into
either the Declining Skill group or the Non-Declining Skill
group based on whether their performance in solving
procedurally-based problems decreased from pre- to posttest. Descriptives are presented in Table 1. Then, a 2 (Time)
x 2 (Group) repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to
assess whether changes in interest from pre- to post-test
differed by group.
There was no significant main effect of group (F[1, 365]
= .014, p = .906, MSE = 4.033, ηp2 < .001), meaning that
groups did not differ by interest collapsed across time
points. There was no significant main effect of time (F[1,
365] = 2.009, p = .148, MSE = .643, ηp2 = .006), meaning
that interest did not differ from pre- to post-test collapsed
across the two groups. There was a significant group by
time interaction (F[1, 365] = 5.814, p = .016, MSE = .643).
Participants who did not show declines in procedural skill
did not show a decline in math interest from pre-(M = 4.03,
SD = 1.52) to post-test (M = 4.14, SD = 1.52). Participants

Discussion
It was expected that students who showed declines in
interest would also show declines in procedural skills. Our
data was consistent with this hypothesis and expands upon
prior research. For instance, Wang and Pomerantz (2009)
found that positive motivation-orientation is a predictor of
math achievement; it is also known that math performance
is strongly correlated with interest (Fisher et al., 2012). The
results of this study suggest that as a student declines in
procedural skills over time, they may also decline in
interest. It is important to note that the current data is
correlational in nature and directionality of the findings
cannot be established. However, we speculate that the
findings may be attributed to self-efficacy beliefs, which
have been found to have an impact on achievement (Lee,
2009). Low self-efficacy is associated with low levels of
other
more
positive
motivation-orientations
and
achievement. High self-efficacy is associated with high

594

achievement and more positive forms of motivation
(Pajares, 1996).
It is possible that as a student declines in math skill, their
self-efficacy beliefs are lowered which in turn lowers their
interest in math. After repeated failure experiences, a
student may feel less efficacious as well as less interested in
the domain. This could perhaps also lead to the student
exerting less effort-- leading to even more failure.
Moreover, a student’s lowered expectations from one failure
experience may create a self-fulfilling prophecy and from
that, a cycle of below average achievement. However, due
to the correlational nature of the data, these speculations
need to be explored and validated in future work.
Because of the intricate nature of the development of
achievement motivation as well as the quasi-experimental
design of the study, we cannot determine the direction of the
relationship between interest in math and algebraic
procedural skills. Further research should explore the
relationship between declines in middle school students’
algebraic problem-solving skills and their interest in math.
In the interim, it is clear that both students’ motivation for
math, such as interest in algebra, and procedural skills
should be fostered in the classroom as they are both
important components of mathematics achievement.

024). Washington, DC: National Center for Education
Statistics, U.S. Department of Education.
Lee, J. (2009). Universals and specifics of math selfconcept, math self-efficacy, and math anxiety across 41
PISA 2003 participating countries. Learning and
Individual Differences, 19(3), 355-365.
Lein, A. E., Jitendra, A. K., Starosta, K. M., Dupuis, D. N.,
Hughes-Reid, C. L., & Star, J. R. (2015). Assessing the
relation between seventh-grade students’ engagement and
mathematical problem solving performance. Preventing
School Failure: Alternative Education For Children And
Youth, 60, 1-7.
Ma, X. (1997). Reciprocal relationships between attitude
toward
mathematics
and
achievement
in
mathematics. The Journal of Educational Research,
90(4), 221-229.
Matthews, M. S., & Farmer, J. L. (2008). Factors affecting
the algebra I achievement of academically talented
learners. Journal of Advanced Academics, 19(3), 472-501.
Mayfield, K. H., & Glenn, I. M. (2008). An evaluation of
interventions to facilitate algebra problem solving.
Journal of Behavioral Education, 17(3), 278-302.
Middleton, J. A., & Spanias, P. A. (1999). Motivation for
achievement in mathematics: Findings, generalizations,
and criticisms of the research. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 30, 65-88.
Pajares, F. (1996). Self-efficacy beliefs and mathematical
problem-solving of gifted students. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 21(4), 325-344.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (1996). When paradigms clash:
Comments on Cameron and Pierce’s claim that rewards
do not undermine intrinsic motivation. Review of
Educational Research, 66(1), 33-38.
Star, J. R. (2005). Reconceptualizing procedural knowledge.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 36, 404411.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to think mathematically:
Problem solving, metacognition, and sense making in
mathematics. In Grouws, D. Handbook of research on
mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 334-370). New
York: Macmillan.
Simpkins, S. D., Davis-Kean, P. E., & Eccles, J. S. (2006).
Math and science motivation: A longitudinal examination
of the links between choices and beliefs. Developmental
Psychology, 42(1), 70.
Wang, Q., & Pomerantz, E. (2009). The motivational
landscape of early adolescence in the United States and
China: A longitudinal investigation. Child Development,
80, 1272-1287.
Wang, X. (2013). Why students choose STEM majors
motivation, high school learning, and postsecondary
context of support. American Educational Research
Journal, 50(5), 1081-1121.

Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to the participating school districts.
Research reported here was supported by the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through
Grant R305A100150 to Strategic Education Research
Partnership Institute.
Christina Barbieri’s continued
contribution to this project was supported by Grant
R305B130012 from the U.S. Institute of Education Sciences
to the University of Delaware. The opinions expressed are
those of the authors and do not represent views of the
Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

References
Booth, J. L. (2011). Why can’t students get the concept of
math. Perspectives on Language and Literacy,
Spring, 2011, 31-35.
Cameron, J., & Pierce, W. D. (1994). Reinforcement,
reward, and intrinsic motivation: A meta-analysis. Review
of Educational Research, 6 (3), 363-423.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and
self-determination in human behavior. New York:
Pantheon.
Fisher, P.H., Dobbs-Oates, J., Doctoroff, G.L., & Arnold,
D.H. (2012). Early math interest and the development of
math skills. Journal of Educational Psychology, 104(3),
673-681.
Kelly, D., Nord, C. W., Jenkins, F., Chan, J. Y., & Kastberg,
D. (2013). Performance of U.S.15-Year-Old students in
mathematics, science, and reading literacy in an
international context-first look at PISA 2012(NCES 2014-

595

