Fuse to be used: A weak cue’s guide to attracting attention
Zara Harmon (zforough@uoregon.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1290 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97401 USA

Vsevolod Kapatsinski (vkapatsi@uoregon.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1290 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97401 USA
explanation of the inverse base rate effect, participants learn
about C first, acquiring moderate associations from both I
and PC to C. The strengths of these associations are only
moderate because they compete for associative strength.
Participants then learn to predict R from I.PR, but at this
point I predicts PC. I’s presence in I.PR then forces the
participants to assign high associative strength to PRR in
order to overcome the IC association. PCC is therefore
weaker than PRR, leading participants to respond with R
when cued with PC.PR.
Juslin et al. (2001) instead propose that the IBRE can be
explained by eliminative inference. Like Kruschke (1996),
they maintain that participants learn well what predicts C
but they learn little about R. PC.PR is then mapped onto R
because it is unlike anything previously encountered, and
nothing has been associated with R strongly: C is already
associated with I.PC so it is reasoned not to also be
associated with PC.PR, whereas R is unassociated.
Therefore, C is eliminated from the options and PC.PR is
associated with R. In response, Kruschke (2001) argues that
eliminative inference does not explain part of the findings in
the inverse base rate effect literature; namely, that I.PC.PR
favors C less than I alone does, which is consistent with the
PC.PR combination rooting for R.

Abstract
Several studies examined cue competition in human learning
by testing learners on a combination of conflicting cues
rooting for different outcomes, with each cue perfectly
predicting its outcome. A common result has been that
learners faced with cue conflict choose the outcome
associated with the rare cue (the Inverse Base Rate Effect,
IBRE). Here, we investigate cue competition including IBRE
with sentences containing cues to meanings in a visual world.
We do not observe IBRE. Instead we find that position in the
sentence strongly influences cue salience. Faced with conflict
between an initial cue and a non-initial cue, learners choose
the outcome associated with the initial cue, whether frequent
or rare. However, a frequent configuration of non-initial cues
that are not sufficiently salient on their own can overcome a
competing salient initial cue rooting for a different meaning.
This provides a possible explanation for certain recurring
patterns in language change.
Keywords: Frequency; Inverse base rate effect; configural
learning; Artificial language learning; cue salience; selective
attention

Introduction
The inverse base rate effect was first documented by Medin
and Edelson (1988) in a human contingency learning
experiment. Medin and Edelson presented participants with
pairs of symptoms co-occurring with diseases. One of the
diseases was common (C), and one rare (R). One of the
symptoms, the imperfect predictor/cue I, occurred whenever
either disease was present. Another symptom was a perfect
predictor of the common disease (PC), appearing whenever
the common disease occurred and not otherwise, as shown
in (1). The remaining symptom, PR, was a perfect predictor
of the rare disease.

Eliminative inference in form-meaning learning
In the present paper, we examine whether these effects are
seen with learning of form-meaning mappings. Our interest
in looking for an inverse base rate effect in this paradigm
was motivated by results that suggested that eliminative
inference plays a major role in form-meaning learning
because forms and meanings are often assumed by learners
to be in a one-to-one relationship (mutual exclusivity,
Markman & Wachtel, 1989). In our own previous work, we
exposed adult learners to a miniature artificial language in
which the suffixes –dan and –sil were mapped onto the
meaning [-dim(inutive);+pl(ural)] (multiple large creatures),
while the suffixes –nem and –shoon were mapped onto the
meaning [+dim;-pl] (one small creature). For some
participants, the suffix –nem occurred more often than
others in training; for other participants, the suffix –dan was
more frequent than others.
Participants were asked to map words containing one of
the four suffixes onto meanings. On each trial, they would

(1) I.PC C
I.PR R
Medin and Edelson’s (1988) participants learned that PC
predicts C, and PR predicts R. More interestingly, they
inferred that the uninformative predictor I on its own
predicts the common disease C, as does the combination of
all symptoms, I.PC.PR. On the other hand, the combination
of perfect predictors PC.PR was taken to predict the rare
disease R. Two major accounts of these results have been
proposed. According to Kruschke’s (1996, 2001)

520

hear a word bearing one of the suffixes, and have to click on
one of four pictures: either a picture of one large creature [dim;-pl], multiple large creatures [-dim;+pl], one small
creature [+dim;-pl] or, crucially, multiple small creatures
[+dim;+pl]. This last meaning was novel, never presented in
training. We found that, unlike rare suffixes, which were
mapped onto the new meaning of [+dim;+pl] as often as the
meaning they were paired with in training, the frequent
suffixes were more likely to be mapped onto their familiar
meanings than onto the new meaning.
Thus, when –nem was as frequent as –shoon both were
equally likely to be mapped onto [-pl;+dim] and [+pl;+dim].
However, when the frequency of –nem increased, it became
almost exclusively mapped onto [-pl;+dim]. Interestingly,
when –nem was frequent, its competitor, –shoon was
increasingly mapped onto [+pl;+dim]. Similarly, the
frequent –dan pushed its rare competitor –sil out of the
familiar meaning [-dim;+pl] into the novel meaning
[+dim;+pl].
Our explanation for this finding is general-to-specific
learning (Rogers & McClelland, 2004; Kapatsinski, 2013),
also sometimes called entrenchment (Braine & Brooks,
1995), coupled with eliminative inference (Juslin et al.,
2001; Ramscar et al., 2013). Participants start out with
general, underspecified meanings: all suffixes could have
any meaning at the onset of training. Gradually, the
semantics of suffixes narrow. With some exposure, –dan
becomes [+pl], and with extra exposure it becomes [+pl;dim]. At this point, the learner is certain about the meaning
of –dan but is less certain about the meaning of its
competitor –nem. They therefore reason that ‘if –dan means
[+pl;-dim], –sil must mean something else’. There is only
one meaning that has not been explicitly assigned to
anything, [+pl;+dim], hence –sil comes to have that
meaning. Interestingly, by being mapped onto the rare
meaning, the rarer –sil finds a niche, in which it is
somewhat protected from competition with highly frequent
suffix –dan. This kind of semantic change has been
documented in historical linguistics and described as a form
seeking
a
niche
(Aronoff,
1976).
The
Entrenchment+Elimination Hypothesis provides a nonteleological explanation for this phenomenon. It is possible
that we see this effect at play with conflicting combinatorial
cues that can be mapped onto more than one meaning.

associations, it becomes an open question whether elemental
IC, PCC, and PRR associations form as well (cf.
Pearce, 1994, vs. Rescorla, 1973).

Experiment 1
Participants
One hundred and eight native speakers of American English
who were undergraduate students at the University of
Oregon and were recruited from the Linguistics-Psychology
Human Subjects pool participated for course credit. All had
normal hearing and normal or normal-to-corrected vision
and gave written consent.

The artificial language
The artificial language presented to the learners consisted of
two constructions that were used to express the location of a
creature relative to a table. The vocabulary in these
languages consisted of one prepositional form, two
postpositional forms and 25 nouns that were used to refer to
different types of creatures. The prepositional form bes and
postpositional form zon expressed the meanings of ‘above’
and ‘below’, respectively. The final and required form in
each sentence of the language was the postpositional form
mik that could be interpreted as referring to the ‘table’ or
‘creature’ or be treated as a grammatical morpheme such as
English determiner the. The two resulting constructions are
presented in (2).
(2) bes NOUNi mik = CREATUREi ABOVE TABLE
NOUNi zon mik = CREATUREi BELOW TABLE
We manipulated the frequency by which each of these
constructions occurred in the language, creating the two
conditions, BES and ZON. In each condition, the frequency
of one of the two forms (bes or zon respectively) exceeded
the frequency of the other by a factor of 3.

Tasks
The experiment consisted of an exposure stage (i.e., training
without feedback) followed by a form-meaning mapping
task and three questions probing the meaning of the forms.
Exposure Before exposure, participants were instructed that
they are to learn two constructions expressing locations of
creatures relative to a table in a miniature artificial
language. Exposure stage proceeded as follows. Each trial
consisted of the presentation of a picture of a creature above
or below a table on the computer screen. Each picture was
accompanied by a sentence that appeared at the bottom of
the screen and described the picture using one of the
constructions in (2). Picture background was black and
sentence background was white. Each picture and its
corresponding sentence appeared simultaneously and stayed
on the screen for five seconds. Participants were instructed
to use the cues in the sentence to predict the location of the
creature.

Language forms as configural cues
While form-meaning learning seems to involve eliminative
inference, it is different from classic work demonstrating the
inverse base rate effect in that form-meaning learning is
usually thought of as mapping configurations of cues onto
meanings (Kapatsinski, 2009, 2013).
Kruschke (1996) assumes that the presented cue
combinations are treated as sets of elemental cues. It is quite
possible that instead an entire cue combination (I.PC or
I.PR) forms a complex configural cue (e.g. Rescorla, 1973;
Pearce, 1994). In that case, participants may form I.PCC
and I.PRR associations. In the presence of such

521

FormMeaning Mapping Task In this task, participants
were asked to map a form onto one of two meanings by
pressing the left and right arrow keys on the keyboard. At
the beginning of each trial, the two target meanings of
‘above’ and ‘below’ were presented with pictures on the left
and right side of the computer screen, respectively. At the
same time, a sentence appeared at the bottom of the screen.
Participants pressed the corresponding arrow to choose
between the two meanings. As soon as they pressed a
button, the experiment continued to the next trial.

in BES and ‘below’ in ZON) versus rare (‘above’ in ZON
and ‘below’ in BES). These results are shown in Figure 1.

Questions Once after training and again after judgment
task, learners responded to three questions about the
meanings of the forms bes, zon and mik: On each trial,
‘What does bes/zon/mik mean?’ appeared in the middle of
the screen. At the same time a textbox appeared at the
bottom of the screen for participants to type in their
responses. The experiment advanced once the ENTER key
was pressed.

Stimuli
Each participant experienced 80 exposure trials, with 20
trials allocated to the low-frequency construction and 60
trials allocated to the high-frequency one. Of the 25 nouns
in the language, 20 appeared in both constructions during
exposure. The form to meaning mapping test task consisted
of 80 trials and 10 nouns, 5 of which were novel. Cue
combinations presented to the learners in both tasks
comprised 8 categories (10 items each): noun in isolation
(N); isolated cues: bes N, N zon, N mik; cue combinations:
bes N mik, N zon mik; and finally conflicting cue
combinations: bes N zon and bes N zon mik. The experiment
ended after the 3-trial question task about the meanings of
bes, zon, and mik. Ninety-three participants also received the
same questions immediately after training to determine if
their beliefs about the form-meaning mappings changed
during the test.

Figure 1: The probability of choosing the common
predictor when presented with forms PC (bes N in BES and
N zon in ZON), I.PC (PC + mik), PR (bes N in ZON and N
zon in BES), I.PR (PR + mik), PC.PR (bes N zon), I.PC.PR
(bes N zon mik), and I (N mik).
Participants showed a strong preference for mapping the
common cue to the common meaning (z=-5.709, p<.001 for
PC, z=-7.828, p<.001 for I.PC) as well as a strong
preference for choosing the rare meaning in the presence of
the rare cue (z=6.376, p<.001 for PR; z=7.221, p<.005 for
I.PR). However, responses were at chance when both rare
and common cues (PC.PR) were present (z=-0.141, p=.888)
as well as when the only present cue was mik (z=0.507,
p=.612) or no cues were present at all, i.e. the noun was
presented in isolation (z=1.362, p=.173).
While mik in isolation was not associated with either of
the two meanings, its presence together with PC in I.PC and
I.PC.PR increased C responses compared to PC and PC.PR
(for I.PC.PR vs. PC.PR, z=3.197, p=.001; for I.PC vs. PC,
z=2.18, p=.029). There was no significant effect of adding I
to PR (I.PR vs. PR, z=0.691, p=.49). In addition, the
likelihood of mapping I.PC.PR onto C was also significantly
higher (and not lower as in prior studies of the inverse base
rate) than the likelihood of mapping I onto C (z=-1.993,
p=.0462). Overall, these results suggest that I.PC behaved
as a configural cue to C so that the combination I.PC
elicited C better than you would expect from how well I and
PC could elicit C on their own.
Note that the constructions in (2) place zon next to mik (I)
while bes is separated from mik by the noun. Therefore, we
might expect that zon may be more likely to fuse with mik
into a larger configural chunk than bes is. If there is an
effect of contiguity on cue chunking, we should see more

Procedure
Learners were tested one at a time. During training, the
stimuli were presented on the computer screen and the
subjects were asked to read aloud the sentences that
accompanied each trial. Subjects did so while wearing a
head-mounted microphone, although their speech was not
recorded. The stimuli were presented using E-prime 2.0
Professional, which recoded the subjects’ responses
automatically during the test phase. The order of
presentation of the stimuli was randomized separately for
each learner.

Results
The data were analyzed using mixed effect logistic
regression in R (lme4 package, Bates et al., 2015) with
random intercepts for subjects and nouns, and random
slopes for cue within both subjects and nouns. The binary
dependent variable was meaning chosen: common (‘above’

522

evidence of configural processing of I.PC in the ZON
condition than in the BES condition.
Most of the results shown in Figure 1 hold across
conditions. Thus, for example, I.PC is a better cue to C than
PC alone is, whether PC is adjacent to I or not. Similarly, I
is mapped onto C and R equally often in both conditions,
suggesting some degree of configural processing of I.PC in
both conditions.

~ ‘below’ and bes N ~ ‘above’, the participants would be
presented with N in isolation and with bes N zon at test).
Twenty-nine additional participants (15 in BES and 14 in
ZON) were recruited for this replication.
Figure 3 shows the results: As in Experiment 1,
participants showed 50/50 guessing in the I (stem alone)
condition (z=0.589, p=.56). They also continued to show
reliance on the stimulus-initial cue on trials that involved
conflicting cues (z=-2.061, p=.039). Interestingly, zon alone
remained unable to override the influence of the initial bes
(z=-0.167, p=.87), even though it was always final, rather
than medial, during the training in this experiment, and there
was no mik to distract attention from it, or to fuse with it.
These results suggest that the inability of zon to overcome
bes in Experiment 1 is not due to zon fusing with mik during
training: participants continue to show reliance on the initial
cue.

Figure 2: Participants’ mapping of the two meanings of
‘above’ and ‘below’ to bes N zon (PC.PR) and bes N zon
mik (I.PC.PR) in the two conditions BES and ZON.
However, as shown in Figure 2, the two conditions differ
greatly in the effect of adding I to PC.PR (z=3.198, p=.001).
There is no difference between PC.PR and I.PC.PR in the
BES condition (z=-0.015, p=.99): participants’ responses to
both PC.PR and I.PC.PR are dominated by the PC bes (z=2.756, p=.006), the cue that occurs first in the stimulus. In
contrast, there is a large difference between PC.PR and
I.PC.PR in the ZON condition (z=4.59, p<.0001): while the
treatment of PC.PR is still dominated by bes, the initial cue
(PR in this condition; z=-2.84, p=.005), I.PC.PR usually
elicits the response appropriate for I.PC (zon mik). In other
words, only zon and mik together were able to successfully
compete with the early cue bes, and only when they were
frequent in the input.

Figure 3: Participants’ mapping of the two meanings of
‘above’ and ‘below’ to bes N, bes N zon (PC.PR), zon N
and N stem alone (I) in the two conditions BES and ZON.

Discussion and Conclusion
A summary of our findings in shown in Table 1. These
results differ substantially from much previous work on the
inverse base rate effect and provide no support for the
phenomenon.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 suggested that participants
mapped I.PC onto C, in addition to mapping PC onto C and
PR onto R. In addition, in cue conflict situations,
participants showed a bias to respond on the basis of the
initial cue. Experiment 2 was designed to replicate these
results without mik, the I stimulus. We were interested in
whether zon may be able to override the influence of bes on
its own in the ZON condition, now that it alone associates
with ‘below’.
The experiment was exactly the same as Experiment 1,
except for the absence of mik in training and the absence of
I, I.PC, I.PR, and I.PC.PR trials at test. On the closest
equivalent to an I trial, a noun stem could appear on its own,
without any other morphemes (e.g. after experiencing N zon

Table 1: Participants’ mapping of cue to meaning.
Stim/Cue type
PC
PR
I (mik)
PC.PR
I.PC.PR (bes zon mik)
I.PC
I.PR

Response
C
R
C
C
R

In particular, we fail to observe IC and PC.PRR (cf.
Kruschke 1996, 2001). At the same time, as in previous
studies, we do observe PCC, PRR and I.PC.PRC. It

523

is worth noting that in previous studies the I.PC.PRC
association was weaker than PC.PRR or IC (Kruschke,
2001). Thus, our failure to find the latter two associations is
unlikely to be a power issue. We now proceed to
interpreting the findings.
First, the comparison of PC.PR and I.PC.PR detailed in
Figure 2 suggests that the presence or absence of mik (I)
adjacent to zon influences the meaning of the sentence.
Without mik, zon, despite its higher frequency in ZON, is a
weaker cue to its meaning than bes is. Thus, when bes and
zon are placed in competition, bes wins, whether it is
frequent or not. The stronger reliance on the initial cue is
observed when the initial and postnominal cues are placed
in conflict. Even when both cues are accurately mapped
onto their meanings in the absence of conflict, the conflict
situation reveals that one of the cues is stronger than the
other (see also work within the Competition Model
framework, e.g. MacWhinney et al., 1985, on similar
findings from placing case and word order cues to agency in
conflict).
The advantage of bes in this context is likely due to bes’
position in the sentence (initial and prenominal). Early cues
tend to be more important than later cues for word
recognition due to incremental processing (e.g. MarslenWilson & Tyler, 1980). In addition, the meanings ‘above’
and ‘below’ are expressed by a preposition in English, thus
bes is in the more expected location for an expression
bearing this kind of spatial meaning. Given this, participants
are likely to allocate selective attention to the beginning in
searching for spatial expressions, which may make the
initial cue more associable in this situation. Indeed, because
of this bias, the subjects may learn the meaning of the
initial, prenominal cue before they learn the meaning of the
postnominal cue, allowing the initial cue to partially block
other cues. If this happens, bes may block mik from
associating with bes’ meaning, ‘above’.
Importantly, the decision about the meaning of a besinitial sentence is influenced by later cues, just not as much
as by the initial cue. The importance of the initial cue for
this decision is therefore unlikely to be due to the
participants failing to perceive other cues. Rather, the initial
cue appears to develop a stronger association to its
meanings than non-initial cues do or to result in an early
commitment to an interpretation that is difficult to revise.To
tease apart these possible contributing factors, future work
should determine whether increased reliance on an initial
cue during a test trial is due to its initial position during that
test trial or its consistently initial position in training.
The presence of mik (I) in the context of bes N zon
(PC.PR) reduced the likelihood of ‘above’ (R) responses in
the ZON condition. This finding is consistent with mik
being associated with the meaning ‘below’. However, unlike
in studies observing the IBRE (Kruschke, 1996), mik does
not cue ‘below’ on its own: I is not associated with C, and
I.PR does not show any evidence of cue competition. Thus,
mik only cues ‘below’ in the presence of zon, suggesting
that zon and mik form a configural cue.

Unlike PC.PR (bes N zon), I.PC.PR (bes N zon mik) does
usually elicit the C response. This means that zon mik is able
to compete with bes when it is more frequent than bes.
Interestingly, Experiment 2 showed that the mik-less final
zon is overpowered by the initial bes even if zon is the only
cue to the meaning ‘below’. The cue zon in Experiment 2 is
as frequent as the cue combination zon mik in Experiment 1,
and appears in the same position. Yet, a frequent zon mik
can compete with bes but a frequent zon cannot. This
finding suggests an influence of cue salience: the initial cue
is much stronger than a later cue unless that cue is longer
(hence, more salient).
Cue salience has previously been argued to be important
for acquiring form-meaning mappings by MacWhinney et
al. (1985) and Ellis & Sagarra (2011). The present study
adds to this body of work by showing that salience matters
under cue competition even when – in the absence of cue
competition – the less salient cue can cue its meaning
perfectly well on its own.
In the present study, zon is not lacking associations: when
presented alone, it is almost always mapped onto ‘below’,
whether it is frequent or not. This finding suggests that the
emergence of the configural zon mik cue as a result of
frequent zon mik‘below’ exposures does not eliminate the
zon‘below’ associations: both the parts and the whole can
become associated with outcomes (Rescorla, 1973).
Frequent occurrence of I.PCC causes both I.PC and PC to
associate with C.
In contrast, the uninformative I (mik) is associated with
neither C nor R. Responses to the questions about form
meanings suggest a likely explanation. Because the
sentences were paired with a visual world depicting the
position of a creature relative to a table, most participants
took mik (I) to mean ‘table’ or ‘creature’. In fact, the
proportion of participants who associated I with one of these
referents (74% in BES, 70% in ZON) was identical to the
proportion of respondents reporting that bes means ‘above’
and zon means ‘below’. There was no difference in what
mik was taken to mean across conditions. Nonetheless, mik
behaved as if it reinforced zon in the form-meaning mapping
task only when zon was the PC. This again suggests that it is
the configuration I.PC and not I alone that was mapped onto
C.
Given the reported meaning of mik, one might argue that
the true cue-outcome structure presented to participants was
more like (3) than like (1), allowing I to map onto A or B.
(3) I.PC C A B
I.PR R A B
Because of a strong preference for one-to-one formmeaning mappings in adults (giving rise to eliminative
inference), the mapping of I onto A or B may have
prevented it from also mapping onto C. This may be one
reason we do not observe the IBRE in the present study.
According to Kruschke (1996), the motivation for strongly
associating PR with R is to counteract the influence of IC.

524

Without such an influence, there is no motivation for
PRR to be stronger than PCC.
An additional reason for not observing the IBRE in the
present study may be that the difference in frequency
between C and R was not as extreme as in some previous
studies. In particular, Shanks (1992), was able to obtain the
effect with a 7/1 ratio but not a 3/1 ratio (which we used
here). Though Kruschke (1996) did find the effect with a 3/1
ratio, Kruschke’s attentional explanation for the effect
assumes that participants learn about C before they learn
about R, despite examples of both being interspersed within
a single training stage. This is more plausible with a more
extreme frequency asymmetry. It may be that with our more
moderate frequency ratio participants learn about both
categories in parallel. If C is not learned before R, then there
is little reason for I to become associated with C. 1
At the start of this project, we thought that an IC
association may develop alongside, say, IA because, in
language change, a form that happens to frequently co-occur
with another form seems to become associated with the
meaning of that form over time. For example, in French, pas
used to always mean ‘step’ but came to also mean ‘not’, by
virtue of usually occurring in the construction ne pas ‘not a
step’ (Bybee, 2003, 2015, p.126). Here, pas starts out as an
imperfect cue (I) for ‘not’ but a perfect cue for ‘step’ (A),
becomes associated with ‘not’ (C), and comes to subvert the
erstwhile PC ne. How does this happen? One way would be
for an IC association (pas‘not’) to develop despite the
existence of an IA association. Our results suggest that
the IC association does not easily develop alongside
IA. Rather, perhaps especially when PC is not very salient
(like the unstressed ne), I.PC becomes associated with C.
Thus, the development of the IC (pas‘not’) association
may need to be preceded by the development of increasingly
strong I.PCC (ne pas‘not’) followed by erosion of the
low-salience ne. Indeed, the historical data appear consistent
with this story: the use of ne with multiple nouns seems to
have given way to use of ne pas for ‘not’ some time before
pas could be used to mean ‘not’ without being accompanied
by ne (Bybee, 2015, p.126). This historical development is
thus one possible example of cues to meaning fusing
together, and in so doing overcoming the otherwise low
salience of the cue that perfectly predicts the meaning.

Braine, M. D. S., & Brooks, P. J. (1995). Verb argument
structure and the problem of avoiding an overgeneral
grammar. In Tomasello, M., & Merriman, W. E. (Eds.),
Beyond names for things: Young children's acquisition of
verbs (pp. 353-376). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bybee, J. (2015). Language change. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Bybee,
J.
(2003).
Cognitive
processes
in
grammaticalization. In Tomasello, M. (Ed.), The new
psychology of language, Vol.2, 145-167. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ellis, N. C., & Sagarra, N. (2011). Learned attention in adult
language acquisition. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 33, 589-624.
Juslin, P., Wennerholm, P., & Winman, A. (2001). Highlevel reasoning and base-rate use: Do we need cuecompetition to explain the inverse base-rate effect? JEP:
LMC, 27, 849-871.
Kapatsinski, V. (2013). Conspiring to mean: Experimental
and computational evidence for a usage-based harmonic
approach to morphophonology. Language, 89, 110-148.
Kapatsinski, V. (2009). Testing theories of linguistic
constituency with configural learning: The case of the
English syllable. Language, 85, 248-277.
Kruschke, J. K. (2001). The inverse base-rate effect is not
explained by eliminative inference. JEP: LMC, 27, 13851400.
Kruschke, J. K. (1996). Base rates in category
learning. JEP: LMC, 22, 3-26.
MacWhinney, B., Pléh, C., & Bates, E. (1985). The
development of sentence interpretation in Hungarian.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 178-209.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children's use of
mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20(2), 121-157.
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Tyler, L. K. (1980). The temporal
structure of spoken language understanding. Cognition, 8,
1-71.
Medin, D. L., & Edelson, S. M. (1988). Problem structure
and the use of base-rate information from
experience. JEP: General, 117, 68-85.
Pearce, J. M. (1994). Similarity and discrimination: a
selective review and a connectionist model. Psychological
Review, 101, 587-607.
Ramscar, M., Dye, M., & Klein, J. (2013). Children value
informativity over logic in word learning. Psychological
Science, 24(6), 1017-1023.
Rescorla, R. A. (1973). Evidence for "unique stimulus"
account of configural conditioning. Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 85(2), 331338.
Rogers, T., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic cognition:
A parallel distributed processing approach. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Shanks, D. R. (1992). Connectionist accounts of the inverse
base-rate effect in categorization. Connection Science, 4,
3-18.

References
Aronoff, M. (1976). Word formation in generative
grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B, & Walker, S. (2015).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4. R
package version 1.1-9, URL: https://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=lme4.
1

We should note that it is not the case that our frequency ratio is
so small that participants do not learn which cues and outcomes are
more frequent. Prior data from our lab and others have used 3/1
ratios and found that adult participants match the presented
probabilities (e.g. Kapatsinski, 2013).

525

