General Mechanisms Underlying Language and Spatial Cognitive Development
Hilary E. Miller (hemiller@wisc.edu) and Vanessa R. Simmering (simmering@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Abstract
Previous research showed that children’s spatial language
production predicts their spatial skills, but the mechanisms
underlying this relation remain a source of debate. This study
examined whether 4-year-olds’ spatial skills were predicted by
their attention to task-relevant information—in tasks that
emphasize either memory or language—above and beyond
their spatial word production. Children completed three types
of tasks: (1) a memory task assessing attention to task-relevant
color, size, and location cues; (2) a production task assessing
adaptive use of language to describe scenes, varying in color,
size, and location; and (3) spatial tasks. After controlling for
age, gender, and vocabulary, children’s spatial skills were
significantly predicted by their memory for task-relevant cues,
above and beyond their task-related language production and
adaptive use of language. These findings suggest that attending
to relevant information is a process supporting spatial skill
acquisition and underlies the relation between language and
spatial cognition.
Keywords: spatial cognition; short-term memory; language
production; cognitive development

Introduction
Spatial skills are fundamental cognitive abilities that support
basic behaviors such as perceiving and remembering
locations, navigating, and relational reasoning. Additionally,
spatial skills predict performance in math and science and
entry into STEM fields (Verdine et al., 2014; Wai, Lubinski,
& Benbow, 2009). As individual differences in spatial skills
arise early in development (e.g., Verdine et al., 2014), it is
important to understand the factors that contribute to the
development of spatial skills during early childhood in order
to devise effective interventions to promote spatial cognition.
Spatial language has been identified as one factor that
predicts children’s spatial abilities. Multiple studies have
identified relations between language and spatial cognition
across a variety of spatial tasks (e.g., Dessalegn & Landau,
2008; Pruden, Levine, & Huttenlocher, 2011). Despite the
proliferation of research, the causal nature of the link between
language and spatial cognition remains unclear. It is possible
that language directly causes changes in spatial abilities,
spatial abilities cause changes in language, language
indirectly relates to spatial cognition through general
mechanisms such as attention, or that multiple causal factors
interact bi-directionally to shape spatial skills and language.
The current study investigated whether a more general
mechanism of attention to task-relevant cues might underlie
the relation between language and spatial cognition.
Previous research has shown correlations between
children’s spatial word production and their spatial
performance. For example, children who produced particular

spatial terms such as “left” and “right” (Hermer-Vazquez,
Moffet, & Munkholm, 2001) and “middle” (Simms &
Gentner, 2008) tended to perform better on spatial tasks that
involve these dimensions. Also, the total number of spatial
words that children spontaneously produced during free play
predicted their spatial performance (Pruden et al., 2011).
These effects are thought to be specific to spatial words, as
the relation between spatial word production and children’s
performance on spatial tasks held even after controlling for
spatial word comprehension, IQ, (Hermer-Vazquez et al.,
2001) and general receptive vocabulary (Pruden et al., 2011).
Further evidence that language facilitates spatial
development comes from paradigms in which children were
provided with verbal cues specifying spatial relations among
objects or features (e.g., “top”, “left”) before or during spatial
tasks. The results across these studies showed that spatial
language cues enhanced children’s spatial task performance
(e.g., Dessalegn & Landau, 2008; Miller, Patterson, &
Simmering, 2016). These findings have been interpreted as
evidence that language helps children verbally encode taskrelevant spatial information and once children have acquired
relevant spatial words they can use language to facilitate their
performance (e.g., Hermer-Vazquez et al., 2001;
Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005; Pruden et al., 2011).
Other studies showed that such effects were not specific to
spatial language, but arose more generally through
highlighting task-relevant cues (e.g., Shusterman, Lee, &
Spelke, 2011). Specifically, Shusterman et al. (2011) showed
that providing children with non-spatial language (e.g., “the
red wall can help you find the sticker”) that highlighted the
utility of particular cues improved their spatial performance.
This effect was specific to task-relevant language, as similar
but task-irrelevant language did not improve performance
(e.g., “look at the pretty red wall”).
The range of results across conditions with both spatial
and non-spatial words suggests that language can draw
children’s attention to relevant cues in a spatial task.
However, these findings raise questions about whether the
relation between language and spatial cognition arises from
children’s spatial word acquisition. Is it the case that once
children can produce relevant language (e.g., spatial words)
they use their language knowledge to verbally encode taskrelevant information or is it the case that children need to be
selective in the types of cues they encode? It is possible that
children can produce task-relevant language on their own, but
may not use it in the context of spatial tasks. Being provided
with language could help children encode relevant
information, but their abilities to produce words on their own
may not be enough to direct children to encode relevant cues.
Miller, Vlach, and Simmering (in press) tested these two

1709

alternative accounts and showed that the relation between
language and spatial cognition does not arise solely from
children’s abilities to produce spatial words. Rather, it
reflects children’s abilities to adaptively use language. In this
study, 4-year-olds completed a spatial scene description task
that assessed their use of task-relevant language. In the task,
children described the location of a mouse in a spatial scene
(Figure 1). There were three possible types of cues (color,
size, or location) that children could use to describe the
location of the mouse; across trials the relevance of the color
and size cues varied such that on some trials, color and/or size
was not a relevant cue for describing the mouse’s location (cf.
Figure 1A vs 1B or 1C). Results showed that children who
used language more adaptively (i.e., provided more relevant
than irrelevant cues) performed better on the spatial tasks,
even when controlling for their age, gender, vocabulary (both
general receptive and spatial productive), and quantity of
task-related language produced (including spatial words).

from the description task and after a brief delay had to choose
which of three pictures matched the memory array based on
color, size, or location of the target referent object. We
hypothesized that children’s memory for task-relevant
information in this task would predict their spatial skills
above and beyond the factors previously shown to relate to
children’s spatial cognition: age, gender, PPVT-IV score,
task-related production, and adaptation score (Levine,
Huttenlocher, Taylor, & Langrock, 1999; Miller et al., in
press; Pruden et al., 2011; Voyer, Voyer, & Bryden, 1995).

Method
Participants
Sixty-nine-4-year-olds (M = 4.52, SD = 0.39 years, 31
females) participated in the study. An additional 13 children
participated but were excluded due to: incomplete data (4),
experimenter error (1), technical problems (2), parental
interference (1), non-compliance (1), and not talking during
the production task or insufficient vocabulary (3 and 1,
respectively, described further below). Participants were
recruited from a database compiled by a university research
center. Participants received small prizes for participation.

Design and Procedures

Figure 1: Sample trials of the spatial scene description task
with varying numbers of distinctive cues: A) 3 cues = color,
size, and/or location, B) 2 cues = color and/or location, C) 2
cues = size and/or location, D) 1 cue = location only.
Miller et al.’s (in press) results suggest that using language
in task-relevant ways relates to spatial performance, but it is
unclear whether language is the causal factor underlying this
link or whether a third factor—not specific to language or
spatial skills—contributes to both. Miller et al. hypothesized
that children’s attention to task-relevant cues supports both
language and spatial skills. Some support for this hypothesis
comes from research showing that children’s spatial task
performance can be facilitated by non-spatial language (e.g.,
Shusterman et al., 2011) and/or non-verbal cues that direct
attention to task-relevant features (i.e., by making them more
stable or salient; Learmonth, Nadel, & Newcombe, 2002;
Learmonth, Newcombe, & Huttenlocher, 2001).
The current study provides a further test of the hypothesis
that the link between spatial skills and language arises from
a third common factor: the ability to direct attention to taskrelevant cues. We tested this by comparing children’s spatial
task performance to not only their spatial scene descriptions
(as in Miller et al., in press), but also a memory task assessing
attention to relevant spatial and non-spatial cues (see Figure
2 below). In the memory task, children viewed the scenes

Children were tested individually in the spatial scene
description task (description task), the spatial scene memory
task (memory task), three spatial tasks, and the Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) IV. Tasks were presented in
a quasi-random order such that the first, third, and fifth tasks
were always spatial tasks and the second and fourth tasks
were the description and memory tasks, and the final task was
the PPVT-IV. The order of the spatial tasks and the order of
the description and memory task were counter-balanced
across participants. Children received small prizes between
tasks. Caregivers completed a productive spatial vocabulary
checklist. Sessions lasted approximately 45 minutes each.
Spatial Scene Description Task Before the description task,
children completed a warm-up task to help them understand
the task and to feel comfortable talking aloud. In the warmup task, children viewed 10 PowerPoint slides showing one
familiar object on each slide and were asked to describe what
they saw to a stuffed animal who was not looking at the
screen (“Tell Bucky what you see”). The experimenter
discouraged children from pointing during the warm-up and
description tasks by instructing them to sit on their hands.
The description task tested children’s abilities to
disambiguate the target object’s location (i.e., mouse) relative
to a referent object. The task was conducted in PowerPoint.
Each trial showed a picture of a spatial scene in the center of
the slide. Each scene included three referent objects (e.g.,
beds) distributed diagonally across the screen (see Figure 1
above); the diagonal orientation (top-left to bottom-right vs.
top-right to bottom-left) varied randomly across trials. The
mouse was in a support relation to one referent object (target

1710

referent object). On each trial, the child was asked to “Tell
Bucky where the mouse is” to a stuffed animal not facing the
screen. The trials varied in the number of relevant cues for
describing the mouse’s location such that the child could use
3 cues (color, size, and location, Figure 1A), two cues (color
and location, size and location; Figure 1B and 1C), or one cue
(location, Figure 1D) to describe the mouse’s location.
The description task included 24 trials presented in one of
four randomized orders. There were 6 trials per cue type, with
2 trials for each possible mouse’s location (i.e., front, middle,
back referent; see Figure 1). The diagonal alignment of the
referent objects allowed children to use a range of different
spatial words to describe the referent object’s location (e.g.,
front, middle, back, first, last, left, right, top, center, bottom).
Spatial Scene Memory Task The memory task was modeled
after the description task and tested children’s memory for
the features associated with the mouse’s location. The
PowerPoint slides from the description task were used in this
task (in the same trial order) as memory arrays. Following the
memory array presentation, there was a 1 s delay with a blank
screen, and then the test array was presented. Test arrays
probed memory for one dimension (color, size, or location)
of the target referent object (Figure 2). Test arrays included
three pictures along the bottom of the screen; these pictures
showed only one referent object, and children were instructed
to pick the picture that exactly matched the referent (e.g., box,
ball, couch) the mouse was on in the memory array. Foil
pictures varied along the probe dimension, for example, if the
probe was color the referent objects in the foil scenes would
be the same size and location as the target referent, but a
different color (see Figure 2A). For each cue type (e.g., 2 cuecolor and location, Figure 2C) of the memory array, children
were presented twice with each probe type. The probe
dimensions were randomized across trials and children did
not know which probe would be tested in advance.

Figure 2: Sample trials of the spatial scene memory task: A)
3-cue memory array, color probe; B) 1-cue memory array,
size probe; C) 2-cue memory array, location probe.
Spatial Tasks Children participated in short versions of three
spatial tasks (shown in Figure 3): Spatial Analogies Task
(Levine et al., 1999; Pruden et al., 2011), Children’s Mental
Transformation Task (Huttenlocher & Levine, 1990; Pruden

et al., 2011), and Feature Binding Task (Dessalegn & Landau,
2008). For the Spatial Analogies and Mental Transformation
Task, we adapted the short version from Pruden et al. (2011)
and for the Feature Binding Task, we used half the number of
trials as in Dessalegn & Landau (2008). In the Mental
Transformation Task (10 trials; Figure 3A), children saw two
pieces of a shape and selected which of four shapes the two
pieces would make if combined. In the Spatial Analogies
Task (13 trials; Figure 3B), children viewed a picture
depicting two objects in a spatial relation and chose which of
four other pictures shared that relation. In the Feature Binding
Task (12 trials; Figure 3C), children saw a square with two
different colors on opposite sides and chose a matching figure
out of three options following a 1 s delay.

Figure 3: Sample trials of the spatial tasks: A) Mental
Transformations; B) Spatial Analogies; C) Feature Binding.
Vocabulary assessments. The PPVT-IV measures receptive
vocabulary and involved the children pointing to one of four
pictures depicting the target word. The spatial vocabulary
checklist measured productive spatial vocabulary and
included 80 words taken from both the MCDI: Words and
Sentences (Fenson et al., 1994) and from a spatial word
coding manual. Caregivers indicated words they have heard
their child produce (Cannon, Levine, & Huttenlocher, 2007)

Coding and measurement
Spatial scene description task Each session was transcribed
by two research assistants. Transcribers were reliable on 89%
of trials and discrepancies were resolved through a third
research assistant blind to the first two transcripts. Final
transcripts were coded by two different research assistants
blind to the study hypotheses (mean 98% reliability across
dimensions coded), and disagreements were resolved by the
first author. Coders scored the number of times children
mentioned color or spatial terms, and whether they used the
terms correctly. For spatial terms, we separately categorized
both size (e.g., small, medium) and location terms (terms
referring to the referent’s location in the scene, e.g., top chair)
from the other types of spatial terms mentioned.
For the regression analysis, we calculated three measures
from the coding as in Miller et al. (in press). For task-related
production, we tabulated per trial (1) the quantity of nonspatial terms used by averaging the number of color terms
produced, and (2) the quantity of spatial terms used by
averaging the number of spatial terms (including but not
limited to size and location terms). These variables were

1711

created to ensure that any effects found with children’s
adaptive use of language did not result solely from the
number of potentially-relevant words children could produce.
For (3) the adaptation score, we calculated how often each
child produced relevant versus irrelevant cues during the
description task. On each trial, a child's response was scored
for the three cue types (color, size, and location) as a 0 or 1
depending on whether they produced any description of those
cues. Multiple descriptions of the same cue type were only
counted as one (i.e., "front corner" and "front" would both
count as 1 for location cues on that trial). To account for the
relevance of the cues, color and size terms were coded as
negative if produced on trials when the terms could not
differentiate the referents. Specifically, color was coded as
negative on 2 cue (size and location) and 1 cue trials (Figure
1C and 1D), and size was coded as negative on 2 cue (color
and location) and 1 cue trials (Figure 1B and 1D). On all other
trials color and size cues were coded as positive, and location
cues were always coded as positive because location was
relevant on all trial types. Positive adaptation scores reflected
children providing more relevant than irrelevant cues and
negative adaptation scores reflected children providing more
irrelevant than relevant cues. Scores closer to 0 reflected
performance that did not differ by trial type; for example, a
child who mentioned only color terms on every trial would
receive a score of 0. Scores farther from 0 reflected both the
number of cues mentioned and the cue relevance. Thus, the
adaptation score was sensitive to the context in which
children provided different types of cues.
To ensure that children had sufficient language knowledge
to perform the task, we made two types of exclusions. We
excluded trials for which the child’s caregiver indicated on
the checklist that their child did not produce any of the
relevant location words (e.g., trials with the target on the
middle object if the checklist indicated the child did not
produce middle or center) and the child did not produce these
words during the task. We also excluded trials from the
description task if the child used an incorrect color, size, or
location term (e.g., saying “top”, when the object was on the
bottom of the display). This resulted in the exclusion of 121
trials from 25 children’s data (8% of total trials).

responses. We also grouped the trial types based on whether
the probed dimension varied in the memory array (i.e., Figure
2A shows a trial where color was probed when it varied, and
Figure 2B shows a trial where size was probed when it did
not vary) to parallel the adaptation score from the description
task. As in the description task, the memory arrays varied as
to whether color and size cues differentiated the target
referent object. However, unlike the description task, all cue
dimensions were probed across trials and thus were
potentially relevant. As such, instead of taking a difference
score of relevant vs. irrelevant cues as in the adaptation
scores, we created separate variables based on whether the
probed dimension differentiated the target referent object.
We created three variables for this analysis: color/size
(C/S) differentiated, C/S undifferentiated, and location
differentiated. The C/S differentiated variable was calculated
as children’s mean proportion correct on color-probe trials on
which color varied in the memory array (e.g., Figure 2A) and
size-probe trials on which size varied in the memory array.
The C/S undifferentiated variable was calculated as
children’s mean proportion correct on color-probe trials on
which color did not vary in the memory array and size-probe
trials on which size did not vary in the memory array (e.g.,
Figure 2B). The location differentiated variable was
calculated as children’s mean proportion correct on all
location-probe trials (e.g., Figure 2C), as location always
differentiated the referent objects. Although the location
differentiated and C/S differentiated variables were similar
(i.e., both include probe dimensions that varied in the
memory arrays), we chose to calculate them separately to
have equal number of trials (8) included for each variable.

Spatial scene memory task and spatial tasks The
experimenter marked responses on a session sheet during the
study. Videos were used to code for reliability; 18
participants’ sessions per task (26%, with different
participants chosen for each task) were checked by a second
research assistant, resulting in 99% agreement with
disagreements resolved by a third research assistant. We
created a spatial composite score by calculating the mean
proportion correct in the three spatial tasks after normalizing
for different chance levels (see Figure 3 above). We
normalized scores by taking each child’s score minus chance,
then dividing by one minus chance, resulting in scores with 0
as chance and 1 as perfect performance.
For the memory task, we calculated a memory composite
score for each child as their overall proportion of correct

This study investigated the relation between children’s
spatial skills and their attention to task-relevant information
in both memory and language tasks. We hypothesized that
individual differences in children’s memory for relevant cues
would predict their spatial composite score above and beyond
demographics, vocabulary, quantity of task-related language
production, and adaptive use of language. One participant’s
data was removed for being an outlier in the regression model
(final N = 68). As a preliminary analysis, we tested whether
there were differences in children’s spatial composite scores
based on whether they received the description or memory
task first, but found no significant difference (p = .926) and
thus excluded this variable from further analyses.
To evaluate our hypothesis, we conducted a regression
analysis with two steps. The first step was conducted as a

Vocabulary assessments The experimenter marked
children’s responses while administering the PPVT-IV and
terminated testing when the child responded incorrectly on
eight or more trials within a 12-trial block (following the
standardized instructions). Children’s standardized scores
were calculated offline using established norms (Dunn &
Dunn, 2007). Productive spatial vocabulary was calculated as
the proportion of words caregivers checked.

Results

1712

replication of Miller et al. (in press) to test whether children’s
adaptive use of language predicted their spatial task
performance. The second step evaluated our hypothesis by
testing whether children’s memory for task-relevant
information predicted their spatial skills above and beyond
their adaptive use of language. For the first step, children’s
spatial composite scores were regressed on demographics
(age, gender), vocabulary (PPVT-IV, productive spatial
vocabulary), quantity of task related language production
(quantity of non-spatial and spatial terms used), and
adaptation score. We found that children’s adaptation score
significantly predicted their spatial composite score (t60 =
2.21, p = .031, ΔR2 = .045), replicating previous findings
(Miller et al., in press). For the second step, we added each
child’s memory composite score to the model. We found that
proportion correct on the memory task significantly predicted
children’s spatial composite score (t59 = 2.43, p = .018, ΔR2
= .050) as shown in Figure 4A, and the variance accounted
for by the adaptation score became marginal (p = .090)1.

Figure 4: Relation between children’s spatial composite
score and A) memory composite score, performance on B)
C/S differentiated trials, C) C/S undifferentiated trials, and
D) location (Loc) differentiated trials. Error bars represent
+1 S.E. for point estimates from the regression models.
To test whether performance across the trial types
differentially predicted spatial performance, children’s
spatial composite scores were regressed on C/S
differentiated, C/S undifferentiated, and location
differentiated (controlling for demographic, vocabulary,
task-related production, and adaptation score variables as
before), shown in Figures 4A-4C, respectively. Performance
on C/S differentiated trials significantly predicted children’s
spatial composite scores (t57 = 3.77, p < .001, ΔR2 = .101) but
1

The qualitative pattern of results remains the same with the
outlier data included. The only quantitative difference is that the
adaptation score is marginal in the first step (p = .089) and non-

performance on C/S undifferentiated and location
differentiated trials did not account for significant
proportions of the variance in spatial composite score (p =
.777, p = .265, respectively). The results are consistent with
the hypothesis that attention to task-relevant cues is a general
mechanism supporting spatial cognition and language use.

Discussion
This study tested whether children’s attention to task-relevant
cues in a memory task was more predictive of their spatial
skills than their use of task-relevant cues in a production task.
We posited that 4-year-olds’ memory for task-relevant cues
would predict their spatial composite score above and beyond
demographics (age, gender), vocabulary (PPVT-score,
productive spatial vocabulary), task-related production
(quantity of non-spatial and spatial terms used) and
adaptation score. Before adding the memory score, the model
showed that adaptive language use predicted children’s
spatial composite scores after controlling for the other
variables, replicating results that adaptive use of language—
both spatial and non-spatial—is more predictive of spatial
skills than spatial word production (Miller et al., in press).
Adding the memory composite score to the model showed
that memory for task-relevant cues predicted children’s
spatial skills above and beyond all factors included in the
model. The amount of variance accounted for by the
adaptation score became only marginally significant when
the memory composite score was added, indicating overlap
in the contributions these measures make toward accounting
for variance in children’s spatial skills. Overall, these
findings suggest that children’s attention to cues in a spatial
scene is related to their spatial performance, and could
potentially account for much of the variance previously
thought to be related to language. However, it is important to
note that these findings do not exclude the possibility that
other factors such as encoding or memory strategies may
explain some of the variance in the memory task.
When we grouped memory task performance in a similar
way to the description task, we found that only children’s
memory for color and size cues that differentiated the target
referent objects in the memory array, when these dimensions
were probed, significantly predicted spatial skills. These
results are consistent with our hypothesis that attention to
task-relevant cues underlies the relation between spatial skills
and language. Children who correctly recognized the target
referent object’s color or size cues when these cues were
differentiated in the memory array likely performed better on
the spatial tasks because they are better at attending to cues
that distinguish relevant information in the spatial tasks. This
ability would also support more relevant language production
in the spatial scene description task, leading to the shared
variance across these tasks found in our results. Performance
on the color and size undifferentiated trials likely did not
significant in the second step (p = .225) with the outlier data
included.

1713

predict spatial performance because in the spatial tasks
features that do not differentiate among cues would not be
relevant for solving the task. Thus, whether or not children
attended to non-differentiated cues should not influence their
performance as long as they attend to the
relevant/differentiated cues. Although location cues always
differentiated the target referent object, performance on
location probes likely did not predict children’s spatial skills
due to poor performance (M = .42, SD = .49; see Figure 4D).
Children rarely produced location terms in the spatial scene
description task (5% of trials; similar to levels reported by
Miller et al., in press), indicating that they may not have
attended to location cues in the description or memory tasks.
This is interesting because it suggests that attention to
locations is not strongly related to spatial skills that rely on
transforming or comparing relations among objects.
The current study provides novel insights into the
mechanisms underlying the relations between language and
spatial cognition. Of the potential causal models laid out in
the introduction, our results suggest that a third factor
connects spatial language and spatial skills. Further studies
will be needed to test potential causal directions among the
various factors that support developmental improvements in
spatial skills and language use. Our research highlights the
importance of considering the multiple cognitive processes
that support spatial performance and provides insight into
basic cognitive factors that may connect spatial skills to
cognitive processes that support achievement in STEM
domains

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the families who participated in this research, as
well as to the research assistants who aided in data collection.
Participant recruitment was partially funded by the Waisman
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center
grant through NICHD (P30HD03352). Subsets of the data
were presented at the 9th Biennial Meeting of the Cognitive
Development Society and the 56th Annual Meeting of the
Psychonomic Society.

References
Cannon, J., Levine, S. C., & Huttenlocher, J. (2007). A
system for analyzing children and caregivers’
language about space in structured and unstructured
contexts. Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center
(SILC) Technical Report.
Dessalegn, B., & Landau, B. (2008). More than meets the
eye: The role of language in binding and
maintaining feature conjunctions. Psychological
Science, 19, 189–195.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, D. M. (2007). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test, fourth edition: Manual.
Minneapolis, MN: Pearson Assessments.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J.,
Pethick, S. J., … Stiles, J. (1994). Variability in
early communicative development. Monographs of

the Society for Research in Child Development, i–
185. http://doi.org//10.2307/1166093
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P. (2001).
Language, space, and the development of cognitive
flexibility in humans: The case of two spatial
memory tasks. Cognition, 79, 263–299.
Huttenlocher, J., & Levine, S. C. (1990). Primary test of
cognitive skills. CGTB/McGraw-Hill.
Learmonth, A. E., Nadel, L., & Newcombe, N. S. (2002).
Children’s use of landmarks: Implications for
modularity theory. Psychological Science, 13, 337–
341.
Learmonth, A. E., Newcombe, N. S., & Huttenlocher, J.
(2001). Toddlers’ use of metric information and
landmarks to reorient. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 80, 225–244.
Levine, S. C., Huttenlocher, J., Taylor, A., & Langrock, A.
(1999). Early sex differences in spatial skill.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 940-949.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping.
Cognitive Psychology, 50, 315–353.
Miller, H. E., Patterson, R., & Simmering, V. R. (2016). The
role of language in children’s use of spatial relations
to remember locations. Cognition, 150, 170–180.
Miller, H. E., Vlach, H. A., & Simmering, V. R. (in press).
Producing spatial words is not enough:
Understanding the relation between language and
spatial cognition. Child Development.
Pruden, S. M., Levine, S. C., & Huttenlocher, J. (2011).
Children’s spatial thinking: Does talk about the
spatial world matter? Developmental Science, 14,
1417–1430.
Shusterman, A., Lee, S., & Spelke, E. S. (2011). Cognitive
effects of language on human navigation. Cognition,
120, 186–201.
Simms, N., & Gentner, D. (2008). Spatial language and
landmark use: Can 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds find the
middle? In 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 191–196). Washingtion, D.C.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Verdine, B. N., Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K.,
Newcombe, N. S., Filipowicz, A. T., & Chang, A.
(2014).
Deconstructing
building
blocks:
Preschoolers’ spatial assembly performance relates
to early mathematical skills. Child Development,
85, 1062–1076.
Voyer, D., Voyer, S., & Bryden, M. P. (1995). Magnitude of
sex differences in spatial abilities: A meta-analysis
and
consideration
of
critical
variables.
Psychological Bulletin, 117, 250.
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial ability
for STEM domains: Aligning over 50 years of
cumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its
importance. Journal of Educational Psychology,
101, 817–835.

1714

