Gibson's Reasons for Realism and Gibsonian Reasons for Anti-Realism:
An Ecological Approach to Model-Based Reasoning in Science
Guilherme Sanches de Oliveira (sanchege@mail.uc.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 2700 Campus Way
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Abstract
Representational views of the mind traditionally face a
skeptical challenge on perceptual knowledge: if our
experience of the world is mediated by representations built
upon perceptual inputs, how can we be certain that our
representations are accurate and our perceptual apparatus
reliable? J. J. Gibson's ecological approach provides an
alternative framework, according to which direct perception
of affordances does away with the need to posit internal
mental representations as intermediary steps between
perceptual input and behavioral output. Gibson accordingly
spoke of his framework as providing “reasons for realism.” In
this paper I suggest that, granting Gibson his reasons for
perceptual realism, the Gibsonian framework motivates antirealism when it comes to scientific theorizing and modeling.
If scientists are Gibsonian perceivers, then it makes sense to
take their use of models in indirect investigations of realworld phenomena not as representations of the phenomena,
but rather as autonomous tools with their own affordances.
Keywords: perception; ecological psychology; affordances;
representation; philosophy of science; scientific modeling

Introduction:
Representationalism and Skepticism
Representationalism concerns, roughly speaking, the thesis
that the mind operates by generating, storing and processing
representations of the world. In this view, as traditionally
understood, perceptual input is transformed into internal
representations or “information-bearing structures” (Pitt
2013) which in turn are utilized to create behavioral output.
Recent representationalists differ in how they define
'representation', distinguishing between internalism and
externalism about both the “content” of representations and
the “vehicles” that carry representational content (see, e.g.,
Clark and Toribio 1994, for a rejection of the
representationalism/anti-representationalism dichotomy and
the suggestion that representation comes in different degrees
and types; along similar lines, Hurley 2001 provides a
comprehensive taxonomy of externalist views, defending a
distinction between what- and how-externalism).
Representational theories of the mind, in particular the
internalist varieties, are intimately connected to the threat of
skepticism: if our knowledge of the “external world” is
indirect and mediated by “internal reconstructions” of our
surroundings—if, that is, we only have direct experience of
our mental representations, not of the world itself—then it is
reasonable to wonder about the accuracy of such

representations and, consequently, about the reliability of
our knowledge.
Epistemological consideration of the problem of
perceptual knowledge dates back at least to Plato, who
likened input from the senses to the shadows on the dark
cave wall, imperfect reflections of the outside world (cf.
Newman 2014). A classical example of skeptical doubts
resulting from a more explicitly representational approach to
the mind is found in the work of René Descartes, who took
there to be “reasons for which we may, generally speaking,
doubt about all things and especially about material things”
(Descartes, Weissman, & Bluhm 1996, p. 55). In his
Meditations Descartes discusses skeptical threats involving
dreams and evil demons. We sometimes have dreams that
seem so realistic that we have the impression that the dream
is indeed real. Based on this common experience, Descartes
asks: how can we be sure that we are not currently
dreaming? Further, how can we be certain that our entire
lives were not a dream? A second skeptical doubt for
Descartes concerns the possibility that an evil, deceitful
demon or deity gives us misleading sensory inputs such that
we believe in the existence of an external world when in
reality none exists. Different versions of these skeptical
threats have persisted since Descartes and influenced
philosophical theorizing. A variation of the evil demon
argument that has been influential in recent analytical
philosophy, for example, concerns the idea that if one were
a disembodied brain in a vat and were fed representations of
the external world, one would be unable to know that those
were not real (Harman 1973, Putnam 1981).
The thesis that the mind operates by generating, storing
and processing mental representations—particularly internal
structures that encode information about the world—has
been labeled “the central hypothesis of cognitive science”
(Thagard 2014). But that is not to say that there are no
alternatives. Major examples of anti-representationalist
accounts are found in dynamical systems theory (van Gelder
1998), situated robotics (Brooks 1991; Webb 1995, 2005),
and radical enactivism (Hutto and Myin 2013). Ecological
psychology has informed and motivated much of this antirepresentationalist work (see, e.g., van Gelder and Port 1995
on the its influence on the dynamical systems approach),
and will be the focus of the present paper.

Ecological Psychology Revisited
Ecological psychology, as articulated by J. J. Gibson in his
1979 book The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception,

1373

was founded on three precepts. First, Gibson suggested that
perception is direct: rather than having to reconstruct the
world by generating representations built upon sensory
input, we have unmediated perceptual access to what is
present in our surroundings. Second, for Gibson perception
is inherently action-oriented, and we always perceive in
order to do something. Gibson claims that “perceiving is an
act, not a response, an act of attention, not a triggered
impression, an achievement, not a reflex” (1979, p. 149). In
his view, as active explorers of the world, we are in constant
engagement with our environment, such that perception is in
principle and in practice indissociable from our acting and
preparing for action. Third, Gibson proposed a radically
novel account of what the objects of perception are.
Rejecting the idea that we perceive discrete properties such
as an object's size, shape and composition and then have to
analyze those properties in order to determine how to relate
to the object, Gibson proposed that perception is of
“affordances” or “action possibilities.” Ordinary examples
include the possibility to sit on (in the case of a chair), to
pass in between (in the case of an aperture), or to cut with
(in the case of knives). Gibson's proposal is that the
descriptions favored by mainstream psychology and
cognitive science are mistaken when they take perception to
be the first stage in a process that involves the generation
and internal processing of sensory inputs in order to produce
external behavioral outputs (similar to what Hurley 2001
calls the “sandwich view” of the mind). Instead, for Gibson
we simply and directly perceive how we can engage with
objects and what we can do in the environment, such that
perception-cognition-action become an indissociable unit. In
light of this, the title of Gibson's 1979 book and its emphasis
on visual perception can seem misleadingly simplistic: in
reality, by treating perception as necessarily action-guided
and of action possibilities, Gibsonian ecological psychology
collapses perception, cognition and action, at once providing
a unitary account of the three.
Gibson's concept of “affordance” has generated
considerable controversy. His own description was that
affordances are what the environment “offers the animal,
what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill” (1979,
p. 127). This somewhat obscure formulation was later
interpreted as referring to the dispositional properties of the
objects
themselves
(Scarantino
2003).
Another
interpretation, one that seems to be more faithful to Gibson's
proposal, frames affordances in relational terms as the
interplay of subjective skills and environmental properties,
or “relations between the abilities of organisms and features
of the environment” (Chemero 2003, p. 189). A more recent
adaptation of this relational interpretation attempts to
account for social and cultural differences by defining
affordances as “relations between aspects of a material
environment and abilities available in a form of life”
(Rietveld and Kiverstein 2014). Regardless of the particular
variety, similar relational interpretations have in the past
couple of decades influenced expansions of the Gibsonian
framework, which, paired with the explanatory tools of

dynamical systems theory (Kugler, Kelso, & Turvey, 1980),
have led to the use of non-linear modeling to investigate
systems that exhibit “interaction-dominant dynamics” (Van
Orden et al. 2003). These additions and applications have
secured to the Gibsonian framework a place as a successful
approach in contemporary experimental psychology and
cognitive science. As for the concept of 'affordances', it has
taken its own life in the domain of design research (see, e.g.,
Norman 1990) as well as in neuroscience, where it has been
framed in terms of neural representations of object-related
motor intention (Jeannerod 1994, Craighero et al 1998,
Tucker and Ellis 2001) and linked to the mirror systems
believed to be associated with social cognition (Bach et al
2011, Brincker 2015).

Gibson's Reasons for Realism
Framed in relational terms, as seen above, affordances can
be interpreted as undermining the distinction between
subject and object: action possibilities exist objectively
regardless of subjective awareness, and still they are
subjective in that they change according to the individual
organism and its characteristics. Gibson himself seemed
unbothered by the dichotomy, claiming that “an affordance
is neither an objective property nor a subjective property; or
it is both if you like” (Gibson, 1979, p. 129). An anti-dualist
in many respects, Gibson rejected also the existence of any
difference between the natural and the artificial, and,
accordingly, between “affordances in general” and the
affordances of human artifacts. Psychologist Alan Costall
has questioned this point, proposing that artifacts have what
he calls “canonical affordances,” that is, conventional and
normative action possibilities: even if other uses can be
found, chairs, for example, are for sitting on. Costall
considers this expansion of the conceptual framework to
complement Gibson's own interests by taking analysis
beyond the subject-object dyad: “The object needs to be
understood within a network of relations not only among
different people, but also a “constellation” of other objects
drawn into a shared practice” (Costall 2012, p. 92). Whether
this is a reasonable suggestion and particularly whether it
provides additional insights into scientific modeling qua
affordance-based practice is something to be explored
elsewhere. For now, with the basic outline of the Gibsonian
approach in place, let us consider what conclusions it
motivates for philosophical discussions about realism.
In a paper published a decade before his explicit
articulation of the ecological approach in the 1979 book,
Gibson argued that the view of perception he was
developing provided the basis for a kind of naïve realism,
one that justified the confidence we ordinarily have in (the
reliability of) our epistemic access to the world around us.
He summarized his account at the time saying that it was
based on: “(1) the existence of stimulus information, (2) the
fact of invariance over time, (3) the process of extracting
invariants over time, and (4) the continuity of perception
with memory and thought” (1967, p. 167-168). Despite the
difference in terminology, the spirit of the theory seems

1374

similar enough to the 1979 book, particularly with respect to
the assumption that information is available perceptually, as
well as to the merging of perception and cognition. Again,
Gibson's view, even in this earlier stage, is that perception is
of publicly available information; this is a direct approach,
with no intermediary steps between perception and action
that involve the generation and manipulation of mental
representations. If there existed such representations, there
would be a risk that they are inaccurate, that they
misrepresent. But Gibson does away with the need to posit
representations—he claims: “I am quite certain that there is
no such thing as a phonograph record in the ear and no such
thing as a picture in the eye—no reproduction of an external
event or object that the organ transmits to the brain” (1967,
p. 169). Accordingly, Gibson concludes that his ecological
approach provides answers to traditional epistemological
concerns by substantiating a kind of direct naïve realism:
taking the senses as perceptual systems, he says, offers
“sophisticated support for the naive belief in the world of
objects and events, and for the simple-minded conviction
that our senses give knowledge of it” (1967, p. 168)—that
is, since perception is a process of actively and directly
picking up ecological (publicly available) information,
skeptical threats do not even get off the ground and we can
rest assured—as non-philosophers tend to—that we stand on
solid epistemic foundations.

Scientific Models and Representation
Assuming for the sake of argument that Gibson is right both
in the basic ecological framework and in the interpretation
that direct perception provides the basis for a realist outlook,
this paper is concerned with whether Gibson's reasons for
perceptual realism translate into reasons for scientific
realism—i.e, realism about the unobservable entities
postulated in scientific theorizing and about the relationship
between scientific products and the “real world.” Taking the
recent debate about scientific modeling as a starting point
for this investigation, and assuming that scientists are
Gibsonian perceivers, the question here concerns what
conclusion Gibson's reasons for perceptual realism motivate
with regards to the epistemic import of the use of models in
scientific research.
In recent years, philosophers have increasingly
acknowledged the role played in contemporary science by
mediated or indirect forms of investigation through the
construction and manipulation of models like mathematical
equations, computer simulations, and robotic replicas. A
widespread view in this literature is that scientific modeling
is a representational activity (Giere 2004, 2010; Morrison
and Morgan 1999; Morrison 2015; Suarez 2003, 2004; van
Fraassen 2008; Weisberg 2013). The representational view
of models amounts to the assumption that models are
representations of the target systems or phenomena they
simulate, and that the epistemic value of model-based
scientific research is grounded on the supposedly
representational relationship between a model and its target.
Even while acknowledging that models often neglect some

details from the target phenomena and include known
distortions and simplifications, the representational view of
models takes it that models represent the target—that is,
that despite containing purposeful deviations from
“veridical representation[s] of real-world phenomena,” a
model is a representation of the phenomena (Weisberg
2013, p. 98). And in addition to taking the relationship
between models and their targets to be representational, the
representational view of models assumes further that this
representational relationship is what secures the epistemic
value of modeling, or what allows scientists to learn about a
target through indirect experimentation with a model:
models can teach us about the world “precisely because
(…) they fulfill a representative function” (Morrison &
Morgan 1999, p. 24-25). Recent contributions to this
literature have put forward different accounts of scientific
representation, providing distinct views of how a model
represents its target: some have framed representation in
terms of isomorphism or one-to-one structural
correspondence (van Fraassen 2008) or in terms of
resemblance or similarity (Giere 2004, 2010); other
accounts suggest that, beyond the properties of the modeltarget dyad, scientific representation involves drawing
inferences (Suarez 2003, 2004) and active interpretation
(Contessa 2007), or that it is best understood through the
lens of semiotics (Knuuttila 2010). Despite the variety of
takes on how scientific representation works, the
representational view of models presupposes that scientists
build and use models to learn about some target
phenomenon because models represent their target.

An Ecological Approach to Scientific Modeling
What would an alternative to this representational view of
model-based scientific research look like? More
specifically, what would a Gibsonian alternative to
representationalism about scientific modeling look like? The
account I outline here builds upon the ideas of treating
models as “autonomous agents” and “instruments of
investigation” (Morrison & Morgan 1999) and as “epistemic
tools” (Knuuttila 2011). Morrison and Morgan emphasize
how models are partially independent both from theory (the
scientific conceptual framework within which models are
built) and from the phenomena they are intended to
simulate, such that experimenting with a model can shed
light both on the relevant scientific theory and on the target
of investigation. Like Morrison and Morgan, Knuuttila
highlights the manipulability of models as central to their
epistemic contribution in science—researchers need to be
able to manipulate, intervene on, and otherwise experiment
with a model in order to learn something from it. But
Knuuttila further adds that the manipulability of models
implies their concreteness or “materiality,” based on which
she proposes that models can play the role of an external
scaffolding that, in the sense suggested by Hutchins (1995)
and Sterelny (2004), extends the scientists' cognitive
processing. This last, stronger claim about cognitive
extension, while interesting and worthy of further

1375

exploration, actually complicates the issue at hand more
than is necessary: the notion of cognitive extension is not
one Gibson included in his framework, and can be set aside
for present purposes. Accordingly, the working hypothesis
to be considered here is simply that the creation and
manipulation of models in the context of scientific research
can be understood in comparison with how we create and
engage with instruments, artifacts and tools more generally.
From a Gibsonian perspective, the ordinary objects we
encounter in daily life afford a variety of uses, depending on
various properties such as shape, size, and composition. For
example, “a pointed elongated object affords piercing”
while “a rigid object with a sharp dihedral angle, an edge,
affords cutting and scraping” (Gibson 1979, p. 133). Indeed,
we manufacture objects with those properties (such as
spears and needles in the first case and knives in the second)
because they afford such uses. Importantly, however,
affordances are not reducible to the properties of objects or
the environment. In the relational framework reviewed
above, action possibilities are relations between organism
and environment. Thus, in any situation, affordances will
vary according to not only what the environment is like, but
also who is engaging with it: the actions that are possible or
not, are possible or not for some entity. The characteristics
that make a surface climbable for a fit adult of average
height are not the same that make it climbable for a child,
for a dog, or for a climbing plant, and the differences are not
simply a matter of body scale but of the general abilities and
skills that the organism has.
Applying this framework to scientific modeling allows us
to recognize that models are designed and built by modelers
and scientists so as to afford some use(s) of interest.
Whether it is a robotic model that is built to display some
particular behavior, or a computer simulation that is
designed to allow interventions of some sort, or a
mathematical model that is specified in order to generate
predictions based on some data input, scientific models are
indissociable from the research context in which they are
built. The guiding questions of a model-based project thus
determine what the features of the model need to be so that
it can be useful in that context. But usefulness is not an
absolute value, which means that, from the early stages,
model-building is a matter of constructing a tool that will
provide relevant action possibilities for someone. This
specificity imposed by research context and intended
uses/users makes it so that no model is ever a perfect
representation of its target: in fact, rather than accurate or
inaccurate descriptions of some target phenomenon, the
suggestion here is that models are, at best, the most useful
tool available for a given task. The affordances of a model,
then, are the action possibilities the model offers or makes
available to model-builders and intended users.
An interesting consequence of Gibsonian ecological
psychology is that it blurs the distinction between the
subjective and the objective: affordances are subjective, or
“relative to the animal” and “unique for that animal”
(Gibson 1979, p. 127), but they are also “objective, real, and

physical” (p. 129) in the sense that an “opportunity for
action” exists for an animal even if that animal does not act
upon it. First, which action possibilities an object affords an
organism is a fact irrespective of that organism's awareness
of it, that is, “independent of the individual’s ability to
perceive this possibility” (McGrenere & Ho 2000, p. 179).
And additionally, the particular affordances of any object
can vary across individuals at a given time as well as for the
same individual over time: “knee-high for a child is not the
same as knee-high for an adult, so the affordance is relative
to the size of the individual” (Gibson 1979, p. 128), varying
also, as seen above, according to what kind of organism it is
—whether it is a human, a dog, a plant, and so on.
In this view, the affordances of a scientific model are
objective in that they exist independently of their being
perceived by an individual scientist, but they are also
subjective in that the same model may not afford the same
action possibilities to different individuals. This is
significant because it illuminates both the differences
between scientists and non-scientists, as well as, within
science, the different practices that characterize distinct
scientific disciplines. On the one hand, the variability of
affordances resonates with the fact that in order to become a
scientist one has to go through years of training and arduous
work—it requires learning, or in Gibson's terminology, the
“education of attention” (1979, p. 254); it is only through
serious intentional effort that the novice can learn to
perceive certain affordances that are already present and
also develop new ones, as is evident in the case of highly
complex mathematical models, which are gibberish to the
uninitiated. On the other hand, the variability of affordances
also sheds light on the differences that exist between
scientific disciplines: training with the methods and tools of
a particular discipline attunes an individual to the particular
approach favored in that discipline, making more salient
specific features of the world (both the phenomena of
investigation and the models that are built and used to
investigate them). The effect of specialization over time is
thus present also collectively, shaping how disciplines
develop differently from one another, so that, for example,
the modeling techniques which appear essential to a
behavioral ecologist may seem dispensable to a molecular
biologist and entirely useless to a physicist, and vice versa.
Members of the same species surely share many of the same
affordances (as in the example of cutting objects); yet,
oftentimes a lot of effort is required for individuals to
become aware of certain affordances or even to develop new
ones (as in the cases of training to become a scientist, and of
intra- and interdisciplinary methodological differences).

Gibsonian Reasons for Anti-Realism
As seen above, Gibson took his direct-perception approach
to substantiate a realist stance: our perception of the world is
reliable because it is not based on the production of
“internal representations” that could be wrong about the
“external world,” but rather perception is the very process
by which we actively and directly pick up ecological

1376

information. Now even if in this Gibsonian perspective we
can be realists about our perception of the world, the
ecological view of models sketched above motivates a more
nuanced conclusion for realism about scientific knowledge
generated from model-based research. Applying to scientific
methodology the insight that perception is direct and of
action possibilities, we conclude that the models and
simulations used in science are tools to whose affordances
we also have direct perceptual access. Just like any
organism perceives in its surroundings opportunities to act
in particular ways, some scientists perceive in aggregates of
silicon and synthetic compounds, or in simulation softwares,
or in mathematical equations the action possibilities that
enable them to study the phenomena they are interested in.
The point, however, is that this ecological approach to
modeling also articulates the model-target relationship in
anti-representational terms. That means that rather than
taking the resulting robotic, computational or mathematical
model to be an accurate or inaccurate representation of some
target, the model is an independent tool that is useful insofar
as it offers the manipulability that is considered relevant in
the given research context.
In the 1979 book, Gibson briefly speaks of a kind of
“second-hand” perceptual knowledge in which ecological
information is somehow mediated. This is the case, for
example, in the use of instruments like telescopes and
microscopes, and in pictures and verbal descriptions. He
claims: “The reality-testing that accompanies unmediated
perceiving and that is partly retained in perceiving with
instruments is obviously lost in the kind of perceiving that is
mediated by pictures. Nevertheless, pictures give us a kind
of grasp on the rich complexities of the natural environment
that words could never do” (Gibson 1979, p. 263). While the
(partial) persistence of ecological information in these forms
of mediated perception allows Gibson to remain a
perceptual realist, the same does not apply to knowledge
generated through model-based scientific research because
models are not instruments that mediate perception, but
rather autonomous tools and artifacts built for a range of
action-oriented purposes.
Consider projects in situated robotics. Some robotic
models are explicitly intended to simulate real-world
phenomena, such as phonotaxis in crickets (Webb 1995;
Reeve et al 2005) and thigmotaxis in rat pups (Schank et al
2004; May et al 2006), while others merely set out to design
autonomous intelligent robotic agents for exploratory
purposes (Brooks 1991; Beer and Williams 2015). It seems
intuitive to say that the latter do not represent any particular
target because the models are not designed to replicate the
performance or architecture of particular types of real-world
creatures. Yet, the same conclusion applies, within the
present framework, to the former cases: robots do not
represent their targets (real crickets and rat pups), but are
autonomous tools whose building and manipulation lead to
insights that can be applied to the targets—in other words,
the models are not descriptions of what the target organisms
are like, but rather they are tools that are like and unlike the

target organisms in contextually-relevant ways. And the
same idea applies more broadly to other kinds of models
(whether concrete, virtual, mathematical, etc.) in different
disciplines. In the Gibsonian perspective being proposed
here, it is not a supposedly representational relationship
between model and target that makes scientific modeling
epistemically valuable—rather, it is the agent-specific action
possibilities scientists exploit in building and manipulating
models that enable an indirect way of learning. In some
cases modeling involves the generation of predictions that
are subject to empirical confirmation, but in other cases it
involves simply the generation of some behavior that is
importantly similar and different from what is observed in
the target. In these and other cases, however, models do not
yield representations of the target that we can be realists
about—no description, that is, that can be universally valid,
independent from particular perspectives (Chakravartty
2011) or assumption-free and accurate (Gaukroger 2012).
In the ecological view of human cognition-actionperception, the usefulness of model-based science is
explained in terms of the action possibilities afforded by
models and by targets. Those are necessarily action
possibilities for someone; and in most if not all cases, they
are action possibilities that are limited to trained experts in
the right research context, material environment, and
conceptual problem-space. The fact that this results in
Gibson's reasons for (perceptual) realism motivating a kind
of anti-realist stance with regards to the epistemic products
of scientific modeling should not be seen as negative for
either the original Gibsonian framework nor for the
proposed ecological view of modeling; rather, this proves
that Gibson's insights remain relevant for empirical and
theoretical work alike, contributing to interdisciplinary
debates where philosophical and psychological tools
combined can provide a better understanding of scientific
practice and methodology.

References
Bach, P., Bayliss, A. P., Tipper, S. P. (2011). The predictive
mirror: Interactions of mirror and affordance processes
during action observation. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 18(1), 171-6.
Beer, R. D., and Williams, P. L. (2015). Information
Processing and Dynamics in Minimally Cognitive Agents.
Cognitive Science 39, 1-38.
Brincker, M. (2015). Beyond sensorimotor segregation: On
mirror neurons and social affordance space tracking.
Cognitive Systems Research 34-35, pp. 18-34.
Brooks, R. A. (1991) Intelligence without representation.
Artificial Intelligence 47, 139-159.
Chakravartty, A. (2011). Scientific Realism. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition), Edward
N.
Zalta
(ed.),
URL
=
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/scienti
fic-realism/>.
Chemero, A. (2003). An Outline of a Theory of
Affordances. Ecological Psychology, 15(2), 181–195.

1377

Clark, A., and Toribio, J. (1994). Doing Without
Representing? Synthese 101: 401-431.
Contessa,
G.
(2007).
Scientific
Representation,
Interpretation, and Surrogative Reasoning. Philosophy of
Science, 74, pp. 48–68.
Costall, A. (2012). Canonical affordances in context.
AVANT Volume III, Number 2/2012. ISSN: 2082-6710.
Craighero, L., Fadiga, L., Rizzolatti, G., and Umilta, C.
(1998). Visuomotor Priming. Visual Cognition 5 (1/2),
109-125.
Descartes, R., Weissman, D., & Bluhm, W. T. (1996).
Discourse on the Method: And, Meditations on First
Philosophy. Yale University Press.
Gaukroger, S. (2012). Objectivity: A Very Short
Introduction. Oxford University Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1967). New Reasons for Realism. Synthese 17,
2.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception. Houghton Mifflin Co. Boston.
Giere, R. (2004). How Models Are Used to Represent
Reality. Philosophy of Science, 71, pp. 742–752.
Giere, R. (2010). An agent-based conception of models and
scientific representation. Synthese 172:269–281.
Harman, G. (1973). Thought. Princeton University Press.
Hurley, S. (2010). The Varieties of Externalism. In R.
Menary (Ed.), The Extended Mind. MIT Press.
Hurley, S. (2001). Perception and Action: Alternative
Views. Synthese 129: 3-40.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. MIT Press.
Hutto, D. D., and Myin, E. (2013). Radicalizing Enactivism.
Basic Minds without Content. MIT Press.
Jeannerod, M. (1994). The representing brain: Neural
correlates of motor intention and imagery. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 17, pp 187- 202.
Knuuttila, T. (2010). Not Just Underlying Structures:
Towards a Semiotic Approach to Scientific
Representation and Modeling. In Bergman, M., et al.
(Eds.), Ideas in Action: Proceedings of the Applying
Peirce Conference (pp. 163–172).
Knuuttila, T. (2011). Modelling and representing: An
artefactual approach to model-based representation.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 42, 262–
271.
Kugler, P. N., Kelso, J. A. S., and Turvey, M. T. (1980).
Coordinative structures as dissipative structures I.
Theoretical lines of convergence. In G. E. Stelmach & J.
Requin (Eds.), Tutorials in motor behavior (pp. 3–47).
May, C. J., Schank, J. C., Joshi, S., Tran, J., Taylor, R. J.,
and Scott, I. (2006). Rat Pups and Random Robots
Generate Similar Self-Organized and Intentional
Behavior. Complexity 12, 53–66.
McGrenere, J., & Ho, W. (2000). Affordances: Clarifying
and evolving a concept. Proceedings of Graphics
Interface 2000, 179-186.
Morrison, M., & Morgan, M. (1999). Models as Mediators.
Cambridge University Press.

Morrison, M. (2015). Reconstructing Reality: Models,
Mathematics, and Simulations. Oxford University Press.
Newman, Lex, "Descartes' Epistemology", The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2014 Edition),
Edward
N.
Zalta (ed.),
URL
=
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/entries/descar
tes-epistemology/>.
Pitt, D. (2013). Mental Representation. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 Edition), Edward
N.
Zalta
(ed.),
URL
=
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/mental
representation/>.
Putnam, H. (1981). Reason, Truth, and History. Cambridge
University Press.
Reeve, R., Webb, B., Horchlerb, A., Indiveri, G., Quinn, R.
(2005). New technologies for testing a model of cricket
phonotaxis on an outdoor robot. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 51, 41–54.
Schank, J. C., May, C. J., Tran, J. T., and Joshi, S. S.
(2004). A Biorobotic Investigation of Norway Rat Pups
(Rattus norvegicus) in an Arena. Adaptive Behavior, Vol
12, no 3–4, 161–173.
Sterelny, Kim. (2004). Externalism, epistemic artefacts and
the extended mind. In R. Schantz (Ed.), The externalist
challenge. New studies on cognition and intentionality. de
Gruyter.
Suarez, M. (2003). Scientific representation: against
similarity and isomorphism. International Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, 17 (3). 225-244.
Suarez, M. (2004). An inferential conception of scientific
representation. Philosophy of Science, 71 (5). 767-779.
Thagard, P. (2014). Cognitive Science. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 Edition), Edward
N.
Zalta
(ed.),
URL
=
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2014/entries/cogniti
vescience/>.
Tucker, M., and Ellis, R. (2001). The potentiation of grasp
types during visual object categorization. Visual
Cognition, 8 (6), 769-800.
van Fraassen, B. (2008). Scientific Representation. Oxford
University Press.
van Gelder, T. (1998) The Dynamical Hypothesis in
Cognitive Science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21,
615-665.
van Gelder, T., and Port, R. F. (1995). It's about time: An
overview of the dynamical approach to cognition. In R. F.
Port and T. van Gelder (1995) (Eds.). Mind as Motion:
Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition. MIT Press.
Van Orden, G., Holden, J., and Turvey, M. T. (2003). Selforganization of cognitive performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 331-351.
Webb, B. (1995). Using robots to model animals: a cricket
test. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 16, 117-134.
Weisberg, M. (2013). Simulation and Similarity: Using
Models to Understand the World. Oxford University
Press.

1378

