Grammatical gender affects odor cognition
Laura J. Speed (l.speed@let.ru.nl)1

Asifa Majid (asifa.majid@let.ru.nl)1,2,3

1

Centre for Language Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
3
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
2

Abstract
Language interacts with olfaction in exceptional ways.
Olfaction is believed to be weakly linked with language, as
demonstrated by our poor odor naming ability, yet olfaction
seems to be particularly susceptible to linguistic descriptions.
We tested the boundaries of the influence of language on
olfaction by focusing on a non-lexical aspect of language
(grammatical gender). We manipulated the grammatical
gender of fragrance descriptions to test whether the
congruence with fragrance gender would affect the way
fragrances were perceived and remembered. Native French
and German speakers read descriptions of fragrances
containing ingredients with
feminine or masculine
grammatical gender, and then smelled masculine or feminine
fragrances and rated them on a number of dimensions (e.g.,
pleasantness). Participants then completed an odor recognition
test. Fragrances were remembered better when presented with
descriptions whose grammatical gender matched the gender of
the fragrance. Overall, results suggest grammatical
manipulations of odor descriptions can affect odor cognition.
Keywords: olfaction; odor memory; grammatical gender;
linguistic relativity; French; German

Introduction
“…a warm passionate fragrance that combines the
uniquely liberating notes of crispy apple and white florals
with a vanilla and sandalwood heart. They fuse to create a
warm, inviting and free-spirited scent, that you can wear
with passion.”
Boss Orange Woman – The Perfume Shop
Choosing a personal fragrance can be a difficult
undertaking. But how much of what we perceive about a
fragrance is based on smell alone? Does the language used
in advertisements, product descriptions, and magazine
reviews influence us? With over five hundred new fragrance
launches every year, sniffing fragrances individually would
be an arduous and tiring task. Instead, reading fragrance
descriptions can be the most efficient means by which to
make a decision. But what do we imagine when we read
something like: “white florals with a vanilla and
sandalwood heart”?
Research has shown we are, in fact, poor at imagining
odors (Crowder & Schab, 1995). Moreover, we are bad at
identifying and naming odors. It is estimated that we can
correctly name only around 50% of common odors, such as
coffee or peanut butter (e.g., Cain, 1979; de Wijk, Schab, &
Cain, 1995).

There are a number of possible explanations for these
facts. One theory claims the olfactory cortex is poorly
linked with semantic and linguistic information in the brain
(Olofsson & Gottfried, 2015). Olfactory information is
processed by fewer channels than other sensory domains,
and is argued to be linked with lexical information more
directly than modalities such as vision (Olofsson &
Gottfried, 2015). This may mean olfactory information is
less elaborated by the time lexical retrieval occurs, making
it hard to link an odor with a name. Another possibility is
the difficulties with olfaction are a product of cultural
experience (Majid, 2015). In the West, we lack experience
attending to and talking about smells (e.g., San Roque et al.,
2015). However, speakers of some languages, such as the
Jahai in the Malay Peninsula, are, in fact, just as good
talking about smells as they are talking about colors (Majid
& Burenhult, 2014). For people in such cultures, odor is an
integral part of their daily lives, featuring in their cultural
practices and belief system (Burenhult & Majid, 2011).
Research has shown that because of the limitations in
thinking and talking about odors, verbal labels and
descriptions can easily influence how odors are perceived
(Herz, 2003; 2005). This is comparable to the proposal that
language is more powerful at influencing thought for more
abstract domains, such as time (e.g., Boroditsky, Schmidt, &
Phillips, 2003). That is, similar to time, odor is a domain
that can be difficult to conceptualize and verbalize, and so is
a modality in which language has a strong influence. In fact,
Herz (2003) suggests olfaction should be influenced by
language more than other perceptual modalities because we
cannot see odors, we cannot easily spatially locate them, nor
can we easily identify them. So, instead we search for any
other contextual information (such as language) to inform
odor perception. In sum, it has been suggested that because
conceptual representations of odors are weak, they can more
easily be shaped by other sources of information, such as
words.
Hedonic ratings of odors, for example, differ when odors
are given verbal labels compared to when they are presented
alone (Herz, 2003). De Araujo, Rolls, Velazsco, Margot,
and Cayeuk (2005), and Herz and Clef (2001) found odors
were rated as more pleasant when they were labeled with
positive (e.g., cheese) instead of negative terms (e.g., body
odor). Verbal labels modulated regions of the brain thought
to be activated by odor pleasantness, suggesting the labels
affected perception of the pleasantness of the odor rather
than simply biasing pleasantness ratings (de Araujo et al.,
2005). Similarly, Zellner, McGarry, Mattern-McClory, and
Abreu (2008) found explicitly labeling unisex fragrances as
1

1451

male (or female) made participants perceive the fragrance as
more masculine (or feminine) (measured by colors matched
to fragrances). These effects have been described as
“olfactory illusions” (Herz, 2003; 2005).
Previous studies examining effects of language on
olfaction have used explicit labels, so it is possible
participants in these studies were strategically using the
linguistic information they were given. So, although de
Araujo et al., (2005) find effects of labels on olfactory
pleasantness in the brain, the effects could still be the result
of top-down integration of explicit semantic information
with an ambiguous olfactory percept. The current study
aims to investigate the influence of language on odor
cognition by moving away from explicit semantic
information to implicit semantic cues provided through
grammatical gender. By focusing on grammatical cues we
can address, in a novel manner, the extent to which
language can affect odor cognition. Specifically, we test
whether the grammatical gender of descriptions of
fragrances affects how a fragrance is perceived and
remembered.
Grammatical gender divides nouns into classes according
to the behavior of associated words (e.g., articles,
adjectives; cf. Corbett, 2006). In some languages, nouns
possess a gender based on natural gender, or “sex”, i.e.,
masculine, feminine. Grammatical gender is typically
semantically arbitrary for objects without a natural gender
(that is, there is nothing inherently masculine or feminine
about the objects to which grammatical gender is assigned).
Moreover, grammatical gender of nouns can vary across
languages (for example apple is masculine in German, der
Apfel, and feminine in French, la pomme). Despite this
apparent arbitrariness of gender assignment to nouns,
grammatical gender has been shown to affect how speakers
of such languages think about objects. For example, Spanish
and German speakers are more likely to ascribe masculine
qualities to grammatically male objects and feminine
qualities to grammatically female objects: German speakers
described a key, which has masculine grammatical gender in
German, using terms such as “hard, heavy, jagged, metal,
serrated and useful”, whereas Spanish speakers, for which
the grammatical gender is female, instead used terms such
as “golden intricate, little, lovely, shiny and tiny”
(Boroditsky et al., 2003).
Effects of grammatical gender have been found in tasks
that do not explicitly promote the use of grammatical
categories, suggesting grammatical gender information is
accessed automatically and implicitly (Boutonnet,
Athanasopoulos, & Thierry, 2012). Using ERPs during a
semantic categorization task of pictures, grammatical gender
consistency affected LAN amplitude, an ERP marker of
morphosyntactic processing, in Spanish-English bilinguals,
but not English monolinguals (Boutonnet et al., 2012). This
effect was found within an all English context, suggesting
grammatical gender information can be accessed
automatically and implicitly (although see, e.g., Vigliocco,
Vinson, Paganelli, & Dworzynski, 2005).

This study builds on previous work in two fundamental
ways. First, we test a non-lexical verbal manipulation on
odor: i.e., grammatical gender. Second, we test the effects of
grammatical gender on thought in a new way. Instead of
explicitly judging the referent objects of nouns (e.g.,
Boroditsky et al., 2003), here participants judged odors
associated with nouns possessing male or female
grammatical gender.
We gave French and German speakers the same perfumes
and the same descriptors, differing only in their grammatical
gender: if the descriptors were masculine in one group, they
were feminine in the other. Participants read the descriptions
of odors (with masculine vs. feminine nouns), then smelled
masculine and feminine fragrances, and rated the fragrance
on a number of dimensions. After that, participants
completed a recognition test for the fragrances they had
smelled. Note, participants were never explicitly told
whether the perfumes were masculine or feminine (cf.,
Zellner et al., 2008). This information was implicitly
conveyed through the nouns by virtue of their grammatical
class. We predicted the perception and memory of the
fragrances would be affected by the congruence between
grammatical gender of the nouns used to describe the
fragrance and the gender of the fragrance.

Method
Participants
30 native German speakers (21 female; average age 26.9,
SD = 9.9) and 31 native French speakers (20 female;
average age 31.2, SD = 12.8) participated in the experiment.
Material
Eight fragrances were used, four marketed as masculine
scents and four marketed as feminine scents. Fragrances
were selected according to online “bestseller” lists in
Germany and France (see Table 1). In addition, a further
eight fragrances (four masculine, four feminine) were
selected to be used as distractors in the recognition test at
the end of the experiment. To present each fragrance, plastic
pellets were sprayed with a small amount of a fragrance and
then placed inside a squeezy bottle.
Eight fragrance descriptions were used (four female
grammatical gender, four with male grammatical gender)
(see Table 2). Each description contained three nouns of the
same grammatical gender. Nouns were selected so that their
grammatical genders were different in German and French.
For example, one set of ingredients was pumpkin, sage,
marjoram, with all ingredients masculine nouns in German
(Kürbis, Salbei, Marjoran), but feminine nouns in French
(citrouille, sauge, marjolaine).
Each fragrance was paired once with a grammatically
female description and once with a grammatically male
description, distributed across two experimental lists.

2

1452

clicking. After completing the five ratings, a 2000ms blank
screen was presented before the next trial.
After all fragrances had been rated, participants were told
they must complete a recognition test. They smelled sixteen
fragrances, half they had smelled before, and half were new.
As before, the squeezy bottles were placed beneath the
participants’ nose and they were asked to smell when the
bottle was squeezed by the experimenter. If the fragrance
was new, participants were told to click in a box labeled
“new”, but if the fragrance had been smelled previously
they were to click in a box labeled “old”. Each box turned
red when a response had been made.

Table 1. Male and female fragrances

Results

Table 2. Masculine (m) and feminine (f) fragrance
descriptions.

Procedure
E-Prime (Version 2.0) was used to present written fragrance
descriptions and collect participants’ responses. Participants
were instructed to carefully read the description of each
fragrance that included key ingredients. To make sure
participants paid attention to the descriptions, they were told
they would need to remember the fragrances and
descriptions at the end of the experiment. When they had
read a description, the experimenter placed the squeezy
bottle beneath the participants’ nose and instructed them to
smell as it was squeezed. The bottle was squeezed three
times with a gap of around four seconds between each
squeeze. Order of fragrance presentation was randomized.
After smelling the fragrance, participants pressed the space
bar on the keyboard to continue to ratings of the fragrance.
Participants were then asked to rate the fragrance in terms of
pleasantness, intensity, how likely they would be to buy the
fragrance for their father or brother, their mother or sister,
how much they would be willing to pay for the fragrance,
and how clearly they could smell the ingredients in the
fragrance. Ratings were made on a scale of 0 to 100, and
participants responded by moving a mouse along a scale and

Linear mixed effect models in R (R Core Team, 2013),
using the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, &
Walker, 2014), were conducted on the rating scores for each
rating question separately, and for accuracy in the
recognition test (proportion of fragrances correctly
recognized as “old”). Fragrance gender (male vs. female),
grammatical gender (male vs. female), language (German
vs. French) and the interaction were entered as fixed factors
and fragrance item and participant were random factors.1
We predicted ratings and memory of the fragrances would
be different when the gender of the fragrance matched the
grammatical gender of the descriptors compared to when
they did not match. For brevity sake, we only report
significant effects.
As would be expected, participants indicated they were
more likely to buy a female fragrance than a male fragrance
for their mother or sister (t = 2.62, p < .01), and vice versa
more likely to buy a male fragrance for their father or
brother (t = 5.27, p < .001). Overall, male fragrances were
rated as more pleasant than female fragrances (t = 1.95, p =
.05).
For ratings of ingredient clarity there was a significant
interaction between fragrance gender and language (t = 2.8,
p < .01) such that ratings were higher for French
descriptions than German descriptions for female, but not
male fragrances. There was also a significant three-way
interaction between grammatical gender, fragrance and
language (t = 2.64, p < .01). This three-way interaction
reflects a significant interaction between grammatical
gender and language for male fragrances (t = 4.29, p <
.001), but not for female fragrances (t = .97, p = .33).
Participants indicated they could perceive the ingredients in
male fragrances more clearly with masculine descriptions in
French, but with feminine description in German (see Figure
1). There were no other effects in the ratings of fragrances.

1

A separate set of participants smelled each fragrance and
judged whether they thought it was for a man or woman. Based on
these ratings Joop was classified as a female fragrance instead of a
male fragrance.

3

1453

Figure 1: Fragrance ratings for question “How clearly can
you perceive the ingredients in the fragrance?”
Importantly, and in line with our predictions, we found an
interaction between fragrance gender and grammatical
gender in memory performance (t = 2.0, p = .05).
Participants were more likely to correctly recognize a
fragrance when the gender of the fragrance matched the
grammatical gender of the description than when it did not
match (see Figure 2). There were no further significant
effects in memory.

Figure 2: Recognition accuracy for male and female
fragrances described with masculine and feminine nouns in
French and German

Discussion
We found memory for male and female fragrances was
greater when the fragrance was described using nouns with
grammatical gender matching the fragrance gender. This
finding parallels previous work examining gender
information during sentence processing, showing processing
is enhanced for gender congruent information compared to
gender incongruent or neutral information (Friederici &
Jacobsen 1999; Guillelmon & Grosjean, 2001). Similarly,
Boroditsky and Schmidt (2000) found memory for the sex
of proper names given to objects (e.g., Erica) was higher
when the sex matched the grammatical gender of the object.
What could explain these effects? There are, at least, three
possible mechanisms to consider. Grammatical gender
information from the descriptions could be combined with
gender information from the fragrance, so that the more
similar the information, the stronger the memory trace

formed. Alternatively, grammatical gender information
could have primed a specific gender construal, making it
easier to subsequently process information matching in
gender – meaning fragrances of the same gender were more
easily processed, and hence remembered better. Similar
findings have, however, been explained as inhibition in
processing when there is incongruent gender information
(e.g., Jakubowicz & Faussart, 1998). That is, information is
more difficult to process, or the memory trace is interfered
with, when gender information is mismatching.
Odors are difficult to name and identify: we cannot see
them and we have difficulty localizing them in space
(Engen, 1982). We therefore rely more heavily on external
context to extract meaning (Herz, 2003). Herz (2003)
proposes there may be a dual-coding system for olfaction
(similar to Paivo’s (1971) original dual-coding theory) in
which olfactory perception is sensitive to both verbal
context and sensory experience. Thus, verbal labels
attributed to odors can be a crucial factor in odor
interpretation. Previous studies have concluded that odor
memory is improved with the addition of verbal labels in
general (e.g., Rabin & Cain, 1984; Lyman & McDaniel,
1986) because they provide extra retrieval paths (Lyman &
McDaniel, 1990), for example. Here we show the type of
label is important for memory, with memory being
enhanced only when features of the verbal label match odor
features.
We used fragrances in this study, which contain a mixture
of scents. Odor perception is a configural process (ThomasDanguin et al., 2014), with little access to constituent parts
of an odor. Perceiving all individual ingredients within a
fragrance is thus almost impossible (our ability to perceive
odor constituents in a mixture is limited; Laing & Francis,
1989). Fragrances can be considered complex, and so we
have tested odor cognition at its most vulnerable. Whether
or not grammatical gender information could influence
perception and memory for simpler or more familiar odors
with more clearly identifiable sources is an open question.
Evidence from other perceptual domains suggests
language is more likely to influence perception when
perception is difficult. Results from Pavan, Skujevskis, and
Baggio (2013) support the view that semantic information is
more likely to interact with perception when the sensory
signal is reduced or the task is more difficult. In a direction
discrimination task, listening to direction verbs affected
perceptual sensitivity when the visual stimuli were
presented at threshold, but not when presented at
suprathreshold. Similar findings are found in speech
perception: watching a speaker’s lip movements enhances
speech comprehension, particularly in noisy environments
(e.g., Ma, Zhou, Ross, Foxe, & Parra, 2009). Again, since
odor cognition is more difficult to conceptualize than the
other senses, we could expect language to have its maximal
influence here (cf., Herz, 2003), and even more so for
complex mixtures of odors.
We found an interaction between fragrance gender,
grammatical gender and language in ratings of ingredient
4

1454

clarity such that participants perceived the ingredients in
male fragrances more clearly with masculine descriptions in
French, but with feminine descriptions in German. We
primarily included this rating question to encourage people
to carefully read the fragrance description, as it would be
possible to complete the other ratings based on the smell of
the fragrance alone. Since this is the only rating specifically
requiring participants to combine descriptions with the odor,
it is not surprising this is where we see effects of language.
However, the results are puzzling. Why would grammatical
gender behave differently in French and German?
One possibility is the effect is not driven by grammatical
gender, but another aspect of the words used, such as
conceptual gender. That is, people may have masculine or
feminine associations to the objects themselves. It is known
that people “genderize”, or assign conceptual gender to,
objects (Yorkston & de Mello, 2005). Certain objects are
associated more with maleness and potency, and others
femaleness and beauty (Foundalis, 2002). For example,
Sera, Berge, and Pintado (1994) found English speakers
(for whom there is no grammatical gender) consistently
judged natural objects as female, and artificial objects as
male. In the present experiment, it is possible slate, for
example, had more masculine associations than magnolia. If
one set of words in our study had systematic
masculine/feminine conceptual associations, then their
congruence with the gender of the fragrance could affect
responses. It would therefore be important in future work to
carefully control stimuli such that grammatical and
conceptual gender are manipulated orthogonally.
An alternative explanation for the difference between
French and German is related to the transparency of the
gender systems (e.g., Sera et al., 2002; Vigliocco et al.,
2005). French has only two grammatical genders: masculine
and feminine, but German has three: masculine, feminine
and neuter. Famously, the mapping of natural gender to
grammatical gender in German is not clear-cut. So although
woman is feminine, as would be expected, girl and wife are
neuter grammatical gender (Twain, 1880). In French
grammatical gender information is widespread in every
utterance: articles, nouns, and adjectives all carry
morphological information about gender. But in German
marking of grammatical gender is more haphazard, so not
all indefinite articles and adjectives carry gender
information. In addition, case interacts with gender in
complex ways in German, but not French. If grammatical
gender is learned by noticing the relationship between
natural gender and grammatical gender, then an inconsistent
relationship between natural and grammatical gender within
a language would lead to weak effects of grammatical
gender. This idea is supported by the fact that systematic
and robust grammatical gender effects have been found in
Romance languages (e.g., French and Spanish), but not in
German (Sera et al., 2002; Vigliocco et al., 2005).
We found participants preferred female fragrances for
female relatives and male fragrances for male relatives. This
suggests the gender of a fragrance comes to mind readily

when smelling it. Fragrances are typically marketed as male
or female, thus over time associations are learned between
certain types of odors and natural gender. So, although
correctly identifying the source of an odor is difficult (e.g.,
Cain, 1979; de Wijk et al. 1995), gender may be one of the
dimensions along which odors can be successfully
described, along with pleasantness – at least for fragrances
(cf., Yeshurun & Sobel, 2010).
Our results have further implications for marketing. We
have shown information from language can be combined
with information from odors, subsequently enhancing
encoding and recognition. This is important from a
marketing perspective: it is no good a fragrance being
pleasantly perceived if the product itself cannot be
remembered. When odor identification is weak, it becomes
particularly vulnerable to contextual information, making it
the ideal venue to use interesting marketing devices and
ploys.
In sum, we have shown grammatical information can
affect how odors are perceived and remembered. Thus, not
only is odor cognition vulnerable to explicit semantic labels,
it can also be affected by more subtle linguistic
manipulations, such as grammatical gender.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by The Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research: NWO VICI grant “Human olfaction at
the intersection of language, culture and biology”. Thanks to
Annetta Kopecka, Miklos Dorsche, Nina Krijnen, Alice
Reinhartz, Patricia Manko and Julia Misersky for help with
stimuli creation, translations and testing.

References
de Araujo, I. E., Rolls, E. T., Velazco, M. I., Margot, C., &
Cayeux, I. (2005). Cognitive Modulation of
Olfactory Processing. Neuron, 46(4), 671–679.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen
and S4. R Package Version, 1(7).
Boroditsky, L., & Schmidt, L. A., (2000). Sex, Syntax, and
Semantics. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Philadelphia, PA.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex,
syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner & S. GoldinMeadow (Eds.) Language in mind: Advances in the
study of language and thought (pp. 61–80).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boutonnet, B., Athanasopoulos, P., & Thierry, G. (2012).
Unconscious effects of grammatical gender during
object categorisation. Brain Research, 1479, 72–
79.
Burenhult, N., & Majid, A. (2011). Olfaction in Aslian
ideology and language. The Senses & Society, 6(1),
19–29.
5

1455

Cain, W. S. (1979). To know with the nose: Keys to odor
identification. Science, 203 (4379) 467–470.
Corbett, G. G. (2006). Gender, grammatical. The
Encyclopedia of language and linguistics. (pp.749–
756.) 2nd Edition. Oxford: Elsevier
Crowder, R. G., & Schab, F. R. (1995). Imagery for odors.
In R. G., Crowder, & F. R. Schab (Eds.) Memory
for odors (pp. 93-108). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Foundalis, H. E. (2002). Evolution of gender in IndoEuropean languages. In Proceedings of the 24th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Fairfax, VA
Friederici, A. D., & Jacobsen, T. (1999). Processing
grammatical
gender
during
language
comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 28(5), 467–484.
Guillelmon, D., & Grosjean, F. (2001). The gender marking
effect in spoken word recognition: The case of
bilinguals. Memory & Cognition, 29(3), 503–511.
Herz, R. S. (2003). The effect of verbal context on olfactory
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 132(4), 595–606.
Herz, R. S. (2005). The unique interaction between
language and olfactory perception and cognition. In
Rosen, D. T. (Ed.) Trends in experimental research
(pp 91–99). London: Nova Publishing.
Herz, R. S., & Clef, J. von. (2001). The influence of verbal
labeling on the perception of odors: Evidence for
olfactory illusions? Perception, 30(3), 381 – 391.
Jakubowicz, C., & Faussart, C. (1998). Gender agreement in
the processing of spoken French. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 27(6), 597–617.
Laing, D. G., & Francis, G. W. (1989). The capacity of
humans to identify odors in mixtures. Physiology
& Behavior, 46(5), 809–814.
Lyman, B. J., & McDaniel, M. A. (1986). Effects of
encoding strategy on long-term memory for
odours. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 38(4), 753–765.
Lyman, B. J., & McDaniel, M. A. (1990). Memory for odors
and odor names: Modalities of elaboration and
imagery. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
16(4), 656–664.
Ma, W. J., Zhou, X., Ross, L. A., Foxe, J. J., & Parra, L. C.
(2009). Lip-reading aids word recognition most in
moderate noise: a Bayesian explanation using
highdimensional feature space. PloS One, 4(3),
e4638.
Majid, A., & Burenhult, N. (2014). Odors are expressible in
language, as long as you speak the right language.
Cognition, 130(2), 266–270.
Majid, A. (2015). Cultural factors shape olfactory language.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(11), 629–630.
Olofsson, J. K., & Gottfried, J. A. (2015). The muted sense:
neurocognitive limitations of olfactory language.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19 (6), 314-321

Paivio, A (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Pavan, A., Skujevskis, M., & Baggio, G. (2013). Motion
words
selectively
modulate
direction
discrimination sensitivity for threshold motion.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, (134).
R Core Team. (2013). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved
from http://www.R-project.org
Rabin, M. D., & Cain, W. S. (1984). Odor recognition:
Familiarity,
identifiability,
and
encoding
consistency. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10(2), 316–325.
San Roque, L., Kendrick, K. H., Norcliffe, E. J., Brown, P.,
Defina, R., Dingemanse, M., … Majid, A. (2015).
Vision verbs dominate in conversation across
cultures, but the ranking of non-visual verbs varies.
Cognitive Linguistics, 26(1), 31–60.
Sera, M. D., Berge, C. A. H., & Pintado, J. C. (1994).
Grammatical and conceptual forces in the
attribution of gender by English and Spanish
speakers. Cognitive Development, 9(3), 261–292.
Thomas-Danguin, T., Sinding, C., Romagny, S., El
Mountassir, F., Atanasova, B., Le Berre, E., Le
Bon, A., Coureaud, G. (2014). The perception of
odor objects in everyday life: a review on the
processing of odor mixtures. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5.
Twain, M. (1880). A tramp abroad. Leipzig: Bernhard
Tauchnitz.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Paganelli, F., & Dworzynski,
K. (2005). Grammatical gender effects on
cognition: Implications for language learning and
language use. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134(4), 501–520.
de Wijk, R.A., Schab, F.R. & Cain, W.S. (1995) Odor
identification. In R. G., Crowder, & F. R., Schab
(Eds). Memory for odors. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
21-37.
Yeshurun, Y., & Sobel, N. (2010). An odor is not worth a
thousand words: From multidimensional odors to
unidimensional odor objects. Annual Review of
Psychology, 61, 219–241.
Yorkston, E., & de Mello, G. E. (2005). Linguistic gender
marking and categorization. Journal of Consumer
Research, 32(2), 224–234.
Zellner, D. A., McGarry, A., Mattern-McClory, R., &
Abreu, D. (2007). Masculinity/femininity of fine
fragrances affects color-odor correspondences: A
case for cognitions influencing cross-modal
correspondences. Chemical Senses, 33(2), 211–
222.

6

1456

