Aiding Preschoolers’ word-learning by scaffolding lexical awareness
Sofia Jimenez (sofia.r.jimenez@vanderbilt.edu)
Kaitlin Ryan (kaitlin.f.ryan@gmail.com)
Megan M. Saylor (megan.saylor@vanderbilt.edu)
Psychology and Human Development, 230 Appleton Place #552
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Abstract

words and accepting the known words shows mastery of
this task. Overall there was an increase in awareness of
lexical ignorance from three to four. Three-year-olds
accepted an average of 51% of the made-up words and 84%
of the familiar words. Four-year-olds performance was more
robust as they accepted 24% of the novel words and 92% of
the familiar words. Their test of meaning-cued awareness
mirrored this performance pattern. These results suggest
there may be an increase in children’s lexical awareness
during the preschool years.
Children’s awareness of lexical ignorance can be
supported by exposure to words, actions, and objects that
differ in familiarity. For example, asking children to sort
words into piles of known and unknown words with a visual
aid leads to greater accuracy on lexical awareness tasks
(Merriman & Maritza, 2004), the pairing a novel word with
a novel action (Merriman, et al. 1996) and exposure to
familiar and novel objects (e.g., Hartin, Stevenson, &
Merriman, 2016). This work suggests that lexical awareness
in preschoolers may be work best when children are
prompted to consider familiarity and novelty. One
possibility is that children may benefit from being prompted
to consider whether they know the meaning of an unfamiliar
word prior to hearing a definition, if they do not deploy their
awareness of lexical ignorance spontaneously.
One additional question is how age-related improvements
in lexical awareness might be supported by cognitive and
linguistic abilities. One possibility is that concomitant
developments in cognitive skills may support this
understanding (Merriman & Marazita, 2004) such that
increased short-term memory capacity or a heightened
ability to mentally represent objects may support children’s
lexical awareness abilities. These cognitive skills might help
children recognize when they do not know words to the
extent that they support search through their lexicon.
Alternatively, the development of these cognitive skills
might be separate from the advance of lexical awareness.
We investigate these two possibilities in the current study.
Although some children are reluctant to ask adults
questions about unfamiliar words, children with large
vocabularies are one exception; they are much more likely
to ask about the meaning of a word (Jacobson & Saylor, in
prep). This suggests that children who already have large
vocabularies may have an easier time gaining more
vocabulary. This has been referred to as the Matthew effect

Preschool-aged children develop awareness of the words they
do and do not know. Awareness of one’s lexicon may
encourage word learning if children pay more attention to the
definition of unknown words. Here, we tested 3-4-year-old
children (N = 91) on a word learning task embedded in an ebook. When a novel word was read, children were either
asked if they knew the word, asked a question about the
storyline, or asked no question. Then they were given a
description without visual input and asked to identify the
referent’s picture from three choices. Participants who were
asked if they knew a word before being provided with the
definition identified more referents than children in the other
conditions. Children’s word learning was predicted by shortterm memory.
Keywords: word learning, lexical awareness, preschoolers,
object representation, memory

Introduction
Recognizing that a word is unfamiliar might help children
learn its meaning. This recognition can prompt the search
for a definition, or the use of context to reason about
meaning. Although older children and adults are often aware
of what they know and what they do not (Klin et al. 1997,
Flavell, 1979), preschool-aged children are still developing
this ability. The use of the word “know” emerges around a
child’s third birthday (Bartsch & Wellman, 1995;
Montgomery, 1992), along with other words referring to
mental states (Johnson & Maratsos, 1977). At the same
time, preschoolers are developing their ability to monitor
their uncertainty across domains (Lyons & Ghetti, 2011).
Since children ages three-to-five are acquiring many words
each day, researchers have investigated their ability to
recognize when unfamiliar words as well as the factors that
influence this recognition.
Merriman and Marazita (2004) argued that there are two
components to determining whether one knows a word:
recognition that the sound form is unfamiliar (word-cued
awareness) or appreciation that one does not know the name
for a certain type of thing (meaning-cued awareness).
Merriman and Marazita (2004) described preschool
children’s ability to use these types of cues. They tested
word-cued awareness by asking children if made up words
and real words were words or not. Rejecting the made up

913

(Stanovich, 1986), or the “rich getting richer.” However, the
direction the relationship is unclear: does having a larger
lexicon lead you to knowing when a question should be
asked (i.e. more lexical awareness leads to more question
asking and vocabulary increases), or do some children have
a larger vocabulary because they are predisposed to asking
questions. One way to investigate these possibilities is to
have adults scaffold lexical awareness by ask preschoolers
questions about word knowledge.
Question asking during joint book reading is an
established technique called dialogic reading (Whitehurst, et
al., 1988) and it aids in word learning (Senechal & Cornell,
1993; Senechal et. al., 1995; Whitehurst et. al., 1988). The
benefit of using a dialogic reading-like technique to
manipulate lexical awareness is that it children can be asked
about the novel vocabulary as well as other elements of the
story. Asking if a child knows the meaning of novel items
could scaffold awareness of lexical ignorance and lead to
word learning. Another possibility is that asking any type of
question heightens preschoolers’ attention to the text and
promotes word learning.
In the current study we explore these possibilities by
asking questions that draw attention to lexical ignorance,
asking a question unrelated to the target word, or asking no
questions. We will also test skills that may influence word
learning and the ability to access the lexicon such as shortterm memory, object representation and existing language
ability. We predict that children with more robust memory,
object representation, and language abilities will learn more
words during our task. By testing cognitive abilities we
hope to more fully explain the developmental trend in
lexical awareness.

Design
All participants were administered five tasks in the same
order: the electronic picture book, lexical awareness task, a
forward digit span, Test of Early Language Development -3
(TELD-3; Hresko, Reid, & Hammill, 1999) and an object
representation task called the Vanderbilt Expertise Task-Kid
(VET-Kid). Children tested in the lab completed the tasks
during a single visit and most of the participants tested in
child-care centers did four of the tasks on one day and the
VET-Kid a few days later (Range: 0-21 days, M = 2.55, sd
= 3.50).
For the electronic picture book, children were randomly
assigned to one of three conditions so that ages were and
distribution of males and females across conditions was
equal (to be described in more detail below): lexical
awareness (n = 26, 11 females), distractor question (n = 31,
14 females), no question (n = 34, 16 females) See Table 2
for mean ages by condition.

Materials
Electronic Picture Book. Participants were read an
electronic picture book on a laptop that was created for this
experiment. It contained six novel target words, which were
names for made-up creatures. In the picture book, two
people (a brother and sister) participated in various activities
(e.g., playing in the garden, eating ice cream) and found
novel creatures. Illustrations were presented through
Microsoft Power Point on a laptop computer. An
experimenter read the text from a separate binder.
For test trials, children were presented each target item
with two distractors. The distractors matched the target in
color but differed in location and shape (See figure 1). One
of the distractors was another novel creature and one was a
familiar creature in an unfamiliar color (e.g. a purple pig).
The order of the target items and the order of the dimensions
were counterbalanced across participants.
Lexical awareness task. A task that assessed participants’
lexical awareness was created for the purpose of this
experiment. Twelve word pairs consisted of a familiar (i.e.
old) word paired with a novel (i.e. new) word. The familiar
words in the pairs increased in difficulty for later items (the
words were from the PPVT-IV). A PowerPoint of pictures
testing familiar word knowledge was also created.
Object representation task. To determine how well each
participant could mentally represent an object, we
administered a task that was an adaptation of the Vanderbilt
Expertise Task (McGugin, Richler, Herzmann, Speegle, &
Gauthier, 2012) originally designed for use with adults. This
task was programed on MatLab. Images of three object
types, teddy bears, toy cars and kid’s shoes were gathered
from Google images and shopping websites such Ebay (See
Table 1 for some example pictures).

Method
Participants
Ninety-one 3-4-year olds (range 36-63 months, M = 47
months, 44 Females) were recruited from childcare centers
and state birth records in the southeastern United States.
Eight additional children were recruited and not included in
the analysis for non-compliance (n = 2), biased responding
(n = 2) and experimenter error (n = 4). Participants were
typically developing, had intact hearing, and heard English
in their household 70% of the time or more.
Demographic surveys revealed that 53% of mothers had a
post graduate degree or some graduate school, 36% had a
college degree or some college, and 6% had a technical/AA
degree or a high school degree. Four participants’ parents
did not respond to this question. 22% of participants’
families reported an income of $150,000 or more per year,
25% reported an income between $100,000 to $150,000 per
year, 30% reported an income between $100,000 and
$50,000 per year, and 12% of families reported an income
of less than $50,000 per year. Ten participants’ parents did
not respond.

Procedure
To begin, children were seated at a table across from the
experimenter and began the electronic picture book task.
There were three conditions that differed according to what

914

the experimenter said after a novel word was mentioned
(e.g., Grimp in “They went into the garden to look for a
grimp.”). In the lexical awareness condition, the researcher
asked children if they knew what the target word meant
after a novel word was mentioned (Do you know what that
is?”). Children were expected to say “no” as the target
words were all novel, but if they said “yes” they were asked
to provide a definition. Most participants then admitted that
they did not know what it was. However, if they made up a
definition, they were told that the word was one they did not
know. In the distractor question condition, children were
asked about an element of the story that was not target-word
related (“Do you have a garden?”), and in the no question
condition the story was read straight through with no
interactive questions from the researcher to the participant.
After the target item was mentioned in the electronic
picture book and participants were either asked a question,
or not, the target was described in three dimensions: color,
location and shape. For example, the researcher would tell
the participant, “A grimp is orange, has a droopy nose and
lives in the trees.” The descriptions were given without
visual reference. Afterwards participants were asked,
“Which creature did they see?” and were presented with
three pictures, one target and two distractors. The placement
of the target words and distractors were counterbalanced
across trials and participants. There were six target words
and six different target-word presentation orders for each
condition.
Following this, children completed the lexical awareness
task. Participants were told that they were going to play a
game with words where they would hear two words; one
was an old word that they had heard before and knew what
it meant, for example, the word “book.” They were told the
other word was going to be a new word that they had not
heard before and didn’t know what it meant, like the word
“floopydoopy.” They were then given two practice trials in
which they were given word pairs (e.g. sock and baloota)
and asked to say the new word. For each practice trial, if
participants responded incorrectly (i.e. by saying the old
word) they were asked if they knew the definition of the old
word (e.g. sock) and were guided to the correct answer.
Once they provided or were given the correct answers on
the two practice items they proceeded to the testing phase.
Participants were reminded about saying the new word
before each pair was presented. Additionally every four
items they were reminded that new words were words they
had never heard before. The order of familiar and novel
words was counterbalanced across items.
After the pairs were administered we tested participants’
knowledge of the familiar words by presenting them with a
three-option forced task in which they selected the familiar
referent (e.g. a picture of a cat) among two distractor
pictures (e.g. a picture of an oven and a frog). If the
participant could not identify the familiar item when
prompted then those items were excluded. The number of
errors on the task (i.e. saying the known word was the word
they did not know) was the measure of performance. If

participant failed to identify any particular familiar word the
trial was not included as an error, because both words in the
pair would have been unknown for the child.
To assess short-term memory children were given a
forward digit span task. Then their language abilities were
tested with the TELD-3.
The VET-Kid task tested object representation. For this
task we tested children on three different categories: teddy
bears, toy cars and shoes. Children were asked to remember
three exemplars of a category (e.g., three teddy bears) in the
context of story about a character named Casey who lost his
three teddy bears and needed the child to help find them.
During training they were shown Casey’s three teddy bears.
Then they are asked, “Can you find one of Casey’s bears”
when presented with an array of three teddy bears that
included one of Casey’s bears.
For the first nine trials participants were asked to identify
pictures of the items that were identical to the ones they
were trained on (OR-Easy). They received feedback on the
first 9 trials, and showing them the target item if they were
incorrect. Then children completed twelve transfer trials in
which children were asked to identify the target items that
were shown from a different angle (OR-Hard). For the
transfer trials, children did not receive feedback. Three
additional study trials, as well as three catch trials where the
target object was paired with unrelated distractors were
interspersed to ensure participant’s attention and boost
confidence. See Table 1 for the design matrix.

Results
Preliminary analyses revealed no differences in age,
lexical awareness, TELD-3, digit span, or object
representation between the participants in the three
conditions (see Table 2).
A planned comparison revealed that children in the
lexical awareness condition (M = 3.36, sd = 2.00) learned
significantly more words than children in distractor
question (M = 2.45, sd = 1.67, p < .05) and no question (M =
2.44, sd = 1.36, p < .05) conditions.
To test whether children were able to identify words
beyond what would be expected by chance, we conducted
tests against chance for each condition. In the two control
conditions word learning performance did not differ from
chance, for the distractor question (t(30) = 1.51, p = .14)
and the no question (t(35) = 1.96, p = .06) conditions, but
the lexical awareness condition boosted children’s word
learning above chance levels (t(25) = 3.40, p = .002).
For the purposes of the rest of the analysis we collapsed
across the two control conditions (since responding in these
two conditions did not differ). Bivariate correlations
revealed that language and memory abilities were correlated
with word learning: TELD-3 (r(87) = .32, p = .002), lexical
awareness (r(86) = .29, p = .006), digit span (r(91) = .33 , p
= .001) and object representation (r(87) = .37, p < .001).

915

We conducted a multiple-regression with age, condition,
TELD-3, lexical awareness, digit span and object
representation as predictors of word learning. Our model
was significant (F(6,77) = 4.50, R2adjusted = .21, p < .001) and
condition was a significant predictor (t(77) = 2.58, β = .26,
p = .012), as was short term memory (t(77) = 2.16, β= .25, p
= .03). Object representation also emerged as a marginal
predictor (t(77) = 1.93, β= .25, p = .06). See Table 3 for
regression table.

Tables
Table 1: Object Representation Task.
Example Stimuli

# of trials
1

Take

See above
See above

Discussion
We investigated whether adults could scaffold lexical
awareness for preschool aged children by asking questions
that made children consider whether they know the meaning
of a novel word. We also investigated whether cognitive
abilities influenced word learning, and if these skills might
explain variability in learning. Our results suggest that both
asking questions that highlight lexical ignorance and
memory abilities affected children’s word learning success.
In this study, age, language abilities and a measure of
lexical awareness did not independently predict word
learning above digit span (short-term memory) or object
representation. This was surprising, in part, because
previous research has found age and language ability to be
important predictors of word learning during shared reading
(Sénéchal et al., 1995). One explanation for our results is
that the current task loaded heavily on children’s memory
skills because the descriptions were offered in the absence
of the referent objects. Children therefore had to hold
information about features in mind rather than immediately
mapping a label to a visible referent. The failure of our
lexical awareness measure to predict success may indicate
that children do not employ their understanding
automatically during the preschool period. In other words, it
may be that preschoolers sometimes know that they do not
know a word, but there are not sure how to act on their
ignorance. This is consistent with research suggesting that
practice with novel and familiar words and objects leads to
greater awareness of lexical ignorance in preschoolers
(Marazita & Merriman, 2004; Hartin et al, 2016).
In the current study, the lexical awareness condition may
have worked in two ways: it could be drawing attention to
the fact that the child does not know the word; alternatively,
it could be drawing increased attention to the word form. To
test these two processes separately in future work, we plan
to draw attention to the phonology of the new word
separately from having children think about the meaning of
the word. Additionally, in future work we will more directly
test word learning by asking children, “Point to the grimp,”
instead of, “Which creature did they see?”
This research provides suggestive evidence that children
may use what they do and do not know to propel their
vocabulary acquisition and adults’ question asking might
support preschoolers’ metacognitive abilities.

Trial type
Study

See above
See above
See above
See above
See above
See above
See above

Identical test

6

Study
Identical test
Catch

1
3
1

Transfer test

3

Study
Transfer test
Catch
Transfer test
Study
Transfer test
Catch

1
3
1
3
1
3
1

Table 2: Means and standard deviations of study
measures.
Variable
Age
Word ID
LA
TELD-3
Digit
Object Rep
OR-Easy
OR-Hard

Lexical
Awareness
48.44 (7.47)
3.36 (2.00)
7.80 (3.33)
27.09 (3.94)
6.24 (1.51)
13.25 (3.83)
5.52 (1.71)
7.73 (2.25)

Distractor
Question
45.42 (10.60)
2.45 (1.67)
8.41 (3.45)
26.13 (4.17)
5.90 (1.68)
13.15 (3.88)
5.67 (1.69)
7.48 (2.46)

No
Question
48.69 (7.18)
2.44 (1.36)
6.72 (3.65)
26.03 (4.53)
6.00 (1.26)
11.96 (4.43)
5.09 (2.14)
6.86 (3.65)

Table 3: Regression predicting word learning.
Predictors
B
Age
-.01
Condition
.97
Digit-span
.28
TELD-3
.02
Lexical Awareness
.05
Object Representation .11
^ = p < .1. * = p < .05.

916

SE B
.02
.37
.13
.05
.06
.06

β
-.07
.26*
.25*
.04
.87
.06^

Figures

McGugin, R. W., Richler, J. J., Herzmann, G., Speegle, M.,
& Gauthier, I. (2012). The Vanderbilt Expertise Test
reveals domain-general and domain-specific sex effects in
object recognition. Vision Research, 69, 10–22.
Merriman, W. E., Evey-Burkey, J. A., Marazita, J. M., and
Jarvis, L. H. (1996). Young two-year-olds’ tendency to
map novel verbs onto novel actions. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 63, 466–498.
Merriman, W. E., & Marazita, J. M. (2004). Young
children’s awareness of their own lexical ignorance:
Relations to word mapping, memory processes, and
beliefs about change detection. In D. T. Levin (Ed.),
Thinking and Seeing: Visual Metacognition in adults and
children. (57-73). MIT Press.
Merriman, W. E., and Schuster, J. M. (1991). Young
children’s disambiguation of object name reference. Child
Development, 62, 1288–1301.
Sénéchal, M., & Cornell, E. H. (1993). Vocabulary
Acquisition through Shared Reading experiences.
Reading research quarterly, 28(4), 360–374.
Sénéchal, M., Thomas, E., & Monker, J. (1995). Individual
Differences in 4-Year-Old Children’s Acquisition of
Vocabulary During Storybook Reading. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 87(2), 218–229.
Stanovich, K. E. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: Some
consequences of individual differences in the acquisition
of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 360–406.
doi:10.1598=RRQ.21.4.1
Whitehurst, G. J., Falco, F. L., Lonigan, C. J., Fischel, J. E.,
Debaryshe, B. D., & Caulfield, M. (1988). Accelerating
Language Development Through Picture Book Reading.
Developmental Psychology, 24(4), 552–559.

Figure 1: Example test trial from electronic picture book.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Vanderbilt Psychology
and Human Development departmental funds as well a
National
Science
Foundation—Graduate
Research
Fellowship awarded to the first author (1445197). We
would like to sincerely thank the members of the Language
Development Lab for their help with recruitment, data input
and organization as well as the parents and preschools that
allowed their children in to participate in this study.

References
Bartsch, K., and Wellman, H. M. (1995). Children talk
about the mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive
monitoring: A new area of cognitive–developmental
inquiry. American Psychologist, 34(10), 906–911.
doi:10.1037/0003-066x.34.10.906
Hartin, T. L., Stevenson, C. M., & Merriman, W. E. (2016).
Preexposure to Objects that Contrast in Familiarity
Improves Young Children’s Lexical Knowledge
Judgment. Language Learning and Development, 1-17.
Hresko, W. P., Reid, D. K., & Hammill, D. D. (1999).The
Test of Early Language Development-3(TELD-3). Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Jacobson, R. & Saylor, M. M. "What does that mean?"
Exploring information-seeking behavior in young
children” (in prep)
Johnson, C. N., & Maratsos, M. P. (1977). Early
comprehension of mental verbs: Think and know. Child
Development, 48, 1743-1747.
Klin, C. M., Guzman, A. E., and Levine, W. H. (1997).
Knowing that you don’t know: Metamemory and
discourse
processing.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23,
1378–1393.
Lyons, K. E., & Ghetti, S. (2011). The development of
uncertainty monitoring in early childhood. Child
Development, 82(6), 1778–87.
Marazita, J. M., & Merriman, W. E. (2004). Young
children’s judgment of whether they know names for
objects: The metalinguistic ability it reflects and the
processes it involves. Journal of Memory and Language,
51(3), 458–472.

917

