Influence of 3D images and 3D-printed objects on spatial reasoning
Akihiro Maehigashi (mhigashi@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Masahiro Oda (moda@mori.m.is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan

Yoshihiko Nakamura (ynakamura@jo.tomakomai-ct.ac.jp)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tomakomai College, Japan

Kensaku Mori (kensaku@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Information and Communications, Nagoya University, Japan

Tsuyoshi Igami (igami@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University, Japan
more effective than 2D images in providing an understanding of shapes and layouts; 3D images integrate the multiple
perspectives expressed by 2D images into a single perspective, provide supplementary depth cues, and display object
features that would be invisible in 2D images. In contrast,
they also found that 2D images were more useful than 3D
images for an understanding of relative positions because 2D
images display only necessary information and allow people
to focus on it.
Other studies have shown that 3D images are more useful than 2D images only for people with high spatial ability (Hegarty, Keehner, Cohen, Montello, & Lippa, 2007;
Nguyen, Nelson, & Wilson, 2011). Spatial ability is the
ability to mentally store and manipulate spatial representations accurately (Hegarty & Waller, 2005). High spatial ability individuals can infer a structure’s internal representation,
whereas low spatial ability individuals cannot accurately construct a structure’s internal representation and tend to depend
on external representations (Kali & Orion, 1996). Because
people with high spatial ability can recognize the complex
spatial information in a 3D image with less difficulty, they
can better take advantage of the information (Nguyen et al.,
2011).

Abstract
In this study, we experimentally investigated the influence of
a three-dimensional (3D) graphic image and a 3D-printed object on a spatial reasoning task in which participants were required to infer cross sections of a liver in a situation where liver
resection surgery was presupposed. The results of the study
indicated that using a 3D-printed object produced more accurate task performance and faster mental model construction of
a liver structure than a 3D image. During the task, using a
3D-printed object was assumed to reduce cognitive load and
information accessing cost more than using a 3D image.
Keywords: External representation; 3D print; Spatial reasoning; Mental model

Introduction
Spatial reasoning and external representations
Spatial reasoning refers to inferring an object’s shape and
structure and the physical relationship between objects using spatial information (e.g., Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989).
Spatial reasoning is ubiquitous in daily activities such as planning routes, inferring a road’s slope angle, or arranging furniture in a room.
External representations such as figures, tables, and graphs
are often used for spatial reasoning (Hegarty, 2011). Many
studies on distributed cognition theory demonstrated the effects of using external representations on cognitive activity
(e.g., Zhang & Norman, 1994). External representations
can store information externally and reduce working memory load (Zhang & Norman, 1994). Physically manipulating
external representations allows people to save mental rotation
efforts (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994). Furthermore, spatially organized information on external representations could allow the
offloading of cognitive processes onto perceptual processes
(Scaife & Rogers, 1996).
Many studies on spatial reasoning have shown that different external representations of the same information have different effects on spatial reasoning (e.g., Hegarty, 2011). John,
Cowen, Smallman, and Oonk (2001) experimentally investigated the effects of using two-dimensional (2D) and threedimensional (3D) graphic images of the same spatial information for spatial reasoning and found that 3D images were

3D-printed objects
The recent prevalence of 3D printers has made it possible for
people to replicate objects. 3D printers give people a totally
new and unprecedented way of displaying information and
have been used in various fields such as education, industrial manufacturing, and medicine. However, very few studies
have investigated the influence of 3D-printed objects on spatial reasoning.
Some studies experimentally investigated human understanding of molecular structures using concrete models
(Barrett, Stull, Hsu, & Hegarty, 2015; Stull, Barrett, &
Hegarty, 2013). In their experimental tasks, participants
learned molecular structures using 3D images or concrete
models. After their learning the structures, they were required
to orient the 3D images or concrete models in the same direc-

414

tions as the molecular structures depicted on paper. The results of these experiments demonstrated no difference in task
accuracy between the use of 3D images and concrete models.
However, the task completion time was shorter with the use
of 3D images than with concrete models. Based on these results, they concluded that a 3D image was more useful than a
concrete model for understanding physical structures. However, in their experiments, task accuracy rate was very high.
Therefore, further investigations that consider situations requiring people to understand more complex structures with
physical object models are necessary.
Furthermore, Maehigashi et al. (2015) investigated, using
an ethnographic method, the influence of using a 3D-printed
liver model on doctors during liver resection surgery. Protocol analyses results revealed that using 3D-printed models
helped doctors elaborate their mental models of a patient’s
liver, mentally simulate the liver resection accurately, and
share a similar mental model with other doctors. They also
suggested the possibility that a 3D-printed model enhances
mental model elaboration more than a 3D image.
In this study, we experimentally investigated the influence
of 3D images and 3D-printed objects on a spatial reasoning
task in which participants were to infer cross sections of a
liver in a situation where liver resection surgery was presupposed. We tested the following two hypotheses: (1) spatial
reasoning would be more accurate when a 3D-printed object
was used than when a 3D image was used and (2) the learning
time for constructing a mental model would be shorter when a
3D-printed object was used than when a 3D image was used.

the liver used for surgery. Figure 1 shows a 3D image, a 3Dprinted object, and a target.

(a) 3D image

(b) 3D-printed object

(c) Target

Figure 1: (a) 3D image, (b) 3D-printed object, and (c) target
The 3D image was created with Pluto, a computer-aided
diagnosis system developed at Nagoya University’s Graduate
School of Information Science, using data from a patient’s
liver measured by computed tomography (CT) (Figure 1a). In
the 3D image, the thickest vein, an inferior vena cava (IVC),
and five veins branching from the IVC were represented in
blue, and a tumor was represented in white. The participants
could rotate, zoom in on, and zoom out of the image using a
mouse.
The 3D-printed object and the three targets were created
with a 3D printer using the same CT liver data as the 3D
image (Figure 1b, 1c). In particular, a 0.02-mm thick layer
of acrylic resin was laid down in approximately 4,000 layers
to produce the 3D-printed object and the target. The extra
resin was then melted and removed, and the surface of the
printed liver was polished. The 3D-printed object shows a
liver’s inside structure. In the 3D-printed object, the IVC,
the five veins, and the tumor had the same relative scale and
color as those in the 3D image. In contrast, the liver’s inside
structure was invisible in the target as the inside structure of
a patient’s liver is invisible during surgery. The target’s surface was colored light gray. A line was drawn around each of
the three targets created from the same CT liver data. Each
line was drawn at a different location. Furthermore, on each
target, the letters “A” and “B” were represented and indicated
the two separated areas based on the drawn line. Two sets of
3D images, a 3D-printed object, and three targets were created from different CT liver datum.

Experiment
Participants memorized or referred to a liver’s internal structure displayed by a 3D image or a 3D-printed object and inferred the locations of veins on a certain cross section of a
liver and a tumor in the liver.

Method
Participants Forty-eight university students participated in
this experiment.
Factorial design The experiment had a two-factor mixed
design. The factors were (1) external representation (image
and object) between participants and (2) task situation (memory and reference) within participants.

Experimental task The experiment employed a spatial reasoning task in which participants were required to take a vein
and a tumor location test for each target after examining a 3D
image or a 3D-printed object. In the vein location test, participants were required to indicate the locations of the veins
that appeared on the cross section resulting from cutting the
target along the drawn line. In particular, participants were
required to mark “O” for the IVC and “X” for the branching
vein on the cross section’s outer contour that was printed on
the answer sheet (Figure 2). There were three types of cross
sections: one with no IVC and two branching veins, another
with one IVC and two branching veins, and the last with one
IVC and three branching veins. In the tumor location test,
the participants were to identify the area in the liver, A or B,
where the tumor occurred.

Material Two desks, a primary and a secondary desk, were
used in the experiment. The primary desk (representing an
operating table in a surgical setting) was set in front of a participant, and the secondary desk (representing a tool stand in a
surgical setting) was set on the participant’s right side. Three
boxes were placed on the primary desk. Each box contained a
3D-printed model of a liver (target) (representing a patient’s
liver) and an answer sheet. On the secondary desk was either a computer on which a liver’s 3D image was displayed
or a box containing a liver’s 3D-printed object created using
the same manufacturing method as the 3D-printed model of

415

ages or 3D-printed objects created from the different CT liver
datum were used.
The answer sheet provided for the vein and tumor location
tests and two questionnaires. In the questionnaires, the participants rated their confidence toward their answers in the vein
and the tumor location tests on a 7-point scale from (1) not
confident at all to (7) extremely confident. After the participants completed the tests and questionnaires for one target,
they returned the target and answer sheet to the box and took
another set from another box. One of the two task situations
was completed when they completed the tests and questionnaires for all three targets. A five-minute break was given
between the task situations.
The order of the task situations was counterbalanced between the participants. The combinations of CT liver datum
and task situations were also counterbalanced between the
participants. Three sets of targets and answer sheets were randomly placed in the boxes on the primary desk. Participants
were instructed to perform the tasks as accurately as possible.
Furthermore, removing the target from the primary desk was
forbidden during the experiment because it would be impossible for doctors to remove a patient’s liver from the operating
table during surgery. However, removing the 3D-printed object from the secondary desk was permitted in the object condition because doctors can place a liver’s 3D-printed model
right beside a patient’s liver to confirm the interior structure
of the liver during surgery (Maehigashi et al., 2015).

Figure 2: Figure 2: Vein location test. (a) Contour of cross
section of liver, (b) cross section of liver, and (c) participant’s
answer. (a) shows the outer contour of a liver’s cross section
printed on the answer sheet. (b) shows an actual cross section
of a liver. (c) shows a participant’s answer, which provides
the number of IVCs, O, and the branching veins, Xs, (drawn
correctly here).

Procedure
Twenty-four participants were randomly assigned to the image condition where they conducted the experimental task
with the 3D image, and the other participants were assigned
to the object condition where they conducted the task with the
3D-printed object. First, the participants took anatomical and
spatial ability tests. The anatomical test comprised five questions on the names of the liver’s regions and veins. The spatial
ability test was produced by Guay and McDaniels (1976) and
comprised 24 questions requiring mental rotations. The participants were required to answer as many questions as possible in three minutes. Next, all the participants performed a
practice task in the memory and reference task situations. In
the practice task, the 3D image or the 3D-printed object representing one IVC and three branching veins were used. During
the learning period, the participants used the 3D image or the
3D-printed object for one to three minutes to memorize the
inside structure in a memory task situation and observe it in
a reference task situation. After that, they took the vein and
tumor location tests for one target.
After the practice, all participants conducted the experimental task in the memory and reference task situations. During the learning period, participants memorized the inner liver
structure in the memory task situation and observed it in the
reference task condition for three to five minutes using the 3D
image or the 3D-printed object. When the participants had
judged themselves prepared for the tests after at least three
minutes had passed, or when five minutes had passed, the
tests began. Participants took out the target and the answer
sheet from one of three boxes on the primary desk and attempted the vein and tumor location tests. In the memory task
situation, the computer display was switched off in the image
condition, and the 3D-printed object was put into a box on the
secondary desk in the object condition. In the reference task
situation, the computer display stayed switched on in the image condition and the 3D-printed object remained on the secondary desk in the object condition. The participants could
refer to the 3D image or the 3D-printed object freely while
taking the tests in the reference task situation. Moreover, for
the memory and reference task situations, different 3D im-

Results
None of the participants answered any of the questions on
the anatomical test correctly, and no significant difference
emerged between the image (M = 9.08) and the object (M =
7.88) conditions in the spatial ability test (t(46) = 1.01, p =
.32). These results confirmed the homogeneity of the participants’ anatomical knowledge and the homogeneity of spatial
abilities between the conditions.
Next, we conducted 2(External representation: image and
object) × 2(Task situation: memory and reference) analysis
of variance (ANOVA) on the following dependent variables.
First, the analysis was conducted on the learning time. The
learning time was the mean time used by the participants to
memorize or observe the inner structure of the 3D image or
the 3D-printed object before attempting the tests in each condition (Figure 3). Results showed no significant interaction
(F(1, 46) = 0.14, p = .71). There was a significant main effect on the external representation factor, indicating that the
learning time was shorter for the object condition than for the
image condition (F(1, 46) = 7.72, p < .01). The task situation factor also showed a significant main effect, indicating
that the learning time was shorter for the reference condition
than for the memory condition (F(1, 46) = 23.35, p < .001).
Moreover, as the vein location test score, we calculated the
mean absolute difference value between the correct number
of veins and the number of drawn veins on the answer sheet
in each condition for the IVC and the branching veins respec-

416

4'-*2526"7('"8.'39!

%#!"

reference condition (F(1, 92) = 21.15, p < .001), thus indicating higher scores in the object condition than in the image
condition. We also conducted a simple main effect test on
the task situation factor and found a marginally significant
difference for the image condition, indicating that the score
was lower in the reference condition than in the memory condition (F(1, 46) = 2.85, p = .10). In contrast, no significant
difference was observed for the object condition (F(1, 46) =
1.46, p = .23). A significant main effect was observed on the
external representation factor (F(1, 46) = 18.98, p < .001),
but not on the task situation factor (F(1, 46) = 0.12, p = .73).

:(-6'"
;<='3,"

%!!"
$#!"
$!!"
#!"
!"
&'()*+",-./"

0'1'*'23'",-./"

45()*"6)3-7)2",'.,".3)*'!

Figure 3: Learning time. The error bars indicate the standard
error.

!4.)56,'"789'*'23'":-56'"

tively; the closer to zero the score, the more accurate the number of the drawn veins. First, for the IVC, analysis results
showed no significant interaction (F(1, 46) = 1.73, p = .19).
There was no significant main effect on the external representation factor (F(1, 46) = 0.50, p = .48). There was a
marginally significant main effect on the task situation factor (F(1, 46) = 3.08, p = .09). Next, for the branching veins,
there was no significant interaction (F(1, 46) = 0.09, p = .77)
(Figure 4). There was no significant main effect on the task
situation factor (F(1, 46) = 2.19, p = .15). However, there
was a significant main effect on the external representation
factor, indicating that the the number of the veins was more
accurately drawn for the object condition than for the image
condition (F(1, 46) = 8.30, p < .001).
%#$"

:;<'3,"
$"

#"

!"
&'()*+",-./"

0'1'*'23'",-./"

Figure 5: Tumor location test scores. The error bars indicate
the standard error.
In addition, the analysis was conducted on the confidence
ratings for the vein and the tumor location tests. No interaction was found in the rating for the vein location test
(F(1, 46) = 1.34, p = .25). No main effect was observed on
the external representation factor (F(1, 46) = 0.40, p = .53),
but a significant main effect was observed on the task situation factor, indicating higher confidence ratings in the reference condition than in the memory condition (F(1, 46) =
47.06, p < .001). Moreover, no interaction was found in the
rating for the tumor location test (F(1, 46) = 1.13, p = .29).
No main effect was found on the external representation factor (F(1, 46) = 0.44, p = .51), but a significant main effect
was found on the task situation factor, thus indicating that the
confidence rating was higher in the reference condition than
in the memory condition (F(1, 46) = 36.27, p < .001).
Finally, we conducted a correlation analysis on the relations between the spatial ability test score and the task performance, the learning time, and the vein and tumor location
test scores in each condition (Table 1). In the memory task
situation’s object condition, a positive correlation was found
between the spatial ability test score and the learning time. A
negative correlation between the spatial ability test score and
the vein location test score was also found for the branching veins. These results showed that participants with higher
spatial ability tended to memorize the liver’s inner structure
more slowly and draw the number of branching veins accurately with the 3D image.

;(-<'"
=4>'3,"

%"

!#$"

!"
&'()*+",-./"

8(-9'"

%"

0'1'*'23'",-./"

Figure 4: Absolute difference value for branching veins. The
error bars indicate the standard error.
Furthermore, in each tumor location test, if the tumor location was correctly answered, a score of one was assigned.
The tumor location test score was the mean total score of
the tests for the three targets in each condition (Figure 5),
meaning that the higher the score, the more accurate the answer. This analysis found a significant interaction (F(1, 46) =
18.98, p < .001). Next, we conducted a simple main effect test on the external representation factor and found a
marginally significant difference for the memory condition
(F(1, 92) = 3.38, p = .07) and a significant difference for the

417

Table 1: Correlation matrices showing correlations between the spatial ability test score and the task performance, the learning
time, and the vein and tumor location test scores in each condition. Values are correlation coefficients (r).
Learning time
Image
Object

Memory task
Reference task
Memory task
Reference task

.45∗∗
-.22
.08
.17

Vein location test score Tumor location
IVC Branching vein
test score
-.14
-.44∗
.30
-.19
-.13
-.19
-.03
-.04
-.30
.21
-.05
.18
∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01

Discussion

structure was more accurate in the reference task situation
than in the memory task situation. The participants in the
memory task situation had to take the test using mental models constructed during the learning period. Participants in the
reference task situation, in contrast, could continue updating
their mental models and thus sustain more accurate models
while attempting the test. As a result, the difference in the
test score between the task situations was considered to be
observed.
Furthermore, in the tumor location test, inference using the
3D image was more accurate in the memory task situation
than in the reference task situation. This is because during
problem solving, people tend to depend more on inaccurate
memory with its low cost of accessing information than on
seeking accurate external information, which has a higher
cost (Gray & Fu, 2004). In our experiment, participants in the
reference task situation using a 3D image might have avoided
using the image because of the high cost of accessing information, depending instead on inaccurate memories, thus leading to lower test scores. The fact that the tumor location test
was easier than the vein location test was also assumed to lead
them to rely more on their inaccurate memory.

Accuracy of spatial reasoning
The vein and the tumor location test results indicated that
the liver’s inner structure was more accurately inferred when
the 3D-printed object was used than when the 3D image was
used, especially for the branching veins’ structure in the vein
location test. This result supported hypothesis 1 that stated
that spatial reasoning would be more accurate with use of a
3D-printed object than with a 3D image.
It is possible that the participants in the object condition
had a smaller cognitive load than those in the image condition. People perceive depth information in the real world
more accurately than in the virtual 3D environment because
the real world offers more depth cues (Kemeny & Panerai,
2003). This indicates that depth information is also missing
from 3D images. Therefore, participants in the image condition might have to mentally complement or modify the 3D
image’s spatial information, temporarily storing this information in their memory and mentally resizing it to map the information to the target. Participants in the object condition, in
contrast, were assumed to store the spatial information temporarily in their memory as they perceived it and map this
information from the 3D-printed object directly to the target
without internally complementing, modifying, or resizing it.
Thus, participants in the object condition were assumed to
have a smaller cognitive load and fewer errors from the internal manipulation of spatial information.
Moreover, it is also possible that the participants in the
object condition incurred a lower information accessing cost
than those in the image condition. Information accessing cost
is incurred from acquiring information (Gray, Sims, Fu, &
Schoelles, 2006). Participants in the image condition had to
manipulate a computer mouse to acquire the required information, but participants in the object condition only had to
pick up and physically rotate a 3D-printed object. Accessing information with a 3D-printed object was thus considered
easier and less prone to errors or omissions than doing so with
a 3D image.
In addition, in the vein location test, no difference was
found between inferring the IVC’s structure with the 3D image and the 3D-printed object. As the scores were very close
to zero in all conditions, the test was considered easy and a
ceiling effect was observed. Also, inferring the liver’s inner

Learning time for mental model construction
Analysis of the learning time showed that the learning time
was shorter when a 3D-printed object was used than when
a 3D image was used. This result supported hypothesis 2
that stated that the learning time for constructing a mental
model would be shorter when a 3D-printed object was used
than when a 3D image was used.
This result could also be explained by the reduced cognitive load and information accessing cost when a 3D-printed
object is used. Using the 3D image presumably required participants to mentally complement or modify the 3D image’s
spatial information. However, such internal manipulation was
unnecessary when the 3D-printed object was used. Moreover,
manipulating a computer mouse could involve more cost to
access the required information than picking up and rotating
a 3D-printed object. This could explain why learning times
were shorter when a 3D-printed object was used than when a
3D image was used.
Moreover, the learning time was shorter in the reference
task situation than in the memory task situation. In the mem-

418

ory task situation, participants had to construct mental models as accurately as possible during the learning period because they were not allowed to refer to the external representations during the tests. In the reference task situation,
however, participants could refer to external representations
during the tests, so they did not have to construct elaborate
mental models during the learning period.

in-the-world for imperfect knowledge in-the-head. Cognitive Science, 28, 359-382.
Gray, W. D., Sims, C. R., Fu, W.-T., & Schoelles, M. J.
(2006). The soft constraints hypothesis: A rational analysis approach to resource allocation for interactive behavior.
Psychological Review, 113, 461–482.
Guay, R., & McDaniels, E. (1976). The visualization of viewpoints. West Lafayette: The Purdue Research Foundation.
Hegarty, M. (2011). The cognitive science of visual-spatial
displays: Implications for design. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3, 446-474.
Hegarty, M., Keehner, M., Cohen, C., Montello, D. R., &
Lippa, Y. (2007). The role of spatial cognition in medicine:
Applications for selecting and training professionals. In
G. L. Allen (Ed.), Applied spatial cognition (p. 285-315).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hegarty, M., & Waller, D. (2005). Individual differences
in spatial abilities. In P. Shah & A. Miyake (Eds.), The
cambridge handbook of visuospatial thinking (p. 121-169).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
John, M. S., Cowen, M. B., Smallman, H. S., & Oonk,
K. M. (2001). The use of 2d and 3d displays for shapeunderstanding versus relative-position tasks. Human Factors, 43, 79-98.
Kali, Y., & Orion, N. (1996). Spatial abilities of high school
students in the perception of geologic structures. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 33, 369-391.
Kemeny, A., & Panerai, F. (2003). Evaluating perception in
driving simulation experiments. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 31–37.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18, 513-549.
Maehigashi, A., Miwa, K., Terai, H., Igami, T., Nakamura, Y.,
& Mori, K. (2015). Investigation on using 3d printed liver
during surgery. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, 1476-1481.
Nguyen, N., Nelson, A. J., & Wilson, T. D. (2011). Computer
visualizations: Factors that influence spatial anatomy comprehension. Anatomical Sciences Education, 5, 98-108.
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How
do graphical representations work? International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Stull, A. T., Barrett, T., & Hegarty, M. (2013). Usability of
concrete and virtual models in chemistry instruction. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 2546–2556.
Walsh, M. M., & Anderson, J. R. (2009). The strategic nature
of changing your mind. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 416–
440.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

Effect of spatial ability and confidence on spatial
reasoning
Participants with higher spatial ability tended to take a longer
learning time and draw the number of branching veins accurately only when the 3D image was used in the memory
task situation. Inferring the branching vein structure was the
most difficult task in this experiment. Therefore, the effects
of one’s spatial ability were considered to be observed in the
test score for the branching veins. Also, in the memory task
situation, the participants had to construct mental models as
accurately as possible and attempt the test without referring
to any of the external representations. Therefore, the effects
of one’s ability to store and manipulate the spatial representation were considered to be prominent in the memory task situation. Because participants with higher spatial ability could
store and manipulate the complex spatial representation, they
were assumed to tend to take longer learning time to elaborate mental models and inferred the liver’s inner structure accurately. Moreover, it is also possible that using a 3D-printed
object might cancel the effect of using one’s spatial ability to
infer a physical structure, particularly raising the performance
of participants with lower spatial ability, although we did not
acquire sufficient data to support it in this experiment.
At last, the confidence ratings for the vein and tumor location tests showed an effect of the task situation and no effect
of external representation. As people are sensitive to a task’s
cognitive load (Chandler & Sweller, 1991), participants reported themselves less confident in the memory task situation,
which required a higher cognitive load than in the reference
task situation. People are also sensitive to the cost of manipulating external representations (Gray et al., 2006). However,
this cost is usually evaluated unconsciously (Walsh & Anderson, 2009). Therefore, the costs and effects of using external
representations are considered difficult to be evaluated subjectively.

References
Barrett, T. J., Stull, A. T., Hsu, T. M., & Hegarty, M. (2015).
Constrained interactivity for relating multiple representations in science: When virtual is better than real. Computers and Education, 81, 69–81.
Byrne, R. M. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). Spatial
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 564-575.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory
and the format of instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 8,
293-332.
Gray, W. D., & Fu, W.-T. (2004). Soft constraints in interactive behavior: The case of ignoring perfect knowledge

419

