Influencing Categorical Choices Through Physical Object Interaction
Nicholas J. Shipp (n.j.shipp@herts.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, AL10 9AB, UNITED KINGDOM

Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau (f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University,
Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UNITED KINGDOM

Susan H. Anthony (s.h.1.anthony@herts.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, AL10 9AB, UNITED KINGDOM
Abstract
Recent research has shown that action knowledge
influences categorical decisions (Borghi, Flumini, Natraj &
Wheaton, 2012; Chao & Martin, 2000; Iachini, Borghi &
Senese, 2008; Kalénine, Shapiro, Flumini, Borghi &
Buxbaum, 2013). Shipp, Vallée-Tourangeau, and Anthony,
(2014) showed that action influences categorisation in a
forced-choice triad task when combined with taxonomic
information and presented within a functional context. The
present experiment examined whether participants would
be more likely to match items in a triad task based on
shared actions following priming with the functional
actions of the objects. Participants engaged in the triad task
used in Shipp et al. after a priming phase where they either
interacted with a series of objects for their functional
capacity (Action Priming), grouped them into categories
(Taxonomic Priming) or moved them from one table to
another (Movement Priming). Items within the triads were
presented as an image either on a white background
(context-lean condition) or as a functional scene with the
object being used by an agent (context-rich condition).
Consistent with Shipp et al. the results showed that action
was primarily used to base choices on the triad task when
the action choice also shared a taxonomic relation, and was
presented in context. Additionally, participants were more
likely to select the action related item when they had been
primed with the functional action of the objects. The results
are discussed in terms of the transfer effect from the object
interaction task that facilitates how the objects are
simulated (Barsalou, 1999, 2003; Yeh & Barsalou, 2006).
Keywords: Action; Triads; Categorisation; Priming

Introduction
Research into conceptual knowledge demonstrates that
knowledge of action influences categorisation judgments
(Borghi, Flumini, Natraj & Wheaton, 2012; Chao &
Martin, 2000; Iachini, Borghi & Senese, 2008; Kalénine,
Shapiro, Flumini, Borghi & Buxbaum, 2013; Shipp,
Vallée-Tourangeau, & Anthony, 2014). For example
Iachini et al. (2008) showed that when participants
categorised cups varying in size, shape and grip method,
they used the grip of the object as the primary strategy for
categorisation. What is evident in such research is that the
influence of action becomes particularly salient when
participants are required to physically make the action
associated with an object. For example participants in
Bub, Masson and Cree (2008) performed a variant of the
Stroop (1935) task where gestures were associated with

colours. Objects were shown on a screen in varying
colours and participants were instructed to make the
gesture that they had previously associated with that
colour. Participants were faster when the gesture they
performed was congruent with the action that would
normally be used to operate the object seen. Reaction
times significantly increased when the action performed
was incongruent with that normally associated with the
object.
Shipp et al. (2014) found that action was not a primary
source of categorising in a forced-choice triad task, but
that it did have an additive effect. Participants were shown
triads where a target was matched with a choice item
sharing a taxonomic relation but no action, and a choice
item sharing an action but no taxonomic relation. For
example the target of calculator was presented with set
square (taxonomically related, stationary) and mobile
phone (action related, both operated by pressing buttons).
In these Different Category Object (DCO) triads (see Fig.
1), participants were most likely to select the taxonomic
choice when the objects were shown on a white
background as context-lean. However in the context-rich
condition where the objects were shown being used in a
functional manner by an agent, participants were more
likely to select the action-related item compared to the
context-lean condition. Participants were also shown
Same Category Object (SCO) triads where participants
matched a target with one of two choice options which
both shared a taxonomic relation to the target, but one also
shared an action. For example orange was shown with
strawberry (taxonomic, non-action) and banana
(taxonomic/action, both require a peeling action). In both
the context-lean and context-rich conditions participants
were more likely to select the item sharing both a
taxonomic and an action relation to the target. In order to
rule out the possibility of perceptual features confounding
the explanation (it is possible that participants chose
mobile phone to go with calculator because they look
similar) a series of Perceptual Object Category (PCO)
triads were designed. In these PCO triads the target was
presented with a choice sharing perceptual features but
not taxonomic and not action relation, and a choice
sharing an action but not perceptual or taxonomic relation.
For example the target of cocktail shaker was presented
with vase (perceptual choice) and maracas (action
choice). The results showed that participants were
significantly more likely to select the action choice when

468

	  
Figure	  1. Examples of stimuli employed in the experiment. From left to right: Same Category Object triad, Different
Category Object triad, and Perceptual Category Object triad in the context-lean condition (top panels) and in the contextrich condition (bottom panels).

	  
Figure 2. Arrangement of the objects shown to participants in the Action Priming condition including additional
resources as necessary.
shown in the context-rich condition supporting the notion
that context enhances action choices. It further pre-empts
the potential criticism that the action choices were being
selected because of their perceptual similarities. Shipp et
al. demonstrated that action is not used in categorisation
when it stands alone but has an additive effect when
matched with taxonomic relations, and its effect is
heightened when shown in context.

The aim of the current research was to examine how
participants perform on the forced-choice triad task used
in Shipp et al. (2014) after they were primed with the
physical actions that relate to the triad items. In addition
research supports that differences exist between
performing physical actions on objects compared to the
intention to act (Jax & Buxbaum, 2010; Osiurak, Roche,
Ramone & Chainay, 2013). Jax and Buxbaum showed

469

that when participants were instructed to put their hand on
an object as though they would either use it or pass it to
the experimenter, they were faster on the latter. Osiurak et
al. not only replicated the results of Jax and Buxbaum, but
also showed the reverse when participants were asked to
actually pick up and use the object or pick it up and pass it
to the experimenter. Borghi, Bonfiglioli, Lugli,
Ricciardelli, Rubichi and Nicoletti (2007) showed primes
of either a precision or a power grasp to participants
followed by an object that would either be picked up with
a precision or a power grasp. Previous research would
suggest a strong compatibility effect (Ellis & Tucker,
2000; Tucker & Ellis, 1998, 2001) when asked to
categorise the object as either natural or man-made, but
this pattern was only found when participants had
completed a motor training phase prior to this task.
The present experiment had two main aims. First to
replicate the findings of Shipp et al. (2014) with action
based choices being selected with higher frequency when
shown in context, and when it also shared a taxonomic
relation to the target. The second aim was to see if these
action choices were more frequent when participants had
previously interacted with the objects in a functional
capacity. All of the items used were presented to
participants prior to the triad task and participants
completed either an action (using the objects), taxonomic
(grouping the objects) or a movement (picking up the
objects) priming phase. It was predicted that the action
priming phase should lead to higher action choices on the
triad task than the taxonomic or movement priming.

Method
Participants
Fifty-six undergraduate Psychology students (9 males, 47
females, Mage = 22.87, SD = 6.34) from the University of
Hertfordshire took part in the experiment in return for
course credit.

Materials
The triads used in Shipp et al. (2014) were considered for
the present experiment consisting of ten of each triad type
(see Fig. 1). It was important that all of the items in the
triads could be interacted with prior to the triad task in the
priming phase. Physical constraints of the items (e.g., fax
machine, bed, piano) or to ethical considerations (rifle,
saw, axe) meant that not all the original triads could be
used. The final set of 16 triads consisted of five SCO
triads (pencil, glass, pin, orange, leaflet), six DCO triads
(screwdriver, drink bottle, mug, calculator, book,
paperclip, deodorant) and five PCO triads (USB pen,
present, calculator, peppermill, handbag). In the same
manner as Shipp et al. context was manipulated: In the
context-free condition the triads were presented as
isolated items on a white background. In the context-rich
condition participants saw the objects being used by an
agent in a functional scene. All the 48 items that
comprised the triads were then physically collected for
use in the priming phase. The Action priming task was
designed so that participants were presented with a list of
tasks that involved using each item in its functional

capacity such as writing their name with a pencil or
reading a passage from a book.

Procedure
All participants upon entering the room saw the 48 items
used in the triads presented on a table (see Fig. 2) and
initially completed the priming phase. Participants were
assigned to one of three priming task; action, taxonomic
or movement priming. Those in the action priming
completed a checklist task where the experimenter read
out each task one-by-one which the participant had to
complete before moving on to the next task. Each task
involved using the object in its functional capacity and
could either be completed on its own (e.g., “tie the
shoelace on the shoe”, “open the book on any page and
read out the top line”) or were presented with additional
resources (e.g., “write your name on a piece of paper” –
where paper was provided to the participant though not
included in any of the triads). Participants were instructed
to move at their own pace and that there was no time limit
to this task. Participants in the taxonomic priming were
asked directly to sort the items into categories. They were
told that they could sort them however they liked
providing that each resulting group had a minimum of two
members and that they would have to explain their
groupings afterwards. They were also told that each sort
must have a valid reason behind it and no items should be
grouped together based on being remaining items that did
not fit into other categories. Afterwards participants were
asked to explain their decisions and describe what each
category comprised. Again, no time limit was placed on
the task and participants performed at their own pace.
Participants in the movement priming saw two tables, one
of which had all the 48 items on it, and were simply asked
to pick up each item and move it to the next table in their
own time. This was in order that the participants
interacted with the object but not with respect to its
intended function. Again no time limit was placed onto
the task and participants performed at their own pace.
After the priming phase concluded participants in each
priming condition were allocated to either the context-lean
or context-rich condition to undertake the triad task. This
was completed immediately after the priming task took
place with approximately two minutes between
completion of the priming task and onset of the triad task.
Thus the experiment employed a mixed design with three
factors, Priming (action, taxonomic, movement), Triad
Type (SCO, DCO, PCO), and Context (lean, rich), with
triads as a repeated measures and priming and context as
between subjects factors.
The triad task was presented Using Superlab on a 15”
Macintosh laptop and began with a practice trial to show
the participants the format of the triads on screen. Each
trial began with a fixation cue presented at the top of the
screen for 1000ms after which the cue disappeared and the
target appeared consisting of the word and the appropriate
picture depending on the experimental condition (contextlean or context-rich). After 1500ms the two choice options
appeared beneath the target alongside the appropriate
images. Using the same instructions as in Shipp et al.
(2014) participants were instructed to “select the choice
item that goes best with the target”. Participants were

470

Table 1. Mean percentage of action choices in the DCO, SCO and PCO triads across context and priming.
Triad

Priming

DCO

Context
Lean
.53
.32*
.46
.48
.60
.48
.48
.50
.40

Action
Taxonomic
Movement
Action
Taxonomic
Movement
Action
Taxonomic
Movement

SCO
PCO

Rich
.58
.35
.40
.66*
.54
.48
.78*
.58
.65

Note. *Indicates those mean scores that significantly differed from a 50/50 chance ratio.

instructed to press the ‘a’ key to choose the item on the
left-hand side of the screen and the ‘l’ key for the item on
the right-hand side of the screen. The choice items were
counterbalanced across the triads so that in half the triads
the action choice appeared on the left hand side while in
the remaining half the action choice appeared on the right.
After they had made their choice the triad disappeared and
the fixation cue appeared again for the next triad.
Participants completed all 16 trials and were debriefed.

Results
Figure 3. Mean percentage of action choices across the
Action, Taxonomic and Movement Priming conditions.
Error bars are standard errors of the mean.	  

	  

0.8"
0.7"

Percentage"of"Ac;on"Choices"

The mean proportion of action responses was calculated
for the SCO, DCO and PCO triads across context and
priming. As was found in Shipp et al. (2014) participants
showed a tendency to select the action choice more with
the SCO (54%) and PCO (57%) triads than with the DCO
triads (44%), and more so in the context-rich (58%) than
in the context-lean (47%) condition. In addition Figure 3
shows that action choices were higher following the
action priming (59%) than in the taxonomic (48%) and
movement (48%) priming. A 3x2x3 mixed Analysis of
Variance was used to analyze the mean action responses
using Triads as a within subjects factor and Priming and
Context as between subjects factors. The analysis revealed
a significant main effect of Context with a higher number
of action choices in the context-rich condition, F(1, 50) =
2
5.25, p = .026, η = .1. The main effect of Triads was
2
significant, F(1.84, 92.67) = 6.74, p = .002, η = .12. Post
hoc analysis using the Bonferroni adjustment found that
the action responses on the DCO triads were significantly
lower than both the SCO triads (p = .046) and the PCO
triads (p = .004). No difference was found between the
SCO triads and the PCO triads (p = 1.). The main effect of
Priming was also found to be significant, F(2, 50) = 3.84,
2
p = .028, η = .13. Post hoc analysis using the Bonferroni
adjustment revealed that the difference between action
and taxonomic priming (p = .063) and the action and
movement priming (p = .066) were marginally significant
(see Fig. 3). The difference between the taxonomic and
moving priming was not significantly different (p = 1.).
The two-way interaction effect between Context and
Triads was significant, F(1.84, 92.67) = 4.58, p =
2
.012, η = .08. Post hoc analysis using the Bonferroni
adjustment (see Fig. 4) found no effect of context on the
DCO (p = .92) and SCO triads (p = .45), but action
choices were significantly higher for the PCO triads in the

ContextDLean"

ContextDRich"

0.6"
0.5"
0.4"
0.3"
0.2"
0.1"
0"
SCO"

DCO"

PCO"

Triad"Type"

Figure	  4. Mean percentage of action choices with Same
Category Object (SCO), Different Category Object
(DCO), and Perceptual Category Object (PCO) triads in
the context-lean condition (light grey bars) and in the
context-rich condition (dark grey bars). Error bars are
standard errors of the mean.

	  

context-rich than context-lean condition (p < .001). The
two-way interaction between Priming and Triads was not
found to be significant, F(3.71, 92.67) = 2.02, p = .10,
η2 = .08, nor was the two-way interaction between
2
Priming and Context, F(2, 50) = 1.72, p = .19, η = .06, or
the three-way interaction between Context, Priming and
Triads, F < 1.
Due to the dichotomous nature of the response variable
it is possible that the mean action scores were no different

471

from selecting the action choice by chance. Therefore
further post hoc analyses were conducted on the mean
percentage of action choices across the conditions in order
to assess if the means were significantly different from a
50/50 ratio. Single sample t-tests were conducted on the
cell means shown in Table 1 using a theoretical mean of
0.5. Only the SCO and PCO triads following the action
priming were significantly higher than chance (p < .05).
The DCO mean following the action priming was higher
than chance but not significantly so (p = .21). This
partially supports the previous ANOVA analysis where
higher action choices followed only the action priming.
However this effect was not consistent for all the triad
types. In addition the only action scores that were
significantly lower than chance was on the DCO triads
following the categorisation priming (p = .03).

Discussion
The results of the current experiment revealed three main
findings. The first is the replication of the triad effect from
Shipp et al. (2014). The action choice was least likely to
be selected on the DCO triads when choosing between a
taxonomic and an action choice. This shows that, as with
the previous experiments, action information alone is less
likely to be favoured as the basis for category membership
when the alternative is taxonomic information. The action
item was most likely to be selected with the SCO and the
PCO triads. The results on the SCO triads support the
notion of action having an ‘additive’ effect making such
items sharing both action and a taxonomic relation as
‘better’ category members. The PCO triads further show
that when no taxonomic relation is present as an
alternative participants are more likely to use action than
perceptual properties to group items together.
The second main finding is the partial replication of the
context effect from Shipp et al. (2014). While previously
it was found that across all three triads the action choice
was most likely selected in the context-rich condition, this
effect was limited with the PCO triads in this experiment.
The most likely reason for this is the exclusion of certain
triads from the original set used in Shipp et al. It is
possible that these triads removed were more likely to
lead to the action choice than other triads. An item
analysis of the triads used in Shipp et al. (2014) supports
this showing that certain items are more susceptible to
context effects than others (Shipp, Vallée-Tourangeau, &
Anthony, in prep). For example the rifle/sword/water
pistol triad (DCO) was removed from the present
experiment for practical reasons but has been shown to be
strongly influenced by context.
The third main finding from this experiment is the
effect of priming conditions. The results showed that
participants were more likely to choose the action related
item in the triads following the action priming where all
the items were used in their functional capacity. The
selection of action choices in the SCO and PCO triads
were significantly higher than chance in the context-rich
condition following the action priming. Selection of the
action choice in the DCO triads was not significantly
higher than chance. Such results are in line with notions of
situated simulation (Barsalou, 1999; 2003; 2008; Yeh &

Barsalou, 2006). Barsalou (2003) states that category
features recently encountered become more readily
available for subsequent processing. If someone recently
peeled an orange then peeling should be temporarily more
salient than other, more context-dependent, properties.
Therefore prior functional engagement with the objects in
the initial task could temporarily increase the saliency of
the shared actions and have a direct influence on the
simulations made, and hence on the choices in the triad
task. Variations in how the participants interact with the
objects would be expected to influence the simulations
generated. Therefore participants who interacted with the
items functionally should be more likely to simulate those
recent actions and the salience of these could be further
enhanced by the context shown. As such a transfer effect
occurs in which the interaction with the objects directly
facilitates the simulations generated. As the taxonomic
and movement priming does not focus on the shared
actions participants would be less likely to simulate the
relevant actions associated with use and so less likely to
select the action choice in the triads (as was found in the
data).
An alternative explanation might be linked to functional
actions, in comparison to structural actions, resulting in
longer lasting neural representations (Bub & Masson,
2012; Jax & Buxbaum, 2010). The priming tasks used
here can be separated into two distinctive sets of actions,
functional actions related to functional use and
volumetric/structural actions related to general movement
and interacting with the objects in a non-functional
manner (Bub & Masson, 2012; Bub et al., 2008; Jax &
Buxbaum, 2010; Osiurak et al., 2013). Buxbaum and
Kalénine’s (2010) Two Action Systems (2AS) model
proposes that the brain has separate action systems for the
processing of functional and structural actions. The dorsodorsal stream is specialized for acquiring information
based on the structure of objects and their affordances
whereas the ventro-dorsal system is specialized for the
retrieval of conceptual representations. Functional
activations tend to be long lasting and can cause
interference effects on later actions (Bub & Masson, 2012;
Jax & Buxbaum, 2010). Structural activations occur more
quickly than functional, but decay rapidly and do not
cause later interference effects. Jax and Buxbaum showed
that when participants performed a functional action on an
object and then later performed a grasp action, response
latencies were significantly longer than when they
performed the grasp action first. This interference effect
as a result of functional activation lasted for
approximately 20 minutes during the entire task. While
this functional activation had an interference effect on the
use/grasp task, it is possible that this has a facilitation
effect on the triad task. The partial re-activation of the
neurons during simulation of the objects in the triad
should be facilitated by the current activation of the
functional system. As such the simulation itself should
make the action element more salient between the triad
objects and participants will therefore be more likely to
select the action choice. This is further amplified by the
concurrent activation of conceptual knowledge with the
functional system of the ventro-dorsal stream as proposed
by Buxbaum and Kalénine (2010). The same facilitation

472

effect does not occur following the movement prime as
the structural activations of the dorso-dorsal stream
dissipate quickly. Hence only the long lasting functional
activations as a result of the action priming should lead to
higher action choices in the triad task. However it should
be noted that such an explanation is purely speculative at
this point as the data cannot be used to explicitly support
such claims. However the ventro-dorsal facilitation effect
could be tested and supported through using the full set of
triads developed from Shipp et al. (2014). As explained
above the full range of triads was not used in this
experiment because of ethics and feasibility of priming
how participants use certain objects such as sword. If it is
the case that functional activations of the ventro-dorsal
system facilitate simulations of the objects, then in the
triad task used here this should result in higher action
choices on the primed objects and lower action choices for
those objects not primed. Future research should aim to
compare performance on such triads in this task.
In conclusion the data reported here has shown that the
triad effect found in Shipp et al. (2014) has been
replicated. Participants were more likely to use action as a
source for categorisation on the forced-choice triad task
when it was shown in combination with taxonomic
information, and when it was shown in context. The
results further show that priming participants with the
functional rather than structural actions of the objects led
to increased action choices on the triad task. Such results
are also in line with the view that a transfer effect occurs
from the object-interaction task which facilitates how
objects are mentally simulated (Barsalou, 1999, 2003;
Yeh & Barsalou, 2006).

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Barsalou, L. W. (2003). Situated simulation in the human
conceptual system. Language and Cognitive Processes,
18, 513-562.
Borghi, A. M., Bonfiglioli, C., Lugli, L., Ricciardelli, P.,
Rubichi, S., & Nicoletti, R. (2007). Are visual stimuli
sufficient to evoke motor information? Studies with
hand primes. Neuroscience Letters, 411, 17-21.
Borghi, A. M., Flumini, A., Natraj, N., & Wheaton. L. A.
(2012). One hand, two objects: Emergence of
affordance in contexts. Brain and Cognition, 50, 64-73.
Bub, D. N., & Masson, M. E. J. (2012). On the dynamics
of action representations evoked by names of
manipulable objects. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 141, 502-517.
Bub, D. N., Masson, M. E. J., Cree, G. S. (2008).
Evocation of functional and volumetric gestural
knowledge by objects and words. Cognition, 106, 2758.
Buxbaum, L. J., & Kalénine, S. (2010). Action
knowledge, visuomotor activation, and embodiment in
the two action systems. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1191, 201-218.
Chao, L. L., & Martin, A. (2000). Representation of
manipulable man-made objects in the dorsal stream.
NeuroImage, 12, 478-484.

Ellis, R., & Tucker, M. (2000). Micro-affordance: The
potentiation of components of action by seen objects.
British Journal of Psychology, 91, 451-471.
Iachini, T., Borghi, a. M., & Senese, V. P. (2008).
Categorization and sensorimotor interaction with
objects. Brain and Cognition, 67, 31-43.
Jax, S. A., & Buxbaum, L. J. (2010). Response
interference between functional and structural actions
linked to the same familiar object. Cognition, 115, 350355.
Kalénine, S., Shapiro, A. D., Flumini, A., Borghi, A. M.,
& Buxbaum, L. J. (2014). Visual context modulates
potentiation of grasp types during semantic object
categorisation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21,
645-651.
Osiurak, F., Roche, K., Ramone, J., & Chainay, H. (2013).
Handing a tool to someone can take more time than
using it. Cognition, 128, 76-81.
Shipp, N. J., Vallée-Tourangeau,, F., & Anthony, S. H.
(2014). The context-dependent nature of action
knowledge. In P. Bello, M. Guarani, M. McShane, & B.
Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 29252930). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Shipp, N. J., Vallée-Tourangeau,, F., & Anthony, S. H. (in
prep). Strategies for making forced-choice categories:
An item analysis of Shipp, Vallee-Tourangeau, and
Anthony (2014).
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial
verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
18 , 643-662.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (1998). On the relations between
seen objects and components of potential actions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 24, 830-846.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (2001). The potentiation of grasp
types during visual object categorization. Visual
Cognition, 8 , 769-800.
Yeh, W., & Barsalou, L. W. (2006). The situated nature of
concepts. American Journal of Psychology, 119, 349384.

473

