Information Search with Depleting and Non-Depleting Resources
Amber Bloomfield (anbloomfi@umd.edu)
J. Isaiah Harbison (isaiah.harbison@gmail.com)
Susan Campbell (susanc@umd.edu)
Petra Bradley (pscheck@umd.edu)
Lelyn Saner (lsaner@casl.umd.edu)
University of Maryland, 7005 52 nd Ave
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Abstract

typically take place. First, in food foraging, a given source
normally depletes (e.g., picking a berry results in fewer
berries remaining), but depending on the information
source, the number of items to search may be so large or
replenished so frequently that functionally there is no
depletion. For example, the number of tweets on a topic
could be so numerous that the information forager is
unlikely to read all of them, or the number may increase
faster than they could be read as additional tweets are
created. Search behavior in environments without depletion
has not been investigated in previous studies. A related issue
concerns search behavior in environments where it is
possible to return to previously investigated patches. While
returning to a previous patch is usually sub-optimal in food
foraging, as that patch was only left because its richness had
diminished beneath the expected return for the environment,
a previously visited source may offer the highest richness in
the environment if the source does not deplete. Search
behavior in environments where it is possible to revisit a
patch has not been investigated in previous research.

Predictions about information search behavior have been
informed by extensive research in food foraging behavior.
However, information foraging environments may differ in
key ways from food foraging environments, and these
differences may impact search behavior. We investigated the
effect of patch distribution (depleting or non-depleting) and
ability to return to previously searched patches on
participants’ decision to switch from one patch to another
while searching. Whether or not a participant could return
after leaving a patch led to fewer samples and fewer relevant
items found. Whether or not the patches depleted and whether
it was possible to return to a patch influenced stopping rules,
indicating that these factors may alter the size of the
increment applied through the Incremental Rule.
Keywords: information foraging, marginal value theorem,
stopping rules, patch distribution

Introduction
How do information foragers decide where to look and
when to look elsewhere? Research on information foraging
has benefitted from an analogy to food foraging behavior
(Constantino & Daw, 2015; Dennis & Taylor, 2006; Hills,
Jones, & Todd, 2012; Hutchinson, Wilke, & Todd, 2008;
Jacobs & Hackenberg, 1996; Kalff, Hills, & Wiener, 2010;
Sandstrom, 1994; Wilke, Hutchinson, Todd, &
Czienskowski, 2009). The Marginal Value Theorem (MVT),
introduced by Charnov (1976), describes how animals
foraging for food decide when to cease exploiting a current
source to move on to another. In a situation of depleting
returns (e.g., a berry bush has fewer berries to offer as a
forager consumes berries from that bush), the MVT predicts
that a forager will exploit a resource until the point at which
the resource’s rate of return (i.e., richness) has decreased to
the mean return value of the environment. The point at
which a forager will leave a resource (i.e., the stopping rule)
is then determined by the richness of the resource and the
cost of moving on to another resource (the switch cost). A
strict interpretation of this rule means that foragers should
not leave patches that remain richer than the mean return
expected from moving on.
While the analogy to food foraging in animals has proven
useful, there are a number of potential differences between
the environments in which food and information foraging

Stopping Rules
Because the MVT stopping rule requires that a forager have
access to information about the richness of a patch at each
moment as well as knowledge of the average richness for
the environment, more computationally feasible rules have
been proposed. The rule which has received the largest
share of support in previous information search studies is
the incremental rule. In applying this rule, the information
forager begins with a set threshold of sampling attempts for
a patch (e.g., 10 samples before moving on). When a
relevant item is found, the threshold is increased by some
increment. People tend to use the incremental rule both for
internal search (e.g., memory search; Harbison, Dougherty,
Davelaar, & Fayyad, 2009) and external search (e.g.,
searching in a library or on an online database; Wilke et al.,
2009).
Application of the Incremental Rule can produce different
switching behavior depending on the size of the increment
the information forager uses. For instance, the total failures
rule is a special case of the Incremental Rule where the
threshold is incremented up by one search attempt for every
relevant item found; in essence, samples that yield relevant
items do not count against the sampling threshold. An

990

information forager applying the total failures rule will
switch patches when the total number of samples not
yielding relevant items (i.e., the number of failed samples)
exceeds their threshold. Another special case of the
Incremental Rule is the total samples rule. In this rule, the
size of the increment is zero, such that an information
forager will switch patches after a threshold number of
samples, no matter how many relevant items are found.
Although the total failures rule and the total samples rule are
the most common variations of the Incremental Rule, others
are possible. For instance, an information forager applying
the rule with an increment of size 2 would stay longer in
richer patches than a searcher applying either the total
failures rule or the total samples rule because each
encountered relevant item would increment the sample
threshold up by two. These three cases of the Incremental
Rule make increasingly similar predictions the poorer the
search patch and make the same prediction for patches with
zero target items (the case were there would not be an
increment).

relevant items, it is predicted that participants in the
Depleting condition will find more relevant items at each
level of patch richness than participants in the Nondepleting condition (in Figure 1, the group of black lines are
consistently higher than the group of gray lines).
The present experiment also allows us to measure the
influence of irrelevant items on search termination in a way
that has not previously been explored in the literature. The
number of irrelevant items is not accessible to researchers
when participants are retrieving from memory because the
irrelevant items do not usually elicit a response, and the
number of times such irrelevant items are output such that
they can be observed is relatively rare (but see Unsworth et
al., 2011). In the information search literature, paradigms
such as anagram, word search, and fishing provide only a
measurement of the time spent not finding relevant words or
fish. With the current task, the number of irrelevant items
found and their impact on search termination can be
measured directly.
The predicted relationship between patch richness and
number of irrelevant items found for each depletion
condition with three different increment sizes is shown in
Figure 2. In this case, there is expected to be a different
form of relationship between number of irrelevant items
found and return rate dependent on the increment the
participant uses. A negative relationship between patch
richness and the number of irrelevant items found is
predicted if a participant applies the total samples rule
(increment of 0). More time is spent sampling relevant items
in the richer patches, and since the stopping threshold is not
influenced by the number of relevant items found, these
relevant items displace the irrelevant items that would be
found in poorer patches. Given a larger increment, the
relationship should become increasingly positive. Thus, if
an information forager applies the total failures rule
(increment of 1), a larger number of irrelevant items will be
found as the return rate of the patch increases.

Predictions
Figure 1 shows the predicted relationship between return
rate and number of relevant items found under different
increment sizes for the two depletion conditions. These
simulated results, like the experiment described below,
include three levels of richness: 10%, 30%, and 50%
relevant items.
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
10

30

30

50

Depleting - Increment 0

Depleting - Increment 0.1

Depleting - Increment 0.3

Non-depleting - Increment 0

Non-depleting - Increment 0.1

Non-depleting - Increment 0.3

25
20

Figure 1: Predicted relationship between return rate and
number of relevant items found by depletion condition
and increment size.

15
10
10

If participants in our experiment apply the total samples
variant of the Incremental Rule (i.e., the size of the
increment is zero, represented by the gray and black double
lines in Figure 1), they should find more relevant items as
patch richness increases, regardless of whether the patches
deplete. This is also true for the two other specific cases of
the Incremental rule (increments of size 0.1 and 0.3).
Therefore, the number of relevant items found does not
make a clean distinction between different increment values.
However, because of differences in the distribution of

30

50

Depleting - Increment 0

Depleting - Increment 0.1

Depleting - Increment 0.3

Non-depleting - Increment 0

Non-depleting - Increment 0.1

Non-depleting - Increment 0.3

Figure 2: Predicted relationship between return rate and
number of irrelevant items found by depletion condition
and increment size.
In summary, a different pattern of irrelevant items found
in patches of different richness levels will emerge

991

depending on the size of the increment the information
forager uses. The predictions are the same for both depleting
and non-depleting patches. However, it is possible that
information search under conditions where resources do not
deplete will lead participants to apply a different size of
increment, and so show a different pattern in the
relationship between irrelevant items found and patch
richness. It may also be the case that whether or not it is
possible to return to a patch will impact the increment used
to determine when to stop exploiting a given patch. As
noted above, previous research has not explored stopping
rules when it is possible to return. One possibility is that
information foragers will adopt a more conservative
approach to stopping when they know they can return to a
patch, potentially entailing a smaller increment size. The
analyses will explore these possibilities.

able to return to a patch they had previously searched
(return condition), and all three patches remained available
throughout each trial, or a patch disappeared after the
participant chose to leave the patch (no return condition).
Relevant tweets correctly identified as relevant by the
participant were reflected in a running total at the top of the
screen, labeled “Score”; participants were not penalized for
incorrect decisions, though relevant tweets deemed
irrelevant or irrelevant tweets deemed relevant did not
increase the participant’s score. For each target, participants
had two minutes to search for information. At the end of
each search, they moved on to the search task for a new
target with a new set of patches.

Matching Task
After 20 search trials, each involving a different target
person, participants completed a matching task. This task
involved 10 trials; on each trial, the participants evaluated
the compatibility of a pair of targets (matched based on the
gender of match each target was seeking) using the relevant
tweets found during the search task. Only relevant tweets
the participant had judged to be relevant were available in
this phase of the task. Participants indicated their
compatibility judgment using an unlabeled slider (scored as
a 0-100 scale) with “Horrible Match” and “Great Match” at
the poles. The matching task was used to motivate the
search task but data from this task were not analyzed.

Experiment
Search Task
The participants’ search task was to collect information
about clients for a matchmaking service wherein the
participant would use the information found to judge the
compatibility of a pair of clients. On each trial, participants
saw the name of a client. During the search task, three
different sets of tweets (i.e., brief messages stating a piece
of information about a person) were offered for the
participant to search. Each patch (of tweets) was described
as having been produced by a different algorithm designed
to gather tweets about the service’s clients. Tweets could be
about the client (relevant) or about another person
(irrelevant).
The richness of the algorithm patches (i.e., the percentage
of relevant tweets), could be 10%, 30%, or 50%. The
richness levels available among the three patches in a trial
varied across trials, with the restriction that all three patches
could not have the same return rate. Thus, the highest level
of richness available varied from trial to trial. In the
depleting condition, the tweets in each of the three patches
were ordered such that the rate of return was highest for the
first few selections, but decreased as the number of
selections increased; in the non-depleting condition, the rate
of return remained constant throughout the patch. Patches in
the depleting condition had the highest return rate in the first
ten selections, and the rate of return decreased in successive
sets of ten selections, with the average richness being 10%,
30%, or 50% if the participant sampled 100 times; patches
in the non-depleting condition had a constant return rate of
10%, 30%, or 50% throughout.
For each tweet, participants were asked to indicate
whether it was relevant for the target candidate or not
relevant by clicking one of two buttons. After determining
whether a given tweet was relevant to the target, the
participant could either choose to view another tweet from
the same algorithm or move to a different patch. The switch
cost (i.e., the time required to switch to another patch) was 1
second. Depending on condition, participants were either

Participants
Eighty-five participants were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk. “Workers” on Mechanical Turk receive
monetary compensation for completing online tasks.
Workers who selected this experiment task were informed
that they would receive $10 for their participation in a task
requiring about one hour of time.
Eight participants’ data were removed from the sample
due to low judgment accuracy, no switching decisions,
performing the task twice, or not completing the task. The
total analyzed sample, therefore, was 77 participants.

Procedure
Before beginning the experiment, participants were
provided instructions and a practice session that included
two search tasks and a single matching task. Participants
were able to contact the researchers via email if they had
questions or encountered difficulty during the experiment.
At the end of the experiment, participants were thanked for
their participation and paid via Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
search conditions: return and non-return. Participants were
also, independently, randomly assigned to one of two patch
distribution conditions: depleting or non-depleting. There
were 16-20 participants in each of the four possible
conditions.

992

Results

50% to 10%), depletion condition (B = -4.84, p < 0.05), and
return condition (B = 2.60, p < 0.05). Average number of
relevant items found in each condition are shown in Table 4.

As shown in Table 1, the number of samples participants
made varied considerably by patch, as did the number of
relevant and irrelevant items found.

Table 4. Mean relevant items found per visited patch by
condition. Standard deviation in parentheses.

Table 1. Summary of visits aggregated over patches visited.
Mean
Total Visits
1.31
Total Samples 23.61
Total Relevant 9.81
Total Irrelevant 13.67

SD
1.03
16.34
9.37
9.80

Min
1
1
0
0

Max
10
100
49
90

Depleting
Non-depleting

Table 5. Mean irrelevant items found per visited patch by
condition. Standard deviation in parentheses.

Table 2. Mean visits per visited patch by condition.
Standard deviation in parentheses.
Can Return
1.65 (1.42)
1.47 (1.27)

Depleting
Non-depleting

No Return
1.00 (0.00)
1.00 (0.00)

No Return
13.57 (7.45)
19.31 (11.73)

Switching behavior
In any given search trial, participants could either switch
from the first patch in the set or continue exploiting that
patch for the entirety of the two-minute search time. This
“sticking and staying” behavior occurred on 9.8% of search
trials. We explored how the return rate of the patch and the
depletion and return conditions impacted whether or not
participants stayed with a patch without exploring any other
options in the search trial. Participants were more likely to
stay with the first patch when the return rate of the patch
was higher (B = -2.57, p < 0.001 comparing 30% to 10%
and B = -4.89, p < 0.001 comparing 50% to 10%), but
neither depletion nor return condition impacted likelihood of
staying with the same patch (B = -1.36 and B = 0.51,
respectively). Participants may have gotten a sense of the

Table 3. Mean samples per visited patch by condition.
Standard deviation in parentheses.
Can Return
24.60 (20.89)
19.77 (19.1)

Can Return
12.39 (12.92)
13.36 (11.34)

The relationship between number of relevant items found
and depletion condition is expected given differences in the
distribution of items in these conditions. Because depleting
patches were front-loaded with relevant items and their rate
of return diminished with repeated sampling, participants in
the depleting condition found more relevant items, on
average, than did the participants in the non-depleting
condition. The significant relationship between return
condition and number of relevant and irrelevant items found
is more surprising. Participants consistently found fewer
relevant and irrelevant items when they were able to return
to a previously exploited patch. Taken together, the results
suggest that deciding when to switch to a new patch or a
previously visited patch, and performing a switch, cost the
participants in the Can Return condition a significant
number of relevant items and, because there was no penalty
for finding irrelevant items, saved them nothing.

The analyses in this section focused solely on the
participant’s first visit (for participants in the Can Return
condition) to the first patch offered in each search set, to
investigate how depletion condition and return condition
influenced participants’ search behavior. This focus on the
first patch ensured that participants had ample time to
investigate the patch prior to choosing to leave, rather than
“stopping” as the result of running out of time in the trial. In
addition, each analysis involved a multi-level model which
estimated an intercept for each participant to account for any
individual variability in search behavior.
The first model fit to the data predicted total samples
based on return rate of the patch, depletion and return
condition. Total number of samples from a patch was
related to whether the participant could return (B = 6.98, p
< 0.05), and the return rate (B = 7.41, p < 0.05 comparing
30% to 10% and B = 18.56, p < 0.05 comparing 50% to
10%), but not depletion condition (B = -1.98). The means
for each condition are shown in Table 3.

Depleting
Non-depleting

No Return
14.72 (10.79)
10.13 (10.16)

Only the return condition was significantly related to the
number of irrelevant items found by participants (B = 4.16,
p < 0.05). Participants in the No Return condition found
more irrelevant items than those in the Can Return condition
(Table 5).

Most participants in the Can Return condition chose to
return to a previously exploited patch at least once across
the ten search trials (~88% of the 41 participants). As shown
in Table 2, people were more likely to return in the
Depleting condition than the Non-Depleting condition
(return was not possible in the No Return condition).

Depleting
Non-depleting

Can Return
13.54 (11.10)
8.13 (9.51)

No Return
28.12 (15.92)
28.97 (19.88)

Number of relevant items found was related to all three of
the independent variables: return rate (B = 7.04, p < 0.05
comparing 30% to 10% and B = 18.20, p < 0.05 comparing

993

highest available return rate over several trials and stayed
with the first patch when they suspected this patch had the
highest return rate possible.

Stopping rules
The impact of depletion and return conditions on average
relevant and irrelevant items found suggests that the Can
Return may have led to a less optimal search strategy than
the No Return condition. However, the pattern of number of
relevant and irrelevant items found across patches of
different return rates can provide insight into the dominant
increment used in the stopping rule across participants, and
whether the increment changed due to return or depletion
condition.
Figure 1 shows how the relationship between return rate
and number of relevant items found changes depending on
return and depletion condition. Consistent with the overall
results regarding number of relevant items found,
participants in the Depleting condition found more relevant
items across all return rates and those in the No Return
condition tended to find more relevant items regardless of
return rate. Because all forms of the incremental rule predict
a position relationship between return rate and the number
of relevant items found, these results are consistent with the
use of any size of increment.

Figure 4. Average irrelevant items found for each return
rate, by depletion and return condition.

To explore the dominant stopping rule used by
participants in each condition, we fit a linear model
predicting number of irrelevant items from patch return rate
to each participants’ data separately (for all patches,
regardless of their position in the search set). Of the 77
participants, there was a non-significant relationship
between the number of irrelevant items found and the return
rate of the patch for 33. However, 42% of the sample
showed a significant negative relationship between number
of irrelevant items found and return rate of the patch. Only
14% showed a positive relationship, consistent with using a
larger increment. Further, there was variation in the
predominant relationship between return rate and irrelevant
items found by condition: 63% of participants in the
Depletion – No Return condition showed a negative
relationship between patch return rate and irrelevant items
found; this pattern was found for only 32-40% of
participants in the other conditions. Thus, it seems that both
whether the patches deplete and whether it is possible to
return to previously exploited patches influenced the
stopping rule used by participants.

Discussion
The current study explored whether the distribution of
relevant items in a patch (depleting or non-depleting) and
the ability to return to a previously exploited patch
influenced the search behavior of information foragers.
Overall, ability to return affected the average number of
samples participants made from each patch: those
participants who could return made fewer samples, and as a
result found fewer relevant and irrelevant items. This
suggests that the additional burden of deciding whether to
leave a patch to return to a patch previously searched or a
patch that has not yet been searched, and the accompanying
time taken in switching patches, cut into the amount of time
participants in this condition had to exploit any given patch.
Because these participants found fewer relevant items
compared to participants who could not return, this suggests
that performing information search while weighing the
ability to return to the current or previously explored
patches may lead to suboptimal search. Even in cases where
return to a patch is possible, as it is in most real-world

Figure 2. Average relevant items found for each return rate,
by depletion and return condition.

Figure 4 shows the average number of irrelevant items
found across the three return rates for each depletion and
return condition. Across all return rates, participants in the
Non-depleting – No Return condition found the most
irrelevant items, and there is a slight but positive trend for
number of irrelevant items found as return rate increases for
this condition and for the Non-depleting – No Return
condition. Comparatively, the slope of the Depleting – No
Return and Depleting – Can Return appear slightly negative.
This difference between the depletion conditions is
intriguing because the application of the incremental rule is
predicted to result in a different relationship between return
rate and number of irrelevant items found depending on the
size of the increment the information forager uses.

994

References

information search tasks, it may be advantageous for
information foragers to leave each patch only when they are
confident they will not wish to return to it.
Across all participants, the number of relevant items
found increased with the richness of the patch. This pattern
is to be expected if participants are applying the Incremental
Rule while searching. Further, the relationship between
number of relevant items found and richness of the patch
differs only in degree between uses of an incremental
stopping rule with different sizes of increments (see Figure
1). However, our study provided an opportunity to directly
observe the relationship between number of irrelevant items
found and richness of the patch which has not been possible
in previous studies. Increments of different sizes are
predicted to yield different relationships when the increment
is 0, the relationship is predicted to be negative; as the size
of increment increases, the relationship is predicted to
become increasingly positive (see Figure 2). Of participants
who showed a significant relationship between return rate
and number of irrelevant items found, the majority showed a
negative relationship. This is consistent with application of
the total samples rule, which dictates an increment of 0.
There were further differences between the conditions: a
negative relationship between return rate and irrelevant
items found was most prevalent in the Depleting – No
Return condition, more common than any other pattern,
while other conditions yielded a greater number of positive
or non-significant relationships.

Charnov, E. L. (1976). Optimal foraging, the Marginal Value
Theorem. Theoretical Population Biology, 9, 129-136.
Constantino, S. M., & Daw, N. D. (2015). Learning the
opportunity cost of time in a patch-foraging task. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 1-17.
Dennis, A. R., & Taylor, N. J. (2006). Information foraging on the
web: The effects of “acceptable” Internet delays on multipage information search behavior. Decision Support
Systems, 42(2), 810-824.
Frank, R. G. (2004). Behavioral economics and health
economics (No. w10881). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Friedman, M., & Savage, L. J. (1948). The utility analysis of
choices involving risk. The Journal of Political Economy,
279-304.
Harbison, J. I., Dougherty, M. R., Davelaar, E. J., & Fayyad, B.
(2009). On the lawfulness of the decision to terminate
memory search. Cognition, 111(3), 397-402.
Hills, T. T., Jones, M. N., & Todd, P. M. (2012). Optimal foraging
in semantic memory. Psychological Review, 119(2), 431.
Hutchinson, J. M., Wilke, A., & Todd, P. M. (2008). Patch
leaving in humans: can a generalist adapt its rules to
dispersal of items across patches?. Animal Behaviour,
75(4), 1331-1349.
Jacobs, E. A., & Hackenberg, T. D. (1996). Humans’ choices in
situations of time-based diminishing returns: Effects of
fixed-interval duration and progressive-interval step size.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 65(1), 519.

Conclusion

Kalff, C., Hills, T. T., & Wiener, J. M. (2010). Human foraging
behavior: A virtual reality investigation on area restricted
search in humans. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 168-173).

Previous research on information foraging has not
explored situations where the proportion of targets or
relevant items in a patch does not deplete, or cases where it
is possible to return to a previously searched patch, yet both
scenarios are possible in real-world search tasks. Our results
indicate that these factors influence the stopping rules that
information foragers apply. Further, our results suggest that
having awareness of the ability to return to previously
searched patches may lead to less optimal search behavior.

Parsons, G. R., & Kealy, M. J. (1995). A demand theory for
number of trips in a random utility model of recreation.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
29(3), 357-367.
Sandstrom, P. E. (1994). An optimal foraging approach to
information seeking and use. The Library Quarterly, 414449.
Thorelli, H. B., & Engledow, J. L. (1980). Information seekers
and information systems: a policy perspective. The Journal
of Marketing, 9-24.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the University of
Maryland Center for Advanced Study of Language with
funding from the Department of Defense.

Unsworth, N., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, G. J. (2011). Factors
that influence search termination decisions in free recall: An
examination of response type and confidence. Acta
psychologica, 138(1), 19-29.
Wilke, A., Hutchinson, J., Todd, P. M., & Czienskowski, U.
(2009). Fishing for the right words: Decision rules for
human foraging behavior in internal search tasks. Cognitive
Science, 33(3), 497-529.

995

