Investigating the Effects of Transparency and Ambiguity on Idiom Learning
Mehrgol Tiv (met81@pitt.edu)
University of Pittsburgh
4200 Fifth Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

Evelyn Milburn (eam115@pitt.edu)
University of Pittsburgh
4200 Fifth Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

Tessa Warren (tessa@pitt.edu)
University of Pittsburgh
4200 Fifth Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

Abstract
The purpose of this study was to learn how transparency and
ambiguity affect idiom learning. To start, 157 French idioms
were translated to English and normed for familiarity,
transparency, and ambiguity. Experiment 1 was a training
study in which 32 of these idioms were taught to 25 native
English speakers over two days of training. A cued recall test
during a third session showed a reliable effect of
transparency, but performance was close to ceiling. In
Experiment 2, the amount of training was reduced to one
session and a semantic relatedness test was included after the
cued recall test. The results of Experiment 2 suggest that high
transparency idioms are recalled with greater accuracy in a
cued-recall test but low transparency idioms are recalled with
greater accuracy in a semantic relatedness test. No significant
effect of or interaction with ambiguity was found.
Keywords: Idioms; Language
Language; Individual Differences

Learning;

The current study investigates the way that the properties of
transparency and ambiguity affect idiom learning.
Transparency refers to the ease with which the
comprehender can make a connection between the idiom’s
literal and figurative meanings (Nunberg et al., 1994). The
idiom spill the beans is highly transparent because the
connection between “divulging a secret” and “releasing
beans from a container” is very clear. In contrast, the idiom
wet behind the ears is less transparent because the
relationship between the literal and figurative meaning is
less obvious. Several factors, including properties of
individual words (compositionality) and the capacity to
evoke a mental image (imageability), can influence the ease
of drawing a connection between literal and figurative
meanings and thus contribute to an idiom’s level of
transparency (Nunberg et al., 1994).
Ambiguity refers to whether an idiom has both literal and
figurative meanings, or only a figurative meaning. The
idiom kick the bucket is ambiguous because it has both a
literal meaning (striking a pail with a foot) and a figurative
meaning (dying), but the idiom under the weather is
unambiguous because it only has a figurative meaning
(Titone & Connine, 1994).
We were interested in whether transparency and
ambiguity influence how successfully individuals will learn
the meanings of idioms. There is evidence that transparency
and ambiguity both influence the comprehension of idioms,
such that greater transparency tends to facilitate idiom
comprehension, whereas greater ambiguity usually impedes
comprehension (Foss, 1970), but there is only a small
literature on how these factors influence learning. In one of
the most relevant studies, Steinhel et al. (2007) investigated
the effects of transparency on L2 idiom learning and found
minimal effects of transparency but significant effects of
imageability. However, their study included very few items

Figurative

Background
Figurative language, which includes phenomena such as
metaphor, metonymy, irony, and idioms, is generally
characterized as “going beyond the literal” (Gibbs, 1994).
Of these, idioms have been of particular interest to cognitive
linguists and psycholinguists. Idioms are traditionally
defined by their conventionality; as Nunberg, Sag, and
Wasow stated: “their meaning or use can’t be predicted, or
at least entirely predicted, on the basis of a knowledge of the
independent conventions that determine the use of their
constituents when they appear in isolation from one
another” (1994). The tension that arises between overall
expression meaning and literal word meaning gives rise to
several unique characteristics, two of which, transparency
and ambiguity, will be considered here.
Most research on idiomatic language has focused on how
idioms are mentally represented and processed. There has
been less investigation of how idioms are learned, despite
the practical ramifications it bears for second language
learning applications (e.g. Howarth, 1998; Yorio, 1989).

57

in each condition, so its findings must be interpreted with
caution.
Most previous idiom learning studies have focused on
learning idioms in a second language (e.g. Steinhel et al.,
2007) and on the way that context affects learning (e.g.
Zyzik, 2011). The current study is novel because it
investigates idiom learning in the participants’ native
language and uses completely unfamiliar idioms, thereby
avoiding any learning advantage from previous exposure.
This is critical because there is evidence that comprehenders
find more familiar idioms more transparent (Keysar & Bly,
1995). We presented participants with unfamiliar phrases
that had no English idiomatic meaning. This process, in
which the learner must assign idiomatic meaning to
unfamiliar strings of words, mirrored natural idiom
acquisition and allowed us to examine how unfamiliar
idiomatic meanings are learned.
We base our predictions on findings from the growing
literature on ambiguous word learning, under the
assumption that assigning a new conventionalized meaning
for a phrase that already has a compositional meaning is like
learning a new meaning for a word that already has a
meaning. Given evidence that ambiguous words are harder
to learn than unambiguous words (Degani & Tokowicz,
2010), we predict that figurative meanings of less
ambiguous idioms will be learned better than figurative
meanings of more ambiguous idioms. This is because literal
meanings of ambiguous idioms are highly accessible and
may interfere with learning of figurative meanings. Drawing
from work showing that when new meanings are assigned to
old words, increased semantic similarity between the
meanings leads to increased recall accuracy (Rodd,
Berriman, Landau, Lee, Ho, Gaskell, & Davis, 2012), we
also predict that figurative meanings of highly transparent
idioms will be learned better than figurative meanings of
less transparent idioms. This is because participants will be
able to more easily draw connections between the idioms’
literal and figurative meanings, thereby boosting recall.
Finally, we investigated three individual difference
factors that could interact with the learning process and
influence performance. The first was performance on the
Operation-Span (O-Span) task (Turner & Engle, 1989), a
measure of working memory. Because working memory is
important for learning, we predict that individuals who score
higher on an O-Span task will learn better than individuals
that score lower on the O-Span task (Unsworth, Heitz,
Schrock, & Engle, 2005). Additionally, we predict that more
creative individuals will be able to create more or stronger
connections between the literal and figurative meanings of
the idioms, making the low transparency idioms seem more
transparent to them. Thus, we expect that participants who
score higher on the Abbreviated Torrance Test for Adults
(ATTA) (Goff, 2002) will learn better and show less of a
difference between performance on high and low
transparency idioms. Finally, we expected that better
performance on an Author Recognition Test (Stanovich &
West, 1989), a proxy for language experience and thus

figurative language proficiency, would also be predictive of
idiomatic learning.

Norming Idiom Properties
To inform the choice of stimuli for the training study, we
conducted multiple norming questionnaires.

Methods
Participants 85 undergraduate students enrolled in
Introduction to Psychology at the University of Pittsburgh
participated in one of various norming questionnaires for
course credit. All participants were over 18 years old, native
speakers of American English, and had no prior experience
with French.
Materials 305 French idioms were translated word-forword (literally) and as an idiomatic phrase (nonliterally)
using online and print resources (Bonin, Meot, & Bugaiska,
2013; “Idioms,” 2006; Lamiroy & Klein, 2010; “Proverbes
en français,” 2006; “Traduction en contexte,” 2006; “Word
Reference”) For example, the French idiom avoir un cheveu
sur la langue was translated literally as to have a hair on
your tongue and nonliterally as to have a lisp. French
idioms that were extremely similar to English idioms were
excluded, leaving 157 translated idioms in the set that was
normed.
Procedures We designed online Qualtrics questionnaires to
evaluate familiarity, transparency, and ambiguity. Each
participant was randomly assigned to one questionnaire.
Each questionnaire contained several catch trials to confirm
that participants were on task and attentive. All participants
completed a brief language history questionnaire.
To verify that the translated idioms were not familiar, 15
participants were shown each idiom and asked to
“determine if there is an English phrase that is similar to and
means the same thing as the following expression” by
answering “Yes” or “No.” Any idiom that received more
than one “Yes” response was excluded from the set of
stimuli.
To measure the level of transparency for each idiom, we
presented the literal translation of each idiom (e.g. to have a
hair on your tongue) with its figurative translation (e.g. to
have a lisp) and asked participants to rate how likely from 1
(Very unlikely) to 5 (Very likely) they were to have the same
meaning. Each opportunity for rating was followed by a
free-response question: “why did you select that rating?”
Piloting trials indicated that the questionnaire could take
over an hour to complete, so, in order to avoid fatigue, each
participant received half of the questionnaire. Fourteen
participants completed the first half, and 13 completed the
second half.
To index ambiguity, we evaluated the salience of the
literal interpretation of the idiom by asking participants to
“decide which [interpretation] you think is the more likely
interpretation by assigning each option with a percentage (0100). A higher percentage indicates the more likely

58

interpretation.” For example, for the idiom to have a hair on
your tongue participants would have to assign a percentage
to each of the two options: (1) to have a hair resting on your
tongue and (2) to have a lisp. Increasing the likelihood of
the literal meaning increases the chance that it will compete
with the figurative meaning. Therefore, we used the rated
likelihood of the literal meaning (option 1) as our index of
the ambiguity of the idiom. Participants were additionally
asked to “indicate how likely (from very unlikely to very
likely) you would be to encounter these expressions when
reading a novel or talking with someone.” This
questionnaire was also time-consuming so it was similarly
split in half. Fifteen participants completed each half.

their answer was correct or not. Then participants were
asked to generate a novel sentence that included the idiom.
This procedure was repeated for each idiom.
The second session (approximately 20-30 minutes)
consisted of three parts. First, each idiom and its definition
were presented on the screen for 12 seconds. Then,
participants saw each idiom again, and rated their
confidence in their memory of the idiom’s definition. Then,
the idiom and its definition reappeared on the screen for
another twelve seconds. The metacognitive confidence
rating was included to help ensure that participants were
paying attention and to aid learning (Kang, 2007). During
the second part, participants verbalized each idiom and its
meaning to add a physical and auditory memory trace.
Participants concluded the session by generating a novel
sentence that included the idiom. This time, the participants
saw the idiom and had to type the sentence without a
reminder of the definition.
In the third session, participants were tested via a cuedrecall test. Participants were instructed to “type the learned
definition of the expression to the best of your ability.”
Emphasis was put on recalling the correct meaning, instead
of verbatim recall. On each screen, the participant saw an
idiom and typed their answer below. Next, participants
completed the Operation Span task, the Abbreviated
Torrance Test for Adults, and Author Recognition Test.
Finally all participants completed a brief language history
questionnaire.
In the Operation Span task, participants viewed variably
sized sets of mathematical computations followed by single
words. The task was to judge whether the answer to the
math problem was correct or incorrect and then remember
the subsequent word. At the end of each set, the participants
were asked to recall as many words as they could remember
from that set. Set size ranged from 3-6 words.
In the Abbreviated Torrance Test, participants had three
minutes to complete each of three activities. They had to
answer thought questions and create images or pictures with
incomplete figures. Participants only worked on one activity
at a time.
In the Author Recognition test, participants were given a
piece of paper that contained eighty names. They were
instructed to “read the names and put a check mark next to
the names of the individuals you know to be writers.”

Results
Average ambiguity and transparency scores for each idiom
were calculated. We selected 32 idioms that varied across
the full range of transparency and ambiguity scores, yet also
satisfied a 2x2 design crossing transparency and ambiguity.
Table 1 gives examples from each condition.
Table 1: Example Idioms Used in Training Study
Idiom
To have a hair
on your
tongue
To fall like
apples
To do your
hair
To not miss
the air

Translation
To have a
lisp

Transparency
High

Ambiguity
High

To faint

High

Low

To worry
yourself
a lot
To be bold

Low

High

Low

Low

Experiment 1: Learning of Unfamiliar Idioms
Methods
Participants 26 undergraduate students from the same
population as the norming participated for course credit.
None had previously participated in the norming.
Materials The 32 items described above.

Results

Procedures The training study and Operation Span test
were presented electronically using E-Prime 2.0 software
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA); the ATTA,
Author Recognition test, and language history questionnaire
were administered on paper.
Participants signed up for three separate sessions about
two to three days apart. For each session, presentation of all
items was randomized. During the first session
(approximately 30-45 minutes), participants viewed an
idiom and typed what they thought it meant. After they
typed their answer, the correct meaning of the idiom
appeared, and participants were asked to indicate whether

Responses from the cued-recall test were coded for
accuracy. A verbatim or slightly reworded response of the
learned definition was counted as correct. For example, for
the idiom to jump from the rooster to the donkey, which
means “to switch from one subject to another”, the response
“to switch sides” was marked as incorrect. These criteria are
strict enough to measure learning over guessing, yet flexible
enough to measure competence over memorization. Table 2
shows means and standard deviations for accuracy by
condition. It is important to note that even with this
relatively strict coding, there was limited variability in the
data. Participants performed with perfect accuracy on

59

approximately half the items, and approximately half of
participants made no errors across all items.
Accuracy was analyzed in R (R Development Core Team,
2015; ver 3.2.3) with the lme4 package. We used linear
mixed effect logit models with participants and items as
crossed random factors (Baayen, 2008; Bates, Maechler,
Bolker, & Walker, 2015). Fixed factors (e.g. ambiguity,
transparency) were treated as continuous, and were centered
in all analyses. When maximal models failed to converge,
the random slopes that captured the least variance were
dropped until the model converged (Barr, Levy, Scheepers,
& Tily, 2013).
Analyses showed a significant effect of transparency (β=
0.59, SE= 0.28, p= 0.04), such that more transparent idioms
were learned better. There was no effect of ambiguity (β=
0.01, SE= 0.01, p= 0.63) and no interaction between
ambiguity and transparency (β= 0.01, SE= 0.01, p= 0.32).
Individual difference measures were evaluated according
to standardized procedures. For the Operation Span Task,
set size was used instead of total words recalled because it is
more representative of an individual’s maximal working
memory potential (Unsworth et al., 2005). The range of
scores across subjects for each test was as follows:
Operation Span Task Set Size (3-6), Abbreviated Torrance
Test for Adults Creativity Index (26-90), and Author
Recognition Test hits (4-26). Before inclusion in mixed
models, all measures were centered and the ATTA
Creativity Index was scaled down by a factor of 10 to make
its scale more similar to the others.

transparency and the O-Span test, this task was also
administered in Experiment 2. We did not administer the
other individual differences tasks for lack of time.
Experiment 2 only included a subset of Experiment’s
training procedures. In Session 1, participants viewed an
idiom and typed what they thought it meant. The correct
meaning of the idiom then appeared on the next screen, and
participants indicated whether their answer was correct or
not. They did this for all idioms. Next, participants went
through the same flashcard activity as Experiment 1,
however the duration of each flashcard was reduced from
twelve seconds to six seconds.
Finally, participants
generated a novel sentence that included the idiom. This
procedure was also repeated for each idiom.
In Session 2, participants were tested via the same cuedrecall test as Experiment 1. After the participant typed the
definitions to all idioms, they completed a semantic
relatedness test. In this test, participants saw one of the
idioms they had learned paired with one of two possible
words: one related to the idiom’s learned figurative meaning
and one related to the idiom’s literal meaning. Two versions
of the semantic relatedness test were created for
counterbalancing purposes; this ensured that across the
entire experiment, idioms were paired with both related and
unrelated words, but individual participants saw each idiom
only once, and had an equal number of related and unrelated
trials. Participants indicated whether the idiom and the
presented word were or were not related in meaning by
pressing keys on the keyboard. Finally, participants
completed the O-Span test and language history
questionnaire.

Table 2: Cued Recall Accuracy in Experiment 1
Transparency
High
High
Low
Low

Ambiguity
High
Low
High
Low

Mean
0.94
0.93
0.85
0.85

Results

SD
0.24
0.26
0.36
0.36

All analyses were done in R with the same procedures as
Experiment 1.
Cued Recall Accuracy Recall accuracy was coded
according to the same criteria as Experiment 1; Table 3
shows means and standard deviations for accuracy by
condition. Note that accuracy was lower, and there was
more variability in the data than in Experiment 1. Our model
included random slopes by subject for transparency and
ambiguity, and replicating Experiment 1, it showed a
significant positive effect of transparency (β= 0.61, SE=
0.26, p= 0.02), but no effect of ambiguity (β< 0.01, SE=
0.01, p= 0.95) and no interaction (β< 0.01, SE= 0.01, p=
0.79).

We found a significant positive interaction between
transparency and O-Span (β= 0.42, SE= 0.18, p= 0.02).
However, the limited variability in the data made us hesitant
to draw any firm conclusions from the current results.
Therefore we decided to run a follow-up study with less
intensive training.

Experiment 2: Less Training of Idioms
Methods

Table 3: Cued Recall Accuracy in Experiment 2

Participants 17 undergraduate students from the same
population participated for course credit. None had
participated in the norming or Experiment 1.

Transparency
High
High
Low
Low

Materials The same 32 idioms as Experiment 1.
Procedures Experiment 2 consisted of two sessions: a
learning session and, two days later, a testing session.
Because Experiment 1 hinted at an interaction between

60

Ambiguity
High
Low
High
Low

Mean
0.84
0.88
0.68
0.65

SD
0.37
0.33
0.47
0.48

Semantic Relatedness Accuracy Means and standard
deviations for accuracy by condition on the semantic
relatedness test are shown in Table 4. A model including
random slopes by subject for transparency and ambiguity
showed a significant negative effect of transparency (β= 0.52, SE= 0.22, p= 0.02), but no effect of ambiguity (β= 0.01, SE= 0.01, p= 0.25) and no interaction (β< 0.01, SE=
0.01, p= 0.64).

However, our findings suggest that transparency’s effect
on learning may depend on the test. On the semantic
relatedness task in Experiment 2, accuracy was higher for
less transparent idioms. This result is surprising, and could
potentially be caused by some inadvertently uncontrolled
property of the semantic relatedness test itself. But if we
take it seriously, a potential mechanism for explaining this
data pattern could be borrowed from the ConstructionIntegration model (Kintsch, 1988), or other accounts
according to which comprehenders activate wide networks
of inferred relationships when trying to relate less-related
concepts (e.g. Mason & Just, 2004).
We speculate that a similar process could come into play
during our training sessions, such that participants might
generate a larger set of weak possible relations when trying
to relate low transparency idioms to their meanings than
when trying to relate higher transparency idioms to their
meanings. Although activating this wider network of
possible relations will not necessarily improve performance
on cued-recall tests, it could lead to improved performance
on a semantic relatedness test.. This is because having
activated a wider network of related concepts during
training may make it more likely that the concepts
corresponding to the related words at test had already
received some activation.

Table 4: Semantic Relatedness Accuracy in Experiment 2
Transparency
High
High
Low
Low

Ambiguity
High
Low
High
Low

Mean
0.79
0.79
0.90
0.92

SD
0.41
0.41
0.30
0.27

Transparency x Test Type Interaction We conducted a
repeated-measures ANOVA to investigate the interaction of
transparency and test type. It indicated a significant main
effect of test mode (F(1, 16) = 18.54; p < 0.05) and a
significant interaction between test mode and transparency
(F(1, 16) = 41.78; p < 0.05). The main effect of
transparency approached significance (F(1, 16) = 3.54; p =
0.08). Pairwise comparisons indicated that recall was more
accurate for high transparency idioms than low transparency
idioms. However, this was reversed for semantic relatedness
judgment accuracy: low transparency idioms were more
accurate than high transparency idioms.

Ambiguity
The current experiments found no effect of ambiguity on
recall of idiomatic meaning. It is possible that the way
ambiguity was operationalized and the way the current
experiments were structured could have contributed to this
lack of effect. Unlike in previous word-learning studies in
which ambiguity was manipulated by teaching either one or
more meanings (e.g. Degani & Tokowicz, 2010), in the
current study, ambiguity served as a measure for the
potential of the literal meaning of an expression to compete
with a newly taught figurative interpretation; this kind of
ambiguity has also been referred to as literal plausibility
(Titone, Columbus, Whitford, Mercier, & Libben, 2015).
Critically, although this kind of ambiguity would be
expected to have a strong effect during comprehension
when multiple meanings compete for activation, it may have
a less important role in the context of a training study.
Participants in the current study were focused on learning
idiomatic meanings for all of the items, and at test they
knew that only the idiomatic meanings were relevant. This
strong experiment-internal emphasis on the idiomatic
meaning could have overwhelmed any potential effects of
competition from a literal meaning.

Operation Span Test We found no significant effect of OSpan (β= 0.80, SE= 0.60, p= 0.18) and no interaction of OSpan with transparency (β= -0.04, SE= 0.12, p= 0.70).

Discussion
Transparency
The current results suggest that transparency plays an
important role in idiom learning. In both Experiments 1 and
2, higher transparency idioms were learned better than lower
transparency idioms when learning was indexed by
performance on a cued-recall test. One plausible explanation
for this is that transparency facilitates a useful memorization
strategy: finding connections and links between items.
Transparency may aid learning at both the word and
phrase levels. For cases in which compositionality or
decomposability contributes to higher transparency,
spreading activation from a single word in the phrase could
aid in recall. For example, in the experimental item there is
an eel under the rock, the word eel could prompt recall of
the adjective fishy, thus bringing the learner to the meaning
something fishy is going on. At the phrasal level, the
relationship may rely less on lexical associations, and
instead be be more illustrative or story-like. Participants
may elaborate on the pairing between the literal and
idiomatic meaning through mental imagery or storytelling.

Individual Differences
The current results are inconclusive regarding the influence
of individual difference measures on idiom learning.
Although there was some indication that working memory
might be related to the influence of transparency on idiom
learning in Experiment 1, this did not hold in Experiment 2,
which had more variability in accuracy and a more even

61

distribution of O-Span scores. Therefore we are hesitant to
draw any strong conclusions. Future research with larger
samples will be important for addressing the roles that
individual differences play in idiom learning.

generation and integration component processes utilizing
both cerebral hemispheres. Psychological Science, 15(1),
1-7.
Nunberg, G., Sag, I.A., Wasow, T. (1994). "Idioms."
Language 70(3): 491-538.
Rodd, J. M., Berriman, R., Landau, M., Lee, T., Ho, C.,
Gaskell, M.G., Davis, M.H. (2012). "Learning new
meanings for old words: effects of semantic relatedness."
Memory and Cognition 40(7): 1095-1108.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). Eprime computer software and manual. Pittsburgh, PA:
Psychology Software Tools Inc.
Stanovich, K. E., West, R.F. (1989). "Exposure to print and
orthographic processing." Reading Research Quarterly:
402-433.
Steinel, M. P., Hulstijn, J.H., Steinel, W. (2007). "Second
language idiom learning in a paired-associate paradigm:
Effects of direction of learning, direction of testing, idiom
imageability, and idiom transparency." Studies in Second
Language Acquisition 29(3): 449-484.
Titone, D. A., Connine, C.M. (1994). "Descriptive Norms
for
171
Idiomatic
Expressions:
Familiarity,
Compositionality,
Predictability,
and
Literality."
Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 9(4): 247-270.
Titone, D., Columbus, G., Whitford, V., Mercier, J., &
Libben, M. (2015). Contrasting bilingual and monolingual
idiom processing. Bilingual figurative language
processing, 171-207.
Turner, M. L., Engle, R.W. (1989). "Is working memory
capacity task dependent?" Journal of Memory and
Language 28(2): 127-154.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W.
(2005). An automated version of the operation span task.
Behavior research methods, 37(3), 498-505.
Yorio, C. (1989). Idiomaticity as an Indicator of second
language proficiency. Bilingualism Across the Lifespan.
L. K. O. K. Hyltenstam. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press: 55-72.
Zyzik, E. (2011). "Second language idiom learning: The
effects of lexical knowledge and peagogical sequencing."
Language Teaching Research 15(4): 413-433.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the University of Pittsburgh Honors
College for providing the funding for this project and Dr.
Scott Fraundorf for his help with analyses in R.

References
. Word Reference.
(2006). Idioms. The Free Dictionary, Fairlex.
(2006).
"Proverbes
en
francais."
from
http://parolesfr.kiev.ua/idiomsfr.php.
(2006). Traduction en Contexte. Reverso.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). "Analyzing linguistic data: A
practical introduction to statistics using R." Cambridge
University Press.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of memory and
language, 68(3), 255-278.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., Walker, S. (2015).
"Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4."
Journal of Statistical Software 67 (1): 1-48.
Bonin, P., et al. (2013). "Norms and comprehension times
for 305 French idiomatic expressions." Behav Res
Methods 45(4): 1259-1271.
Degani, T. and N. Tokowicz (2010). "Ambiguous words are
harder to learn." Bilingualism: Language and Cognition
13(03): 299-314.
Foss, D. J. (1970). "Some effects of ambiguity upon
sentence comprehension." Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior 9(6): 699-706.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative
thought, language, and understanding. Cambridge
University Press.
Goff, K. (2002). "The abbreviated Torrance test for adults
(ATTA)." IL Scholastic Testing Service.
Howarth, P. (1998). "Phraseology and second language
proficiency." Applied Linguistics 19(1): 24-44.
Kang, S. H., McDermott, K.B., Roediger III, H.L. (2007).
"Test format and corrective feedback modify the effect of
testing on long-term retention " European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology 19(4-5): 528-558.
Keysar, B., Bly, B. (1995). "Intuitions of the transparency of
idioms: Can one keep a secret by spilling the beans?"
Journal of Memory and Language 34(1): 89-109.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163–182.
Lamiroy, B., Klein, J.R. (2010). "Les expressions verbales
figées de la francophonie: Belgique, France, Québec, et
Suisse." OPHRYS.
Mason, R. A., & Just, M. A. (2004). How the brain
processes causal inferences in text a theoretical account of

62

