Is it a nine, or a six? Prosocial and selective perspective taking in four-year-olds
Xuan Zhao (xuan_zhao@brown.edu)1
Bertram F. Malle (bfmalle@brown.edu) 1
Hyowon Gweon (gweon@stanford.edu)2
1

Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912
2
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
Abstract

To successfully navigate the complex social world, people
often need to solve the problem of perspective selection:
Between two conflicting viewpoints of the self and the other,
whose perspective should one take? In two experiments, we
show that four-year-olds use others’ knowledge and goals to
decide when to engage in visual perspective taking. Children
were more likely to take a social partner’s perspective to
describe an ambiguous symbol when she did not know
numbers and wanted to learn than when she knew numbers
and wanted to teach. These results were shown in children’s
own responses (Experiment 1) and in their evaluations of
others’ responses (Experiment 2). By preschool years,
children understand when perspective taking is appropriate
and necessary and selectively take others’ perspectives in
social interactions. These results provide novel insights into
the nature and the development of perspective taking.
Keywords: social cognition; cognitive
perspective taking; theory of mind; pedagogy

development;

Introduction
We all see the world from unique perspectives, forming
different perceptions and beliefs and pursuing individual
goals. Thus, to effectively interact with others, we often
have to juggle various viewpoints and even choose between
conflicting perspectives: When my dinner guest asks, “could
you pass the plate on the left,” should I hand over the one on
his left or mine? When a friend in a different time zone says,
“I’ll call you at 6pm”, does she mean 6pm for her, or for me?
From ambiguity resolution in conversations to large-scale
collaborative efforts, perspective selection—deciding whose
perspective to take—is a central and pervasive problem in
navigating the social world.
Previous research has revealed various benefits of taking
another’s perspective: it allows people to better understand
others’ mental states, improves interpersonal and intergroup
relations, and even promotes generosity and helping
behaviors (see Hodges, Clark, & Myers, 2011 for a review).
However, perspective taking is not always necessary; our
own perspectives are usually sufficient and even more
relevant for many daily tasks such as spatial navigation or
goal-directed actions. Moreover, deliberately taking on
others’ perspectives can be cognitively demanding (Hodges
& Klein, 2001; Epley, Morewedge, & Keysar, 2004; Surtees
& Apperly, 2012) and may even lead to poorer coordination
(Galinsky, Ku, & Wang, 2005; Ku, Wang, & Galinsky,
2015). Because indiscriminately taking others’ perspectives
can be costly and even counterproductive, we must know
when perspective taking is called for and employ it
selectively in proper contexts.

924

For instance, imagine you see a number “9” on the table,
which looks like a “6” to Emma who is sitting across the
table. When Emma asks, “What is the number on the table?”
would you say that it is a “nine,” or a “six”? There is no
inherently correct or incorrect answer to this question; the
meaning of the symbol is perspective-dependent. Depending
on the context, however, it may be more appropriate to
answer the question from one perspective than the other. For
instance, suppose Emma doesn’t know numbers at all and
wants to learn from you; then reading it as “nine” from your
perspective might mislead her to falsely believe that what
appears as “6” to her should be read as “nine.” However, if
Emma already knows numbers and is simply testing your
number knowledge, then taking her perspective to say “six”
might be unnecessary; it may even be potentially counterproductive if Emma (the teacher) expects you (the learner)
to read the number from your own perspective.
This example illustrates a case in which the appropriate
perspective is determined by the communicative context.
Importantly, others’ goals and knowledge can provide
critical information about the nature of context. In this
study, we investigate young children’s ability to use such
information to decide when to take others’ perspectives.
Decades of developmental research have revealed young
children’s ability to reason about others’ mental states, such
as their goals, desires, and beliefs—an ability often labeled
“theory of mind” (Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). Even
toddlers use others’ mental states to flexibly modulate their
behaviors in social interactions, such as providing the food
that others like rather than what they themselves like
(Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997; Doan, Denison, Lucas, &
Gopnik, 2015), or offering help or information for those in
need (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006; Cortes Barragan &
Dweck, 2014; Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2008).
Furthermore, children around age 5 readily consider others’
prior goals and knowledge to decide what, and how much,
information is appropriate in a given communicate context
(Gweon, Shafto, & Schulz, 2014; Gweon, Chu, & Schulz,
2014). These studies suggest children’s ability to consider
others’ mental states to modify their social behaviors.
However, little research has examined whether children
can also use others’ mental states to solve the perspectiveselection problem. Developmental research on perspective
taking has traditionally focused on whether children at
certain ages are capable of reasoning about others’ visual
experiences (e.g., Piaget & Inhelder, 1956; Clark, 1997;
Moll & Tomasello, 2006). By using tasks that explicitly
instructed or clearly suggested children to report what others
see, researchers have found that although the sensitivity to

Experiment 1

others’ visual perspectives is present even in infancy (e.g.,
Luo & Johnson, 2009), the ability to report what others see
gradually develops throughout childhood. Importantly,
children show varying degrees of success depending on the
complexity of the task. For example, around age 2, children
can reliably report what object someone else can see (i.e.,
“Level-1 perspective taking”, e.g., Moll et al., 2006), but
they cannot decide how another person may see the same
object differently until age 3 or even later (i.e., “Level-2
perspective taking”, e.g., Moll & Meltzoff, 2011; Flavell et
al., 1981). Particularly challenging are tasks that require
suppressing one’s own visual percepts to deliberately
respond from another’s conflicting perspective (Moll et al.,
2013); in such tasks, even adults are slow and error-prone
(e.g., Epley, et al., 2004), as such tasks require a careful
deployment of executive resources (Qureshi, Apperly, &
Samson, 2010).
The competition between two representations is
particularly prominent in the above “9”/”6” example, which
provides an ideal setup to test the perspective-selection
problem: The perspective-dependent nature of the symbol
provides the critical ambiguity, and the relevance of each
perspective can only be decided by taking the contexts, such
as the communicative partner’s mental states, into account.
We thus exploit this example1 to test whether children use
others’ goals and epistemic states to decide when to take
others’ perspectives. Importantly, unlike prior studies that
explicitly specified the perspective people should take when
judging similar stimuli (e.g., Surtees, Samson, & Apperly,
2016), we embedded our ambiguous task in a pedagogical
interaction to examine the effect of communicative contexts.
Motivated by recent studies showing children’s ability to
consider others’ mental states to select what information to
communicate (e.g., Gweon et al., 2014a; 2014b), we
hypothesized that children would consider others’ goals and
epistemic states to decide whose perspective to take in a
social interaction. We targeted four-year-olds because prior
research on this age group has found reliable above-chance
performance in Level-2 perspective taking tasks that require
suppressing one’s own representation to report what another
person sees (Masangkay et al., 1974; Moll et al, 2013).
We predicted that even four-year-olds would show
prosocial and selective perspective taking, spontaneously
adopting another person’s point of view to describe the
ambiguous symbol when it would yield benefits to the other
person. In Experiment 1, we looked at children’s responses
(i.e., reading the number from self-perspective or otherperspective) in a dyadic interaction. In Experiment 2, we
examined children’s evaluations of others who responded
used different perspectives to answer the same question.

In Experiment 1, we asked children to directly respond to
the puppet Emma’s question, “What is the number on the
table?” Across two conditions, we manipulated Emma’s
apparent goals and knowledge. We predicted that children
would be more likely to report “six” from Emma’s
perspective when she didn’t know numbers and wanted to
learn from them (the “Puppet-Learner” condition) compared
to when she already knew numbers and was testing the
child’s knowledge (the “Puppet-Teacher” condition).

Method
Participants Forty 4-year-old children were randomly
assigned to the Puppet-Learner (9 boys, 11 girls, M (SD) =
4.52 (.35) yrs) or the Puppet-Teacher condition (9 boys, 11
girls, M (SD) = 4.48 (.21) yrs). Children were recruited from
a university preschool (N=22) or a local children’s museum
(N=18). An additional 11 children were excluded for: Not
knowing numbers “6” and “9” and failing to learn during
the number-pretest session (N=4; see Procedure), reading
aloud the number before hearing the critical test question
(N=4), answering from both perspectives (N=2), or failing to
follow task instructions (N=1).
Materials A plastic cutout of number “6” in Arial Narrow
font (3 × 5.5 inches) was used for the number pretest (see
Procedure). For the practice trial and the test trial, we used
two laminated photographs (8.5 × 11 inches): The Practice
Photo showed a puppet (Emma) looking at an orange on a
table; the Number Photo showed her looking at a number
“6” laid flat on the table, which would be a “9” to the
participant (Fig. 1). The puppet was gazing at the object in
both photos, a gesture shown to trigger a moderate level of
visual perspective taking (Zhao, Cusimano & Malle, 2015,
2016).
Procedure The experiment took place in a quiet, separate
room. All children sat at a table across from the
experimenter. If children’s parents or siblings were in the
testing room, they were asked to sit outside the children’s
visual field and not intervene during the procedure.
Number pretest. The experimenter held the number “6”
upright and asked the child what number it was. After the
child correctly answered “six”, she rotated the number to
show “9” and asked what number it was. If the child gave an
incorrect answer to either question, the experimenter
provided the correct answer and repeated the question. Once
the child correctly identified both numbers, the
experimenter said, “the same thing can be seen as both a
‘six’ and a ‘nine’! How cool is that!”
Practice trial. The experimenter then placed the Practice
Photo on the table and introduced the puppet in the photo as
“Emma”. Then she impersonated Emma using a voice
distinct from her own (while avoiding eye contact with the
child): “Look at that! It is my favorite fruit! I have a
question for you: what is the fruit on the table?” All
children answered this question correctly.

1

We have also considered other stimuli with similar
perspective-dependent property (e.g., up/down arrows,
“u”/”n”, convex/concave curves as mouths on a happy/sad
face). The numbers were the most accessible symbols for
our target age group (4-year-olds).

925

These results suggest that children solved the perspectiveselection problem by taking into account Emma’s goal to
teach or to learn and her number knowledge. Specifically, as
teachers in the Puppet-Learner condition, children were
more likely to describe the number from her perspective.
Given that many four-year-olds still struggled with taking
specific perspectives even upon explicit instructions, the
proportion of children who spontaneously took Emma’s
perspective in the Puppet-Learner condition is impressive.
In Experiment 2, we sought another way to test our
hypothesis. Prior work suggests that children evaluate
informants based on the quality of information they
provided, preferring those who provide accurate, complete
information over those who provide inaccurate, incomplete
information (e.g., Koenig & Harris, 2005, Gweon et al.,
2014b). Here we asked whether children also evaluate
others’ perspective-taking decisions using Emma’s goals
and knowledge. As in Experiment 1, we hypothesized that
children would prefer the informant who took Emma’s
perspective only when she did not know numbers and
wanted to learn about numbers.

Figure 1. The Number Photo of the test trial in
Experiment 1 (in the middle), and Emma’s lines in the
“Puppet-Learner” and the “Puppet-Teacher” conditions.
Test trial. The experimenter placed the Number Photo on
the table and continued to impersonate Emma. In the
Puppet-Learner condition, Emma said: “I know nothing
about numbers, and I want to learn about numbers.” In the
Puppet-Teacher condition, she said: “I know everything
about numbers, and I want to teach you about numbers.”
Then she asked an identical question across conditions: “I
have a question for you. What’s the number on the table?”
After the test trial, all but three children received the
questions “What does this number look like from your
side?” and “What does this number look like from Emma’s
side?” The latter question resembles the kind of questions
used in previous research to gauge participants’ perspectivetaking ability upon explicit request (e.g. Flavell et al., 1981).

Experiment 2
Method

Results and Discussions
Consistent with our prediction, children were significantly
more likely to take Emma’s visual perspective and report
“six” in the Puppet-Learner condition (14 of 20, 70%, 95%
CI: 47.37-89.65%) than in the Puppet-Teacher condition (5
of 20, 25%, 95% CI: 7.41-45.45%; p = .006, Fisher’s exact.
See Fig. 2). When explicitly requested to take Emma’s
perspective, the proportions of children who accurately
reported “six” were nevertheless comparable (67% and 63%
in the Puppet-Learner and the Puppet-Teacher conditions,
respectively). Similarly, accuracy rates were also
indistinguishable when they were explicitly instructed to
respond from their own perspective (61% and 68%, p = .74).

**

Participants Forty 4-year-old children were randomly
assigned to the Puppet-Learner condition (6 boys, 14 girls,
M (SD) = 4.53 (.22) yrs) or the Puppet-Teacher condition (8
boys, 12 girls, M (SD) = 4.53 (.30) yrs). They were recruited
either at a university preschool (N=8) or at a local children’s
museum (N=32). An additional 14 children participated but
were excluded due to inconsistent responses (N=6; see
Procedure), not knowing numbers “6” and “9” and failing to
learn them during the number-pretest session (N=3), not
completing the procedure (N=3), endorsing both informants
as correct (N=1), and sibling interference (N=1).
Materials A cutout of number “6” (“9” if rotated) was used.
In addition to the “Emma” puppet, “Bert & Ernie” puppets
appeared in the practice trial, and two nearly identical
puppets (only differing in their hair colors) were used in the
test trial. As in Experiment 1, Emma was standing behind
the table and facing the participant; the informants appeared
on the other side of the table, facing away from (and thus
sharing the same viewpoint with) the participant. We
recorded audio tracks of puppets’ voices separately and
overlaid them on the video images during postproduction.
All videos lasted 30 seconds and were played on a Macbook
Pro in the experiment. To help children focus on the screen,
we placed the laptop inside a “viewing box”—a tightly
fitting box around the laptop (approximately 13 ×10 × 10
inches) with a front opening for watching videos.
Procedure The number pretest trial was identical to that in
Experiment 1 except that the child and the experimenter sat
on the same side of the table.

Figure 2. Results from Experiment 1. Vertical black lines
show 95% confidence intervals bootstrapped from the data.

926

Practice trial. The experimenter invited the child to watch
“a show about Emma and her friends”. Similar to the
Practice Photo in Experiment 1, the Practice Video showed
Emma looking at the orange and asking what fruit was on
the table. Bert appeared from the lower-left corner of the
screen and said, “I know what it is. It’s a banana!” and
disappeared. Then Ernie appeared from the lower-right
corner and said, “I know what it is. It’s an orange!” and
disappeared. Both puppets then reappeared simultaneously,
and the experimenter asked, “Now, who did a better job
answering Emma’s question? The guy on this side (while
tapping on the left side of the box), or the guy on this side
(while tapping on the right side of the box)?” If children
pointed to the screen to indicate their choice instead of
tapping, the experimenter repeated the tapping instruction to
avoid any ambiguity in coding their choices. All children
answered this question correctly.
Test trial. Similar to the Number Photo in Experiment 1,
the Number Video showed Emma looking at the number
“9/6” on the table. In both the Puppet-Learner and the
Puppet-Teacher conditions, Emma’s lines were identical to
Experiment 1 (shown in Figure 1), ending with the critical
question: “I have a question for you: What number is on the
table?” As in the Practice Video, two puppets appeared and
disappeared in sequence; one puppet said, “I know what it
is. It’s a six!”, while the other puppet said, “I know what it
is. It’s a nine!” (order of “six” and “nine” counterbalanced)
Both puppets appeared again at the end of the video, and the
experimenter asked, “Who did a better job answering
Emma’s question?” As in the practice trial, children were
asked to tap on the side of the box to indicate their choice. If
a child could not answer, the experimenter repeated the
video and her question. After the children made their choice
by tapping, the experimenter tapped on the same side and
asked, “What did this guy say?” This question served as a
memory check, and those (N=6) who provided inconsistent
responses (e.g., tapped to endorse the guy who answered
“six” but believed he said “nine”) were dropped from
analysis.
Similar to Experiment 1, the experimenter also asked
“What does this number look like from your side?” and
“What does this number look like from Emma’s side?” All
but four children received these questions.

**

Figure 3. Results from Experiment 2. Vertical black lines
show 95% confidence intervals bootstrapped from the data.
In addition, when explicitly asked to report the number
from Emma’s perspective, children had similar accuracy
rates in both conditions (62% and 70%, p = .33). Their
accuracy rates were also almost identical when instructed to
respond from their own perspective (69% and 75%, p = .48).
Experiment 2 showed that 4-year-olds were able to
evaluate the appropriateness of other agents’ perspectivetaking responses based on the social context; in particular,
the requester’s mental states were critical for determining
which perspective was more relevant and appropriate.
Rather than always preferring the informant who engaged in
perspective taking, children preferred the informant who
answered from Emma’s perspective when, and only when,
Emma indicated her lack of number knowledge and her
intention to learn. Such results are consistent with children’s
own perspective-selection decisions in Experiment 1.

General Discussion
People perceive the world through their own eyes. However,
in everyday interactions with others, they also encounter
perspectives that differ from their own. Therefore, people
often need to decide which perspective is more relevant in a
given social interaction; even though taking the other’
perspective is effortful, such effort may be worthwhile when
the situation calls for it. Across two studies, we
demonstrated that 4-year-olds took into account another’s
mental states to flexibly and selectively engage in visual
perspective taking. In Experiment 1, they responded to their
social partner’s question by reading an ambiguous symbol
either from their own viewpoint or from the partner’s
viewpoint depending on the partner’s goals and epistemic
states. In Experiment 2, they showed a similar
understanding when evaluating other agents’ responses.
This research generates novel insights into the nature and
the development of perspective taking and suggests possible
directions for future work. To start with, these results reveal
previously undocumented perspective-selection ability in
preschoolers: While prior research focused primarily on
whether, or at what age, children demonstrated perspectivetaking competencies upon explicit request, we provide
evidence that four-year-olds showed considerable levels of
spontaneous perspective taking even without explicit

Results and Discussion
We hypothesized that children in the Puppet-Learner
condition would be more likely to prefer the informant who
took Emma’s perspective to respond (i.e., “it’s a six!”) than
children in the Puppet-Teacher condition. As predicted,
their preferences for informants differed significantly across
conditions—while 60% of children in the Puppet-Learner
condition believed the perspective-taking informant did a
better job (12 of 20, 95% CI: 36.86-80.95%), only 15% in
the Puppet-Teacher condition thought so (3 of 20, 95% CI:
0-33.33%), p = .004, Fisher’s exact test (see Fig. 3).

927

instructions. Furthermore, their perspective taking was
selective: Instead of indiscriminately taking others’
viewpoint, they did so only when the other “wanted to
learn” (i.e., showed a need or interest). Because the
proportion of children who took Emma’s perspective in the
Puppet-Learner condition might have been bounded by the
proportion of children who would be able to report the
number from Emma’s view upon explicit request, it would
be worthwhile to compare our results with explicit
perspective-taking performance in an independent group of
4-year-olds (“What number does Emma see?”), as well as
with results from adults who would have little trouble with
perspective taking. Both studies are currently underway.
Our findings pose further questions on how children make
such astute decisions about when (and when not) to take
others’ perspectives. Given accumulating evidence on
preschooler’s impressive inferential capacities in prosocial,
pedagogical contexts (e.g., Gweon et al., 2014a), we
speculate that children reason about the consequences of
their options for both themselves and others to decide whose
perspective to take. For example, if Emma is ignorant about
numbers, taking her perspective would yield the benefit of
correctly informing her, whereas using the egocentric
perspective is likely to mislead her. In contrast, when Emma
is already knowledgeable about numbers, there is no
apparent benefit from taking her perspective; in fact, it is
pragmatically more reasonable to answer from their own
perspective. Indeed, a handful of children explained their
decisions along this line (although we did not solicit verbal
justification). However, it is also possible that the majority
solved the problem of perspective selection using a simpler
heuristic or norm acquired from their own experiences, such
as “teachers usually take students’ perspectives.”
Our research also expands the phenomenon of visual
perspective taking by highlighting its social nature. Because
researchers have traditionally considered visual perspective
taking as a perceptual and spatial ability (e.g. Piaget et al.,
1956), relatively few theories or experimental investigations
have questioned why humans engage in perspective taking
at all. Recent work has started to examine how social cues
from another person, such as goal-directed behaviors, may
influence people’s perspective-taking tendency (Tversky &
Hard, 2009; Zhao et al., 2015). We extend this line of
research in the context of dyadic interactions and
demonstrate that even young children consider social
information when engaging in visual perspective taking and
use it to serve prosocial functions.
Understanding others’ perceptions of the physical world
is inherently tied to understanding their beliefs, desires, and
intentions (Flavell, 2004). Thus, “visual” perspective taking
may not depend on a fundamentally different capacity from
“social” perspective taking in a broader, abstract sense (c.f.
Moll & Kadipasaoglu, 2013). Although our research utilizes
a visual perspective-taking task in the sense that children
reason about what another sees, success in this task also
requires thinking and reasoning from another’s perspective.
For future work, we hope to further study whether people

might show selective and prosocial perspective taking
regardless of the apparent visual, mental, or social nature of
the task. Finally, note that we used both the social partner’s
goals (e.g., wanting to learn about numbers) and her
epistemic states (e.g., knowing nothing about numbers) to
reveal her mental states. In real-world pedagogical contexts,
the presence of one mental state (either goal or knowledge)
usually implies the presence of the other; nonetheless,
teasing apart the roles of each of these mental states (e.g., by
embedding them in other social contexts) would be an
interesting direction for future research.
Both in everyday situations and in educational practices,
perspective taking is generally considered desirable and
beneficial for facilitating social interactions. This has led
prior researchers to focus primarily on whether, and at what
ages, children can accurately take others’ perspectives. Our
results highlight the importance of investigating when
children take others’ perspectives, and what information
may support such inferences. We hope that our work
generates more future research to explore this broad topic.
Such research will not only clarify the use of perspective
taking in everyday life, but also provide an opportunity to
better understand failures of perspective taking in real-world
contexts. By identifying situations where people naturally
engage in perspective taking, researchers, educators, and
practitioners may also find opportunities to create favorable
conditions for people to exercise their critical perspectivetaking skills.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Mika Asaba, Sophie Bridgers, Erik Santoro, &
Taylor Holubar for help with stimuli; Alyssa Lombardo,
Andrew McCabe, Veronica Chu, and Amy Qian for help
with data collection. We are grateful to Bing Nursery
School, Palo Alto Junior Museum & Zoo, our participants
and their families. We also thank Herb Clark and members
of Stanford Social Learning Lab for helpful feedback. This
work was supported by the Exchange Scholar Program
between Brown and Stanford (X.Z.) and Varieties of
Understanding Grant from Fordham University and the John
Templeton Foundation to H.G.

References
Clark, E. V. (1997). Conceptual perspective and lexical
choice in acquisition. Cognition, 64, 1–37.
Cortes Barragan, R., & Dweck, C. S. (2014). Rethinking
natural altruism: Simple reciprocal interactions trigger
children’s benevolence: Fig. 1. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 111(48), 17071–17074.
Doan, T., Denison, S., Lucas, C. G., & Gopnik, A. (2015).
Learning to reason about desires: An infant training study.
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 578–583.
Epley, N., Morewedge, C. K., & Keysar, B. (2004).
Perspective taking in children and adults: Equivalent
egocentrism but differential correction. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40(6), 760–768.

928

Flavell, J. H. (2004). Chapter 1 Development of Knowledge
about Vision. In D. T. Levin (Ed.), Thinking and Seeing:
Visual Metacognition in Adults and Children (pp. 13–36).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flavell, J. H., Everett, B. A., Croft, K., & Flavell, E. R.
(1981). Young children’s knowledge about visualperception – Further evidence for the level 1–level 2
distinction. Developmental Psychology, 17, 99–103.
Galinsky, A. D., Ku, G., & Wang, C. S. (2005). PerspectiveTaking and Self-Other Overlap: Fostering Social Bonds
and Facilitating Social Coordination. Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations, 8(2), 109–124.
Gweon, H., Chu, V., & Schulz, L. E. (2014). To give a fish
or to teach how to fish? Children weigh costs and benefits
in considering what information to transmit. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 559-564.
Gweon, H., Shafto, P. & Schulz, L. E. (2014). Children
consider prior knowledge and the cost of information both
in learning from and teaching others. In Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 565-570.
Hodges, S. D., Clark, B, & Myers, M. W. (2011). Better
living through perspective taking. In Biswas-Diener, R.
(Ed.), Positive Psychology as a Mechanism for Social
Change (193-218). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer
Press.
Hodges, S. D., & Klein, K. J. K. (2001). Regulating the
costs of empathy: the price of being human. The Journal
of Socio-Economics, 30(5), 437–452.
Koenig, M., & Harris, P. L. (2005). Preschoolers Mistrust
Ignorant and Inaccurate Speakers, 76(6), 1261–1277.
Ku, G., Wang, C. S., & Galinsky, A. D. (2015). The
promise and perversity of perspective-taking in
organizations. Research in Organizational Behavior.
Lin, S., Keysar, B., & Epley, N. (2010). Reflexively
mindblind: Using theory of mind to interpret behavior
requires effortful attention. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 46(3), 551–556.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008).
Twelve-month-olds
communicate
helpfully
and
appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners.
Cognition, 108(3), 732–739.
Luo, Y., & Johnson, S. C. (2009). Recognizing the role of
perception in action at 6 months. Developmental Science,
12(1), 142–149.
Masangkay, Z. S., McCluskey, K. a, McIntyre, C. W., SimsKnight, J., Vaughn, B. E., & Flavell, J. H. (1974). The
early development of inferences about the visual percepts
of others. Child Development, 45(2), 357–366.
Moll, H., & Kadipasaoglu, D. (2013). The primacy of social
over visual perspective-taking. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 7(September), 558.
Moll, H., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2011). How Does It Look  ?
Level 2 Perspective-Taking at 36 Months of Age, 82(2),
661–673.
Moll, H., Meltzoff, A. N., Merzsch, K., & Tomasello, M.

(2013). Taking versus confronting visual perspectives in
preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 49(4),
646–654.
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Level 1 perspectivetaking at 24 months of age. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 24(3), 603–613.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1956). The child’s conception of
space. London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Qureshi, A. W., Apperly, I. A., & Samson, D. (2010).
Executive function is necessary for perspective selection,
not Level-1 visual perspective calculation: evidence from
a dual-task study of adults. Cognition, 117(2), 230–236.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, a. (1997). Early reasoning
about desires: evidence from 14- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 33(1), 12–21.
Sabbagh, M. A., & Baldwin, D. A. (2001). Learning words
from knowledgeable versus ignorant speakers: links
between preschoolers’ theory of mind and semantic
development. Child Development, 72(4), 1054–1070.
Slaughter, V. & Repacholi, B. (2003). Introduction:
Individual differences in theory of mind: What are we
investigating?. In B. Repacholi and V. Slaughter (Ed.),
Individual Differences in Theory of Mind: Implications
for Typical and Atypical Development (pp. 1-12). New
York: Psychology Press.
Surtees, A. D. R., & Apperly, I. A. (2012). Egocentrism and
automatic perspective taking in children and adults. Child
Development, 83(2), 452–60.
Surtees, A., Samson, D., & Apperly, I. (2016).
Unintentional perspective-taking calculates whether
something is seen, but not how it is seen. Cognition, 148,
97–105.
Tomasello, M., Dweck, C., Silk, J., Skyrms, B., & Spelke,
E. (2009). Why we cooperate. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Tversky, B., & Hard, B. M. (2009). Embodied and
disembodied cognition: spatial perspective-taking.
Cognition, 110(1), 124–129.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic Helping
in Human Infants and Young Chimpanzees. Science,
311(5765), 1301–1303.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: the truth about
false belief. Child Development, 72(3), 655–84.
Zhao, X., Cusimano, C., & Malle, B.F. (2015). In search of
triggering conditions for spontaneous visual perspective
taking. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2811-2816.
Zhao, X., Cusimano, C., and Malle, B. F. (2016). Do people
spontaneously take a robot’s visual perspective? In
HRI ’16: Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction,
Christchurch, New Zealand (pp. 335-342). Piscataway,
NJ: IEEE Press.

929

