L2 Idiom Processing: Figurative Attunement in Highly Idiomatic Contexts
Sara D. Beck (sara.beck@uni-tuebingen.de)
Collaborative Research Center 833, Wilhelmstrasse 50
72074 Tübingen, GERMANY

Andrea Weber (andrea.weber@uni-tuebingen.de)
English Department, Wilhelmstrasse 50
72074 Tübingen, GERMANY

While understanding idioms is a piece of cake for native
speakers of English, non-native (L2) speakers often struggle
to recognize and understand them. Not only is figurative
language extremely prevalent in everyday English use, but
idioms are among the most frequent figurative expressions
used by native speakers and an integral part of non-native
language competence (see e.g., Cieślicka, 2006; 2013). In
defining idioms, researchers generally agree that 1) the
meaning of an idiom often differs from the literal meaning of
the words comprising the phrase, 2) idioms have fixed
structures or structures with limited variation, and 3) idioms
are multi-word expressions (Liu, 2008). Although the
challenges that these expressions pose for L2 learners are
well-documented (see e.g., Cooper, 1999), the underlying
processes are still in need of research. While we know that
highly proficient L2 listeners can have access to figurative
meaning in some instances, it may not be the case for all
idioms. The current experiment tested online processing of
figurative and literal meaning for L2 listeners in two different
contexts: a highly figurative and a less figurative context.

and literal interpretations. For instance, a piece of cake can
refer literally to a slice of cake or it can be figurative and
mean “easy.” This aspect of idioms has been the basis of one
of the most studied questions of idiomatic processing: How
does the processing of figurative meaning compare to that of
literal meaning? A number of models have been proposed to
address this issue.
One of the first models of processing developed
specifically to address idiomatic processing was proposed by
Bobrow and Bell (1973). Like standard pragmatic models,
the Idiom List Hypothesis assumes that figurative and literal
meaning undergo separate processes and, in normal contexts,
literal meaning has processing priority over figurative
meaning. In the idiomatic mode of processing, idiomatic
meanings are retrieved from a list and do not undergo the
same composition that literal language does. Following
contradictory psycholinguistic evidence, Swinney and
Cutler’s (1979) Lexical Representation Hypothesis proposed
that simultaneous processing occurs; however, figurative
meaning is accessed first due to lower processing costs. Both
theories assume that idioms are stored as one unit and
processed as long words; thus, figurative meaning need only
be retrieved, while a literal phrase must be retrieved and
composed. An alternative proposed by Cacciari and Tabossi
(1988), the Configuration Hypothesis, assumes that literal
word meaning is processed until an idiomatic key in the
idiom is reached. At this point, the configuration of words is
recognized as an idiom, and the figurative meaning is
accessed, giving priority at that point to figurative processing.
Literal-first models have been widely discounted based on
the mounting psycholinguistic evidence that figurative
meaning is often faster than not only literal meaning in a nonbiased sentential context (e.g., Cacciari & Tabossi, 1988;
Swinney & Culter, 1979) but also comparative novel phrases
(e.g., Tabossi, Fanari & Wolf, 2009). However, it is not clear
whether processing occurs simultaneously as two separate
processes, one process that differentiates at a recognition
point, or even one process influenced by other individual
idiomatic properties such as decomposability (see e.g.,
Gibbs, Nayak & Cutting, 1989), literal saliency (e.g.,
Cieślicka 2006), or frequency (e.g., Tabossi et al. 2009).

Native Idiom Processing

Non-Native Idiom Processing

Idiom processing has been the subject of many L1 studies for
quite some time. Idioms are a particularly interesting
linguistic phenomenon since many allow for both figurative

Much research on non-native processing of idioms focuses
on both the comparison of access to figurative and literal
meaning in addition to the comparison of idiomatic

Abstract
Using cross-modal priming, we investigated the processing of
idioms in non-native listeners in varying experimental
contexts. As idiomatic processing models have presented
evidence for an idiomatic mode of processing that can be
activated for non-native speakers in highly figurative contexts
(Bobrow & Bell, 1973), this experiment revisits those claims
while also examining access to figurative meaning in addition
to the literal meaning of individual words within an idiom. This
experiment showed increased priming for visual targets related
to the figurative meaning of an idiom when the experimental
list contained a large proportion of idiomatic sentences
compared to when the list contained only a small proportion of
idiomatic sentences. Non-native speakers not only showed
online access to figurative meaning but were also sensitive to
highly idiomatic contexts; though, responses to the targets
related to literal meaning of the final word of the idiom were
faster in all instances than figuratively-related targets.
Keywords: cross-modal priming; L2 listening; figurative
language; idioms; context; attunement

Introduction

1817

processing to novel language. Unlike L1 research, there is
more variation in the access to figurative meaning and most
L2 results focus on supporting or refuting the existing L1
models of processing. Researchers such as Conklin and
Schmitt (2008) and Underwood, Schmitt and Galpin (2004)
and Siyanova-Chanturia, Conklin and Schmitt. (2011)
investigated access to figurative meaning in comparison to
novel phrases using eye-tracking methods. Conklin and
Schmitt (2008) found that idioms, examined in their research
as a subset of formulaic language, were read more quickly
than comparable novel phrases whether used figuratively or
literally. Underwood et al. (2004) found a similar advantage
based on the number of fixations, but not for total fixation
length, suggesting a more complex picture of the processing
of idioms and other formulaic language that also accounts for
L2 disadvantages. However, neither make any claims about
figurative access in comparison to literal access. SiyanovaChanturia et al. (2011), on the other hand, found no advantage
for idioms compared to novel phrases in proficient L2 users
and also found that the figurative meanings of idioms
required more time to retrieve than the literal interpretation,
which seems to support a literal-first model of processing for
L2 users.
Some L2-specific idiom processing models have been
proposed in addition to the L1 models. The Idiom Diffusion
Model of Second Languages (Liontas, 2002; 2015) proposes
a two-stage comprehension model. The first stage involves
prediction, eased by idioms which are the same in a learner’s
L1 and L2; the second stage is confirmation or replacement
and/or reconstruction. Though a comprehension model, it
suggests that processing is eased for translatable idioms,
supported by an offline study from Irujo (1986) and a timed
production task from Liontas (2002). In her Model of Dual
Idiom Representation, Abel (2003) proposes that the
important factor for L2 processing is decomposability, or the
relation of the individual constituents to the idiomatic
meaning. This model assumes that nondecomposable and
frequently encountered idioms are represented by idiom
entries in the mental lexicon, as in the Idiom List Hypothesis,
while nondecomposable idioms are represented by lexical
entries of the individual constituent words. Abel’s model,
however, is based solely on offline ratings. Finally,
Cieślicka’s (2006) Literal Salience Model directly addresses
idiom processing and is based on online data. The model
suggests that literal meanings remain most salient for L2
users, even for well-known idioms, as they are more likely to
be used and encountered by learners. Based on ideas
presented by Giora (1997), salient meanings are accessed
more quickly than non-salient meanings. The model is based
on findings from a cross-modal priming experiment that
showed that access to literal meaning occurs prior to
figurative meaning for L2 listeners. Using non-biasing
sentences followed by literally- and figuratively-related
targets, reaction times to literal targets were faster than
figurative ones when compared to matched controls.
Research on L2 idiom processing is less developed than
and lacks the quantity that L1 research has been afforded.

While some evidence supports fast access to figurative
meaning, the speed of access in comparison to novel or literal
language is still inconclusive. And, like L1 research, it is
unclear whether or not figurative language has its own mode
of processing.

The Current Experiment
While the L1 Idiom List Hypothesis based on research by
Bobrow and Bell (1973) has been dismissed, among other
reasons (see e.g., Cacciari & Tabossi, 1988; Cacciari, 2014)
based on false assumptions about slow access to figurative
meaning in the absence of a biasing context, this model is not
necessarily refuted by the literature for L2 users and still
reflects some intuitions about the way we comprehend
idioms. As Swinney and Cutler (1979) also observed, when
an individual becomes aware of a highly idiomatic context,
L1 listeners often become more attuned to figurative meaning
occurring in natural communicative situations and might
even fail to see the literal meaning of an idiom. The
experiment from Bobrow and Bell (1973) presented idioms
with the possibility of both literal and figurative
interpretations following a biasing context containing several
sentences with either literal-only or figurative-only
interpretations. Participants were asked to note which
interpretation—literal or figurative—they first perceived.
Based on increased literal interpretations first following the
literal-only contexts and figurative interpretations first
following figurative-only contexts, Bobrow and Bell argued
for two separate modes of processing. Following a highly
figurative context, the figurative mode of processing
becomes active and leads to deviation from a normal literalfirst mode of processing. What Bobrow and Bell did not
consider, and what Swinney and Cutler’s observations
suggest, is that the adjustment observed might be due to a
contextual adaptation rather than a mode of processing
unique to idiom or figurative language processing.
The ability of L2 listeners to adapt to their environment in
language comprehension is well-documented, and there is
evidence for rapid attunement to varying linguistic situations.
Listeners can adapt, for example, to speech rate, surrounding
noise and idiosyncrasies of a speaker both in their L1 and
their L2 (see e.g., Sebastián-Galĺes et al., 2000). L2 listeners
are also able to quickly attune to changes in their environment
such as surrounding noise (McQueen & Huetting, 2012) and
foreign accents (e.g., Weber et al. 2014). In addition,
sequential effects of item presentation can influence the
listening process. Perea and Carreiras (2003) found that
listeners are able to shift their response criterion on a trial-bytrial basis to adjust to the lexical status and frequency of a
previous trial. While an offline, even conscious, adaptation to
the presence of figurative meaning is a common intuition, this
phenomenon has not been examined in on online setting, and
it warrants further research to determine if a context
dependent shift based on the presence of figurative language
occurs in L2 listeners—be it via a figurative mode of
processing or a contextual figurative attunement.

1818

The current experiment will revisit the idea of an idiomatic
mode of processing for non-native listeners activated in a
biasing experimental context using current psycholinguistic
methods. We address the questions still left open in light of
current research on idiom processing: Will a highly literal or
idiomatic experimental context also affect online processing
of figurative meaning in L2 listeners? If so, do the results
support a unique mode of idiomatic processing or attunement
to the figurative context?

Method
In the present English cross-modal priming study, we
presented idioms with a medium degree of literal and
figurative interpretation (neither highly literal nor figurative
based on L2 ratings) in one of two experimental contexts to
German learners of English (see Beck & Weber, 2014).
Participants either encountered target idioms embedded in
sentences among more sentences containing idioms and very
few literal sentences or among only literal sentences.
Listeners were presented an auditory prime followed by
a visual target. In a lexical decision task, German participants
had to decide whether or not the visual target was a real word
of English or not—reaction times (RTs) to targets are known
to be faster when prime and target are semantically related
compared to when they are unrelated. Facilitatory priming
provides information about the processing of the auditory
prime, and faster targets compared to their unrelated controls
indicate the activation of meaning. For the current
experiment, we were interested in both facilitatory priming
for targets related to the figurative meaning of the idioms and
targets related to the literal meaning of constituent words
compared to matched controls. If the same kind of contextual
attunement found by Bobrow and Bell (1973) applies to nonnative listeners, then we would expect increased priming
effects for figurative targets in an idiomatic experimental
context compared to the non-idiomatic experimental context.
Additionally, access to literal constituent words can give us
more insight into non-native idiom processing.

Participants
Eighty-one native speakers of German were paid a small fee
to participate in the experiment. Participants were University
of Tübingen students who identified themselves as skilled
speakers of English. One participant was excluded as she
reported that she was unable to hear the stimuli.

Materials
Twenty-five target idioms were embedded at the end of nonbiasing short sentences and presented in one of two varying
experimental contexts containing 100 trials. The two
experimental contexts differed only in 75 filler items,
specifically the amount of sentences with idioms in the fillers
(explained below). The target idioms had a VP syntactic
structure and were controlled for familiarity, meaningfulness,
literality, and translatability (English to German) as rated by
L1 and L2 users (Beck & Weber, 2014). Each trial consisted

of an auditory sentence prime followed by a visual target.
Each sentence prime was paired with four different targets.
The four targets included literal or figurative targets and
their respective unrelated control targets. Targets
semantically related to the literal meaning were based on the
last content word of the sentence and chosen from the Nelson
et al. (1998) association norms database. For the idiom to kick
the bucket (primed in the sentence His uncle kicked the
bucket.), the literal target PAIL was chosen. The unrelated
control word was matched for orthographic complexity and
length (BOAT as a control for PAIL). Targets related to the
figurative meaning of the idiom were chosen based on
relation to the overall meaning of the idiom. For to kick the
bucket, the target DIE was chosen, as the overall meaning is
“to die.” Similarly, figurative control targets were also
controlled for orthographic complexity and length (ZOO as a
control for DIE). The four lists of targets were also controlled
for lexical frequency. See Table 1 for reference. The auditory
sentence primes remained the same for all four lists. Targets
were equally distributed across 8 lists (all four targets in two
experimental contexts) and presented 400ms after the offset
of the final word in each sentence.
Table 1: Sample of experimental items.

Stimuli
His uncle
kicked the
bucket.

Literal
Target
Control
PAIL

BOAT

Figurative
Target Control
DIE

ZOO

The experiment was performed using Presentation®
software (Version 17.2, www.neurobs.com). Experimental
sentences were recorded by a female speaker of American
English (first author) in an experimental lab setting. The eight
lists were randomly distributed among participants. Each list
began with four practice trials followed by 25 experimental
and 75 filler trials (a total of 100 experimental trials) and was
presented to an equal number of participants. Conditions
were evenly distributed across lists.
High-idiomatic Context This variation included a highly
figurative context by increasing the amount of idiomatic trials
to a total of 75. In addition to the 25 critical trials, 50 filler
sentences also embedded idioms into the end of neutral
sentences. Only 25 filler trials did not include idioms.
Fifty of the filler trials contained non-word targets, and the
other half contained word targets. The four lists in this
variation differed only in experimental target words.
Low-idiomatic Context This variation kept the idiomatic
context to the 25 experimental trials by including only literal
filler items.
Half of the trials contained non-word targets, and the other
half contained word targets. The four lists in this variation
differed only in experimental target words.

1819

Procedure

70

Analysis
Ten correct responses with RTs longer than 2000ms (0.5%
of the total data) were considered outliers and were removed
from these analyses. Additionally, three targets (CHIME,
SHRUB, YARN) were answered correctly by participants only
50% or less of the total trials and were excluded from the
results (29 responses or 1.5% of total data). In total, 2.0% of
the data were not included in these analyses.
Table 2: Reaction times (in ms).

Related
Unrelated

Variation 1
(75% Idioms)
Figurative Literal
749
709
813
739

Variation 2
(25% Idioms)
Figurative Literal
737
674
740
711

Analyses of Variance (ANOVAs) were conducted on
correct responses of the remaining RTs across participants
(F1) and across items (F2) to examine the within-subject
effects of figurativeness (with two levels figurative and
literal) and relatedness (with two levels related and
unrelated) and the between-subject effect of experimental
context (with two levels high-idiomatic and low-idiomatic)
between-participants and between-items. Table 2 reports the
mean RTs measured from target onset for each condition, and
the corresponding priming effects for RTs are shown in
Figure 1.

60

priming ms:
(unrelated-related)

Participants were tested individually in a quiet room. First,
participants were given instructions in English on the lexical
decision task. Participants were instructed that they would
hear sentences directly followed by the appearance of a word
or non-word on the computer screen in front of them.
Participants were told to listen to sentences and then decide
whether the string of letters on the screen was a word or not.
Subjects were asked to make their decision by pressing a
green button with their dominant hand for ‘YES’ and a red
button with the other hand for ‘NO’ as quickly and accurately
as possible. Participants were also instructed that it was
important both to listen and to respond to the visual targets,
as they would be asked about what they heard after
experiment.
Once participants understood the instructions and
answered the instruction questions correctly, they could
participate in the priming study. The participants listened
over closed headphones, and the visual targets were presented
on a laptop screen. The targets appeared on the screen 400ms
after the offset of the auditorily presented sentence. The next
trial began 1000ms later. Reaction times were measured from
the onset of the presentation of the visual stimuli.
The experiment concluded with a short yes/no
comprehension test on items and a language background
questionnaire (see also Cieślicka, 2006). The entire
experiment took about 15 minutes.

50
40

30
20
10
0
Figurative

Literal

Variation 1: 75% Idioms

Figurative

Literal

Variation 2: 25% Idioms

Figure 1: Priming effects (in ms).
Overall ANOVAS on RTs showed main effects of
figurativeness (F1[1,78]=20.29, p<.001; F2[1,42]=11.41,
p=.002), relatedness (F1[1,78]=9.89, p<.01; F2[1,42]=2.80,
p>.05), and a weak interaction between figurativeness,
relatedness, and experimental context (F1[1,78]=4.02, p<.05;
F2<1). No other interactions were significant.
To further explore the interaction in the RT analysis,
separate analyses for figurativeness were conducted. For
literal targets, there was a main effect of relatedness
(F1[1,78]=5.88, p<.05; F2[1,42]=2.37, p>.05) and no
significant interactions. RTs for literally-related targets were
faster than RTs for unrelated targets across both experimental
contexts. Effects were more consistent across subjects than
across items, suggesting variation between individual targets.
For figurative targets, there was a main effect of
relatedness (F1[1,78]=6.14, p<.05; F2[1,48]=1.87, p>.05)
and an interaction between relatedness and experimental
context (F1[1,78]=5.24, p<.05; F2[1,48]=1.22, p>.05). Again,
both effects are more consistent across subjects than items.
RTs figuratively-related to the prime, as in the literal analysis,
were faster than unrelated targets. Thus, we find facilitatory
priming for relatedness in both figurative and literal targets.
In order to further explore the interaction in the figurative
analysis, separate analyses were conducted for each
experimental context. In the high-idiomatic context there was
a main effect of relatedness (F1[1,39]=10.58, p<.01;
F2[1,24]=2.75, p>.05). However, in the low-idiomatic
context, no main effects were present. While facilitatory
priming was present for figurative targets in the presence of
the high-idiomatic context, this effect disappears in a more
literal context for non-native listeners.

Results
Though there was no main effect of experimental context, our
results show that the experimental context significantly
impacted facilitatory priming for figurative targets. As shown
in Figure 1, the facilitatory priming for figurative targets
(dark grey bars) varies considerably from one variation to the
other, while the literal targets (light grey bars) show no
significant changes. In the high-idiomatic context, a
facilitatory priming effect for figurative targets of 64ms is

1820

observed compared to a non-significant 3ms in the lowidiomatic context. Figurative targets in this context
represented the only condition in which relatedness was not
a significant effect. These results provide evidence that even
in a non-biasing sentence context, a highly figurative global
environment can impact online processing of figurative
meaning for idioms. This data is in line with the offline
results from Bobrow and Bell for native participants (1973).
The priming effect for literally-related targets showed less
variation—an increase of only 7ms—suggesting that while
processing for figurative targets was impacted, the processing
of individual literal constituents was not significantly
impacted. In the case of the low-idiomatic experimental
context, we can also argue that where figurative meaning is
not facilitated, literal meaning is more dominant. This result
also supports the L1 data collected by Bobrow and Bell
(1973) as well as the L2 data from. Cieślicka (2006) and
Siyanova-Chanturia et al. (2011).
Considering the impact of figurativeness, overall, literallyrelated targets were faster than figuratively-related targets.
While this reflects the same results found by Cieślicka
(2006), it does not necessarily imply a processing priority for
literal meaning over figurative meaning. While the
figuratively-related targets correspond to the overall meaning
of the idiom, the literally-related targets correspond only to
the literal meaning of the final constituent of the idiomatic
phrase. It does, however, indicate that literal processing of
constituents is present even when figurative meaning is
processed. And, when figurative meaning is not facilitated by
context, literal meaning appears to be dominant.
Our results are further supported by those gathered by
Sprenger (2003), who also found strong literal constituent
activation in production tasks. Our results differ, though,
from Rommers, Dijkstra and Bastiaansen (2013). Rommers
et al. collected EEG data from a top-down procedure which
indicated that related literal targets were not activated in
highly predictable idioms when the final word of an idiom
was replaced with the related target. Thus, while hearing a
word might activate the literal meaning of that word, the
functionality of these literal words may be limited or even
switched off in some cases.
The consistency of effects—generally stronger across
subjects than across items—supports general knowledge of
variation across idioms (see e.g., Titone & Connine 1994)
and possibly varying association strength of our targets, as
these were selected by this author rather than a database.
While our idioms were controlled for much of this variation,
the presence of remaining differences cannot be excluded.

Discussion
Based on the results of this study, we will briefly consider the
fit of our data with L1 and L2 models of idiom processing.

L1 Processing Models
Our results are not compatible with the assumptions of stage
models of processing. The Idiom List Hypothesis (literalfirst) is problematic as our participants activated literal

constituent meaning in addition to figurative meaning of the
idiom in a high-idiomatic context. Additionally, while
priming of figurative meaning increased in the highidiomatic context, literal constituent meaning still precluded
figurative meaning. This hypothesis predicts, however, that
that literal meaning should not be activated at all in a highidiomatic context. While our data does not rule out a second,
idiomatic mechanism that might be primed by a global
figurative context, we argue that attunement is a more
suitable explanation for this phenomenon. The Lexical
Representation Hypothesis, assuming that figurative meaning
is retrieved faster than compositional processing of literal
meaning, is likewise not supported by participants’ RTs in
our experiment. However, the tenant of this model suggesting
that composition and idiom retrieval can occur
simultaneously cannot and should not be dismissed.
Furthermore, our data cannot make strong claims for or
against the Configuration Hypothesis as we included only
highly familiar idioms, and this model focuses on predictable
idioms based on the recognition point of the idiom. Though
familiarity generally correlates with predictability (see e.g.,
Titone, Connine 1994), any further interpretation of
compatibility would be far-reaching.

L2 Processing Models
We can make limited claims about the previously discussed
L2 processing models, but it seems that our results showing
online access to figurative meaning are not compatible with
the challenges many of these models present. As we used
only non-translatable idioms, we would expect processing
difficulties for our participants based on the Idiom Diffusion
Model of Second Languages. Although we cannot compare
our results with translatable idioms to make a stronger claim,
the access to figurative meaning makes a case against it.
Our data is generally compatible with the Literal Salience
Model. Our participants responded faster to literally-related
targets than to figuratively-related targets as predicted by this
model. However, the results solely from this observation are
not compelling enough to interpret that literal meaning has a
priority over figurative meaning. Sprenger, Levelt and
Kempen (2003) also found literal constituent priming in
production tasks and claimed that, rather than a processing
priority, activation of constituent word lemmas in addition to
a superlemma, a phrasal representation of the idiom on a
lexical-syntactic processing level, are activated. Though this
production model does not clearly lay out a time course for
processing, we assume that activation must spread to a
superlemma from individual constituents, and it is possible
that this activation occurs more slowly for L2 listeners than
activation of an individual word lemma does.

Figurative Attunement
Our findings can generally be interpreted as compatible with
current ideas on L2 listening adaptation. Based on the strong
differences in processing of figurative language between the
experimental variations, we argue that listeners are able to
quickly adapt to a figurative context on the processing level.

1821

Conclusion
Though our data does not provide strong evidence for or
against idiom processing as its own mode of processing,
separate from literal processing, it does provide strong
evidence that proficient L2 listeners can have online access
to figurative meaning. Additionally, the experiment supports
the idea that figurative attunement is possible even in a very
short amount of time, furthering evidence that L2 listeners
can detect and shift their response-criterion in the presence of
a highly figurative context.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Daniel Baumgartner, James Kemmler, Ida
Sanders, and Friederike Sieß for help with data collection.

References
Abel, Beate (2003): English idioms in the first language and
second language lexicon: a dual representation approach.
In Second Language Research 19 (4), pp. 329–358.
Beck, S.; Weber, A. (2014, July): L2 Idiom Processing.
Presented at Cross-Linguistics Perspectives on Language
Learning and Processing, Tübingen, Germany.
Cacciari, Cristina (2014): Processing multiword idiomatic
strings. Many words in one? In The Mental Lexicon 9 (2),
pp. 267–293.
Cacciari, Cristina; Tabossi, Patrizia (1988): The
Comprehension of Idioms. In Journal of Memory and
Language 27, pp. 668–683.
Cieślicka, Anna (2006): Literal salience in on-line processing
of idiomatic expressions by second language learners. In
Second Language Research 22 (2), pp. 115–144.
Cieślicka, Anna (2013): Second Language Learners'
Processing
of
Idiomatic
Expressions:
Does
Compositionality Matter. In Krystyna Droździał-Szelest,
Mirosław Pawlak (Eds.): Psycholinguistic and
sociolinguistic perspectives on second language learning
and teaching. Studies in honor of Waldemar Marton.
Berlin, New York: Springer.
Conklin, Kathy; Schmitt, Norbert (2008): Formulaic
Sequences: Are They Processed More Quickly than
Nonformulaic language by Native and Nonnative
Speakers? In Applied Linguistics 29 (1), pp. 72–89.
Cooper, Thomas C. (1999): Processing of Idioms by L2
Learners of English. In TESOL Quarterly 33 (2), pp. 233–
304.
Gibbs, Raymond W.; Nayak, Nandini P.; Cutting, Cooper
(1989): How to kick the bucket and not decompose:
Analyzability and idiom processing. In Journal of Memory
and Language 28 (5), pp. 576–593.
Giora, Rachel (1997): Understanding figurative and literal
language: The graded salience hypothesis. In Cognitive
Linguistics 8 (3), pp. 183–206.
Irujo, Suzanne (1986): Don't Put Your Leg in Your Mouth:
Transfer in the Acquisition of Idioms in a Second
Language. In TESOL Quarterly 20 (2), pp. 287–304.

Liontas, John I. (2002): Context and idiom understanding in
second languages. In EUROSLA Yearbook 2, pp. 155–185.
Liontas, John I. (2015): Straight from the Horse's Mouth:
Idiomaticity Revisited. In Roberto R. Heredia, Anna B.
Cieślicka (Eds.): Bilingual figurative language processing:
Canbridge University Press, pp. 301–340.
Liu, Dilin (2008): Idioms. Description, comprehension,
acquisition, and pedagogy. New York: Routledge (ESL &
applied linguistics professional series).
McQueen, James M.; Huetting, F. (2012): Changing only the
probability that spoken words will be distorted changes
how they are recognized. In Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 131 (1), pp. 509–517.
Nelson, D. L.; McEvoy, C. L.; Schreiber, T. A. (1998): The
University of South Florida word association, rhyme, and
word
fragment
norms.
Available
online
at
http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/.
Perea, Manuel; Carreiras, Manuel (2003): Sequential effects
in the lexical decision task: The role of item frequency of
the previous trial. In The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology 56A (3), pp. 385–401.
Rommers, Joost; Dijkstra, Ton; Bastiaansen, Marcel (2013):
Context-dependent Semantic Processing in the Human
Brain: Evidence from Idiom Comprehension. In Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 25 (5), pp. 762–776.
Sebastián-Galĺes, N.; Dupoux, E.; Costa, A.; Mehler, J.
(2000): Adaptation to time-compressed speech:
Phonological
determinants.
In
Perception
&
Psychophysics 62 (4), pp. 834–842.
Siyanova-Chanturia, Anna; Conklin, Kathy; Schmitt, Norbert
(2011): Adding more fuel to the fire: An eye-tracking study
of idiom processing by native and non-native speakers. In
Second Language Research, pp. 1–22.
Sprenger, Simone A. (2003): Fixed expressions and the
production of idioms. Dissertation. MPI, The Netherlands.
Swinney, David A.; Cutler, Anne (1979): The Access and
Processing of Idiomatic Expressions. In Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior 18, pp. 523–534.
Tabossi, Patrizia; Fanari, Rachele; Wolf, Kinou (2009): Why
are idioms recognized fast? In Memory & Cognition 37
(44), pp. 529–540.
Titone, Debora A.; Connine, Cynthia M. (1994): Descriptive
Norms for 171 Idiomatic Expressions: Familiarity,
Composability, Predictability, and Literality. In Metaphor
and Symbolic Activity 9 (4), pp. 247–270.
Underwood, Geoffrey; Schmitt, Norbert; Galpin, Adam
(2004): The Eyes Have It: An Eye-Movement Study into
the Processing of Formulaic Sequences. In Norbert Schmitt
(Ed.): Formulaic Sequences. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Weber, Andrea; Di Betta, Anna Maria; McQueen, James M.
(2014): Treack or trit: Adaptation to genuine or arbitrary
foreign accents by monolingual and bilingual listeners. In
Journal of Phonetics 46, pp. 34–51.

1822

