Left-right mental timeline is robust to visuospatial and verbal interference
Rose K. Hendricks* (rhendricks@ucsd.edu)
Esther J. Walker* (e1walker@ucsd.edu)
Benjamin K. Bergen (bkbergen@ucsd.edu)
Lera Boroditsky (lera@ucsd.edu)
Rafael Núñez (nunez@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
* Joint first authors who contributed equally to this work

Abstract
We test the robustness of American college students’ mental
timeline to dual tasks that have interfered with spatial and
verbal reasoning in prior work. We focus on the left-right axis
for representing sequences of events. We test American
college students, who read from left to right. We test for
automatic space-time mappings using two established spacetime association tasks. We find that their tendency to
associate earlier events with the left side of space and later
events with the right remains under conditions of visuospatial
and verbal interference. We find this both when participants
made time judgments about linguistic and non-linguistic
stimuli. We discuss the relationship between these results and
those obtained for mental timelines that result from learning
new metaphors in language (Hendricks & Boroditsky, 2015),
and the effects of the same interference tasks on number tasks
(mental number-line and counting; van Dijck et al., 2009;
Frank et al., 2012).
Keywords: space; time; mental timeline; metaphor; working
memory; interference; implicit association

Introduction
Space and time are intricately linked in the human mind.
Systematic associations between time and space show up
not only in how we talk about time (e.g., I’m looking
forward to the weekend), but also in co-speech gesture
(Cooperrider & Núñez, 2009), in a variety of cultural
artifacts (e.g., calendars, timelines), and in how we reason
about time (e.g., Boroditsky, 2000; for review, see Núñez &
Cooperrider, 2013).
In this paper we focus on representations of the order of
events on the left-right axis. Prior work has shown that
people who read and write from left to right (as English
speakers do) tend to form a left-right representation of time
with earlier events mapped to the left and later events
mapped to the right (e.g., Tversky, Kugelmass & Winter,
1991; Weger & Pratt, 2008). People who read and write
from right to left (as Hebrew and Arabic speakers do),
accordingly tend to associate earlier events with the right
side of space, and later events with the left (e.g., Fuhrman &
Boroditsky, 2010).
Here we ask whether such left-right representations of
time are robust to two forms of dual task interference:
verbal and visuospatial. We used interference paradigms
that have been shown to selectively interfere with other

tasks. The current paper reports two experiments. The
experiments were designed and conducted independently by
two subgroups of the authors (E.W., B.B., R.N. [Exp. 1] and
R.H. and L.B. [Exp. 2]), with some differences in methods
and materials. Despite the differences, these independently
conducted studies yielded remarkably similar results.
Both studies tested American college students on implicit
space-time association tasks on the left-right axis. In both
studies, participants made speeded judgments about the
order of sequential events under either verbal, visuospatial,
or no interference. In Experiment 1, the stimuli used were
linguistic (sequences of words describing life events). In
Experiment 2, the stimuli were entirely non-linguistic
(picture sequences). In both studies, results revealed an
implicit left-right association for time (as expected), and in
both studies this left-right mapping was robust to both
verbal and visuospatial interference; that is, dual tasks that
are typically considered “interference” did not in fact
interfere with participants’ left-right mental timelines.
We discuss the relationship between these results and
those obtained for mental timelines that result from learning
new spatiotemporal metaphors in language (Hendricks &
Boroditsky, 2015), and the effects of the same interference
tasks on number tasks (mental number-line and counting;
van Dijck et al., 2009; Frank et al., 2012).

Experiment 1: Linguistic Stimuli
Methods
Participant & Inclusion Criteria
72 undergraduate students at the University of California,
San Diego participated for course credit.
Participants were excluded if performance was below
20% on the visuospatial or verbal interference task (five
participants) or below 50% on the time judgment task
(seven participants). One additional participant was
removed because the program crashed halfway through the
experiment. This left a total of 58 participants for analysis
(22 in the verbal interference condition, 18 in the control
condition, and 18 in the visuospatial interference condition).
Only trials where participants responded accurately to the
time judgments were included in the analysis (93.8% of
trials). Furthermore, only reaction times that were within 3

2417

standard deviations of each participant’s cell mean (97.8%
of correct trials) were included in analysis.

Procedure
The design of the experiment was modeled after van
Dijck, Gevers, and Fias (2009), who conducted a similar
dual-task experiment on spatial representation of number.
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: control (no interference), verbal interference, or
visuospatial interference. First, a baseline measure of
performance was taken for the time judgment task. Then,
each participant’s working memory span was measured
using either a visuospatial or a verbal task. This span was
used to calibrate the final portion of the study, a dual-task,
which is described below.
Time Judgment Task
Participants held two computer mouses, one in each hand,
with each thumb placed over a single mouse button.
Participants held one mouse with their left hand on their left
side and the other mouse in their right hand on their right
side. Before each block, participants were presented with
instructions that explained the stimulus-response mappings
(e.g., left response for earlier events, right response for later
events) they would use for that block. The stimulusresponse mappings were changed after each block. After the
presentation of a fixation cross for 1000ms, participants
read a reference life event written in the center of the
computer screen (e.g., “high school graduation”), which
remained on the screen for 2000ms. A white screen was
then presented for 500ms and the text of a second life event
(e.g., “college graduation”) was presented and remained on
the screen until the participants responded, up to 5000ms.
Reaction times were measured from the onset of the second
event. Participants received new instructions before each
block. Participants completed four practice trials, followed
by forty experimental trials during each of two blocks.
Whether the participants received congruent or incongruent
mappings during their first block was counterbalanced
across participants.
Interference Task / Working Memory Measures
After the baseline time judgment task was completed, the
verbal or visuospatial working memory spans of the
participants were measured, depending on which condition
they were randomly assigned to. For both the visuospatial
and verbal calibration tasks, strings of items were presented
in an increasing number (from three to eight items, with
three strings of items per testing length). The participant’s
span was then defined as the highest sequence length where
they recalled at least two of the three strings for that length.
The verbal working memory span was modeled after
Szmalec and Vandierendonck (2007). Each trial started with
a blank screen, followed by a string of single consonants,
which were each separated by an empty screen. Participants
were then asked to type their responses after all of the
consonants were presented.
A computerized Corsi task was employed to measure
visuospatial working memory. Nine white squares were

presented on a black background and were positioned in the
same manner as used by van Dijck et al. (2009). Each trial
started with an image of the white squares, followed by a
sequence of squares flashing blue, one at a time. When the
sequence was over, all of the squares were left on the screen
and the participant had to reproduce the sequence by
clicking on the squares in the order that they saw them flash.
Dual Task
Participants in the dual task conditions were first
presented with either a verbal or visuospatial sequence to
remember. To ensure the dual-task was challenging, but not
too difficult, the participant’s working memory span minus
one was used to calibrate the dual task setup. They then
completed 2 time judgment trials. Finally, they were asked
to recall the verbal or visuospatial sequence. This cycle was
repeated 20 times for each mapping (either incongruent or
congruent), for a total of 80 temporal judgment trials and 40
span trials. Each participant completed two blocks of dualtask trials, with each block using a particular set of
stimulus-response mappings (congruent or incongruent).
Participants in the control condition simply completed the
time judgment task once more, rather than completing the
dual task version.

Results
Reaction Times
A 3 (type of interference group: control, verbal,
visuospatial) x 2 (congruency: congruent or incongruent) x
2 (load type: baseline or under load, which includes the
Control, Verbal, and Visuospatial Interference groups)
ANOVA on reaction times revealed an overall congruency
effect, F(1,55)=25.62, p<.001, where participants were
faster to respond to congruent (M=1360 ms) than
incongruent (M=1529 ms) trials. There was also a main
effect of load type, F(1,55)=5.88, p=.005, where participants
were faster under load (1345 ms) than at baseline (1544 ms).
However, this doesn’t imply that the “under load” condition
was easier. Rather, the “under load” condition was also the
second time they completed the time judgment task, so this
effect likely reflects a practice effect. There was, however,
an interaction between interference type and load condition,
F(2,55)=5.88, p=.005. Follow-up tests revealed that while
participants in the Control (F(1,21)=30.51, p<.001) and
Verbal (F(1,17)=21.42, p<.001) interference conditions got
faster the second time they completed the task, participants
in the visuospatial interference condition showed no such
improvement, p=.62.
There was no main effect of type of interference (p=.66),
nor was there an interaction between interference condition
and congruency (p=.16). There was also no interaction
between congruency and load type, p=.78, suggesting that
congruency effects did not change between the baseline and
when the load was introduced. Finally, no three way
interaction emerged, p=.62. Reaction times for the load
conditions are shown in Figure 1a.

2418

Time Judgment Accuracy
A 3 (type of interference: control, verbal, visuospatial) x 2
(congruency: congruent or incongruent) x 2 (load type:
baseline or under interference) ANOVA was also conducted
on the accuracy of the time judgment trials. There was an
overall main effect of congruency, F(1,55)=7.87, p=.007,
where participants were more accurate on congruent
(94.8%) than incongruent (92.7%) trials. There was also a
main effect of load, F(1,55)=7.24, p=.009, again reflecting
practice effects, as participants were more accurate the
second time through the task (94.8%) than during baseline
(92.7%). There was no main effect of interference type,
p=.26, nor were there any interactions.

Figure 1 Reaction times to make time judgments in the main
task in Experiment 1 (a) and Experiment 2 (b)
Interference Task
Based on the working memory span calibration, there was
no difference in the number of interference items assigned
to participants in the verbal (M=4.0, SD=1.195) and
visuospatial (mean: 4.5, sd: 1.0) interference groups, p=.15.
Performance on the working memory interference tasks
(visuospatial task or verbal task) was analyzed using a 2
(congruency: congruent/incongruent) x 2 (type of task:
visuospatial or verbal) ANOVA on secondary task accuracy.
Participants were more accurate in the interference task on
trials that occurred with congruent time judgment trials
(63.9%) than those that occurred with incongruent time
judgment trials (57.6%), F(1,38)=6.49, p=.015. Participants
also performed better on the verbal interference task
(71.3%) than on the visuospatial interference task (47.9%),
F(1,38)=12.91, p<.001. When the different interference
tasks were analyzed separately, post-hoc paired t-tests
revealed that participants performed better in the
visuospatial interference task when the temporal judgment
trial was congruent (52.6%) than when the temporal
judgment was incongruent (43.4%), t(17)=2.45, p=.025.
Such a congruency effect was not observed for the verbal
interference task, p=.25 (see Figure 2a).

Discussion
In Experiment 1, we found no effect of visuospatial or
verbal interference on the left-right mental timeline. Similar
space-time congruency effects were observed in the control,
verbal and visuospatial interference conditions, suggesting a
robust left-right mental timeline. However, while an effect
of interference on time judgment reaction times was not
observed, evidence of interference appeared in other, more
subtle, forms. First, as each participant completed the time
judgment task twice (once for baseline and once under
interference), one would expect them to improve the second
time through the task. While this improvement was
observed in the control and verbal conditions, it was not
seen in the visuospatial interference condition. This suggests
that participants in the visuospatial condition were more
impacted by load than those in the verbal condition,
reflected by slower reaction times the second time through
in the visuospatial group. Second, participants performed
worse on the visuospatial memory task during the
incongruent blocks of the time judgment task than during
the congruent blocks. This effect was not seen on the verbal
memory task. While this analysis was exploratory, it
suggests that the visuospatial interference task, but not the
verbal interference task, requires some of the same cognitive
resources as the main task. It is possible that the visuospatial
interference did not impact congruency effects in the time
judgment task because the stimuli were linguistic. To test
for this possibility, Experiment 2 involved making similar
time judgments, but the stimuli used were nonlinguistic, in
the form of pictures.

Figure 2. Interference Accuracy in both interference groups
in Experiment 1 (a) and Experiment 2 (b).

Experiment 2: Visual Stimuli
Methods
Participants & Inclusion Criteria
A total of 102 UC San Diego undergraduates participated
for course credit. They received a link to participate through
the Psychology participant recruitment site.

2419

We excluded 5 participants with accuracies below 25%
for one time judgment task block and 7 additional
participants whose accuracies on one or both blocks of the
time judgment task were greater than 3 standard deviations
from the sample mean accuracy. For the secondary
interference task, participants who performed below 3
standard deviations from the sample mean accuracy for their
interference type were eliminated. This resulted in
eliminating only one participant from the verbal interference
condition. After exclusions, all three conditions included 30
participants.
Only trials for which the time judgment was correct
(91.0% of all trials) and reaction times were within 3
standard deviations of each participant’s cell mean (97.9%
of correct trials) were included.
Materials and Procedure
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: control (no interference), verbal interference, or
visuospatial interference. Participants in the interference
conditions completed a calibration block at the beginning of
the experiment. Everyone completed two blocks of the time
judgment task with opposite key mapping instructions. The
time judgment task included either visuospatial or verbal
interference for participants in those conditions.
Interference Task Calibration
Participants in the verbal and visuospatial interference
groups first completed a calibration task to ensure that the
memory tasks were properly tuned for individual ability.
The materials and calibration procedure were identical to
those used in Frank et al (2012). Both conditions followed a
staircase method, increasing difficulty (the number of
distractors to remember) when participants got 2
consecutive trials correct, and decreasing it when they got
one wrong. The number of items that a person could
successfully remember was determined after 60 trials.
Time Judgment Task
The main task involved the same nonlinguistic stimuli and
procedures used in prior work examining effects of writing
direction and linguistic metaphors on representations of
time (Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010; Hendricks &
Boroditsky, 2015). Participants responded on a QWERTY
keyboard. To begin each trial, they pressed the ‘G’ key.
Then, the first of two images appeared on the screen (e.g.,
Julia Roberts in her 20s). After 2000ms, this image was
replaced by a second image (e.g., either a younger or older
Julia). For the congruent time judgment block, participants
were instructed to press the ‘D’ key if the second image
showed a conceptually earlier time point than the first, and
the ‘J’ key if it showed a conceptually later point. This
instruction was reversed for the incongruent block. All
participants completed one congruent and one incongruent
block, and whether the first block was congruent or
incongruent was counterbalanced across participants.
There were 10 practice trials and 56 experimental trials in
each block. Sequences of images were selected in a random
order, and each sequence was shown only once in each
block.

In the two interference groups, participants remembered
either a string of consonants or a pattern of boxes while
performing the time judgments. After completing the
temporal judgment, people in the verbal interference group
were prompted to type in the letter sequence they had been
rehearsing. For the visuospatial interference group, the
string of letters was replaced by a set of blue squares that
appeared sequentially in different locations on a 4x4 grid of
white blocks. After the time judgment trial, participants
clicked on the appropriate boxes when given a blank grid.

Results
Reaction Times
As in Experiment 1, a 3 (interference type) x 2
(congruency) ANOVA revealed that participants were
overall faster for congruent trials (M=1617ms) than
incongruent trials (M=1977ms; F(1,87) = 51.55, p <
.00001). This was true in all three conditions (all ps <
.0001). The size of the congruency effect did not differ
among the three conditions, confirmed by a lack of
interaction between congruency and interference type (p =
.78). Reaction times are shown in Figure 1b.
There was a main effect of interference type on overall
reaction times, (F(2,87) = 3.84, p = .03). Pairwise
comparisons demonstrated that those in the verbal
interference group were slower overall than those in the
control (F(1,58) = 9.06, p = .004), but not slower than those
in the visuospatial interference group (p = .21). There was
no difference in overall reaction times between the
visuospatial interference and control groups (p = .30).
Time Judgment Accuracy
People were overall more accurate on congruent time
judgment trials (92.4%) than on incongruent trials (89.6%;
F(1,87) = 14.93, p = .0002). There was also a main effect of
interference type on time judgment accuracies (F(2,87) =
4.73, p = .01). Pairwise tests revealed that participants in the
visuospatial interference group were less accurate on the
time judgment task (88.8%) than the participants in the
verbal interference (91.5%; F(1,58) = 4.73, p = .03) and
control (92.6%; F(1,58) = 7.54, p = .008) groups. There was
no difference in accuracy between the verbal interference
and control groups (F(1,58) = 0.77, p = .38).
Interference Task
The number of distractor items assigned to the
participants for the time judgment task based on calibration
was the same for both the verbal (M=4.47, SD = 1.14) and
visuospatial (M=4.90, SD = 1.42) interference groups (p =
.20).
Accuracies on the secondary memory task were higher for
congruent trials (62.7%) than incongruent trials (58.3%;
F(1,58) = 6.05, p = .02). They were also higher for
participants who experienced verbal interference (69.8%)
than those who experienced visuospatial interference
(51.2%; F(1,58) = 14.2, p = .0003). As in Experiment 1, a
post-hoc analysis was conducted on accuracies for each
interference group separately. Participants in the
visuospatial interference group were more accurate at

2420

remembering the box pattern when the time judgment trial
was congruent than when it was incongruent (t(29) = 2.30, p
= .03), but there was no difference in accuracy between
congruent and incongruent trials in the verbal interference
group (t(29) = 1.06, p = .30). Interference task accuracies
are shown in Figure 2b.

Discussion
In this experiment, the canonical left-right mental timeline
was again robust to both visuospatial and verbal interference
conditions. Despite the use of visual (picture) stimuli, the
canonical mental timeline persisted amidst a visuospatial
load, suggesting that people are able to recruit space to think
about time while also maintaining visuospatial information
in memory. As in Experiment 1, however, there was a subtle
indication that making time judgments while experiencing a
visuospatial load was more difficult than making the same
judgments under a verbal load. Exploratory analyses
revealed that accuracy for the visuospatial interference task
was worse in incongruent trials than in congruent, but this
same discrepancy was not present in the verbal interference
condition.

General Discussion
Across two experiments, American undergraduates
consistently demonstrated strong congruency effects (faster
responses for early on the left and later on the right than for
the reverse), even when faced with visuospatial or verbal
dual task. These effects were also robust to differences in
stimuli presentation, as they were observed in cases where
the stimuli were linguistic (Experiment 1; words presented
on a screen), as well as nonlinguistic (Experiment 2; images
presented on a screen). However, though the interference
tasks did not affect performance on the time judgment task,
exploratory analyses revealed that the time judgment task
appeared to affect performance on the visuospatial
interference task. In both studies, participants performed
worse on the visuospatial interference task during the
incongruent blocks of the time judgment task than during
the congruent blocks. This effect was not seen in the verbal
memory task. However, due to the post-hoc nature of those
analyses, future work should more carefully investigate the
influence of temporal reasoning on visuospatial working
memory performance.
These findings lead us to ask: what is the nature of the
representation that underlies American college students’
left-right mental timelines? What is it most like? Does it
have important similarities or differences from the mental
number line effects observed in prior work (e..g, van Dijck
et al., 2009)? Or is it more like spatial representations for
time that are shaped by linguistic forces?

Connection to Mental Number Lines
Left-right mental timelines are often compared to mental
number lines, as they both express serial order in terms of
spatial position across the lateral axis (Bonato et al., 2012).
In both cases, Americans associate earlier items (e.g., 1, 2,

“yesterday”) with the left side of space and later items (e.g.,
7, 8, “tomorrow”) with the right side of space. Furthermore,
writing direction influences the directionality of both mental
timelines (Tversky, Kugelmass & Winter, 1991) and mental
number lines (Dehaene, Bossini & Giraux, 1993).
However, the persistence of a left-right mental timeline
under conditions of verbal and visuospatial interference
contrasts with work on the mental number line in which the
same visuospatial interference task used here eliminated the
bias to associate smaller numbers with left-space and larger
numbers with right-space (van Dijck et al., 2009). In
addition, while verbal interference did not affect the
presence of a left-right mental timeline in our participants,
the same verbal interference tasks have eliminated evidence
of a spatial representation for number when making parity
decisions (van Dijck et al., 2009), as well as eliminating
people’s ability to count (Frank et al., 2012).
Other work has observed differences in the mental
timelines and mental number lines of blind people (Bottini
et al., 2015). While the mental number line is anchored on
an anatomical frame of reference for blind people and on an
external frame of reference for sighted people, the mental
timeline is anchored on an external frame of reference for
both sighted and blind people. This is interpreted as
evidence of different experiential bases for spatial
representations of time and number.

Linguistic Metaphor and Mental Timeline
Our mental timelines can be shaped by the linguistic
metaphors we use to talk about time (Hendricks &
Boroditsky, 2015). Learning a new metaphor (that placed
earlier events as either above or below later ones) in a lab
setting fostered new metaphor-consistent vertical
representations for time. The robustness of those new
representations was tested using the same dual task
conditions used in Experiment 2. Consistent with the
findings we report here, neither the visuospatial nor the
verbal dual task interfered with the metaphor-consistent
representation for time. Together, the novel metaphor
experiment and experiments reported here suggest that our
spatial representations of time, though evident in a
nonlinguistic implicit association task, do not rely on the
same cognitive resources as those needed to complete the
visuospatial and verbal dual tasks described here.
The similarities in the robustness of the space-time
association between the metaphor work and current studies
are notable because the origins of the associations in these
experiments were very different. In the case of linguistic
metaphor, participants learned a new metaphor in the lab.
They practiced that metaphor for about 10 minutes before
showing evidence of nonlinguistic associations consistent
with the metaphors they had just acquired. Associations
between space and time on the lateral axis, however, are
absent from the English language. English speakers do not
refer to Wednesday as to the left of Thursday, or moving a
meeting to the right by 2 hours, for example. Although these
associations are not evident in spoken language, they follow

2421

References

the direction of reading and writing (Tversky, Kugelmass &
Winter, 1991, Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010), an experience
that accumulates throughout a person’s life. Despite very
different origins and developmental time scales, the
robustness of the spatial representation of time remained
consistent.

Spatial Representations
It is important to remember that although we use the same
word, spatial, in different contexts, our spatial abilities are
not one monolithic entity. Our conceptualization of number
and time may both be grounded in an understanding of
space, but as we have explored here, those spatial
representations need not be the same. Similarly manifesting
spatial representations can also come from different origins,
developed on different time scales, though this does not
necessarily mean that the representations truly share the
same nature either. Because spatial cognition is not a single
concept, a single dual task cannot be expected to interfere
with all mental processes that rely on some form of spatial
cognition.
In addition to exploring additional dual tasks that may
interfere with congruency effects while making time
judgments, future work might explore individual differences
in spatial abilities. For example, Viarouge and colleagues
(2014) found that stronger spatial computation and
numerical semantic skills both independently predicted
greater SNARC effects, suggesting that spatial
conceptualizations of number are influenced by both spatial
computation and number semantics. A similar individual
differences approach could be useful in exploring the nature
of spatial representations for time.

Conclusion
Taken together, the experiments reported here
conceptually replicate findings showing that American
college students think of sequences of events as unfolding
from left to right (Weger & Pratt, 2008). They also
demonstrate the persistence of this mental timeline to
traditional interference tasks that eliminate mental number
line effects involving parity judgments and counting (verbal
interference; van Dijck et al., 2009; Frank et al., 2012) and
magnitude judgments (visuospatial interference; van Dijck
et al., 2009). These experiments highlight a difference
between the way we think about time and number,
encouraging us to better understand the complexity of what
it means for an abstract representation to be spatial.

Acknowledgments
E.W. would like to thank Alyssa O’Neill and Tara
Loveland for help with Experiment 1, which was supported
by a NSERC PGS-D awarded to EW. Work on Experiment
2 was supported by a National Science Foundation award
BCS 1058119 to L.B.

Bonato, M., Zorzi, M., & Umiltà, C. (2012). When time is
space: Evidence for a mental time line. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(10), 2257–2273.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1–28.
Bottini, R., Crepaldi, D., Casasanto, D., Crollen, V., &
Collignon, O. (2015). Space and time in the sighted and
blind.
Cognition,
141,
67–72.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.04.004
Cooperrider K. & Núñez, R. (2009). Across time, across the
body: Transversal temporal gestures. Gestures, 9(2), 181206.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S. & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. J Exp
Psych: General, 122(3), 371-396.
Frank, M. C., Fedorenko, E., Lai, P., Saxe, R., & Gibson, E.
(2012). Verbal interference suppresses exact numerical
representation. Cognitive Psychology, 64(1-2), 74–92.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-Cultural
Differences in Mental Representations of Time: Evidence
From an Implicit Nonlinguistic Task. Cognitive Science,
34(8), 1430–1451.
Núñez, R.E. & Cooperrider, K. (2013). The tangle of space
and time in human cognition. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 17, 220-229.
Saj, A., Fuhrman, O., Vuilleumier, P., & Boroditsky, L.
(2014). Patients With Left Spatial Neglect Also Neglect
the “Left Side” of Time. Psychological Science, 25(1),
207–214.
Szmalec, A., & Vandierendonck, A. (2007). Estimating the
executive demands of a one-back choice reaction time
task by means of the selective interference paradigm. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60(8),
1116–1139.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. and Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Van Dijck, J.-P., Gevers, W., & Fias, W. (2009). Numbers
are associated with different types of spatial information
depending on the task. Cognition, 113(2), 248–253.
Viarouge, A., Hubbard, E. M., & McCandliss, B. D. (2014).
The Cognitive Mechanisms of the SNARC Effect: An
Individual Differences Approach. PLoS ONE, 9(4),
e95756.
Weger, U. W., & Pratt, J. (2008). Time flies like an arrow:
Space-time compatibility effects suggest the use of a
mental timeline. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(2),
426–430.
Ulrich, R., Eikmeier, V., de la Vega, I., Fernández, S.R.,
Alex-Ruf, S., & Maienborn, C., (2012). With the past
behind and the future ahead: Back-to-front representation
of past and future sequences. Memory and Cognition, 40,
483-495.

2422

