Linguistic input is tuned to children’s developmental level
Daniel Yurovsky

Gabriel Doyle

Michael C. Frank

yurovsky@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

gdoyle@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
Children rapidly learn a tremendous amount about language
despite limitations imposed on them by their developing cognitive abilities. One possible explanation for this rapid learning is that caregivers tune the language they produce to
these limitations, titrating the complexity of their speech to
developmentally-appropriate levels. We test this hypothesis in
a large-scale corpus analysis, measuring the contingency between parents’ and children’s speech over the first 5 years.
Our results support the linguistic tuning hypothesis, showing
a high degree of mostly parent-led coordination early in development that decreases as children become more proficient
language learners and users.
Keywords: Language acquisition, cognitive development,
computational modeling

Introduction
Children acquire a tremendous amount of language in their
first few years of life. By the time they are able to run down
the street, typically developing children have over a thousand
words in their productive vocabularies (Mayor & Plunkett,
2011). They can combine these words to produce new, meaningful multi-word utterances (Lieven, Salomo, & Tomasello,
2009). They can even learn new words from just the syntactic constructions in which they occur (Yuan & Fisher, 2009).
What explains this rapid developmental progression?
Young children have access to a surprising range of learning mechanisms. By 8-months, infants can use distributional
properties of language to segment discrete words from continuous speech (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996), and by
12 months can use these same kinds of cues to learn ordering regularities in artificial grammars (Gomez & Gerken,
1999) and mappings between words and objects (Smith & Yu,
2008). But while these and other competencies are available
early, the amount of information that children can actually
learn in lab experiments often strikingly limited. For instance,
children’s learning of new words from distributional properties of language is highly constrained by their developing attentional and memory systems (Vlach & Johnson, 2013).
How can children learn so quickly when their learning abilities are so constrained? One possibility is that the speech that
children hear in the world differs systematically from speech
used to test their learning in the laboratory. Indeed, the language that parents produce to their children—across a variety of levels and structures—appears to contain many redundant cues that facilitate learning (Gogate, Bahrick, & Watson, 2000; Thiessen, Hill, & Saffran, 2005; Yurovsky, Yu, &
Smith, 2012). However, in some cases child-directed speech
appears systematically different in ways that do not support
learning. For instance, child-directed speech typically contains simpler and less variable syntactic structures. This sim-

plicity helps children learn simple structures, but also makes
it harder for them to learn more complex ones (Montag,
Jones, & Smith, 2015; Montag & MacDonald, 2015). The
input that is best for children’s learning thus depends on what
they already know, and what they are trying to learn next.
The explanation for rapid language acquisition may thus be
neither in the learner nor in the input, but in the coordination
between learner and input: Parents may tune the complexity of their language to the developing abilities and needs of
their children. This linguistic tuning hypothesis is intuitively
appealing, and was supported by some early evidence (Snow,
1972). However, two pieces of contradictory evidence diminished initial enthusiasm for it. First, parents do not appear to
use simpler words when speaking to younger children (Hayes
& Ahrens, 1988). Second, parents rarely show sensitivity to
their children’s syntactic errors by correcting them, and children are resistant to the few corrections they get (Brown &
Hanlon, 1970; Newport, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 1977).
More recent work has suggested other—perhaps more
subtle—ways in which parents might tune the language they
produce in response to children’s developing knowledge and
learning mechanisms. Although they do not correct syntactic
errors, parents are much more likely to repeat and reformulate
children’s ungrammatical utterances, providing a potential
corrective signal (Hirsh-Pasek, Treiman, & Schneiderman,
1984; Chouinard & Clark, 2003). And although parents’ vocabulary choices may be due at least in part to the content they
need to convey, there may still be ways for adults to tailor the
structure of their utterances to children’s perceived competence. In the current paper, we pursue this question, asking
whether parents choose their non-content words in a manner
contingent on their children’s developmental level.
To test whether parents tune their speech to that of their
children, we conduct a large-scale corpus study using linguistic alignment, a measure of how much speakers change
the way they talk to accommodate their conversational partners. Critically, alignment is a local measure: High alignment
results not from choosing words that are simpler overall, but
from choosing words that are more contingent on one’s conversational partner, and thus easier to process in context (cf.
Hayes & Ahrens, 1988). We predict that caregivers should
alter their levels of alignment across development, aligning
more to younger children who need more linguistic support.

Linguistic alignment
When we use language to communicate, we use the words we
say to convey the message we intend. Some of these words
will be critical for getting the message across. Consider the

2093

Naima:
Mom:
Naima:
Mom:
Naima:

Eating that. Eating some of that.
Some of this? You know what that is? It is
sweet potato.
I am a bear that eats.
You’re a bear that eats what? What do you
eat little bear?
Fresh pear

Table 1: An exchange between Naima (20-mo.) and her mom
in the Providence Corpus. Bolded words are LIWC category
members included in the model (Pennebaker et al., 2007).
conversation in Table 1, taken from the Providence corpus
(Demuth, Culbertson, & Alter, 2006). In her first response,
Naima’s mom has little choice but to say “sweet potato” if
she wants to inform Naima that they are eating sweet potato.
However, she could perfectly well have left out the words
“some,” “that,” and “this,” or exchanged them for others and
still conveyed the identity of the food on Naima’s plate.
Speakers are influenced in their production choices by a
variety of factors, ranging from the phonological to the sociolinguistic. We focus here one particular reason for these
choices: Contingency on a conversational partner. When we
talk, we tend to re-use use each-other’s expressions, aligning
to each other. This kind of alignment appears to be a pervasive property of human social interaction and linguistic communication (Giles, Coupland, & Coupland, 1991; Garrod &
Pickering, 2004). Further, alignment appears to be useful, facilitating fluent processing of speech, and increasing the probability of successful communication and accomplishment of
joint goals (Ireland et al., 2011; Fusaroli et al., 2012). Critically, alignment is directional: Even in the same conversation, some speakers will align more than others. For instance,
alignment varies across a social hierarchy, with less powerful speakers aligning more to powerful speakers (Kacewicz,
Pennebaker, Davis, Jeon, & Graesser, 2013). Thus, linguistic
alignment can measure a speaker’s effort to coordinate with a
conversational partner. We leverage this property to measure
the extent to which parents are altering the way they speak to
coordinate with their developing children.
We explicitly focus on the words that are least critical for
conveying the content of the message. If Mom produces
“sweet potato” after Naima does, we know only that they
are discussing the same object. However, if Mom produces a
function word like “of” after Naima does, she is more likely
to be using a similar structure that facilitates Naima’s language processing. To capture this idea, we chose as our target words a set of 676 words falling into 14 categories identified as strictly non-topical style dimensions (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count; Pennebaker et al., 2007). We perform
our analyses at the level of categories, to capture both exact
repetitions of a conversational partner’s words and also reformulations and expansions (Chouinard & Clark, 2003). For
example, in Mom’s response to Naima, both “this” and “that”
would count as instances of the impersonal pronoun category (Table 2). These 14 LIWC categories have been used

by us and others in previous work examining alignment in a
variety of contexts from social media to supreme court proceedings (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lee, Pang, & Kleinberg,
2012; Doyle, Yurovsky, & Frank, 2016).

Model
The linguistic tuning hypothesis predicts that parents should
tune the complexity of their language to the developing cognitive and linguistic capacities of their children. It thus predicts
that parents should show high alignment to their young children, but should gradually reduce their levels of alignment
as children develop. To test this hypothesis, we extended
the Hierarchical Alignment Model introduced by Doyle et al.
(2016). Our model estimates the extent to which a speaker’s
use of function words is influenced by their conversational
partner’s use of words in the same category. In Mom’s first response to Naima, for instance, she uses the quantifier “some”
and the indefinite pronoun “this” (Table 1). Would Mom have
been less likely to use these words if Naima had not produced
a quantifier and an indefinite pronoun in her previous utterance? And would she be less likely if Naima were older?
The model attempts to predict on an utterance-by-utterance
level whether a speaker will produce a word belonging to
each of the 14 function word categories. The probability of
producing a word is controlled by two independent factors:
(1) the speaker’s baseline probability of producing that word,
and (2) the speaker’s tendency to align to their conversational
partner, producing words from categories that their partner
just produced. Thus, the primary computation in the model
is essentially the same as standard logistic regression, which
predicts a binary response (production) from a linear combination of predictors (word frequency and alignment probability). The remaining machinery of the model allows frequency and alignment estimates to be pooled hierarchically
across categories, speakers, and ages in a principled way.

Model Details
The full graphical representation of our model is shown in
Figure 1. The model operates over a representation of utterances as binary vectors indicating the presence or absence of
each of the 14 LIWC categories. The probability of producing each category in each utterance is then predicted via two
parameters: (1) The speaker’s baseline probability for using
that word category (ηbase ), and (2) The speaker’s change from
this baseline due to interacting with the listener (ηalign ). For
replies to utterances not containing a category, the category’s
parameter is produced by taking
 the inverse logit of its baseline log odds logit −1 ηbase . If the utterance follows an
utterance that contains the category, we say that its probability of production is the inverse logit of the sum of
the baseline
and alignment log odds logit −1 ηbase + ηalign .
Because the LIWC categories vary widely in the production frequencies, we draw the log odds of each from an
independent uninformative prior (Uni f orm (−5, 5)), which
covers more than the range of observed probabilities without putting too much mass on extremely large or small val-

2094

β

ηbase

ηalign

α

ηalign

α

Category
Article
Certainty
Conjunction
Discrepancy
Exclusive
Inclusive
Indefinite pronoun
Negation
Preposition
Quantifier
Tentative
1st person singular
1st person plural
2nd person pronoun

ηalign
logit −1

β

ηbase
logit −1

Age

Age

Calign

N align
Age

N base

Cbase

Category
Person

Age
Person
Category

Figure 1: The Hierarchical Alignment Model (HAM) we use
to analyze linguistic alignment in CHILDES. Speaker’s word
choices are modeled as having two influences: (1) Their baseline probability of using each word category (ηbase ), and (2)
their increase from baseline due to their conversational partner’s use of each category in the previous utterance (ηalign ).
ues. We put a conservative prior on alignment, drawing
ηalign ∼ Normal(0, .5), regularizing it strongly towards zero.
To pool data across participants for robust estimation, we
estimate all parameters hierarchically. We say that there is
a population-level of alignment, which generates speakerlevels of alignment, which generate category-levels of alignment. This decision allows us to make principled inferences
both about how much parents align to their children in general, and about how much specific parents align to their specific children. For baseline probabilities, we instead nest
people within categories as the empirical baseline production
probabilities vary widely across categories.
Finally, we let both the probability of using any of these
categories (β), and the probability of aligning (α) vary over
development. Inspection of posterior parameter estimates in
a model with independent age estimates showed a linear relationship for both in this age range, so for simplicity we model
β and α as linear scalars of ηbase and ηalign respectively.
Using this model, we can test two distinct hypotheses about
the way that parents might coordinate to their children’s developmental level. First, if β is non-zero, then we can infer

Examples
a, an, the
always, never
but, and, though
should, would
without, exclude
with, include
with, include
not, never
to, in, by, from
few, many
maybe, perhaps
I, me, mine
we, us, ours
you, yourself

Adult
.31
.05
.22
.11
.12
.21
.45
.21
.38
.13
.11
.05
.09
.33

Child
.13
.01
.06
.04
..04
.07
.19
.11
.14
.04
.03
.04
.02
.06

Table 2: LIWC categories for estimating linguistic alignment,
with examples and production probabilities for both adults
and children in CHILDES.
that speakers change their baseline likelihood of producing
the function words in the 14 LIWC categories over the course
of children’s development. If parents’ β is positive, they are
using simpler words earlier in development. Second, if α is
non-zero, then we can infer that speakers change their level of
alignment over development. If parents’ α is negative, they
are aligning more to their younger children.

Analysis
Data
To maximize the power and generalizability of our analysis, we selected all English-language transcripts available in
CHILDES containing conversations between a parent and
a target child who was 12–60-mos. of age (MacWhinney,
2000). This yielded 3,851 total transcripts across 417 unique
children. The number of transcripts per child varied widely,
ranging from 1 (n = 164) to 440 (n = 1), with a median of 26.
For each transcript, we first combined all successive utterances from the same speaker into one utterance. We then
transformed each utterance into a binary vector with a value
for each of the 14 LIWC categories (Pennebaker et al., 2007).
We then formatted the utterances as a series of message-reply
pairs, in which each utterance was treated as a reply to the
previous utterance, and a message for the next utterance.

Method
For each pair of speakers A and B in a transcript, we computed
four counts for each of the 14 LIWC categories: The number messages from A to B containing the category (N align ),
the number of messages from A to B not containing the category (N base ), the number of replies containing the category to
messages containing the category (Calign ), and the number of
replies containing the category to messages not containing the
category (Cbase ). To generate robust parameter estimates, we
aggregated counts across all transcripts for the same parent
and child into six-month age bins, yielding 8 bins (youngest:

2095

Population parameter estimate

Alignment (

align

)

Alignment Age (

)

Baseline Age (

)

Alex

Ethan

3

0.8
0.6

2

0.4

Parent

Parent

1

0.2
0.0

0
Parents Children

Parents Children

Figure 2: Posterior parameter estimates for alignment
(ηalign ), developmental change in alignment (α), developmental change in baseline function word production (β) for
both parents and children, as well estimated alignment between parents for a baseline. Bars indicate means, error-bars
indicate 95% highest posterior density intervals.
12–18 mo., oldest 54–60 mo.). When estimating α and β—
the age-related scalars—we numbered these bins from 1 to
8 and then subtracted the mean bin number from each (4.5).
This centers the intercept (ηalign ) at the middle value, yielding
the smallest average predictive error for other age bins.
We then fit the Hierarchical Alignment Model to the data
separately for children and adults. Posterior distributions for
all parameters were estimated using a Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo sampler (Carpenter et al., in press) with three independent chains, and 500 samples in each chain. The first
100 samples of each chain were discarded to ensure sufficient burnin based on inspection of trace plots that typically
showed convergence after 50–75 samples. In addition, to provide a baseline for comparison, we also estimated alignment
for the parent-parent interactions in the corpus. All data and
analysis code are available in a public github repostory at
http://github.com/langcog/alignment.

Results and Discussion
Overall, alignment parameter estimates were above zero for
both parents and children, suggesting that both groups aligned
(Figure 2). Parents aligned reliably more to their children
than children aligned to parents, and parents also aligned reliably more to their children than to each other. Thus, in the
aggregate, we can conclude that parents coordinate to their
children more than they coordinate to other adults.
The linguistic tuning hypothesis makes two predictions.
First, parents might change the words they produce, using
simpler words with younger children. If so, we would expect
an increase in their likelihood of producing optional function
words (positive β). In line with previous analyses, we find
no evidence of this (Newport et al., 1977; Hayes & Ahrens,
1988). (We do, however, find a large and reliable increase in
children’s use of these words as they grow older, as would be
expected based on their developing linguistic competence.)
Second, parents could use the same words, but be less
contingent on children’s production—repeating less, clarifying less, rephrasing less. This second prediction is pre-

Linguistic Alignment

-0.2

Parents Children Adult to
Adult

Child

Child
Lily

Naima

3

Parent

2

Parent

1
0

Child

Child
Violet

William

3
2
1
0

Parent
Child

Parent

Child

12 18 24 30 36 42 48 12 18 24 30 36 42 48

Child's Age (months)

Figure 3: Changes in alignment for 6 children and their
parents measured longitudinally in the Providence corpus
(Demuth et al., 2006). Points indicate the mean of the posterior distribution, shaded regions indicate 68% highest probability density intervals.
cisely what we observe in both the aggregate parameter estimates and the developmental parameter estimates (Figure 4).
Parental alignment decreases reliably over development, and
children’s alignment shows a similar trend. Thus, parentchild conversations become gradually less coordinated over
development, settling to the adult-adult baseline as children
need less scaffolding to be successful communicators.
In addition to estimating population-level parameters for
alignment and its change over development, our hierarchical
model also estimates parameters for each of the individual
adults and children in CHILDES. Examining these parameters shows both consistency and variability across dyads (Figure 3). Across children, parental alignment is consistently
highest early in development, but both children and parents
vary in their level of alignment and in the rate at which it
changes across development. These reliable individual differences in alignment present a possible vehicle for studying
individual differences in children’s language acquisition.
LIWC Category Validation Control. Our measure of
alignment is sensitive to repetitions, reformulations, expansions, and other conversational turns that result in contingency of function word categories. But, the alignment we
observed in parent-child interactions could have been driven

2096

Linguistic Alignment

1.4
1.2

Parents

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4 Children
Adult to
0.2
Adult
0.0
12

18

24

30

36

42

Child's Age (months)

48

54

60

Figure 4: Model-estimated changes in linguistics alignment by 6-month-window. Over development, both parents and children
decrease in their linguistic alignment to each other until they align at adult-adult levels. Points indicate the mean of the posterior
distribution, shaded regions indicate 68% highest probability density intervals, equivalent to one standard deviation.
entirely by repetition. To control for this, we constructed a
set of shuffled LIWC categories by randomly permuting the
original word-category assignments. If these shuffled categories yield the same levels of alignment as the original categories, we would conclude that linguistic alignment between
parents and children is happening at the word level rather than
the category level. Compared to 40 different random shuffles, parents’ alignment on the original categories (ηalign ) was
greater than 37, and developmental change in alignment (α)
was greater than all 40 (p < .001). Similarly, children’s alignment on the LIWC categories was greater than all 40 shuffled
categories (p < .001). Thus, the developmental changes in
alignment we observed are not just due to more exact repetitions in early childhood, but also to higher-level linguistic
coordination.

General Discussion
Although even the youngest infants are equipped with the capacity to learn from the language they hear, their learning is
highly constrained by their developing attentional and memory systems (Vlach & Johnson, 2013). How do children acquire language so rapidly despite these cognitive constraints?
One hypothesis is that the the language they hear is tuned to
their learning capacities, providing the right kind of information at the right time (Snow, 1972; Vygotsky, 1978).
Previous attempts to test this hypothesis have produced
a mixture of evidence, with some in strong support of the
linguistic tuning hypothesis (e.g. Hirsh-Pasek et al., 1984;
Chouinard & Clark, 2003), others in strong opposition (e.g.
Brown & Hanlon, 1970; Newport et al., 1977), and yet others
finding mixed support and interesting individual differences

(e.g. Sokolov, 1993; Dale & Spivey, 2006). Our work leverages the power of hierarchical Bayesian models to integrate
together data from two orders of magnitude more children
than previous work, providing a more robust test of tuning.
We find, at the population level, that parents indeed provide linguistic input that is calibrated to children’s development. The structural elements of their utterances are strongly
contingent on children’s previous productions early in development, but gradually decline to adult-adult levels of coordination. In line with previous work, we do not find evidence
of change at a global level: Parents do not use different words
when talking to children of different ages (Hayes & Ahrens,
1988). Instead, calibration is local—sensitive to the on-going
conversation and attuned to children’s processing in context.
Instead of across-the-board simplification, linguistic tuning may be particularly beneficial; language at just the right
level of complexity may produce desirable difficulties for language learning. Critically, linguistic tuning does not require
that parents consciously have as their goal the optimization
of children’s learning. They need not be teachers; they need
only be communicators. If parents want to communicate with
their children, and their children need significant linguistic
support, they will have no choice but to align.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Aaron Chuey and Jake Prasad for help with
an earlier version of the model. This work was supported by
NIH NRSA F32HD075577 to DY and NSF BCS#1528526
and #1456077 to MCF.

2097

References
Brown, R., & Hanlon, C. (1970). Derivational complexity
and order of acquisition in child speech. In J. Hayes (Ed.),
Cognition and the developmenf of language (Vol. 8, pp. 11–
53). New York: Wiley.
Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Hoffman, M., Lee, D., Goodrich,
B., Betancourt, M., . . . Riddell, A. (in press). Stan: A
probabilistic programming language. Journal of Statistical
Software.
Chouinard, M. M., & Clark, E. V. (2003). Adult reformulations of child errors as negative evidence . Journal of Child
Language, 30, 637–669.
Dale, R., & Spivey, M. J. (2006). Unraveling the dyad: Using
recurrence analysis to explore patterns of syntactic coordination between children and caregivers in conversation.
Language Learning, 56, 391–430.
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Lee, L., Pang, B., & Kleinberg, J. (2012). Echoes of power: Language effects and
power differences in social interaction. In Proceedings of
the 21st international conference on world wide web (pp.
699–708).
Demuth, K., Culbertson, J., & Alter, J. (2006). Wordminimality, epenthesis and coda licensing in the early acquisition of english. Language and Speech, 49, 137–173.
Doyle, G., Yurovsky, D., & Frank, M. C. (2016). A robust framework for estimating linguistic alignment in Twitter conversations. In Proceedings of the 25th international
conference on world wide web (pp. 637–648). International
World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Fusaroli, R., Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Roepstorff, A., Rees,
G., Frith, C., & Tylén, K. (2012). Coming to terms quantifying the benefits of linguistic coordination. Psychological
Science, 23, 931–939.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8–11.
Giles, H., Coupland, J., & Coupland, N. (1991). Contexts of
accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics.
Cambridge University Press.
Gogate, L. J., Bahrick, L. E., & Watson, J. D. (2000). A study
of multimodal motherese: The role of temporal synchrony
between verbal labels and gestures. Child Development,
71, 878–894.
Gomez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (1999). Artificial grammar learning by 1-year-olds leads to specific and abstract knowledge.
Cognition, 70, 109–135.
Hayes, D. P., & Ahrens, M. G. (1988). Vocabulary simplification for children: A special case of ’motherese’? Journal
of Child Language, 15, 395–410.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Treiman, R., & Schneiderman, M. (1984).
Brown & Hanlon revisited: mothers’ sensitivity to ungrammatical forms. Journal of Child Language, 11, 81–88.
Ireland, M. E., Slatcher, R. B., Eastwick, P. W., Scissors,
L. E., Finkel, E. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2011). Language
style matching predicts relationship initiation and stability.
Psychological Science, 22, 39–44.

Kacewicz, E., Pennebaker, J. W., Davis, M., Jeon, M., &
Graesser, A. C. (2013). Pronoun use reflects standings
in social hierarchies. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 33, 125–143.
Lieven, E., Salomo, D., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Twoyear-old children’s production of multiword utterances: A
usage-based analysis. Cognitive Linguistics, 20, 481–507.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The childes project: Tools for analyzing talk. 3rd edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Mayor, J., & Plunkett, K. (2011). A statistical estimate of
infant and toddler vocabulary size from cdi analysis. Developmental Science, 14, 769–785.
Montag, J. L., Jones, M. N., & Smith, L. B. (2015). The
words children hear picture books and the statistics for language learning. Psychological Science, 26, 1489–1496.
Montag, J. L., & MacDonald, M. C. (2015). Text exposure
predicts spoken production of complex sentences in 8-and
12-year-old children and adults. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 144, 447–468.
Newport, E. L., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. R. (1977).
Mother, I’d rather do it myself: Some effects and noneffects of maternal speech style. In C. A. Ferguson (Ed.),
Talking to children language input and interaction (pp.
109–149). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J., & Francis, M. E. (2007).
Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC. Austin, TX:
LIWC.net.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926–
1928.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics. Cognition, 106, 1558–1568.
Snow, C. E. (1972). Mothers’ speech to children learning
language. Child Development, 43, 549–565.
Sokolov, J. L. (1993). A local contingency analysis of
the fine-tuning hypothesis. Developmental Psychology, 6,
1008–1023.
Thiessen, E. D., Hill, E. A., & Saffran, J. R. (2005). Infantdirected speech facilitates word segmentation. Infancy, 7,
53–71.
Vlach, H. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2013). Memory constraints
on infants’ cross-situational statistical learning. Cognition,
127, 375–382.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of
higher mental process. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Yuan, S., & Fisher, C. (2009). “Really? She blicked
the baby?” Two-year-olds learn combinatorial facts about
verbs by listening. Psychological Science, 20, 619–626.
Yurovsky, D., Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Statistical
speech segmentation and word learning in parallel: Scaffolding from child-directed speech. Frontiers in Psychology, 3.

2098

