Listener sensitivity to foreign-accented speech with grammatical errors
Yuki Asano & Andrea Weber
(yuki.asano; andrea.weber@uni-tuebingen.de)
English Department, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Germany
Abstract
The present accent rating study investigates the interaction
between accent strength and grammatical correctness on perceived accentedness. German native (L1) listeners rated German sentences produced by L1 and non-native (L2) speakers.
Sentences either contained a grammatical error or were grammatically correct. Results showed that grammatical correctness affected the accent rating of sentences produced by L1
speakers, but not of those by L2 speakers. The inverse influence of grammatical errors on sentences spoken with stronger
accents suggests that phonological information plays a more
important role for global perception of speech accentedness
than grammatical correctness does, revealing a hierarchical importance of factors that form an L2 accent. This finding is in
line with recent findings from an online processing ERP study
(Hanulı́ková, van Alphen, van Goch, & Weber, 2012) in which
L1 listeners were tolerant towards grammatical errors made by
L2 speakers, i.e. showed no P600 effect for grammatically incorrect sentences.
Keywords: perceived accent strength; grammatical error

Introduction
Spoken language is notoriously variable. The auditory signal
produced by a speaker can vary due to differences in voice,
stress, intonation, and speaking rate, among other factors.
Additionally, phonological processes of assimilation or deletion, as well as dialects and foreign accents, can lead to deviations in form from the standard of a target language. Yet,
despite these deviations, listeners usually understand spoken
language quite easily, suggesting that the human speech processing system is flexible and able to adapt to varying input
quickly. Previous studies have shown that listeners are, for
example, able to adapt to foreign-accented speech within a
few minutes (Bradlow & Bent, 2008; Weber & Pöllmann,
2010). It has also been found that listeners adjust their interpretation of the speech signal so that it is in line with information about the identity of the speaker. As a consequence,
sentences like “I am pregnant.” are perceived to be anomalous when produced by a male speaker, because listeners are
aware of semantic and pragmatic constraints which restrict
the use of the adjective pregnant to females (Van Berkum,
van der Brink, Tesnik, Kos, & Hagoort, 2008).
In the vein of speaker-specific adjustments in comprehension, Hanulı́ková et al. (2012) found in a recent ERP
study that listeners are surprisingly tolerant towards grammatical errors in foreign-accented speech. When a Turkish L2 speaker of Dutch produced sentences containing a
gender-agreement error, L1 Dutch listeners did not show the
P600 effect typically observed for this type of syntactic error
(Van Berkum, Brown, Zwitserlood, Kooijman, & Hagoort,
2005). When the same sentences were produced by an L1
speaker of Dutch, however, there was a clear P600 effect visible in the ERP response of the Dutch listeners. It is possible

that Dutch listeners were so habituated to gender-agreement
errors in Turkish-accented Dutch that the brain no longer
marked them as errors. Interestingly, a comparable and very
fast habituation was also visible for accent-free sentences in
the experiment. When the study was split into two blocks,
the P600 effect observed for L1 speech vanished in the second half of the experiment. This suggests that listeners adjust their model regarding the occurrence of errors even in L1
speech. This finding was in accordance with previous studies (e.g., Hahne & Friederici, 1999). Furthermore, the P600
is sometimes interpreted as an indicator of unexpectedness
(e.g., Gouvea, Philipps, Kazanina, & Poeppel, 2010). In this
sense, the P600 effect found for L1 speech with grammatical
errors can also be interpreted as a surprisal effect.
The question that arises from the study of Hanulı́ková et
al. (2012) is whether grammatical errors have an effect on
perceived accent strength, even though they do not disrupt
online processing of foreign-accented speech. Previous studies on accentedness mainly employed rating tasks that either
focused on effects of speaker background or phonological deviations. One of the decisive factors for speaker background
is, for example, age of acquisition (AOA). Flege, Munro, and
Mackay (1995) found in a rating experiment with Italian L2
speakers of English that speakers who learned their L2 after
the age of 15 hardly ever receive ratings that fall within the L1
English range. Another factor that has been found to affect a
speaker’s accent in L2 is length of residence (LOR), where
LOR means the amount of time spent in a country in which
the speaker’s L2 is the dominant language. Flege and Fletcher
(1992) found that LOR has effects on degree of foreign accent, although this seems to be a slow process and significant effects only showed after roughly 14 years of residence.
Adding to that, gender also affects the degree of perceived
accentedness. Flege et al. (1995) found that female subjects
who did not learn English as their L1, but started learning
it as L2 as children received higher pronunciation scores than
their male peers. However, in late adolescence this picture reverses, and male subjects begin to receive higher scores when
AOA increases. It is unclear, however, whether this is motivated by biological or social factors (Edwards, 2008). A
second main strand in previous foreign accent rating studies
investigated phonological deviations. For example, Magen
(1998) showed that L1 English speakers are sensitive to syllable structure factors, consonant manner, and lexical and
phrasal stress in utterances produced by L2 speakers of English with a Spanish background. More generally, it can be
said that previous studies have shown a high sensitivity of L1
listeners towards non-nativeness in speech. Non-nativeness
is noticed reliably in very short stretches of speech (e.g., the

1775

release burst of stop consonants, see Flege, 1984) and even in
a strongly distorted speech signal (e.g., Munro, Derwing, &
Burgess, 2010).
L2 speakers typically deviate not only in the phonological
form but also in grammar from the target language. How far
grammatical correctness of sentences produced by L2 speakers contributes to overall perceived accentedness is still an
open question. L1 speech usually manifests itself with an
absence of grammatical errors, as is reflected in the strong
P600 effect when errors do occur (Hanulı́ková et al., 2012); in
foreign-accented speech, however, grammatical errors, in addition to myriad phonological and phonetic cues can be considered yet another indicator of a speaker’s non-nativeness.
The current study investigates this matter in a German accent rating study by incorporating grammatical errors into
sentences spoken by L1 and L2 speakers of German. The
L2 speakers had different L1 backgrounds in order to add
variation to the study; the authors judged the L2 speakers
to all have noticeable accents in German but with varying
accent strength. Following the results of Hanulı́ková et al.
(2012), two outcomes are possible: First, grammatical errors
might not influence accent ratings because listeners are familiar with them, and they do not noticeably disrupt online processing. Second, it is also possible that grammatical errors
do influence accent ratings, as we know that L1 listeners can
reliably detect grammatical errors in foreign-accented speech
reliably when asked to do so (Hanulı́ková et al., 2012) and
are generally very sensitive towards nonnativeness in speech
(Flege, 1984). Hence, it could be assumed that grammatical
errors count as yet another cue towards the perceived foreignness of the speaker.

Accent Rating
Method
Participants Thirty-five monolingual L1 speakers of German (mean age = 24.4; 23 = female, 12 = male) took part in
the study.
Materials Fifteen German sentences with varying syntactic structures were constructed as materials. Care was
taken to avoid low frequency words that L2 speakers of
German might not know. Furthermore, the entire breadth
of the German sound inventory was represented in the
sentences. Each sentence was prepared both with and
without grammatical errors. For the incorrect versions, we
used three different kinds of grammatical errors that were
conside to be typical of various L2 speakers of German (see
also Schwartz & Sprouse, 1994). Three typical error types
in L2 German (Heringer, 2001) were chosen to disguise
the grammatical error manipulation. The error types were
preposition errors, case errors, and verb-agreement errors.
Five of the sentences contained a preposition error of the kind
given in (1a/b), where (1a) is correct and (1b) incorrect (the
relevant preposition is marked in italics). The verb kommen
‘to come’ in combination with Hause ‘home’ requires the

preposition nach ‘to’.
(1a) Du musst schnell nach Hause kommen.
(1b) ? Du musst schnell zu Hause kommen.
(Engl. You need to come home quickly.)
Another five sentences contained a case-error that could
either be realized on the determiner or on an adjective
preceding a noun, because both determiners and attributive
adjectives are inflected for case in German. An example can
be found in (2a/b) (a = correct, b = incorrect). The German
preposition hinter ‘behind’ selects a dative NP that is marked
with the dative definite article; in the case of a masculine
noun like Schuppen ‘shed’, the correct form is dem (2a).
(2a) Hinter dem Schuppen steht ein altes Fahrrad.
(2b) ? Hinter der Schuppen steht ein altes Fahrrad.
(Engl. Behind the shed, there is an old bicycle.)
Five additional sentences contained an agreement error
between the main verb and the subject. An example can be
found in (3a/b). Agreement takes place between the subject
du ‘you’ (second person singular) and the main verb spielen
‘to play’. The correct verb form for second person singular is
spielst. The verb in (3b) is, on the other hand, is ambiguous
between first person plural, third person plural, and the
infinitive.
(3a) Du spielst sehr gut Fußball.
(3b) ? Du spielen sehr gut Fußball.
(Engl. You play football very well.)
All sentences were recorded with a mobile Zoom H2N
recorder in a quiet room in .wav format (24Bit/96kHz). There
were two speaker groups. The L1 speaker group consisted
of five female students of the University of Würzburg (Germany) whose L1 was German (age range 23-26, mean age =
24.2). The L2 speaker group consisted of five female speakers
with a mixed L1 language background (Polish (1x), Kirghiz
(1x), Russian (1x), Persian (2x)) of moderate to high proficiency in German with a noticeable accent in their pronunciation. At the time of recording, all L2 speakers studied
at the University of Tübingen (in Germany) in various degree programs. All 10 speakers produced each of the 15 sentences in both the correct and incorrect versions (i.e., 30 sentence recordings per speaker). Speakers were asked to read all
of the sentences carefully before recording them in order to
avoid hesitations and uncertainties. Speakers always recorded
the correct and incorrect versions of each sentence in consecutive trials, and the examiner paid attention that both versions were, apart form the grammatical error, comparable in
pronunciation and fluency. Multiple tokens of each sentence
were recorded, and the best tokens (i.e., recordings with no
hesitations or unintentional grammatical errors) were chosen

1776

for presentation in the study. The chosen sentences were normalized for loudness using Samplitude Music Studio 2013.
Procedure The experiment was carried out as
an online rating study using the OnExp software
(http://www.lingexp.uni-tuebingen.de /OnExp/).
A link to the experiment was emailed to the participants, all
of who were naive to the purpose of the study. Participants
first had to indicate their age and language background
(including L1 and dialects) in a short questionnaire. Then,
they were informed that they would hear short sentences
spoken by L1 and L2 speakers of German and that their
task would be to rate these sentences for degree of foreign
accent. The instructions did not specify that some of the
sentences contained grammatical errors. Participants were
asked to wear headphones to minimize background noise and
distraction during the experiment. They were told that they
would have to rate “accentedness” on a 9-point scale where
1 designates “no accent” and 9 “strong foreign accent” (see
Southwood & Flege, 1999, for a discussion of rating scales
in accent studies). The instructions and the explanation
of the rating scale were visible throughout the experiment
to prevent subjects from accidentally mixing up the two
ends of the scale. The instructions also indicated that they
should listen to each sound file only once. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of five experimental lists. Each
list contained 60 sentences, cross-balanced in a Latin-Square
Design for sentence (N = 15), language background of the
speaker (L1 and L2), and grammatical correctness (correct
and error).

Results
In total, 2100 data points were recorded (35 participants x 60
trials). From these, 5 data points had to be discarded due to
the lack of a response. Average rating scores in each speaker
group, grammatical correctness and type or error are shown
in Table 1.

of a statistical significance referring only to p-values has recently been critically discussed due to the low reliability of
the obtained p-values (Cohen, 1994; Cumming, 2011, 2013;
Loftus, 1993). Cumming (2013) showed a dance of the pvalues (p. 6) to point out an enormous variation in p-values
from less than .001 to 0.75 when replicating an experiment 25
times with two independent groups, each group having an N
of 32. CI error bars are informative because they indicate the
possible variations of p-values shown in the dance of the pvalues, while a single p-value gives virtually no information
about the variation among the infinite possible p-values. The
LMER-analysis included accent rating as dependent measure, speaker group (L1 vs. L2), grammatical correctness
(correct vs. error) and type of error (preposition vs. case
vs. agreement) as fixed factors and participant and sentence
as random factors including random slopes (Cumming, 2013;
Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013). The analysis showed a
significant main effect of speaker group (rating scores for L2
speakers were higher than those for L1 speakers, ß= 4.61,
SE = 0.10, t = 45.6, p < 0.001) and of grammatical correctness (rating scores for grammatically incorrect sentences
were higher than those for correct sentences, ß= 1.15, SE =
0.10, t = 11.3, p < 0.001). Moreover, there was an interaction
between speaker group and grammatical correctness (the difference between the scores of correct and incorrect sentences
were greater for L1 speakers than that for L2 speakers, ß=
0.51, SE = 0.14, t = 3.6, p < 0.001). No effect of type of
error was found, see Figure 1.
Figure 1: Raw rating scores and 95% CI bars by L1 speakers
(left) and by L2 speakers (right). Within-subject CIs were
calculated with summarySEwithin function in R-package
Rmisc.
rating scores

6

rating scores

Table 1: Mean rating scores and standard deviations for each
condition.

4

speaker group

L1

L2

type of error
preposition
case
agreement
preposition
case
agreement

grammatical correctness
correct
error
1.57 (0.89) 2.81 (1.90)
1.37 (0.81) 2.46 (1.60)
1.40 (0.79) 2.43 (1.79)
5.99 (2.18) 6.69 (2.04)
6.15 (2.11) 6.77 (1.78)
6.24 (2.11) 6.63 (2.10)

2

0
L1

correctness

In the following analyses, we provide statistical results
from linear mixed-effects regression (LMER) models providing p-values that are based on null-hypothesis significance
testing, as well as from descriptive statistics providing 95%
CI error bars as a complementary data analysis, since the use

L2

correct

error

The box plots confirm the interaction found in the LMERanalysis. Additionally, they illustrate that the rating scores of
L2 speakers exhibit a larger range than those of L1 speakers.

1777

Importantly, however, we did not find a ceiling effect in the
L2 speaker data. Both in the correct and error conditions, the
upper CIs did not reach the maximum score (=9).
Next, in order to corroborate the interaction found in the
LMER-analysis, the rating scores were normalized by subtracting the average scores of grammatically incorrect sentences from those of correct sentences for each speaker, see
Figure 2.
Figure 2: Mean normalized rating scores (correct - error) and
95% CI bars by L1 speakers (left) and by L2 speakers (right).
Within-subject CIs were calculated with summarySEwithin
function in R-package Rmisc.

normalized rating scores

0.5

normalized rating scores
(error-correct condition)

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

L1

speaker group

L2

Figure 2 shows that only the CI bars of L1 speakers were
placed in the negative area, suggesting that the accent rating
scores for grammatically incorrect sentences were higher than
those for grammatically correct sentences. The CI bars of
L2 speakers crossed 0 and did not overlap with those of L1
speakers, suggesting that the rating scores for grammatically
correct and incorrect sentences did not differ from each other
and that the normalized scores of L1 and L2 speakers differed
significantly from each other. The results from the LMERanalysis and from the CI bars were thus congruent.

Discussion
The results of the present rating study add to our understanding of perceived accent strength. Sentences with grammatical
errors were rated as more strongly accented than the same
sentences without grammatical errors, but this was true only
when the sentences were spoken by L1 speakers. Thus, in the
presence of grammatical errors, L1 speech was perceived as
more accented. When sentences were spoken by L2 speakers, however, additional grammatical errors did not significantly affect the perceived accent strength. This suggests that
phonological and phonetic information is more decisive for

perceived accentedness than grammatical correctness is. It
is important to note that we did not find a ceiling effect in
the L2 speaker data. Therefore, the lack of the grammatical
correctness effect on L2 speakers’ scores cannot be explained
by claiming that L2 speakers would have produced grammatically correct sentences with accents so strong that participants
would have not been able to give higher scores. Our finding is
in line with recent findings from an ERP study (Hanulı́ková et
al., 2012) in which L1 listeners were tolerant towards grammatical errors made by L2 speakers, i.e. showed no P600
effect for grammatically incorrect sentences. We see at least
three possible explanations for this interaction between accent strength and grammatical correctness. First, it is possible that in strongly accented sentences, the grammatical error
was pronounced less clearly, and therefore the error was less
strongly noted, (see, however, Hanulı́ková et al., 2012). Second, listening to foreign accented speech may require higher
demand on attention control (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; Bialystock, 1992) than listening to L1 speech. This attention mechanism controls the limited cognitive resources in all forms of
information processing through shifting efficient attention between foregrounding and backgrounding of task-relevant and
-irrelevant information (Isaacs & Trofimovich, 2011; Rosen
& Engle, 1998). While paying attention to phonologically
deviant forms in L2 speech, listeners’ attention capacity for
grammatical errors is possibly reduced. In this case, the result
suggests that phonological information is perceptually more
dominant in global rating of foreign accents than grammatical information is. This knowledge contributes both to empirically defining a hierarchical importance of factors that form
foreign accented speech as well as to revealing which of the
factors is most dominant in the global perception of accents.
However, it is questionable whether an attention effect would
emerge in our experimental setting alternating nativeness of
the speakers.
Alternatively, experience with grammatical errors in L2
speech led to a reduced surprisal effect and hence weaker adverse influence on the ratings. Based on the mechanism of
statistical learning (e.g. Romberg & Saffran, 2010), exposure
to foreign accented speech accommodated the listener’s sensitivity to processing grammatical errors in L2 speech. This
accommodation is advantageous in processing a specific kind
of speech effectively (e.g. Eisner & McQueen, 2005; Kraljic
& Samuel, 2005; Norris & Cutler, 2003). In order to support
this claim, we need to test whether listeners with little experience with the foreign-accented speech or grammatical errors
atypical of L2 speakers would fail to show the effect found
in the present study. Importantly, our speakers had different
L1s, so accent-specific perceptual accommodation cannot explain our result.
Note that in our study we only used three types of grammatical errors that did not necessarily affect the sentence
meaning, i.e. sentence meaning could still be inferred. The
three types of errors were comparable in their results. We
believe that in most cases it was still possible to correctly

1778

interpret the message of the incorrect sentences. However,
grammatical errors can also affect the interpretability of a
sentence more strongly. If a speaker, for example, uses the
wrong gender in an anaphoric pronoun, this would make processing for this sentence more difficult because the correct
referent of the pronoun can no longer be assigned as a result
of the grammatical error. It is of further interest to investigate
the relationship between the impairment of sentence meaning
and accent rating performance. Further research in this area
could focus on perception differences between other possible
grammatical errors. This was not possible in the study presented in this article because of the small number of items that
were used to keep the length of the experiment manageable.
It could, however, be the case that frequent errors are handled
differently by L1 listeners than errors that occur relatively infrequently in L2 speech. Hahne and Friederici (1999) have
shown in an EEG-study that listeners seem to adjust their response to errors in L1 as a function of error probability. It
would be interesting to see whether this carries over into the
perceived accentedness of speech produced with a foreign accent. In this respect, corpora could help determine frequently
produced grammatical errors in foreign-accented speech for
a certain well-known accent, and these errors could then be
compared to errors that are demonstrably infrequent. Apart
from overall error frequency, further research could also investigate error frequency within a sentence. Is the reaction
of L1 listeners when there is only one grammatical error in a
sentence different from a sentence with more than one error?
Hence, is there a point at which L1 listeners just put an L2
speaker into a category that tells the parsing system to ignore
grammatical errors for the sake of semantic content? Previous research suggests that L1 listeners may develop a focus
on meaning in L2 speech (Galloway, 1980), which makes it
interesting to see whether there is a threshold for error occurrence after which additional errors are simply ignored by the
parser.

Conclusions
The present accent rating study revealed an interaction between accent strength and grammatical correctness which
had not been investigated in previous studies. Only in ratings for sentences spoken by L1 speakers we found an effect of grammatical errors. When it comes to L2 speech,
which was phonologically accented, grammatical errors did
not influence the global perception of accentedness. Thus, in
L2 speech, phonological information was more decisive than
grammatical information for global perception of accentedness. We discussed this result as a piece of empirical evidence
that 1) L1 listeners paid attention to a perceptually more decisive factor than to a less decisive one because the listeners’
capacity of attention control is limited in online speech perception and that 2) listeners accommodated their perception
to a specific kind of speech in order to effectively process it.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Lydia Kiessling and Daniel Baumgartner who helped to design and to prepare the study, including its presentation.

References
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 8, pp. 47–90). London: Academic Press.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language,
68(3), 255–278.
Bialystock, E. (1992). Selective attention in cognitive processing: The bilingual edge. , 83, 501–513.
Bradlow, A. R., & Bent, T. (2008). Perceptual adaption to
non-native speech. Cognition, 106, 707–729.
Cohen, J. (1994). The earth is round (p < .05). American
Psychologist, 49, 997–1003.
Cumming, G. (2011). Understanding the new statistics: Effect sizes, confidence intervals, and meta-analysis. New
York: Routledge.
Cumming, G. (2013). The new statistics: Why and how
[10.1177/0956797613504966]. Psychological Science.
Edwards, J. G. H. (2008). Social factors and variation in
production in L2 phonology. In (pp. 251–279). John Benjamins.
Eisner, F., & McQueen, J. M. (2005). The specificity of
perceptual learning in speech processing. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 67, 224–238.
Flege, J. E. (1984). The detection of French accent by American listeners. Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 76,
692–707.
Flege, J. E., & Fletcher, J. (1992). Talker and listener effects
on degree of perceived foreign accent. Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 91, 307–389.
Flege, J. E., Munro, M. J., & Mackay, I. R. A. (1995). Factors
affecting strength of the perceived foreign accent in second
language. Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 97,
3125–3134.
Galloway, V. B. (1980). Perceptions of the communicative
efforts of American students of Spanish. The modern language journal, 64, 428–433.
Gouvea, A. C., Philipps, C., Kazanina, N., & Poeppel, D.
(2010). The linguistic processes underlying the P600. In
Language and cognitive processes (Vol. 25, pp. 149–188).
Hahne, A., & Friederici, A. D. (1999). Electrophysiological
evidence for two steps in syntactic analysis: Early automatic and late controlled processes. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 11, 194–205.
Hanulı́ková, A., van Alphen, P. M., van Goch, M. M., & Weber, A. (2012). When one person’s mistake is another’s
standard usage: The effect of foreign accent on syntactic
processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24, 878–
887.

1779

Heringer, H. J. (2001). Fehlerlexikon - Deutsch als Fremdsprache: Aus Fehlern lernen: Beispiele und Diagnosen.
Cornelsen Verlag.
Isaacs, T., & Trofimovich, P. (2011). Phonological memory,
attention control, and musical ability: Effects of individual
differences on rater judgments of second language speech.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 32, 113–140.
Kraljic, T., & Samuel, A. G. (2005). Perceptual learning for
speech: Is there a return to normal? Cognitive Psychology,
51, 141–178.
Loftus, G. R. (1993). A picture is worth a thousand p values: On the irrelevance of hypothesis testing in the microcomputer age. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
& Computers, 25(2), 250–256.
Magen, H. S. (1998). The perception of foreign-accented
speech. Journal of Phonetics, 26, 381–400.
Munro, M. J., Derwing, T. M., & Burgess, C. (2010). Detection of nonnative speaker status from content-masked
speech. Speech Communication, 52, 626–637.
Norris, M. J. M., D., & Cutler, A. (2003). Perceptual learning
in speech. Cognitive Psychology, 47(2), 204-238.
Romberg, A. R., & Saffran, J. R. (2010). Statistical learning
and language acquisition. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews.
Cognitive science, 1(6), 906–914.
Rosen, V. M., & Engle, R. W. (1998). Working memory capacity and suppression. Journal of Memory and Language,
39, 418–436.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. A. (1994). Word order and
nominative case in nonnative language acquisition: a longitudinal study of (L1 Turkish) German interlanguage. In
T. Hoekstra & B. D. Schwartz (Eds.), Language acquisition
studies in generative grammar (pp. 317–68). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Southwood, M. H., & Flege, J. E. (1999). Scaling foreign
accent: direct magnitude estimation versus interval scaling.
Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 13, 335–349.
Van Berkum, J. J., Brown, C., Zwitserlood, P., Kooijman, V.,
& Hagoort, P. (2005). Anticipating upcoming words in
discourse: Evidence from ERPs and reading times. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 31, 443–467.
Van Berkum, J. J., van der Brink, D., Tesnik, C. M. J. Y.,
Kos, M., & Hagoort, P. (2008). The neural integration of
speaker and message. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
20(580–591).
Weber, A., & Pöllmann, K. (2010). Identifying foreign speakers with an unfamiliar accent or in an unfamiliar language.
In New sounds 2010: The 6th international symposium on
the acquisition of second language speech (pp. 536–541).
Poznan, Poland: Adam Mickiewicz University.

1780

