Making it Right: Can the Right-Hemisphere Compensate for Language Function in
Patients with Left-Frontal Brain Tumors?
Ethan Jost (edj37@cornell.edu)
Cornell University, Department of Psychology
Ithaca, NY 13068 USA
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, fMRI Lab
New York, NY 10065 USA
Nicole P. Brennan (brennann@mskcc.org), Kyung K. Peck (peckk@mskcc.org), Andrei I. Holodny
(holodnya@mskcc.org)
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, fMRI Lab
New York, NY 10065 USA
Morten H. Christiansen (christiansen@cornell.edu)
Cornell University, Department of Psychology
Ithaca, NY 13068 USA
language processing (Hagoort, 2014; Friederici &
Gierhan, 2013).
However, a lack of research on the role of the righthemisphere in language has left the debate on
specialization open. Even with the focus of research on
left-hemisphere language function, some theories posit a
complementary role for right-hemisphere processing (e.g.,
Jung-Beeman, 2005). In addition, there is much evidence
that the right-hemisphere, specifically Broca’s
homologue, is able to take over function from the lefthemisphere following extensive early brain damage (Thal
et al., 1991; Vicari et al., 2000; Tivarus, Starling,
Newport & Langfitt, 2012). However, the degree to which
adults with brain lesions retain this capacity is currently
underspecified. Some recent smaller-scale work has
suggested that increased right hemispheric activation may
be correlated with better language outcomes in patients
with left-frontal lesions, and in healthy patients who
undergo targeted rTMS (Krieg et al., 2013).
Determining the degree to which the adult brain can
reorganize language function, and under what conditions
this occurs, promises to yield important insights that not
only may inform clinical prognoses, but also lead to a
better understanding of the brain’s equipotentiality.
Examining brain tumor patients may thus provide a
fruitful source of data for uncovering the potentially more
subtle plasticity that exists in adult populations than acute
stroke and brain damage patients, as they may exhibit
different compensatory mechanisms and competencies
(Fisicaro et al., 2016).
Case studies with brain tumor patients have indicated
that damage to traditional language cortex in both the
frontal (Holodny, Schulder, Ybasco & Liu, 2002) and
temporal (Petrovich, Holodny, Brennan & Gutin, 2004)

Abstract
Both the degree to which the left-hemisphere is specialized
for language and the relative ability of the right-hemisphere
to subserve language function are underspecified. The
present study sought to identify whether the right-frontal
fMRI activation seen in a number of case studies in patients
with left-sided brain lesions exists as a group-level trend in
patients with left-frontal tumors. It also sought to examine
the possible compensatory nature of this activation. Thus, a
retrospective analysis of 197 brain tumor patients who had
undergone pre-surgical fMRI language mapping was
conducted. Patients with left-frontal tumors were found to
be more likely to show right- or co-dominant fMRI
activation during language mapping tasks compared to
patients who had tumors elsewhere in the brain. Further,
patients with left-frontal tumors who were identified as
right- or co-dominant for language were found to possess
more intact language function as measured by the Boston
Naming Test.
Keywords: language; neuroplasticity

Introduction
Those studying the cognitive neuroscience of language
have typically described the brain’s left-hemisphere as
specialized for language ever since the seminal work of
Paul Broca and Carl Wernicke. These studies, along with
the century and a half of research they inspired, have
focused primarily on uncovering the roles of the left
frontal and temporal lobes in the learning and processing
of language (Dronkers, Plaisant, Iba-Zizen & Cabanis,
2007). This has led to an emerging characterization of the
role that various regions, sub-regions, and pathways
within the left-hemisphere’s language network play in

420

lobes can result in contralateral reorganization of the
brain’s language network, although how this affects
patients’ cognitive outcomes is not currently known. In
addition, the fact that ipsilateral reorganization also
occurs in this patient population (Brennan, 2008), creates
an ideal setting in which to test for both the relative
frequency of contralateral reorganization and its outcomes
with respect to language. Does the right-hemisphere
demonstrate compensatory activation when there is
damage to the left-frontal lobe more often than the
occasional case study would suggest? Also, do patient
outcomes differ depending on whether the patient exhibits
ipsilateral versus contralateral compensation? This set of
questions led to the present study, in which a large
database of patients with brain tumors of varying grade,
size, location, and etiology was queried in order to answer
these critical questions. We sought to identify whether or
not the compensatory right-frontal activation seen in such
case studies exists as a group-level trend among patients
suffering from left-frontal tumors, and also to examine the
possible compensatory nature of this activation.

coregistration with the functional data. Functional images
were acquired with a gradient-echo echo-planar imaging
sequence (TR, 4000 ms; TE, 30/40 (for 3T/1.5T) ms;
matrix , 128x128; field of view, 240 mm; thickness, 4.5mm;flip angle, 900). Head motion was minimized using
straps and foam padding.

Task Administration
Patients performed one or more covert block designed
fMRI language tasks as part of the pre-surgical language
task panel. Tasks consisted of a phonemic fluency task
where they were required to generate words that began
with a high frequency letter, semantic fluency where they
were required to generate words that fit a category, verb
generation where they were required to generate verbs to
given nouns, or auditory responsive naming where they
were required to answer simple questions. All tasks were
delivered aurally (Ruff et al., 2008). The radiology team’s
reports were based on all scans collected for each patient,
while reported laterality indices were taken from the task
with the highest quality scan, with a preference for the
phonemic fluency task.
There were 90 images in total for each patient,
consisting of 5 activation images (20 sec) followed by 10
rest images (40 sec) repeated 6 times (6 min total).
Subjects were monitored continuously while performing
the task. Subject participation was confirmed using realtime imaging software, which provided real-time
acquisition, processing, and display of functional results
(Brainwave RT, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, Wisconsin).
All language fMRI tasks were visually inspected for
lateralization patterns and discrepancies in language
lateralization by a board certified neuroradiologist.
Clinical reports indicated language lateralization,
language localizations in the peri-tumoral region,
handedness, and if the Boston Naming Test (BNT) was
performed, the patients score.

Methods
Participants
A database was compiled involving all patients who
underwent a pre-surgical fMRI language procedure at
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center over a five-year
time period, excluding patients with sub-optimal scans or
incomplete patient information (n = 197, 95 female; mean
age = 50.52 years, range: 10-83). Patients initially
presented with a range of symptoms and tumor etiologies.
Table 1 indicates the proportion of patients falling into a
number of relevant categories.

Table 1: General patient information.

Female
Proportion
of Patients

0.482

High
Grade
Tumor

Leftfrontal
tumor

Righthanded

Leftdominant
language

0.538

0.482

0.807

0.873

Results
Plasticity in the brain’s language network
In order to determine the possible extent of both
ipsilateral and contralateral reorganization following
tumor infiltration of the left-frontal lobe, the researchers
divided all right-handed patients in the original sample (n
= 159, 72 female; mean age = 50.64, range: 10-83) into
groups based on tumor location. Patients with tumors
impacting the left-frontal lobe (n = 81, 37 female; mean
age = 49.65 years, range: 11-75) can be considered the
experimental group, while patients with tumors elsewhere
in the brain – including other regions within the left-

Data Acquisition
Data were acquired with a 1.5-T or 3.0 T scanner
(General Electric, Milwaukee, WI) using an 8 channel
head coil. Based on localizer images, a set of 26 T1weighted (repetition time [TR], 600 ms; echo time [TE], 8
ms; thickness, 4.5-mm) and T2-weighted (TR, 4000 ms;
TE, 102 ms; thickness, 4.5-mm) spin-echo axial slices,
covering the whole brain, was obtained for the purpose of

421

hemisphere – (n = 78, 35 female; mean age = 52.35,
range: 10-83) served as the control1.
As can be seen in Table 2, patients with tumors
localized in the left-frontal lobe were much more likely to
be reported as right- or co-dominant for language function
by the neuroradiology staff than would be expected given
the control group (χ2 = 9.51, p = .002, φ = .245).
This finding suggests that the frontal component of the
typical left-hemisphere language network is able to shift
to the right-hemisphere in patients with tumor impacting
putative Broca’s area in the left-frontal lobe. It also
demonstrates that this contralateral reorganization
happens with some frequency, and is not isolated to a
small number of cases. However, it remains unclear
whether the plasticity encountered in this patient
population has any effect on language function. It is
possible that the increased right-hemisphere activation is
not compensatory in nature, and may even be deleterious.

As depicted in Figure 1, this analysis found that patients
identified as being right- or co-dominant in terms of
language function had significantly more intact language
abilities than did patients with left-dominant maps
exhibiting ipsilateral, and often perilesional activation to
language tasks (t(22) = -2.36, p = .028). This
independent-samples t-test did not pass Levene’s test for
equality of variances (F = 4.82, p = .037), so corrected
degrees of freedom were used.
This set of analyses demonstrates that the righthemisphere is capable of taking over language function in
adults who were likely left-dominant prior to tumor
development. It also shows that therapeutic techniques
which focus on transferring language function to the
right-hemisphere in the face of left-hemisphere damage
may result in better patient outcomes.

Table 2: χ2-table exhibiting the difference in report
laterality between patients with left-frontal tumors and
those with tumor elsewhere in the brain.

Patients with
left-frontal
tumors
Patients with
tumors
elsewhere in
brain

Patients
reported as
left-dominant

Patients
reported as
right-or codominant

67 (72.85)

14 (8.15)

81

76 (70.15)

2 (7.85)

78

143

16

Figure 1: Bar graph displaying the difference in BNT
performance between patients with left-dominant reports
and those with right- or co- dominant reports. Error bars
indicate 95% CIs.

159

Patterns of reorganization affect language
outcomes

Laterality index verification of report groups

To elucidate the role that potential right-hemisphere
reorganization plays in actual language outcomes, patients
with left-frontal tumors who completed a BNT during
their pre-surgical assessment (n = 28) were evaluated
more closely. In order to determine the effect of laterality
on language performance, the BNT scores of patients with
left-dominant reports (n = 20; M = 48.30; SD = 14.71)
were compared to those with right- or co-dominant
reports (n = 8; M = 56.38; SD = 2.72)2.

In order to confirm the radiologist report data, a laterality
index assessment also was conducted on the patients with
BNT data. The patients in both the left-dominant and
right-/co-dominant groups were also evaluated using
laterality indices (LI), with interior frontal gyrus (IFG),
middle frontal gyrus (MFG), frontal lobe, and
hemispheric ROIs (see Figures 2-5).
Independent-samples t-tests confirmed that there was a
significant difference between the report groups in
laterality for each of the ROIs that were assessed, the IFG
(t(26) = 4.33, p < .001), MFG (t(26) = 4.08, p < .001),
frontal lobe (t(26) = 4.44, p < .001), and hemispheric

1

There were no significant differences between patient groups in
terms of age (t(156) = -1.145, p = .254), sex (χ2 = .01, p = .920), or
tumor grade (χ2 = 2.843, p = .092).
2
Again, no significant differences were found between groups for age
(t(156) = -1.145, p = .254), or tumor grade (χ2 = 2.05, p = .152),
although sex and hemisphere of language dominance were not found

to be independent (χ2 = 4.01 p = .045, φ = .223), as males were more
likely to be right- or co-dominant than expected.

422

(t(26) = 5.78, p < .001). See Table 3 for a report of means
for each group’s LI within each ROI.
This set of analyses corroborates the qualitative
findings of the report data, and suggests that patients
falling into the left- and right-/co-dominant groups were
categorized correctly.

Table 3: Group means for each ROI

Leftdominant
Right-/codominant

IFG

MFG

Frontal

Hemispheric

0.383

0.504

0.472

0.389

-0.466

-0.306

-0.387

-0.153

Figure 2: Difference in LI between patients with leftdominant reports and those with right- or co- dominant
reports in the IFG ROI. Error bars indicate 95% CIs.

Figure 4: Difference in LI between patients with leftdominant reports and those with right- or co- dominant
reports in the frontal lobe ROI. Error bars indicate 95%
CIs.

Figure 3: Difference in LI between patients with leftdominant reports and those with right- or co- dominant
reports in the MFG ROI. Error bars indicate 95% CIs.

Figure 5: Difference in LI between patients with leftdominant reports and those with right- or co- dominant
reports in the hemispheric ROI. Error bars indicate 95%
CIs.

Discussion

stroke patients has incorporated large datasets
(Turkeltaub, Messing, Norise & Hamilton, 2011), case
studies have made up the majority of past research on
atypical language lateralization in adult patient
populations.

This is the first large scale study investigating the
complex relationship between reorganization in the
brain’s language network and behavioral outcomes as a
result of brain tumor. While some past research with

423

The findings of the present study point toward a degree
of equipotentiality in the adult brain’s language network
that is somewhat unexpected. The frontal lobe, likely
Broca’s homologue, in the right-hemisphere seems to be
able to take over language function when there is
compromise of the left-hemisphere, and may even be a
better candidate for reorganization than the ipsilateral
cortex. It is also of note that the patients with lefthemisphere damage exhibiting right- or co-dominant
activation maps fell within the normal-range of scores on
the BNT, demonstrating the right-hemisphere’s ability to
maintain healthy levels of language performance. Patients
with left-dominant maps indicating ipsilateral, and often
peri-lesional compensation suffering from left-frontal
lesions exhibited a much wider range of outcomes.
Such a pattern of results suggests that while typical
development results in an overwhelming majority of
adults having left-dominant language networks (Knecht et
al., 2000), the right-hemisphere may also possess the
requisite capacities for language processing. This falls in
line with the work of Bates and colleagues (Bates & Roe,
2001; Thal et al., 1991; Vicari et al., 2000), whose work
suggests that early language development can occur in
children with severe damage to the left-hemisphere and in
children who are lacking their left-hemisphere entirely. It
is likely that the left-hemisphere is not uniquely suited or
specifically adapted for language learning and processing.
Rather, relatively ubiquitous and subtle biases in early
development likely lead to the typically left-hemisphere
language network. Future work determining the nature of
these biases would be a fruitful addition to understanding
the developmental intricacies of the brain’s language
network.
Clinical studies have also indicated that the righthemisphere may be able to serve what is traditionally the
role of the left-hemisphere in language in some
circumstances (for a recent review, see Fisicaro et al.,
2016). An investigation of a large number of stroke
patients suffering from aphasia demonstrates that patients
suffering from left-frontal damage recruit the righthemisphere more often than healthy controls, although the
findings of this study did not determine whether the
compensatory activation is deleterious or beneficial
(Turkeltaub et al., 2011).
Other case-study research has demonstrated an unclear
and even conflicting relationship between the role of
right-hemispheric activation and language outcomes in
patients with aphasia at different points in recovery
(Turkeltaub et al., 2012). Unlike this past research,
however, the present study demonstrates a clear
relationship between right-hemisphere activation during
language tasks and positive patient outcomes in a large
cohort. Determining whether or not this is true for stroke
patients, or patients suffering from brain damage with

other etiologies constitutes an intriguing question for
future research.
Studies utilizing therapeutic techniques attempting to
transfer language function to healthy right-hemisphere
cortex after damage to the left-frontal lobe in two stroke
patients have demonstrated that the right-hemisphere may
be able to take over such function when the basal ganglia
remains intact, and that this compensation leads to
positive language outcomes for the patient (Crosson et al.,
2005). Other recent research also seems to suggest that a
rightward shift in language related function is related to
the amount of tumor infiltration suffered by the basal
ganglia (Shaw et al., submitted).
It seems likely that basal ganglia activation serves as
the causal mechanism by which language function is able
to transfer between hemispheres following lefthemisphere damage. Further research examining the
trajectories and limitations of this transfer will hopefully
not only elucidate mechanisms for contralateral
reorganization in clinical populations, but also increase
the understanding of how the hemispheres communicate
during normal language processing.
The present study is limited in some regards. By
utilizing radiologist reports for evaluations of laterality,
the analyses are partially based on qualitative measures. A
number of patient scans suffered from issues related to
drop-out artifacts due to prior surgery and other common
issues faced when scanning this patient population,
rendering traditional quantitative analyses useless.
However, the limited laterality index findings reported
here suggest that the radiologist report data overlaps quite
a bit with more quantitative measures, at least at the group
level, mitigating such concerns. In addition, the radiology
team’s reports were able to account for such issues in
their analyses. For example, several patients whose scans
exhibited multiple artifacts were difficult to categorize
using traditional laterality indices due to low voxel counts
in the affected hemisphere. By using the qualitative report
data based on these scans, but not beholden to the
limitations of traditional quantitative analyses, the study
was able to include a larger number of patients.
Ideally future research will be able to control for such
artifacts and issues in a more well-controlled prospective
study, even if that means using a smaller sample. Future
prospective research would also benefit from utilizing a
broader range of neuropsychological assessments than
were able to be accessed in the present study.

Conclusion
The present study is the first to indicate a group level
trend in putative right-hemisphere reorganization as a
result of damage to traditional left-frontal language
cortex. It is also the first to demonstrate positive outcomes
for patients as a result of such reorganization in a large
sample. Such findings show that the left-hemisphere is

424

not likely to be uniquely adapted to subserve language
function.
Rather, the right-hemisphere seems to be able to take
over for left-hemisphere when the latter is damaged, and
can maintain a normal-level of language abilities. This
study also highlights the potential for therapies attempting
to facilitate contralateral shifts in language function in
patients suffering from language problems. As the righthemisphere seems to be just as adept at subserving
language function as the left-hemisphere, therapy targeted
at shifting language function to healthy right-hemisphere
cortex seems like an increasingly attractive option.

left inferior frontal glioma. Journal of computer
assisted tomography, 26(6), 941-943.
Jung-Beeman, M. (2005). Bilateral brain processes for
comprehending natural language. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 9(11), 512-518.
Knecht, S., Dräger, B., Deppe, M., Bobe, L., Lohmann,
H., Flöel, A., Ringelstein, E.B., & Henningsen, H.
(2000). Handedness and hemispheric language
dominance in healthy humans. Brain, 123(12), 25122518.
Krieg, S. M., Sollmann, N., Hauck, T., Ille, S., Foerschler,
A., Meyer, B., & Ringel, F. (2013). Functional
language shift to the right hemisphere in patients with
language-eloquent brain tumors. PLoS One, 8(9),
e75403.
Petrovich N.M., Holodny A.I., Brennan C.W., & Gutin
P.H. (2004). Isolated translocation of Wernicke's area
to the right hemisphere in a 62-year-man with a
temporo-parietal glioma. American Journal of
Neuroradiology 25, 130–133.
Ruff, I. M., Brennan, N. P., Peck, K. K., Hou, B. L.,
Tabar, V., Brennan, C. W., & Holodny, A. I. (2008).
Assessment of the language laterality index in patients
with brain tumor using functional MR imaging: effects
of thresholding, task selection, and prior surgery.
American journal of neuroradiology, 29(3), 528-535.
Shaw K., Brennan N.M., Woo K., Zhang Z., Young R.,
Peck K.K., & Holodny A.I. (submitted). Infiltration of
the basal ganglia by brain tumors is associated with the
development of co-dominant language function on
fMRI.
Thal, D. J., Marchman, V., Stiles, J., Aram, D., Trauner,
D., Nass, R., & Bates, E. (1991). Early lexical
development in children with focal brain injury. Brain
and language, 40(4), 491-527.
Tivarus, M. E., Starling, S. J., Newport, E. L., & Langfitt,
J. T. (2012). Homotopic language reorganization in the
right hemisphere after early left hemisphere injury.
Brain and language, 123(1), 1-10.
Turkeltaub, P. E., Messing, S., Norise, C., & Hamilton, R.
H. (2011). Are networks for residual language function
and recovery consistent across aphasic patients?
Neurology, 76(20), 1726-1734.
Turkeltaub, P. E., Coslett, H. B., Thomas, A. L.,
Faseyitan, O., Benson, J., Norise, C., & Hamilton, R. H.
(2012). The right hemisphere is not unitary in its role in
aphasia recovery. Cortex, 48(9), 1179-1186.
Vicari, S., Albertoni, A., Chilosi, A. M., Cipriani, P.,
Cioni, G., & Bates, E. (2000). Plasticity and
reorganization during language development in children
with early brain injury. Cortex, 36(1), 31-46.

Acknowledgements
This research could not have taken place without the
support of NIH grant 5T32HD055177. We would also
like to thank all of the staff in the Radiology and
Neurosurgery Departments at Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center for their help at every stage of this project.

References
Bates, E., & Roe, K. (2001). Language Development in
Children with Unilateral Brain Injury. In C.A. Nelson
& M. Luciana (Eds.), Handbook of developmental
cognitive neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brennan N.P. (2008). Preparing the patient for the fMRI
Study and optimization of paradigm selection and
delivery. In A.I. Holodny (Ed.), Functional
neuroimaging: A clinical approach. New York:
Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.
Crosson, B., Moore, A.B., Gopinath, K., White, K.D.,
Wierenga, C.E., Gaiefsky, M.E., Fabrizio, K.S., Peck,
K.K., Soltysik, D., Milsted, C., & Briggs, R.W. (2005).
Role of the right and left hemispheres in recovery of
function during treatment of intention in aphasia.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(3), 392-406.
Dronkers, N. F., Plaisant, O., Iba-Zizen, M. T., &
Cabanis, E. A. (2007). Paul Broca's historic cases: high
resolution MR imaging of the brains of Leborgne and
Lelong. Brain, 130(5), 1432-1441.
Fisicaro, R., Jost, E., Shaw, K., Brennan, N.P., Peck,
K.K., & Holodny, A.H. (in press). Cortical plasticity in
the setting of brain tumors. Topics in Magnetic
Resonance Imaging.
Friederici, A. D., & Gierhan, S. M. (2013). The language
network. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 23(2), 250254.
Hagoort, P. (2014). Nodes and networks in the neural
architecture for language: Broca's region and beyond.
Current opinion in neurobiology, 28, 136-141.
Holodny, A. I., Schulder, M., Ybasco, A., & Liu, W. C.
(2002). Translocation of Broca's area to the
contralateral hemisphere as the result of the growth of a

425

