Emotional Implications of Metaphor: Consequences of Metaphor Framing for
Mindset about Hardship
Rose K. Hendricks (rhendricks@ucsd.edu)
Lera Boroditsky (lera@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
Do metaphors shape people’s emotional states and mindsets
for dealing with hardship? Natural language metaphors may
act as frames that encourage people to reappraise an
emotional situation, changing the way they respond to it.
Recovery from cancer is one type of adversity that many
people face, and it can be mediated by the mindset people
adopt. We investigate whether two common metaphors for
describing a cancer experience – the battle and the journey –
encourage people to make different inferences about the
patient’s emotional state. After being exposed to the battle
metaphor participants inferred that the patient would feel
more guilt if he didn’t recover, while after being exposed to
the journey metaphor participants felt that he had a better
chance of making peace with his situation. We discuss
implications of this work for investigations of metaphor and
emotion, mindsets, and recovery.
Keywords: metaphor; framing; emotion; adversity; cancer;
battle; journey; mindset; recovery

Introduction
Linguistic metaphor influences the way we reason about
social problems (Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013),
physical phenomena (Dolscheid & Casasanto, 2013), and
scientific concepts (Gentner & Gentner, 1983). These
examples demonstrate that metaphor influences rational and
deliberate decision-making. Can metaphor also influence
emotion?
Metaphor evokes more emotion-related brain activity than
literal terms (Citron & Goldberg, 2014), and emotion-laden
metaphorical sentences encourage more mental simulation
than less emotional metaphorical sentences (Samur et al.,
2015). In addition, people who read about a character in a
passage that used metaphors felt a greater sense of intimacy
with that character than people who read about the character
in the absence of metaphor (Bowes & Katz, 2015).
Most of the work on metaphor and emotion has detailed
the ways that emotions are described metaphorically
(Fainsilber & Ortony, 1987; Kövecses, 2000). For example,
anger is described as seeing red, and participants who
thought about anger or became angry perceived the color
red more than people who didn’t (Fetterman et al., 2011).
Anger can also be metaphorically described in terms of heat,
and people associate anger-related words and angry faces
with heat (Wilkowski et al., 2009). Additional evidence
suggests that these metaphorical ways of describing
emotions (for example, anger as being contained in a
bounded space, as opposed to being a fluid) influence the

way people reason about those emotional states (Reali &
Arciniegas, 2014). Whether a metaphorical framing can
influence people’s emotional states remains an open
question.
Metaphor is often used in difficult situations. Here, we
look at metaphors for overcoming adversity in the context
of cancer. We compare the emotional inferences that people
make about an individual with cancer after reading about his
situation framed as either a battle or a journey, and we find
that these metaphors give rise to different emotional
inferences related to coping.

Adversity & Coping
The world presents diverse opportunities for dealing with
adversity, and the way we think about that adversity
matters. In a seminal work, Lipowski (1970) suggested that
there are 8 prevalent ways that people attribute meaning to
illness. These categories include seeing illness as a
challenge, enemy, punishment, weakness, irreparable loss,
relief, strategy, or a value. He further suggested that the
meaning we attribute to our disease influences our coping
abilities, in turn affecting recovery.
One way of coping is by reconceptualizing our
experiences. This process of reappraisal allows us to change
the way we feel about something by changing the way we
think about it. At the neural level, reappraisal involves
interactions between the prefrontal control systems that
implement reappraisal strategies and emotional appraisal
systems like the amygdala that generate an affective
response (Ochsner & Gross, 2005). Similar work has shown
that physical health improves when health concerns like
stress are framed in more positive ways (Crum et al., 2013).
Can we alter our mindset about a difficult situation by
invoking different metaphors? Can metaphor facilitate
reappraisal of hardship to improve coping and health
outcomes?

Language about Cancer
Over 1.6 million people are diagnosed with cancer each
year. Upon diagnosis, are they beginning a battle or a
journey with the disease? Psychological variables can affect
recovery. For example, mental states like chronic stress,
depression, and social isolation are linked with the
biological pathways involved in cancer’s progression,
compromising functions like immune response and cancer
cell death (Lutgendorf & Sood, 2011). Women with breast
cancer who had more optimistic expectations of their

1164

surgeries experienced less pain, nausea, and fatigue one
week after surgery than those with negative expectations
(Montgomery et al., 2010). Further, breast cancer patients
with greater social support and a tendency to minimize the
importance of their disease experienced better prognoses,
while those demonstrating depression and constraint of
emotions had lower levels of survival (Falagas et al., 2007).
Metaphors are pervasive in language about cancer.
Casarett and colleagues found that oncologists used
metaphors in roughly two thirds of their conversations with
patients (2010). Patients also rated physicians who used
more metaphors as better communicators and easier to
understand than those who used fewer.
The predominant metaphor when discussing cancer is that
of a battle (Reisfield & Wilson, 2004; Penson et al., 2004).
This metaphor seems so deeply ingrained in our culture that
a “fighting spirit” is one of the five categories in the Mental
Adjustment to Cancer (MAC) scale, which is frequently
used to assess patients’ mentalities about their disease
(Greer et al., 1989). On this scale, someone with a fighting
spirit “fully accepts the diagnosis, uses the word ‘cancer’, is
determined to fight the illness, tries to obtain as much
information as possible about it and adopts an optimistic
attitude; may see the illness as a challenge” (p. 374). The
other four states – helplessness/hopelessness, anxious
preoccupation, fatalism, and denial – are all negative.
Because the only positive adjustment state involves
conceptualizing cancer as a battle, this scale demonstrates
that not only do we think of cancer as a battle, but those
who designed and use the scale assume that patients should
think of it that way. On the other hand, in one study women
with metastatic cancer tended to associate their disease with
the concepts of enemy, punishment, weakness, and
irreparable loss more than patients with earlier stage cancer,
suggesting that the battle metaphor seems more appropriate
to the sickest people (Wallberg et al., 2009).
Our societal belief in the battle metaphor is also evident in
interventions like the game Re-Mission, touted on its
website (www.re-mission.net) as “the original cancerfighting game.” In the game, players fire treatments at
growing tumors, drop chemo bombs on cancer cells, and
collect healthy cells to earn points. Cancer patients aged 1329 who regularly played Re-Mission showed greater
adherence to their treatments, self-efficacy, and knowledge
about the disease than those who did not (Kato et al., 2008).
Despite the prevalence of the battle metaphor, some
researchers, patients, and physicians intuit that a battle,
inherently violent, masculine, and power-based, may not be
a productive framing for cancer. It may suggest that
someone wins (recovers) if they try hard enough, a message
that disregards more social and emotional aspects of healing
(Reisfield & Wilson, 2004). A battle mindset may
encourage suppressing negative feelings and imply the
importance of treatment at all costs (Harrington, 2012).
Further, it is conceptually inaccurate because cancer does
not involve enemy invaders; instead, one’s own cells are the
enemies (Reisfield & Wilson, 2004). In one study, cancer

patients perceived their clinicians as promoting a positive
attitude and a “fighting spirit,” which they then internalized
as encouragement to conceal their emotional distress (Byrne
et al., 2002).
One alternative is to describe cancer as a journey. There is
no winning, losing, or failing on a journey; the emphasis is
instead on a variety of possibilities and a larger process,
since life itself is often compared to a journey (Reisfield &
Wilson, 2004). One’s experience with cancer is therefore
just one part of a larger narrative (Harrington, 2012).
Despite the prevailing intuition that battle metaphors may
do more harm than good, there is likely no perfect metaphor
to talk about cancer. Different metaphors are likely to help
different
patients
experiencing
widely
different
circumstances (Reisfield & Wilson, 2004; Penson et al.,
2004). In fact, a corpus analysis of online support forums
and blogs written by patients and health professionals
demonstrated that the battle was not inherently bad, nor was
the journey inherently good (Semino et al., 2015). Both
patients and health professionals used each of the metaphors
in both empowering and disempowering contexts.

Metaphor & Reasoning
Metaphors often allow us to think about complex ideas by
drawing on domains we have experience with. For example,
when people used an analogy comparing the flow of
electricity in a circuit to that of water through pipes, they
made different inferences about the flow of electricity than
people who use compared it to crowds of mice running
along a track (Gentner & Gentner, 1983). The students made
metaphor-consistent inferences, both correct and incorrect,
because they mapped elements of the metaphorical domain
onto their conceptualization of electrical circuits, when such
a mapping was warranted and when it was not.
Can learning a new metaphor shape the way people think
about complex concepts? Dutch speakers who learned to
talk about musical pitches as thick and thin (as opposed to
their conventional way of describing them as low or high)
began to think of pitches in the new way, even in a nonlinguistic task (Dolscheid & Casasanto, 2013). Similarly,
people who learned to talk about the past as heavy judged an
older book to be heavier than a new book, while those that
learned to talk about the present as heavy judged the newer
book as heavier than the older one, even though the book
weights were identical (Slepian & Ambady, 2014). English
speakers who learned to talk about time in terms of vertical
space (with either earlier events either above or below later
ones) also showed a corresponding shift in their
nonlinguistic mental representations of time, consistent with
their newly learned systems of metaphors (Hendricks &
Boroditsky, 2015).
Some prior work has examined the effect of linguistic
metaphor when more than one metaphor could be used to
describe a social problem. In a series of experiments, people
who read about crime as either a virus or a beast offered
solutions for dealing with the crime that were consistent
with the metaphor they had read (Thibodeau & Boroditsky,

1165

2011, 2013). When people read that crime was a beast, they
were more likely to offer solutions like increasing law
enforcement and punishments for criminals than did virus
readers. This is in line with what people would likely do if a
literal beast were ravaging the town, which suggests that
they reasoned in systematic metaphor-consistent ways.
One question that remains is whether metaphors have
consequences for emotion. Can linguistic metaphor shape
people’s affect and mindset about a difficult situation?
In this paper, we explore the role of metaphor for framing
the experience of having cancer. We investigated two
common metaphors for an experience with cancer – a battle
and a journey. After people were exposed to one of these
metaphors in the context of a fictional character’s disease,
we measured the inferences they made about that person’s
guilt and ability to make peace with his situation.
According to the intuitions shared by a number of
researchers and physicians, if the journey metaphor leads to
more productive conceptualizations of a person’s experience
with the disease, people who read about it as such should
think that the character will have better chances of making
peace with the disease and will feel less guilty if he does not
recover than people who read about his experience as a
battle. Our results confirmed these predictions, suggesting
that metaphors do influence the emotional mindsets that
people adopt toward adversity. This work opens the door for
future investigations of the mechanisms underlying a
metaphor’s influence on emotion.

Methods
Participants
We recruited and paid 528 participants through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. We restricted participants to those whose
IP addresses were in the United States, had completed at
least 500 tasks, and had an overall approval rate of at least
95%. Data from 25 participants were excluded because they
did not finish the survey, resulting in 503 participants for
analysis.
This sample included 295 males and 208 females. Most
(84%) had completed at least some college. Twelve
participants reported having been treated for cancer in the
past, and the rest reported never having been diagnosed with
cancer. Four of those participants read about the battle, and
8 read about the journey.

easy one. Many people have written about their experiences
on the battlefield, and he can turn to those for consolation.
His friends and family want him to know that he will not be
alone in his battle. Even though sometimes he might not feel
like talking, other times he may want to share stories of his
battle with others, and they will be there for those moments.
Joe was just diagnosed with cancer. He knows that for the
foreseeable future, every day will be a journey with the
disease. The road he has to travel will not always be an
easy one. Many people have written about their experiences
on the path, and he can turn to those for consolation. His
friends and family want him to know that he will not be
alone on his journey. Even though sometimes he might not
feel like talking, other times he may want to share stories of
his journey with others, and they will be there for those
moments.
On the following page, participants rated the extent to
which two separate statements described Joe’s experience
based on the information they had read. Options for
agreement with each statement ranged from 1 (not at all) to
7 (very much). The following were presented in a random
order:
a) He will feel guilty that he hasn’t done enough if he
does not recover.
b) He can make peace with his experience.
After responding to the two statements, the next page
stated: “Please give any additional information about Joe’s
experience that you can imagine based on the passage that
you read previously.” The experiment concluded by asking
participants about their personal experience with cancer,
gender, highest level of education, and languages they
speak.
After reading all of the responses, we noticed that people
mentioned Joe’s social support and his mindset about his
disease often, so we decided to code for these elements. To
do so, we read all the responses, blind to participants’
metaphor conditions, and noted the presence of comments
about social support and positive mindset. We also coded
for uses of both battle- and journey-associated language and
whether the participant explicitly commented on the
metaphor they had read.

Results
The metaphor framing influenced people’s emotional
inferences about Joe’s guilt and his ability to make peace
with his situation. Figure 1 shows these main results.

Materials & Procedure
We created two passages about an individual’s experience
with cancer. These passages were identical except in the
metaphor used to describe cancer. One used a battle framing
(n = 249), while the other used a journey (n = 254). Each
participant read one of the following (boldface added to
emphasize differences; no text was bolded in the actual
materials):
Joe was just diagnosed with cancer. He knows that for the
foreseeable future, every day will be a battle against the
disease. The battle he has to fight will not always be an

Figure 1: Main results. Agreement scales ranged from 1 (not
at all) to 7 (very much).

1166

Guilt

Other Information Imagined

As predicted, people who read about the battle agreed
more with the statement that Joe “will feel guilty if he does
not recover,” (M=2.87, SD=1.69) than did people who read
about the journey (M=2.50, SD=1.42). A 2 (metaphor) x 2
(gender) ANOVA confirmed this difference by a main
effect of metaphor (F(1,498) = 7.07, p = .008, d = .24).
Gender was included because the masculinity inherent in the
battle metaphor has been emphasized by previous work
(Reisfield & Wilson, 2004; Penson et al., 2004; Harrington,
2012). Men reported that Joe would feel more guilty
(M=2.88, SD=1.59) than women did (M=2.40, SD=1.50),
confirmed by a main effect of gender (F(1,498) = 11.1, p =
.0009, d = .31). The metaphors did not sway men’s and
women’s responses to different extents, as there was no
interaction between metaphor and gender (F(1,498) = 0.16,
p = .69). Figure 2 shows the results for the statement about
Joe’s guilt.

When writing additional information about Joe’s
experience, people who read about the battle used battle
metaphors (42%) more than those who read about the
journey (18%; χ2 = 23.04, p < .0001). Similarly, people who
read about the journey used journey metaphors (17%) more
than those who read about the battle did (5%; χ2 = 18.13, p <
.0001). Overall battle metaphors were more common (29%)
than journey metaphors (11%; χ2 = 43.46, p < .0001). These
results are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Use of battle and journey metaphors

Figure 2: Responses to how guilty Joe will feel.

Making Peace
There was again a main effect of metaphor (F(1,498) =
7.96, p = .005, d = .25), but no main effect of gender
(F(1,498) = 0.33, p = .56) or interaction between metaphor
and gender (F(1,498) = 0.15, p = .70). Figure 3 shows the
results for this statement.
People who read the journey metaphor agreed more with
the statement that Joe “can make peace with his situation,”
(M=5.35, SD=1.16) than the group who read the battle
metaphor (M=5.05, SD=1.29). There was no main effect of
gender (p = .68) or interaction between metaphor and
gender (p = .95). Figure 3 shows the results for this
statement.

Many people commented on the mindset they imagined
Joe would have after his diagnosis. Examples reflecting the
belief that Joe had a positive mindset include:
I imagine that he has a pretty positive mindset, he has
people to consult with and people to lean on. I think he
would be as positive as he could be because he has support.
He's probably scared, but assured that he can make it.
Joe has come to terms with his situation. He knows just
how hard the battle he has to face will be, and is prepared
for it.
Because we coded for two types of information
mentioned (social support and positive mindset), we used
Bonferroni adjusted alpha levels of .025 per test. People
who read about the journey were numerically, but not
significantly, more likely to write about his positive mindset
than those who read about it as a battle, χ2 = 3.24, p = .07.
Many participants also mentioned that Joe would receive
good social support throughout his experience. These were
comments such as:
Joe is lucky to have support from the people that love him.
This can help him tremendously.
There was no difference in frequency of mentioning
social support between the groups, χ2 = 1.44, p = .23.
There was also no difference in the response length
between the two metaphor groups, t(484.6) = 0.67, p = .50.

Discussion

Figure 3: Responses to whether Joe can make peace.

In this study, we considered the role that metaphor has on
emotion about a difficult situation. People made different
emotional inferences about recovery when they received
different metaphors. Specifically, reading about someone’s
experience with cancer as a battle encouraged people to
infer that the individual would feel more guilt if he did not

1167

recover than reading about the same experience as a journey
did. On the other hand, the journey framing encouraged
people to believe this person could make peace with his
situation more than the battle did.
People were more likely to use metaphors consistent with
the one they read than the alternative. This is notable
because if metaphors are perpetuated, either in a single
person’s mind or in conversations, their effects on emotion
may also be perpetuated over time. This emotional
contagion phenomenon has been observed for social media
posts (Kramer et al., 2014).
Social support is important for health outcomes in cancer
patients (Lutgendorf & Sood, 2011; Falagas et al., 2007),
and there was no difference in the frequency with which this
feature of Joe’s situation was mentioned between people
who read the different metaphors. This suggests that the
differences we do observe in inferences about the guilt Joe
will feel and his ability to make peace with his situation are
not driven by underlying assumptions about Joe’s social
support. Because both journeys and battles can be
experienced with others for support, the comparable
frequencies with which the two groups mentioned social
support show that not all emotional inferences were
influenced by the battle and journey metaphors; instead,
only aspects that were systematically related to the
metaphors were impacted.

Future Work
Do battle and journey metaphors have the same affective
influence when you reason about yourself or someone you
know well, instead of a hypothetical person?
Are there real-world observable consequences of these
metaphors for cancer behaviors or outcomes?
What are the individual differences that affect how people
respond to metaphors? Does extensive experience with the
metaphorical domain (i.e., battle) make a person more or
less susceptible to being swayed by the metaphor than a lack
of experience?
Do trait differences mediate a metaphor’s emotional
influence? For example, people who are competitive, thrive
under stress, or are hesitant to ask for help from others may
respond to the battle metaphor differently than those who
are not. Do people’s emotional processing skills mediate the
effect that metaphor has on their affective reasoning?
What is the impact of mixing metaphors? A number of
participants naturally mixed metaphors in their free
responses (for example: Based on the passage, I can tell
that Joe's battle with cancer will be as difficult as those who
experienced war on the battlefield. I can imagine that Joe
will feel furious and hopeless about his predicament as the
war vets did back on the battlefield. I'm glad that he'll have
a solid supporting system to rely on throughout his journey.)
When metaphors are combined, do effects on inferences
become diminished? Amplified? Are both metaphors’
inferences co-activated?
Similarly, does a metaphor’s influence on emotion change
as it gets repeated and transmitted from one person to the

next? Could its effects snowball, gaining power as the
metaphor is perpetuated, or might its impact become
watered down?
Do the metaphors influence the information that people
seek out? Are people conscious of these metaphors’
presence or their role in shaping emotion? Do people’s
preferences for different metaphors mediate the inferences
that they make as a result of encountering different
metaphors?
Finally, do novel metaphors for the cancer experience
encourage different emotional inferences? Since new
metaphors do alter conceptual representations of the things
they describe (Dolscheid & Casasanto, 2013; Hendricks &
Boroditsky, 2015), perhaps novel metaphors can help cancer
patients see the disease in a new light, one without as much
societal baggage as the current metaphors have.

Limitations
Limitations of this work can be addressed in future
iterations. For one, the character that participants read about
was always a male. This may have caused males to identify
with Joe more than the females, which could at least in part
explain males’ stronger belief that Joe will feel guilty if he
does not recover than females’. In addition, we do not know
whether participants have had close friends or family
members who have had the disease, which may mediate
metaphor’s role in shaping their emotions.

Conclusion
Because cancer is a complicated and multi-faceted
disease, metaphor will likely always be present in the way
we talk about it. This work demonstrates the affective
consequences of two common metaphors for discussing
cancer – as a battle and as a journey. It paves the way for
further consideration of the mechanisms underlying role in
shaping our emotions about adversity.

Acknowledgments
We thank Elena Semino and Zsofia Demjen for sharing
expertise in cancer metaphors and contributing exploratory
analyses. I attribute my zeal for the project to my dad, PH,
and cousin, KF, whose cancer experiences convinced me
that this topic needed to be studied quantitatively.

References
Bowes, A., & Katz, A. (2015). Metaphor creates intimacy
and temporarily enhances theory of mind. Memory &
Cognition, 43(6), 953–963.
Byrne, A., Ellershaw, J., Holcombe, C., & Salmon, P.
(2002). Patients’ experience of cancer: evidence of the
role of “fighting”in collusive clinical communication.
Patient Education and Counseling, 48(1), 15–21.
Casarett, D., Pickard, A., Fishman, J. M., Alexander, S. C.,
Arnold, R. M., Pollak, K. I., & Tulsky, J. A. (2010). Can
metaphors and analogies improve communication with

1168

seriously ill patients? Journal of Palliative Medicine,
13(3), 255–260.
Citron, F. M. M., & Goldberg, A. E. (2014). Metaphorical
Sentences Are More Emotionally Engaging than Their
Literal Counterparts. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
26(11), 2585–2595.
Crum, A. J., Salovey, P., & Achor, S. (2013). Rethinking
stress: The role of mindsets in determining the stress
response. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
104(4), 716–733.
Dolscheid, S., Shayan, S., Majid, A., & Casasanto, D.
(2013). The Thickness of Musical Pitch: Psychophysical
Evidence for Linguistic Relativity. Psychological Science,
24(5), 613–621.
Fainsilber, L., & Ortony, A. (1987). Metaphorical Uses of
Language in the Expression of Emotions. Metaphor and
Symbolic Activity, 2(4), 239–250.
Falagas, M. E., Zarkadoulia, E. A., Ioannidou, E. N.,
Peppas, G., Christodoulou, C., & Rafailidis, P. I. (2007).
The effect of psychosocial factors on breast cancer
outcome: a systematic review. Breast Cancer Res, 9(4),
R44.
Fetterman, A. K., Robinson, M. D., Gordon, R. D., & Elliot,
A. J. (2011). Anger as Seeing Red: Perceptual Sources of
Evidence. Social Psychological and Personality Science,
2(3), 311–316.
Gentner, D., & Gentner, D. R. (1983). Flowing waters or
teeming crowds: Mental models of electricity. Mental
Models, 99–129.
Greer, S., Moorey, S., & Watson, M. (1989). Patients’
adjustment to cancer: The mental adjustment to cancer
(MAC) scale versus clinical ratings. J Psychosomatic
Research, 33(3), 373-377.
Harrington, K. J. (2012). The Use of Metaphor in Discourse
About Cancer: A Review of the Literature. Clinical
Journal of Oncology Nursing, 16(4), 408–412.
Hendricks, R. K., & Boroditsky, L. (2015). New space-time
metaphors foster new mental representations of time.
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Kato, P. M., Cole, S. W., Bradlyn, A. S., & Pollock, B. H.
(2008). A Video Game Improves Behavioral Outcomes in
Adolescents and Young Adults With Cancer: A
Randomized Trial. PEDIATRICS, 122(2), e305–e317.
Kramer, A. D., Guillory, J. E., & Hancock, J. T. (2014).
Experimental evidence of massive-scale emotional
contagion through social networks. PNAS, 111(29),
10779.
Lipowski, Z.J. (1970). Physical illness, the individual, and
the coping process. Int J Psychiatry Med, 1(2), 91-102.
Lutgendorf, S. K., & Sood, A. K. (2011). Biobehavioral
Factors and Cancer Progression: Physiological Pathways
and Mechanisms. Psychosomatic Medicine, 73(9), 724–
730.
Montgomery, G. H., Schnur, J. B., Erblich, J., Diefenbach,
M. A., & Bovbjerg, D. H. (2010). Presurgery

Psychological Factors Predict Pain, Nausea, and Fatigue
One Week After Breast Cancer Surgery. Journal of Pain
and Symptom Management, 39(6), 1043–1052.
Ochsner, K., & Gross, J. (2005). The cognitive control of
emotion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(5), 242–249.
Penson, R. T., Schapira, L., Daniels, K.J., Chabner, B.A. &
Lynch, T.J. (2004). Cancer as Metaphor. The Oncologist,
9(6), 708–716.
Reali, F., & Arciniegas, C. (2014). Metaphorical Framing
Influences How We Think about Emotions: Some
Evidence from Spanish. Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Reisfield, G. M. (2004). Use of Metaphor in the Discourse
on Cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 22(19), 4024–
4027.
Samur, D., Lai, V. T., Hagoort, P., & Willems, R. M.
(2015). Emotional context modulates embodied metaphor
comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 78, 108–114.
Semino, E., Demjen, Z., Demmen, J., Koller, V., Payne, S.,
Hardie, A., & Rayson, P. (2015). The online use of
“violence”and “journey”metaphors by cancer patients, as
compared with health professionals: a mixed methods
study. BMJ Supportive and Palliative Care.
Slepian, M. L., & Ambady, N. (2014). Simulating
sensorimotor metaphors: Novel metaphors influence
sensory judgments. Cognition, 130(3), 309–314.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS One,
6(2), e16782.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2013). Natural
language metaphors covertly influence reasoning. PloS
One, 8(1), e52961.
Wallberg, B., Michelson, H., Nystedt, M., Bolund, C.,
Degner, L. & Wilking, N. (2009). The Meaning of Breast
Cancer. Acta Oncologica, 42(1), 30–35.
Wilkowski, B. M., Meier, B. P., Robinson, M. D., Carter,
M. S., & Feltman, R. (2009). “Hot-headed” is more than
an expression: The embodied representation of anger in
terms of heat. Emotion, 9(4), 464–477.

1169

