Mindfulness meditation as attention control training: A dual-blind investigation

1

Alexa R. Romberg1,2 and Henk J. Haarmann1
{aromberg, hhaarmann}@casl.umd.edu

Center for Advanced Study of Language, 7005 52nd Ave
College Park, MD 20742 USA
2
Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, 3304 Benjamin Building
College Park, MD 20742 USA
Abstract
Mindfulness meditation is a form of secular meditation that
emphasizes non-judgmental awareness of the present
moment. Research into mindfulness has greatly expanded in
recent years (Davidson & Kasniak, 2015) and a growing
literature has documented effects of mindfulness training on
cognition. However, the specific aspects of mindfulness
meditation training for novice practitioners that might
influence cognition remain unexplored. The present study
used a rigorous, dual-blind design to investigate whether the
attention-monitoring component of mindfulness meditation
reduces mind-wandering and improves performance during
reading comprehension and sustained attention tasks. When
compared with relaxation meditation, mindfulness training
improved recall of specific details from a text but did not
reduce mind-wandering or affect sustained attention. The
results are discussed with respect to design considerations
when studying a meditation intervention.
Keywords: mindfulness; meditation; mind-wandering; text
comprehension; sustained attention

Introduction
In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase in the
application of mindfulness meditation training (MMT)
across many sectors of our society. MMT is a form of
secular meditation emphasizing non-judgmental awareness
of thoughts, feelings, and sensations in the present moment
(e.g., Kabat-Zinn, 1994). In some sense, mindfulness can be
thought of as the inverse of mind-wandering (MW; Mrazek,
Smallwood, & Schooler, 2012), with mindfulness arising
from full engagement with the present moment and MW
arising from attention moving away from the present
moment.
Several studies have found positive effects of MMT on
cognition, including fundamental functions such as attention
control and working memory (e.g., Jha, Morrison, DainerBest, Parker, Rostrup, & Stanley, 2015; MacLean, Ferrer,
Aichele, Bridwell, et al., 2010; Mrazek, Franklin, Phillips,
Baird & Schooler, 2013; Zeidan, Johnson, Diamond, David,
& Goolkasian, 2010; but see Banks, Welhaf, & Srour, 2015)
and higher-order abilities, such as reading comprehension
(e.g., Mrazek et al., 2013). Indeed, positive benefits of
MMT on cognition have been found after brief inductions
lasting 6-8 minutes (e.g., Mrazek et al., 2012) as well as
training programs of between 4 and 8 hours of practice (e.g.,
Mrazek et al., 2013; Zeidan et al., 2010) and highly
intensive interventions (e.g., MacLean et al., 2010). A
challenge to interpreting the findings from these studies is

that they employed comparison groups that were engaged in
very different kinds of activities than MMT, such as waitlist controls (e.g., Jha et al., 2015; MacLean et al., 2010),
attending a nutrition class (Mrazek et al., 2013) or listening
to an audiobook (Zeidan et al., 2010). The many differences
between treatment and control groups leaves open the
possibility that differences between groups were due to
nonspecific factors, such as differing expectancy effects
across groups. Just as importantly, the studies leave
unexplored what components of MMT contribute to
cognitive effects.
MMT has many components, some of which may be more
strongly related to specific aspects of cognition than others.
The present study sought to closely examine one of those
components, attention monitoring, while controlling for a
second, relaxation. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis
that the attention-monitoring component of MMT provides
a form of attention training for the novice practitioner that
reduces MW in non-meditation contexts. In testing our
hypothesis we adhered to many recommendations suggested
by Davidson & Kazniak (2015) in their recent critical
review of research on mindfulness and meditation.
First, in designing our comparison group, we used the
“dismantling strategy” advocated by Davidson & Kazniak
(2015) in which the control intervention contains all of the
elements of the treatment intervention except for the
component under investigation. In order to isolate potential
effects of the attention-monitoring component of MMT
above and beyond the general benefits that one might expect
from beginning a meditation practice, we trained two groups
of participants in meditations inspired by MMT. Both forms
involved directing attention inward and focusing on the
breath but the two groups differed in the explicit goal that
was set for them in the meditation and the specific guidance
given during meditation. The Relaxation Meditation
Training group (RMT) were told that the meditation training
they were doing was a form of “relaxation training” and that
their goal was to relax as much as possible. They were
guided to relax by observing their breath. The Mindfulness
Meditation Training group (MMT) were told that the
meditation training they were doing was a form of “attention
training” and that their goal was to improve their mental
focus. They were guided to engage in a relaxation task of
counting their breaths and were given additional instructions
specifically related to MW.
Second, our study procedure followed a “dual-blind”
model and included the 4 desiderata outlined by Davidson

1283

& Kazniak (2015): Comparison groups were matched for 1)
structural dosage, 2) daily practice and 3) instructor
characteristics, and 4) participants were blind as to which
was the “experimental” intervention. In addition,
experimenters were blind to the group assignment of
participants during data collection.
In order to test for effects of the attention-monitoring
component of MMT on MW and cognitive performance, we
used outcome measures that have been shown by previous
work to be sensitive to the effects of MW and that are
relevant to both basic and applied theories of cognition: text
comprehension and sustained attention. Clearly, MW
reduces time-on-task, which may in and of itself impair
performance. Further, MW may reflect a failure of attention
control that could have repercussions across the cognitive
system (McVay & Kane, 2009).
In the present study, meditation-naïve participants made 4
visits to the lab over 8 calendar days. On the first visit they
completed demographic questionnaires, the pre-test for text
comprehension and sustained attention and finally were
introduced to the meditation and given 20 minutes to
practice. Visits 2 and 3 consisted of 45 minutes of
meditation practice. Finally, on visit 4, participants began
with 10 minutes of meditation practice, followed by the
post-tests in text comprehension and sustained attention.
Thus, our study design can be thought of as testing state
effects of MMT relative to RMT, augmented by prior
practice. Our analyses focus on 1) replicating the expected
effects of MW on objective performance markers in text
comprehension and sustained attention and 2) testing the
Meditation Group X Session interaction for both the
measures of MW and objective performance markers in the
text comprehension and sustained attention tasks.

Method
Participants
Participants were young adults with no significant prior
meditation experience. They were selected on a first-comefirst serve basis from respondents to an online pre-screening
questionnaire. All reported (1) normal or corrected-tonormal hearing and vision, (2) being a native speaker of
English, (3) being between 18 and 40 years of age, (4) no
more than minimal prior meditation experience, and no
experience with mindfulness meditation, (5) no intensive
long-term yoga experience, and (6) no prior diagnosis of a
neurological or psychiatric condition. Participants were paid
$90 for the approximately 6 hours of total study time.
Data was collected from a total of 86 participants. The
sample consisted of university students (62 undergraduate
and 20 graduate students, 3 non-students and 1 who
declined to report) and was ethnically diverse (34%
European American, 33% African American, 18% Asian
American, 5% Hispanic, 9% other). Nine participants were
excluded from all analyses for indicating in the first session
that they failed to meet one or more of the inclusion criteria
(6), consistently failing to follow the instructions (2),

attrition after the first session (1). Participants in the final
sample (N = 77) were randomly assigned to two
experimental groups: Mindfulness Meditation Training
(MMT; N=37; 27 females; M age=20.4 years, SD=2.0) or
Relaxation Meditation Training (RMT; N=40; 28 females;
M age=22.4 years, SD=4.3).

Materials
Meditation Training In each meditation training session,
participants were seated at a computer, reviewed written
instructions and then listened to pre-recorded audio over
headphones. Instructions were tailored to the meditation
condition and session, emphasizing either relaxation
meditation training (RMT) or the attention monitoring
meditation training (MMT). Participants were not informed
that different participants were doing different types of
meditation or the specific hypotheses of the study.
Participants were instructed to sit comfortably, with feet
on the floor, hands in their lap and chin up, with their eyes
closed or looking ahead with a dull stare. The first session
included one 20-minute auditory guided meditation,
sessions 2 and 3 consisted of 40 minutes of auditory guided
meditation and session 4 included one 10-minute auditory
guided meditation and a 5-minute non-auditory meditation
reminder. The guided meditations used in training were
created by CASL researchers after referencing Jon KabatZinn meditations. They consisted of instructions alternating
with silence to allow for the participant to practice on their
own. The transcripts were recorded by a male talker with
experience with meditation.
The guided meditations for the two conditions contained
the same general pattern of instructions and silences but the
content of the instructions varied between groups.
Instructions for MMT focused on counting breaths. The
auditory and written instructions also explicitly asked
participants to (a) notice when MW occurred, without
judging the content or frequency of the experience, and (b)
bring attention back to the breath-counting task when they
became aware of their MW. The focus on counting breaths
was intended to give participants a concrete marker by
which to notice MW when it occurred. In contrast,
instructions for RMT were designed to follow the same
general pattern of instruction (i.e., they also had a task to do
during meditation) but to maximally encourage relaxation.
The guided meditation asked participants to relax by
focusing on their breath (without counting) and did not
explicitly mention MW at all. After completing the Text
Comprehension task and before completing the SART,
participants engaged in a 5-minute “reminder” meditation.
They read instructions on the computer asking them to use
the techniques they had been learning during their training.
At the end of the 5 minutes a tone sounded to end the
meditation.
Self-evaluation of meditation training and relaxation
Immediately prior to each auditory meditation, participants
indicated their level of relaxation at that moment using a

1284

visual analog scale. In Sessions 2 to 4, participants were
also asked whether they had used the meditation techniques
they were learning on their own since the last session.
After each meditation training session participants again
rated their relaxation. They also completed a retrospective
attention report, using a slider to indicate the percentage of
time they were 1) completely engaged with the task, 2)
thinking about the task more generally, and 3) thinking
about things unrelated to the task (i.e., task unrelated
thoughts or TUTs).

attention probes and then advanced through the 7 passages
in a fixed order.

Text Comprehension The text comprehension task was
modeled on the self-paced paradigm used by Feng, D’Mello
and Graesser (2013). Participants read passages one
sentence at a time, pressing the space bar to advance to the
next sentence. Each passage was followed by a set of
multiple-choice questions with four possible responses. The
questions fell into one of two categories: Sentence-Linked
or General. Each Sentence-Linked question assessed
comprehension of a specific detail from the passage (e.g.,
What did the poet Homer do in old age?), while General
questions assessed comprehension of the passage as a whole
(e.g., One can conclude Momaday knows about ……?).
Attention probes were inserted between sentences at
several points in each passage, fixed across participants.
Each probe asked “Were you mind wandering when you
read the previous sentence? Press 1 for Yes and 2 for No.”
There were two categories of attention-probes: Each
Question-Linked attention probe (66% of total) immediately
followed a sentence whose comprehension would be
assessed on a Sentence-Linked question. Filler attention
probes were placed in pseudorandom positions in the
passage and were not linked to specific questions.
The passages used were from the reading comprehension
section of Forms G and H of the Nelson-Denny Reading
TestTM, a standardized assessment of reading ability
appropriate for high school and four-year college students
(www.riversidepublishing.com). Each Form consisted of 7
passages: one long passage (approximately 600 words) with
6 attention probes (4 Question-Linked and 2 Filler) and 7
associated questions and 6 shorter passages (approximately
225 words each) with 3 total probes (2 Question-Linked and
1 Filler) and 4-5 associated questions. Participants
completed one Form (i.e., G or H) at Session 1 and the other
Form at Session 4, randomly assigned and counterbalanced
across subjects.
The text comprehension task began with detailed
instructions presented on the computer. These instructions
defined MW as when “attention drifts away from the task”
and provided examples of MW. Participants were told to
report NO mind-wandering if they were “completely
engaged in the task of reading and understanding the
passage” and to report YES if they were either a) thinking
about what they were reading AND something else or b)
thinking only about something else. After the instructions,
participants completed a short practice passage with

Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART) The
SART is “go/no-go” task in which participants make a
response to “non-targets” and withhold that response to
“targets.” Each trial in the SART consisted of a # symbol
(42 pt) presented for 1200 ms followed by a single
uppercase letter (36 pt) presented for 800 ms. All stimuli
were presented in the center of the computer monitor in
black Arial Monospaced font on a grey background.
Participants were told to make no response to the target (the
letter “X”) and to respond by pressing the letter “m” with
the index finger of their dominant hand for all non-targets
(all non-X letters of the alphabet).
Participants completed 4 blocks of 150 trials each. Blocks
alternated between Low Frequency Target (12.5% of total
trials) and High Frequency Target (50% of total trials)
conditions. The exact sequence of trials within each block
was randomly determined at the beginning of each block for
each participant. Before the 4 blocks of test trials,
participants completed a block of 15 practice trials with
feedback in order to make sure they understood when to
respond. The Low Frequency condition was expected to be
significantly more challenging than the High Frequency
condition. Block order was counterbalanced across
participants and fixed across sessions.
Our dependent measures were target sensitivity (dL) and
response time variability (calculated as RT-CV, or the
standard deviation of each participant’s response latencies
divided by their mean). Target sensitivity provides a
measure of target accuracy while controlling for overall
response bias (see Equation 1, in which H and FA refer to
the proportions of hits and false alarms, respectively). RTCV is generally thought to capture MW, with participants
who are less attentive to the task showing greater variability
in response latencies (McVay & Kane, 2009). RT-CV is
typically negatively correlated with dL.
(1) dL = ln {[H(1 – FA)]/[1 – H)FA]}
As a subjective measure of MW, participants were asked
to complete the same retrospective attention report after the
SART as the post-meditation report described above.

Procedure
While participants worked at individual computers, there
were between 1 and 12 participants present in the testing
room for each session. Session proctors were blind to the
participants’ meditation condition, as (i) presentation of
written and spoken meditation materials was done
automatically through E-Prime computer scripts, (ii) the
audio instructions were delivered through closed
headphones, and (iii) single sessions typically included
participants in both meditation conditions. This ensured that
proctors could not influence participants’ expectations based
on meditation group. Proctors actively monitored
participants to ensure they were completing the expected
tasks during their session. All participants completed all 4

1285

sessions within a minimum of 7 and a maximum of 9
calendar days (days between Sessions 1 and 4: MMT:
M=7.1 , SD=0.5; RMT: M=7.3, SD=0.6).

Results
Meditation Training Manipulation
Participants’ self-reports were analyzed to examine whether
the general effects of the meditation experience (level of
relaxation and overall engagement) varied between groups
(see Table 1). Participants in both the MMT and RMT
groups reported feeling substantially more relaxed after each
meditation session than they did before each session. A
linear mixed-effect model was fit to the reported change in
relaxation with fixed effects of Session (1 to 4) and
Meditation Group (MMT or RMT) and random effects of
Subject. The model revealed a significant Session X
Meditation Group interaction (b=3.06, SE=1.47, t= 2.08).
The RMT group, but not the MMT group, reported
increasing changes in relaxation across the 4 sessions. This
difference was largely driven by the fact that the RMT
group reported a smaller change in relaxation after the first
meditation session than the MMT group. After Session 1,
the meditation was equally relaxing for both groups.
The same linear mixed-effect model as described was fit
to percentage of On-Task time. The model revealed a
significant effect of Session (b=4.20, SE=0.77, t=5.49) but
no effect of Group or interaction. The effect of Session is
likely due to the increase in On-Task reported for Session 4
(which was only 10 minutes in duration). Participants in
both groups were equally likely to report having used the
meditation techniques at home since the last session (59%
of the MMT group and 65% of the RMT group, χ2(1)<1.0))
Thus, participants in both groups were equally engaged in
the meditations.
Table 1. Mean (SD) self-reported changes in relaxation
(scale 0-100) and percent of time on task for each
meditation session. Note that sessions varied in duration.
Session
1
2
3
4
23.0
20.2
20.3
20.9
MMT
(18.6)
(14.6)
(14.7)
(17.0)
Relax
Change
14.8
23.6
24.8
22.6
RMT
(18.7)
(17.3)
(19.0)
(20.6)
49.3
44.7
47.6
61.1
MMT
(21.8)
(22.1)
(23.9)
(21.6)
%
OnTask
45.2
45.8
48.4
59.5
RMT
(22.6)
(20.8)
(21.5)
(24.6)

and random effects of Subject, Item and Subject X Session
interaction. Group and Session were dummy coded with
MMT and Session 1 as the reference groups. There was a
main effect of Session (b=0.38, SE=0.16, z= 2.34, p=0.02)
and a significant Group X Session interaction (b=-0.47,
SE=0.22, z= -2.12 , p=0.03) and no main effect of Group
(p=0.87). Thus, Sentence-Linked accuracy increased
significantly from Session 1 to 4 for participants in the
MMT group but not participants in the RMT group. When
the same model was fit to the General question accuracy and
to the amount of reported MW, no main effects or
interactions were significant for either measure.
Table 2. Means (SD) for test accuracy and reported MW
(percentage of “yes” responses) for text comprehension.
MMT
RMT
Session
1
4
1
4
Sentence0.75
0.80
0.75
0.73
Linked
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.2)
(0.2)
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.75
General
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
0.28
0.28
0.34
0.30
MW
(0.16)
(0.23)
(0.20)
(0.21)
Effects of MW equivalent across groups and sessions
Participants’ mean accuracy for Sentence-Linked questions
are illustrated in Figure 1, split by whether participants
reported mind-wandering during the corresponding
sentence. As is clear from the figure, participants had
significantly better comprehension of sentences read with
their full attention than sentences on which they reported
MW. A multi-level logistic model was fit to the raw
Sentence-Linked question accuracy with fixed effects of
Meditation Group, Session, reported MW (Yes or No) and
their interactions and random effects of Subject, Item and
Subject X Session interaction. The model revealed a
significant main effect of MW (b= -0.69, SE=0.12, z= -5.9,
p<0.001) and no other significant effects (all p>0.3).

Text Comprehension
Descriptive statistics for accuracy on Sentence-Linked
and General questions and amount of MW are provided for
both groups in Table 2.
MMT facilitates retention of details A multi-level logistic
model was fit to Sentence-Linked question accuracy with
fixed effects of Group (MMT or RMT) and Session (1 or 4)

Figure 1. Accuracy on Sentence-Linked questions split by
participants’ responses to subsequent MW probes.
In addition to MW affecting comprehension of what is
read during a MW episode, MW may also negatively
influence the reader’s ability to integrate information about

1286

the passage as a whole. We tested the relationship between
total amount of MW reported during a passage and
participants’ accuracy on the General questions for that
passage. Participants’ mean accuracy for General questions
for each passage were fit with a linear mixed-effects model
with fixed effects of Meditation Group (MMT or RMT),
Session (1 or 4) and reported MW (Yes or No), and random
factors of Subject and Passage. Interactions were tested, but
in no case were interactions between the fixed effects
significant. Participants who reported more MW during a
passage were significantly less accurate on the General
questions for that passage (b= -0.11, SE=0.03, t= -4.0) and
the MW effect was equivalent across Session and Group.

Sustained Attention
Target detection and MW were equivalent across groups
The data reveal the general pattern of effects expected for
the SART frequency manipulation: Participants had higher
dL and lower RT-CV (MW) on high-frequency target than
low-frequency target blocks (see Table 3). Greater RT-CV
was also associated with lower dL for both conditions, for
both Groups and Sessions (r(75)=-0.64 to -0.75, all
p<0.001).
Table 3. Means (SD) for SART dependent measures.
MMT
RMT
Session
1
4
1
4
dL
5.39
6.04
5.75
5.99
Low Freq
(1.86)
(1.57)
(2.08)
(2.15)
dL
7.0
7.37
7.23
7.38
High Freq
(1.88)
(1.78)
(1.72)
(1.93)
RT-CV
0.26
0.23
0.24
0.23
Low Freq
(0.08)
(0.06)
(0.08)
(0.09)
RT-CV
0.22
0.23
0.21
0.22
High Freq
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.07)
%TUT
29.6
21.5
28.3
24.3
self-report
(21.0)
(19.3)
(22.6)
(24.0)
There was no evidence for a differential effect of MMT
over RMT on target sensitivity, though dL scores improved
overall across sessions: A multi-level linear model was fit to
the target sensitivity scores with fixed effects of Meditation
Group, Session and Target Frequency (High or Low) and
random effects of Subject, Subject X Session and Subject X
Target Frequency interactions. The model revealed a very
strong and significant main effect of Target Frequency
(b=1.44, SE=0.102, t=14.31) and a smaller main effect of
Session (b=0.36, SE=0.172, t=2.07), but neither of these
factors interacted with Group, nor was there a main effect of
Group. The same interaction model as above was fit to RTCV and revealed only a significant effect of Target
Frequency (b=-0.021, SE=0.004, t=-5.42), with no
interactions.
While RT-CV did not decrease after training, participants
in both groups reported greater task engagement during
SART in Session 4 relative to Session 1. A multi-level
linear model was fit to reported TUTs with fixed effects of

Meditation Group and Session and random effects of
Subject. The model revealed a significant effect of Session
(b=-5.92, SE=2.53, t=-2.34) but no main effect of or
interaction with Meditation Group1.

Discussion
Our data reveal at most mixed results with respect to the
hypothesized effect of MMT influencing cognitive
performance through improvements in attention control. We
found that novice practitioners who completed MMT
improved more at retrieving specific details from a passage
than those who completed RMT. However, this change in
performance was not found for general comprehension and
did not appear to be facilitated by decreased MW, as we
hypothesized, as the two groups reported similar amounts of
MW during reading at post-test. The sustained attention task
revealed no significant group differences across sessions.
A limitation of the current design is the reliance on selfreport of MW during text comprehension. It is possible that
the attention-monitoring instructions in the MMT made
participants more aware of their MW without giving
participants enough practice to better control it (Davidson &
Kazniak, 2015). Such increased awareness might result in
participants reporting MW at equal or higher rates even if
objectively they were MW less. This is particularly
plausible since MW is a graded phenomenon, and
participants might initially consider themselves “on-task” if
they were even partially engaged in the task but after MMT
might consider themselves “off-task” at the same level of
engagement.
We did find a consistent detrimental effect of MW on
reading comprehension. Both recall of specific details and
synthesis of the passage as a whole were negatively affected
by MW (see also Feng et al., 2013; Smallwood et al., 2008).
We also found that increased MW, as measured by both an
objective measure (response time variability) and
retrospective self-report, was detrimental to target detection.
These results are important for establishing key paradigms
that produce reliable effects of MW and can therefore be
used to test the effects of attention training.
Given the sensitivity of the outcome measures to MW, the
fact that we did not find that MMT was more beneficial than
RMT for reducing MW or for improving most objective
performance markers is revealing. This pattern stands in
contrast to that found by Mrazek and colleagues (2013),
who found increases in reading comprehension accuracy
were mediated by decreases in MW after MMT. Our study
differs from that of Mrazek in several ways that might
account for this divergence. First, our training was about a
1

Individual models fit to the MW measures for the sustained
attention task do find significant effects of session for the MMT
group for both the objective measure, RT-CV (b=-0.03, SE=0.01,
t=-2.47) and the subjective measure, reported TUTs (b=-8.05,
SE=3.89, t=-2.07). The RMT group did not have significant
effects of session for either RT-CV (b=0, SE=0.01, t<1) or TUTs
(b=-3.95, SE=3.29, t=-1.20). This is at most weak evidence of an
effect of MMT on MW during the sustained attention task.

1287

quarter of the duration of that employed by Mrazek et al.
and therefore may have not been long enough to influence
MW (though note that benefits of MMT have been found
after interventions as short as 8 minutes (Mrazek et al.,
2012)). Second, the structure of our reading task prevented
rereading and this may have affected the relationship
between MMT and participants’ comprehension. One
possibility is that MMT facilitated partial engagement
during MW and this partial engagement was sufficient to
support encoding of some additional details but not to
support the abstract schema formation required for synthesis
of the passage as a whole. Further study is required to
determine how MMT, MW and reading comprehension may
be related under different task demands.
In the present study, participants in both groups showed
improvements in sustained attention at post-test. Because
we did not have a non-meditation control group, we cannot
say whether this change in performance is due to nonspecific benefits of meditation or are practice effects. One
recent study did find group differences in cognition
(working memory) when comparing MMT specifically to
RMT (Banks et al., 2015). However, the role of MMT
appeared to be one of protecting cognition from the effects
of stress rather than an overall benefit to cognition and the
relationship between meditation, MW and cognition was not
tested. One possibility for future research would be to focus
more specifically on the effects of stress on performance,
rather than on MW in the absence of stress.
Our experimental manipulation, comparing meditation
training with and without instructions to monitor attention,
was necessarily subtle. Both groups reported similar
changes in relaxation and engagement with the meditation.
It’s further possible that asking about MW during pretest
prompted the RMT group to closely monitor their attention
even though we didn’t instruct them that attention control
was the objective of their training. The current study is an
initial attempt at the dual-blind design advocated by
Davison and Kasniak (2015). However, the present study
necessarily samples a very specific set of the many possible
parameters for this type of intervention. It is certainly
possible that changing the duration of training, its mode of
delivery or other factors could result in different patterns
between the MMT and RMT groups. However, it is
precisely this type of comparison that will allow us to
understand how and why different meditation practices may
influence cognition.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported, in whole or
in part, with funding from the United States Government.
Any
opinions,
findings
and
conclusions
or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
University of Maryland, College Park and/or any agency or
entity of the United States Government. We wish to thank
Nick Davey and Patrick Cushen for their role in developing
the meditation materials, Ashlyn Testut, Esther Robinson

and Leon Li for data collection and Stefanie Kuchinsky and
Nick Pandza for helpful discussion.

References
Banks, J. B., Welhaf, M. S., Srour, A. (2015). The
protective effects of brief mindfulness meditation
training. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 277–285.
Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Gray, J. R., Molfese, D. L.,
Snyder, A. (2001). Anterior cingulate cortex and response
conflict: Effects of frequency inhibition and errors.
Cerebral Cortex. 11(9): 825-836.
Davidson, R. J., & Kaszniak, A. W. (2015). Conceptual and
methodological issues in research on mindfulness and
meditation. American Psychologist, 70, 581-592.
Feng, S., D’Mello, S., & Graesser, A. C. (2013). Mindwandering while reading easy and difficult texts.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20, 586–592.
Jha, A. P., Morrison, A. B., Dainer-Best, J., Parker, S.,
Rostrup, N., & Stanley, E. A. (2015). Minds at attention:
Mindfulness training curbs attentional lapses in military
cohorts. PloS one, 10(2), e0116889.
Jha, A. P., Stanley, E. A., Kiyonaga, A., Wong, L., Gelfand,
L. (2010). Examining the protective effects of
mindfulness training on working memory capacity and
affective experience. Emotion 10: 54-64.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1994). Wherever you go, there you are:
Mindfulness meditation in everyday life. New York:
Hyperion.
MacLean, K. A., Ferrer, E., Aichele, S. R., Bridwell, D. A.,
Zanesco, A. P., Jacobs, T. L., King, B. G., Rosenberg, E.
L., Sahdra, B. K., Shaver, P. R., Wallace, B. A., Mangun,
G. R., Saron, C. D. (2010). Intensive meditation training
improves perceptual discrimination and sustained
attention. Psychological Science, 21(6), 829–839.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train of
thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and
mind-wandering in an executive-control task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 35, 196–204.
Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, M. S., Phillips, D. T., Baird, B., &
Schooler, J. W. (2013). Mindfulness training improves
working memory capacity and GRE performance while
reducing mind-wandering. Psychological Science, 24(5),
776–781.
Mrazek, M. D., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2012).
Mindfulness and mind-wandering: Finding convergence
through opposing constructs. Emotion, 12(3), 442–448.
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., & Schooler, J. W. (2008).
When attention matters: The curious incident of the
wandering mind. Memory & Cognition, 36(6), 1144–
1150.
Zeidan, F., Johnson, S. K., Diamond, B. J., David, Z., &
Goolkasian, P. (2010). Mindfulness meditation improves
cognition: Evidence of brief mental training.
Consciousness and Cognition, 19(2), 597–605.

1288

