Monolinguals’ and Bilinguals’ Use of Language in Forming Novel Object Categories
Sarah Fairchild (SarahF@Udel.Edu)
Anna Papafragou (APapafragou@Psych.Udel.Edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of Delaware
105 The Green, Newark, DE 19716 USA
Abstract

Importantly, previous research suggests that non-linguistic
cues are not as powerful as linguistic labels in influencing
categorization. Boutonnet and Lupyan (2015) found that
participants were faster to respond to label-object pairs (the
word ‘dog’ – picture of a dog) than sound-object pairs (a
dog bark – picture of a dog; cf. also. Lupyan and
Thompson-Schill, 2012). Furthermore, linguistic labels are
more effective than numbers or symbols in facilitating novel
category formation (Gervits et al., submitted). Even for
young infants, tones (Ferry, Hespos, & Waxman, 2010),
content-filtered speech (Balaban & Waxman, 1997), and
primate vocalizations (Ferry, Hespos, & Waxman, 2013) are
less effective than labels in facilitating categorization. While
it is clear that language can play an important role in
category formation, to our knowledge all research to date
has been conducted with monolingual participants.
However, there are reasons to believe that bilinguals may
differ from their monolingual counterparts in their use of
labels in categorization. First, monolinguals and bilinguals
naturally differ in terms of language abilities and
experience. The regular use of two languages changes the
way a person’s first language is processed (e.g., Van Hell &
Dijkstra, 2002) and may even lead to cognitive differences
(e.g., Prior & MacWhinney, 2010). Second, we know that
bilinguals describe existing categories differently from
monolinguals in both their first and their second languages
(Pavlenko & Malt, 2010). Additionally, bilingual children
are more flexible than monolingual children in the way they
apply labels to novel objects (they are less likely to apply
the mutual exclusivity constraint when acquiring new
words; Davidson, Jergovic, Imami, & Theodos, 1997), and
in adulthood, bilinguals are better at acquiring novel labels
(Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009). It may be the case, then,
that due to their specific linguistic experiences and
advantages, language is a more available and/or flexible tool
for bilinguals. For purposes of categorization, bilinguals
may weigh linguistic labels more heavily than
monolinguals; alternatively, or additionally, bilinguals may
be more flexible in regards to what can be considered a
label. In either case, bilinguals would not simply be “two
monolinguals in one” (Grosjean, 1989) in terms of their use
of language as a tool for categorization.

Monolinguals and bilinguals differ along a number of
dimensions, including way they label existing object
categories (Pavlenko & Malt, 2011). In the present study, we
ask whether English monolinguals, Spanish-English
bilinguals, and English-Spanish bilinguals also differ in the
way they use language when forming novel categories.
Previous research with monolinguals shows that a shared
label encourages children (e.g., Waxman & Markow, 1995)
and adults (e.g., Lupyan, Rakison, & McClelland, 2007) to
place objects together. Our results further demonstrate that
when two objects shared a Licit Word label like “zeg,”
monolinguals and bilinguals alike are encouraged to group
them together. Illicit Words like “gxz,” on the other hand,
only influence the categorization decisions of bilinguals.
Thus, bilinguals appear to be more flexible in their use of
linguistic information in categorization. Neither group made
use of non-linguistic cues (patterned frames), suggesting a
unique role for language in category formation.
Keywords: verbal labels; categorization; bilingualism

Introduction
The uniquely human faculty of language enables us to
convey incredibly complex information to one another.
However, language has more to offer than its primary
function as a communication tool. Language can be used as
a cognitive tool to aid in resource-intensive operations, such
as spatial (Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005) and numerical
reasoning (Dehaene et al., 1999). Some argue that language
is a general computational tool, allowing us to simplify and
more efficiently work with information in our environment
through a recoding process (Clark, 1998). Here, we
investigate how language specifically aids the formation of
novel categories by highlighting deep conceptual
relationships among objects.
People are more likely to believe that two objects belong
together when they share a label (Gelman & Markman,
1986; Jones, Smith, & Landau, 1991; Waxman & Markow,
1995; Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Waxman, 1999; Nazzi &
Gopnik, 2001; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001; Booth &
Waxman, 2002b; Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007; Lupyan et
al., 2007; Diesendruck & Peretz, 2013; Johanson &
Papafragou, in press). For example, adults can learn a
labeled category of ‘aliens’ faster than an unlabeled
category (Lupyan et al., 2007). Likewise, labels guide
children and adults in forming novel plant and animal
categories when visual cues are ambiguous (Johanson &
Papafragou, 2016). In this sense, language acts as a tool to
form categories of novel entities (Wolff, 2011).

The Present Study
In the present study, we aim to fill a gap in the existing
literature by investigating how monolingual and bilingual
adults use labels to form new categories. Our goal is to
determine to what extent well-formed labels are unique and

93

powerful category markers for monolinguals and bilinguals
alike, as compared to other salient linguistic and nonlinguistic cues. Unlike past studies, we take steps to ensure
that all types of cues are equally discriminable and thus that
any advantage of labels cannot be attributed to superficial
features of the cues themselves.
Specifically, our experiment tests the effectiveness of the
following cues on the categorization of novel objects: (a)
novel Licit Words like “zeg” and “wob,” (b) Illicit Words
such as “xvxs” that possess linguistic features but are not
phonologically possible labels (and as such resemble
reverse speech or ‘content-filtered speech’ – see Balaban
and Waxman, 1997), and (c) patterned Frames that may be
used to indicate some degree of similarity between the
objects contained in them. Following prior studies (Gelman
& Markman, 1986; Sloutsky et al., 2001; Diesendruck &
Peretz, 2013; Johanson & Papafragou, 2016, among others),
we adopt a strong test of the effect of such cues on
categorization by asking whether a shared Licit Word, Illicit
Word or Frame can lead participants to group together
objects that vary in perceptual similarity to each other, from
extremely visually dissimilar to nearly identical.
Of interest is whether Licit Words are a more powerful
cue compared to Illicit Words and Frames for both
monolingual and bilingual speakers – especially for
perceptually dissimilar Standard/Target pairings – and if so,
whether the role of these cues is comparable across
monolinguals and bilinguals. One prediction that one might
make is that because language is a more available tool for
bilinguals, they will be more influenced by the Licit Words.
Alternatively, due to experience with two different linguistic
systems, bilinguals may be more likely than monolinguals
to make use of the Illicit Words. We do not predict any
group differences in the use of the non-linguistic Patterned
Frames. To further specify any potential effects of
bilingualism, we compare bilinguals with a lifetime of
experience using two languages and bilinguals who
acquired a second language later in life.

Spanish proficiency than the English-Spanish bilinguals,
t(30) = 3.175, p = .003. Bilingual participant characteristics
are presented in Table 1. All monolingual and bilingual
participants were undergraduate students at the University
of Delaware, and received course credit for their
participation.
Bilingual
Type
EnglishSpanish
SpanishEnglish

18.94
1

English
Prof.
9.84
.35

Spanish
Prof.
6.84
2.08

19.13
.96

9.42
1.1

8.64
.88

Gender

Age

3 Male
13 Female
6 Male
10 Female

Total

9 Male
19.03 9.63
7.74
23 Female .97
.83
1.82
Table 1: Bilingual participant characteristics (SD in italics).

Materials
Thirty-two grayscale photographs of objects chosen to be
unfamiliar to participants were used as stimuli. These
objects included arcane tools and pieces of other man-made
devices. To ensure novelty, participants were asked at the
completion of the experiment if they recognized any of the
objects. Only one participant correctly identified a
strawberry huller.
The 32 novel objects were then divided into 16 pairs, with
one object in the pair designated as Standard A, and the
other as Standard B. Each pair was morphed together using
the Fantamorph program. For each pair, five morphed
pictures (Targets) were created at 10%, 30%, 50%, 70%,
and 90% similarity to Standard A (according to program
specifications). See Fig. 1 for an example.

Method
Participants
Figure 1: Example stimuli. Percentages reflect target
similarity to Standard A.

Thirty-two English monolingual adults (19 female) aged 1821 (M = 18.53, SD = .76) and thirty-two English-dominant
bilingual adults (23 female) aged 18-21 (M = 19.03, SD =
.97) participated. In the bilingual group, there were sixteen
Spanish-English bilinguals who learned Spanish as a native
language but learned English in early childhood (before age
5) and spoke English in educational and professional
contexts (i.e., heritage language speakers). The other sixteen
participants in that group were English-Spanish bilinguals,
who learned English as a native language and Spanish as a
second language (L2) later in life (i.e., adult L2 learners).
All reported English as being their dominant language, and
the groups did not differ in terms of self-rated English
proficiency. As might be expected, Spanish-English
bilinguals rated themselves as having significantly higher

Eight novel Licit Words were generated using the ARC
Nonword Database (Rastle, Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002).
The Licit Words were between three and five letters in
length, and consisted of only orthographically existing
onsets, orthographically existing bodies, and legal bigrams
(e.g., “zeg”). Additionally, all Licit Words were structured
such that they could reasonably be English nouns. Eight
Illicit Words that could not exist as English (or Spanish)
words were also created. These Illicit Words were designed
to be unpronounceable to English speakers, and were
created by taking the reverse of the novel Licit Word and
replacing the vowels with x’s. For example, “zeg” would

94

become “gxz.” Finally, eight different patterned Frames
(e.g., solid, dashed) consisting of various geometric shapes
(e.g., rectangle, hexagon) were created. Each of these
frames was large enough to surround a Target or Standard.
Norming. Two norming studies were conducted to
ensure that the stimuli were well-controlled. First, it was
important to assess whether or not our participants would be
sensitive to the similarity between Standards and Targets
produced by morphing. A separate group of 10 monolingual
English-speaking adults were presented with all possible
combinations of each pair of Standards with a
corresponding Target, and were asked to rate the similarity
of the Target to one of the Standards on a 9-point scale, 1090%. Participants were very accurate at rating the 30%,
50%, and 70% morphs; ratings did not differ significantly
from actual similarity (all p’s < .05). Ratings for the 10%
and 90% Target stimuli differed significantly from actual
similarity, but in the predicted direction; additionally, 10%
objects were rated significantly lower than 30% objects, t(9)
= 7.003, p < .001, and 90% objects were rated significantly
higher than 70% objects, t(9) = 10.902, p < .001.
Second, we ensured that all three cue types were equally
discriminable. A separate group of 10 monolingual adults
from the same population were asked to rate the
discriminability of pairs of Licit Words, Illicit Words, and
Frames. These pairs are associated with pairs of Standards
in the experiment. For each pair, they answered the question
‘How similar are these two items?’ on a seven-point scale.
Ratings did not differ across cue types (p’s > .1).

At the beginning of the task participants were given onscreen instructions that were reiterated verbally by the
experimenter. They were told that they would see groups of
three objects, and that they would be given time to look at
the objects. Then, a red frame would appear on the screen.
When the red frame appeared, they should press a key to
indicate where they think the bottom object belongs, either
with the object on the right or the object on the left.
Participants were instructed to make a response as quickly
as possible.
There were four stimuli blocks within the experiment, one
for each cue type, counterbalanced across participants, and
stimuli were fully rotated. Within each block, participants
saw all Target/Standard triads in a random order, 20 trials
per block, for a total of 80 trials. Assignment of Standard A
to an object within a triad, as well the left/right position of
Standard A within a display, was also counterbalanced. The
task was administered using the OpenSesame experimental
presentation software (Mathôt, Schreij, & Theeuwes, 2012).

Procedure
Participants were tested individually or in pairs in a quiet
room. All tasks were administered on a laptop with a 15.4”
screen, approximately 24 inches away from the participant.
The session lasted approximately one hour. Before the
experiment began, participants completed a language history
questionnaire to assess self-rated English (and Spanish, for
bilingual participants) speaking, reading, and writing
proficiency (from 1-10, 10 being the highest). All
participants were tested in English.
Participants were presented with displays that contained
triads of objects: Standards A and B from each of the 16
pairs of novel objects and one of the corresponding Targets.
Within each triad, the Standards were presented at the top of
the screen and the target was centered at the bottom of the
screen, separated by a visible line from the Standards (see
Fig.2). All three objects in the triad appeared at once and
remained on the screen for 1 second. At that point, either
one type of cue was introduced (Licit Words, Illicit Words,
or Frames condition), or the display remained the same (No
Cue condition). Licit and Illicit Words appeared below the
objects and Frames surrounded the objects in a triad (see
Fig.2). If a cue was present, the cue for the Target always
matched the cue for Standard A. After 2 seconds, any cues
disappeared and a red frame appeared around the whole
display.

Figure 2: Example stimuli for (a) Licit Word, (b) Illicit
Word. (c) Frame, and (d) No Cue blocks.
Following the categorization task, participants completed
a lexical decision task as a measure of English proficiency.
This task is widely used in both first and second language
research, and has been shown to accurately predict language
proficiency in various groups of monolinguals and
bilinguals (Harrington, 2006), making it an excellent proxy
for English language proficiency for our three participant
groups. Twenty English words and twenty pseudowords
were presented in a random order for 500 milliseconds each.
Participants were asked to indicate by keypress, as quickly
as possible, whether or not each stimulus was a real English
word. Both accuracy and reaction times were collected. For
the analysis of reaction times, incorrect responses and trials
over 3000 milliseconds were excluded. This task was used
to control for English proficiency when performing direct
comparisons between the groups.

95

Results and Discussion

Finally, we see that participants considered both linguistic
and perceptual cues when forming novel categories in our
task. When perceptual similarity was high (70% and 90%
morphs), participants almost always chose the Standard that
shared the same cue as the Target. When perceptual
similarity and cues were at odds (10% and 30% morphs),
however, participants generally grouped objects that were
most similar visually. When the Target was perceptually
ambiguous (50%) and could be grouped with either
standard, participants were biased towards choosing the
label-matched Standard.

Monolingual Group
A 4 (Cue Type: Licit Word, Illicit Word, Frame, No Cue)
by 5 (Perceptual Similarity: 10%, 30%, 50%, 70%, 90%)
repeated measures ANOVA was performed with cue
compliance as the dependent variable. We considered cue
compliant responses to be those where the participant
categorized the Target object with the cue-matched Standard
A. Cue compliance in the No Cue block was calculated in
the same way (i.e., in terms of responses to the
predetermined Standard A).
The ANOVA yielded significant main effects of Cue
Type, F(3, 93) = 9.498, p < .001, η2 = .063, and Perceptual
Similarity, F(2.44, 75.64) = 709.086, p < .001, η2 = .823, as
well as a significant interaction between the two, F(6.14,
190.46) = 2.911, p = .001, η2 = .043. As expected, cue
compliance increased as Perceptual Similarity increased.
Furthermore, there was significantly greater cue compliance
in the Licit Word condition (M = .66, SD = .12) as
compared to the No Cue control (M = .54, SD = .06), F(1,
31) = 24.144, p < .001, η2 = .438, but no significant
difference between the Illicit Word (M = .58, SD = .10) or
Frame (M = .57, SD = .11) conditions and the No Cue
condition (both p’s > .1). More specifically, in the 10%
similarity condition, cue compliance in the Licit Word
condition was significantly higher than in the Illicit Word (p
= .046), Frame (p = .005), and No Cue (p = .003)
conditions. The pattern continues into the 30% similarity
condition, with higher cue compliance observed for Licit
Words as compared to Illicit words (p = .008), Frames (p <
.001), and the No Cue control (p < .001). Cue compliance
was also significantly higher for the Licit Word condition as
compared to the No Cue condition on 50% similarity trials
(p < .001). No such differences were observed on the 70%
and 90% trials, for which cue compliance in the No Cue
condition was already at ceiling (M = .95 and M = 1,
respectively). Results are shown in Figure 3.
These findings lead to three main conclusions. First, Licit
Words – but not Illicit Words – were treated as labels by our
participants. Recall that the cues were presented in a neutral
fashion, without any explicit instruction or acknowledgment
of their role or significance. Despite this fact, participants
spontaneously recruited Licit Words like “zeg” to some
degree during their categorization decisions but were not
influenced by phonologically impossible Illicit Words like
“gxz.” Thus, only possible labels in the participant’s native
language is sufficient to facilitate categorization for
monolingual adults.
Second, and perhaps most importantly, we can conclude
that language is more powerful than both salient, equally
discriminable linguistic (Illicit Words) and non-linguistic
(Frames) cues. Labels influence categorization not because
they are a simply a salient cue that serves to increase overall
similarity, but because adults treat them as category
markers.

Figure 3: Cue compliance for the monolingual group. Error
bars represent +/-1 S.E.M.

Bilingual Group
A mixed ANOVA was conducted with Cue Type (Licit
Word, Illicit Word, Frame, No Cue) and Perceptual
Similarity (10%, 30%, 50%, 70%, 90%) as within-subjects
factors and Bilingual Type (Spanish-English, EnglishSpanish) as a between-subjects factor. The analysis revealed
significant main effects of Cue Type, F(3, 90) = 11.783, p <
.001, η2 =.081, and Perceptual Similarity, F(2.4, 72) =
409.207, p < .001, η2 = .743, as well as a significant
interaction between the two, F(6.6, 198) = 5.346, p < .001,
η2 = .069. As has been observed in the monolingual group,
cue compliance increased with Perceptual Similarity, and
Licit Word (M = .70, SD = .16) cue compliance was
significantly higher than No Cue (M = .55, SD = .06) cue
compliance, F(1, 31) = 25.97, p < .001, η2 = .456. Unlike
the monolingual group, however, there was also
significantly higher cue compliance in the Illicit Word
condition (M = .65, SD = .15), as compared to the No Cue
condition, F(1, 31) = 12.130, p = .002, η2 = .281. Cue
compliance did not differ significantly between the Frame
and No Cue conditions, nor between the Licit Word and
Illicit Word conditions (p’s > .1).
Further analyses reveal that for 10% similarity trials, there
was higher cue compliance in the Licit Word (p < .001) and
Illicit Word (p = .002) conditions as compared to the No

96

Cue condition. Cue compliance was also significantly
higher for Licit Words (p < .001) and Illicit Words (p =
.020) than Frames in the 10% similarity condition. For 30%
similarity trials, cue compliance was significantly higher in
the Licit Word (p < .001) and Illicit Word (p = .008)
conditions as compared to the No Cue condition.
Furthermore, we observed higher cue compliance for both
Licit Words (p = .006) and Illicit Words (p = .020) in
comparison to Frames for 30% similar trials. On 50%
similarity trials, again we saw that there was significantly
higher cue compliance in the Licit Word (p < .001) and
Illicit Word (p = .003) conditions as compared to the No
Cue control. (p < .001) Licit Words (p = .008), but not
Illicit Words (p > .1) had significantly higher cue
compliance than Frames on 50% similarity trials. There
were no differences between cues for the 70% and 90%
trials. The main effect of Bilingual Type was not significant,
nor were the interactions between Bilingual Type and Cue
Type or Bilingual Type and Similarity (all p’s > .1). Results
from both groups combined are shown in Figure 4.

flexibility in the use of linguistic cues for categorization.
Instead, a moderately high level of proficiency in a second
language appears to be sufficient to cause participants to
consider phonologically impossible words as labels.
However, this flexibility did not extend to non-linguistic
cues. Again, we saw that the patterned frames were not as
effective as the linguistic cues, despite the fact that all cues
were salient and equally discriminable. In this way,
language appears to be a unique tool for promoting
categorization. As was observed with the monolingual
group, we found that bilinguals were sensitive to both
linguistic and perceptual information when making
categorization decisions. High visual similarity and a shared
linguistic cue (Licit or Illicit Word) encouraged participants
to group together two objects.

Conclusion
Previous research indicates that people are more likely to
group together objects with a shared label. In the present
study, we asked to what extent the influence of labels on
categorization is unique for monolingual and bilingual
adults by comparing Licit Words to salient, equally
discriminable Illicit Words and Frames. Second, we further
investigated the influence of bilingual language experience
by comparing Spanish-English bilingual heritage speakers
to English-Spanish late second language learners.
Our results first suggest that linguistic labels are unique in
their ability to facilitate categorization for both
monolinguals and bilinguals: two novel objects assigned the
same Licit Word were more likely to be grouped together
than two objects without linguistic cues. The same effect
was not seen for very salient, equally discriminable nonlinguistic cues, patterned Frames. Thus, it is not the case
that language simply serves to highlight similarities and
differences among objects. Rather, linguistic labels (but not
shapes) are taken to be category markers. Additionally, we
found that perceptual similarity is also taken as an important
category marker that works alongside verbal labels. A
shared label increased the likelihood of two objects being
grouped together, but so did a high level of shared
perceptual attributes. These findings contrast with some
previous work which has shown that adults completely
override perceptual similarity in favor of labels (Sloutsky et
al., 2001). However, our results are consistent with more
recent work by Gelman and Davidson (2013) which argues
for a more nuanced relationship between language and
perception in categorization. Because of the influence of
similarity, the label advantage is most strikingly observed in
the low-similarity conditions (10%, 30%, 50%) for both
groups, as cue compliance is already at ceiling for the 70%
and 90% similarity conditions.
Critical to our first goal, we found that Spanish-English
and English-Spanish bilinguals were influenced not only by
Licit Words like “zeg,” but also by phonologically
impossible Illicit Words like “gxz” when forming novel
artifact categories. In this way, bilinguals may be more
flexible in the way they integrate linguistic information in

Figure 4: Cue compliance for the bilingual groups
(combined). Error bars represent +/-1 S.E.M.
Interestingly, these results indicate that both Licit and
Illicit Words are effective in facilitating categorization for
bilinguals, and to the same extent. In contrast, only Licit
Words influenced the categorization decisions of
monolinguals. It is unlikely that the bilingual participants
simply were unable to tell the difference between Licit and
Illicit words, as they were all English-dominant bilinguals
who did not differ from the monolingual participants on a
separate test of English proficiency (lexical decision task,
not reported here in detail for reasons of space). Rather,
what this suggests is that bilinguals are able to use linguistic
information more flexibly in category formation, treating
linguistic cues that are not possible labels as category
markers. Somewhat surprisingly, we also found that there
was no difference between Spanish-English bilinguals and
English-Spanish bilinguals. Thus, a lifetime of experience
using two languages is not necessary to produce this kind of

97

categorization. What we do not know, however, is whether
this flexibility comes from differences in the way
monolinguals and bilinguals process language, represent
object categories (Pavlenko & Malt, 2010), or learn novel
words (Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009).
Interestingly, we found that lifelong experience with two
languages is not necessary for this flexibility to arise. We
found no differences in behavior between Spanish-English
bilinguals who grew up speaking both languages and
English-Spanish bilinguals who learned a second language
later in life. The flexibility observed here seems to stem,
then, from a relatively high level of proficiency in two
languages, regardless of age of acquisition.
In sum, we contribute to the existing literature by showing
evidence that language is a unique tool for categorization
that both monolinguals and bilinguals make use of.
Bilingual language experience contributes to increased
flexibility in the type of linguistic information that can be
considered as a label, but further research is needed to
understand the underlying mechanisms and test the limits of
this flexibility with groups of bilinguals at varying levels of
proficiency.

in very young human infants. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
110, 15231–5.
Fulkerson, A. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2007). Words (but not
tones) facilitate object categorization: Evidence from 6and 12-month-olds. Cognition, 105, 218-228.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gervits, F., Johanson, M., & Papafragou, A. (submitted).
Intentionality and the role of labels in categorization.
Grosjean, F. (1989). Neurolinguists, beware! The bilingual
is not two monolinguals in one person. Brain and
language, 36(1), 3-15.
Johanson, M., & Papafragou, A. (2016). The influence of
labels and facts on children’s and adults’ categorization.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 144, 130-151.
Jones, S. S., Smith, L. B., & Landau, B. (1991). Object
properties and knowledge in early lexical learning. Child
development, 62(3), 499-516.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50(4), 315-353.
Lupyan, G., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2012). The
evocative power of words: activation of concepts by
verbal and nonverbal means. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 141, 170.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007).
Language is not just for talking redundant labels facilitate
learning of novel categories. Psychological Science, 18,
1077-1083.
Mathôt, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012).
OpenSesame: An open-source, graphical experiment
builder for the social sciences. Behavior Research
Methods, 44, 314-324.
Nazzi, T., & Gopnik, A. (2001). Linguistic and cognitive
abilities in infancy: when does language become a tool for
categorization?. Cognition, 80(3), B11-B20.
Pavlenko, A., & Malt, B. C. (2010). Kitchen Russian:
Cross-linguistic differences and first-language object
naming by Russian–English bilinguals. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 14(01), 19-45.
Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534
nonwords: The ARC Nonword Database. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1339-1362.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y. F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels, similarity, and the development of inductive
inference. Child Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Waxman Sandra, R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12-to 13month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257-302.
Wolff, P., & Holmes, K. J. (2011). Linguistic relativity.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2(3),
253–265.

Acknowledgments
We thank Amelia Weiss for assistance with stimuli creation
and data collection.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3–26.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. (2002b). Object names and
object functions serve as cues to categories for
infants. Developmental psychology, 38(6), 948.
Boutonnet, B., & Lupyan, G. (2015). Words Jump-Start
Vision: A Label Advantage in Object Recognition. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 35, 9329-9335.
Clark, A. (1998). Magic words: How language augments
human
computation.
Language
and
thought:
Interdisciplinary themes, 162-183.
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R., & Tsivkin,
S. (1999). Sources of mathematical thinking: Behavioral
and brain-imaging evidence. Science, 284(5416), 970974.
Dessalegn, B., & Landau, B. (2013). Interaction between
language and vision: It’s momentary, abstract, and it
develops. Cognition, 127(3), 331-344.
Diesendruck, G., & Peretz, S. (2013). Domain differences in
the weights of perceptual and conceptual information in
children’s categorization. Developmental Psychology, 49,
2383–95.
Ferry, A. L., Hespos, S. J., & Waxman, S. R. (2010).
Categorization in 3- and 4-month-old infants: an
advantage of words over tones. Child Development, 81,
472–9.
Ferry, A. L., Hespos, S. J., & Waxman, S. R. (2013).
Nonhuman primate vocalizations support categorization

98

