Moral Judgments: Studying People with Helping Professions
Maurice Grinberg (mgrinberg@nbu.bg)
Evgeniya Hristova (ehristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Veselina Kadreva (vkadreva@nbu.bg)
Research Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology
New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo Str., Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
Abstract

Keywords: moral dilemmas; moral judgment; professional
biases in moral judgment

the death of the potential victim is inevitable compared to
when it is avoidable (the ‘inevitability of death’ factor) and
when it is inflicted intentionally rather than as a side effect
(the ‘instrumentality of harm’ factor). These two factors are
considered to be related to rational deliberations (e.g.
Hauser et al., 2007; Moore et al., 2008) and therefore
subject to training and rules.
On the other hand, life-or-death decisions are common for
professionals from different occupational groups (e.g.
judges, pilots, medical doctors, public health professionals,
etc.). A central question needing extensive exploration is
about the role played by special training and professional
experience.
Typically, such decisions have significant consequences
for many people but no systematic study of the factors
underlying them is available. Here, a first step in this
direction is made with the participation of representatives of
two professional groups – midwives and firefighters.

Introduction

Goals and Hypotheses

Experimental research on moral judgment extensively has
used the ‘Trolley problem’ (Foot, 1978). It presents a
situation in which a runaway trolley will kill five people if
not diverted on a side track, where it will kill one person.
Another widely used dilemma – the ‘Footbridge dilemma’ –
describes a similar situation, but in which a bystander
should be pushed from a footbridge in front of the trolley in
order to save several people whose life is endangered by the
moving trolley (Thomson, 1985).
From a utilitarian point of view (based on the comparison
of the utility of saving one or several human lives), the
situations are identical. However, when people are asked to
judge the moral appropriateness of the suggested
resolutions, most of them find the resolution permissible in
the ‘Trolley problem’ but not in the ‘Footbridge dilemma’
(e.g. Greene et al., 2001).
This behavioral dissociation reveals that moral judgment
does not universally follow deontological rules or utilitarian
calculations, but is shaped by various factors, and probably
several cognitive mechanisms stand behind the process. For
instance, Greene et al. (2001) claimed that the ‘personal’
infliction of harm in the ‘Footbridge dilemma’ as opposed to
the ‘impersonal’ one in the ‘Trolley problem,’ leads to higher
emotional level, which is responsible for the greater proportion
of deontological judgments in the ‘Footbridge dilemma.’
Further research, using a set of modified scenarios,
established that two other important factors also influence
moral judgment. Harm is judged as more permissible when

Presently, many experiments on moral judgment are conducted
on-line thus including diverse participants. However, to the
best of our knowledge, no specific information about the
participants’ occupation has been used in relation to their moral
judgments.
The present study provides the first results of a series of
experiments, started recently, focusing on moral judgments
of representatives of occupations directly related to moral
choice or involving ethical issues (military officers,
firefighters, medical doctors, midwives, etc.). Here, we
report the results about firefighters and midwives.
Both groups face situations in which they have to make
decisions related to life and death. For instance, Chappa,
Gonzales, & Stinger (2013) consider the question of
measuring firefighters’ ‘moral courage’, which they define
as ‘making moral decisions despite the circumstances’. One
of the items of their questionnaire, aimed at evaluating
moral courage, is about the readiness to ‘stop and help
people’ in dangerous situations. According to Sekerka,
Bagozzi, & Charnigo (2009), moral courage is a managerial
competency and has to be supported by ‘proactive
organizational ethics’. Even if firefighters have no specific
training in moral courage, the corresponding behavior is part
of the code of conduct of this profession (Cooper, 1995) and
as such is potent to implicitly bias moral judgment outside
the professional context.

While a considerable amount of research is done in the field
of moral psychology, to our best knowledge, no systematic
study of moral judgments made by professional groups who
make moral decisions as part of their occupational duties
exists (e.g. firefighters, medical doctors, midwives, police
officers). By their training and practice, such professionals are
expected to exhibit differences in moral judgment compared
to the general population. Here we report data about moral
judgments of firefighters and midwives using moral dilemmas
in which one person must be sacrificed in order to save more
people. The study reveals that midwives and firefighters are
considerably less utilitarian compared to a control group of
students. Midwives almost never find the utilitarian action to
be permissible. This striking result demonstrates that further
understanding of the specific mechanisms involved in special
professional groups’ moral judgment is needed.

704

Similarly, midwives facing termination of pregnancy for
fetal abnormality or situations in which birth can endanger
the life of the mother, have to get to terms with a moral
decision and shared responsibility (Cignacco, 2002; Garel,
Etienne, Blondel, & Dommergues, 2007). Some of the
difficulties they report are related to the responsibility felt
when supporting the patients and coping with their own
distress. In Garel et al. (2007), 75% of the midwives reported
concern about the child being alive in late termination of
pregnancy and 25% of them reported moral conflicts related to
personal, cultural, or religious background. Some midwives
believed that it was illegal to kill a living unborn child. At
the same time, these problems were less pronounced in
experienced midwives. The latter draws attention to a factor
common to professions involving stress and decision
making concerning human life – experience and training can
lessen the emotional impact of the responsibility and risks
and promote a more utilitarian viewpoint.
Following this brief analysis of specificities related to job
experience, we discuss several important factors to be taken
into account but which sometimes lead to different
hypotheses about the outcomes of the experiments.
The first factor is the practical real-life experience with
similar situations involving life-or-death decisions. Both
groups are experienced in making judgments and taking
action in life-threatening situations. This could make them
more tolerant towards intervention in general and hence,
more utilitarian.
The second factor is their repetitive experience with
highly emotional situations and their practice and ability in
emotion management. That, according to the dual-process
theory of Greene et al. (2001), should increase the number
of utilitarian judgments.
A third factor, specific to the artificial settings of moral
dilemma scenarios, could be the underestimation of the
presented task based on comparison with real life situations
encountered in the professional life of the participants. If this is
the case, the judgments of firefighters and midwives will not
differ from those of ordinary participants.
A fourth factor may be the fact that firefighters and
midwives rarely face situations in which they have to make
choices involving saving the life of one person or the lives of
five. More often, they are involved in decisions and actions
concerning the life of a single person. That factor will imply
non-utilitarian judgments based on the awareness of the value
of each life.
As noted above, it is well established that physical
directness of harm (personal vs. impersonal) and
instrumentality of harm (instrumental vs. incidental) are
important factors in moral judgments (see e.g. Moore et al.,
2008). However, due to the professional experience of both
groups, e.g. the physical contact for midwives, it is expected
that these factors would be less important for them.
Although the presented considerations apply to both
groups, some important differences should also be noted.
Midwives usually do not make the moral decisions
themselves but only take part in their execution (Cignacco,

2002). Additionally, midwives’ professional obligations
imply responsibility for individual patients while firefighters
are often responsible for a number of people, e.g. when they
participate in rescue missions. This difference might
contribute to more utilitarian judgments for firefighters than
for midwives.
Moreover, firefighters are more regularly exposed to
situations that resemble the hypothetical scenarios. This lack
of experience in similar situations for midwives could lead
to underestimation of the presented task based on
comparison with real life situations encountered in their
professional life. It is possible that this underestimation
would produce less utilitarian judgments for midwives
compared to firefighters.
This paper undertakes a systematic comparative
exploration of the above considerations based on a
standardized set of artificial moral dilemmas that has been
extensively used in other contexts and are carefully
controlled for uniformity, structure, and content (Hristova,
Kadreva, & Grinberg, 2014a, 2014b).

Method
Stimuli and Design
Three groups of participants with different occupations were
studied – midwives, firefighters, and students.
Using hypothetical artificial moral dilemmas, three
factors significant in moral judgment (Greene et al., 2001,
Moore et al., 2008) were explored:
• physical directness of harm – requiring physical
contact (personal harm) or mediated through other
means (impersonal harm);
• inevitability of death – harm leading to death is
inflicted either to a person that is going to die anyway
(inevitable death), or to a person that is not endangered
by the described situation (avoidable death);
• instrumentality of harm – in order to save endangered
people, harm is inflicted as an instrument to saving
others (instrumental harm) or as a byproduct of the
undertaken action (incidental harm).
Two avoidable and two inevitable situations were used. In
order to manipulate physical directness of harm and
instrumentality of harm, only the resolution paragraphs were
modified. As it is not possible to have personal/incidental
resolution, there are three resolution versions for each situation
– personal/instrumental, impersonal/instrumental, and
personal/incidental. In all situations, there is a constant tradeoff
between killing one person and saving five other persons. It is
also important to note that all of the endangered and potentially
sacrificed persons in the scenarios are adults.
Each situation is followed by the same question: ‘Is it
permissible to act as described?’ with two possible responses –
‘Yes’ and ‘No’.
The following is an example of an avoidable dilemma with
three possible resolutions:
You are in a factory. You are standing on a platform above a
railway track. Some loaded trolleys are moving along the

705

harm and inevitability of death factors are varied resulting in
2 dilemmas for each combination of the factors’ levels. All
of those 8 dilemmas are incidental dilemmas.
First, we analyzed data for all participants. Then, we
performed separate analyses for female participants
(midwives and female students) and for male participants
(firefighters and male students) in order to control for
possible gender differences.
All participants. The mean number of responses ‘permissible’
was analyzed in a 2x2x3 mixed ANOVA with physical
directness of harm (personal vs. impersonal) and inevitability
of death (avoidable vs. inevitable) as within-subjects factors
and occupation (firefighters vs. midwives vs. students) as a
between-subjects factor.
The analysis revealed a main effect of the occupation (F(2,
57) = 52.06, p < 0.001, ηρ² = .2). Midwives (8.6% responses
‘permissible’) were less utilitarian than both firefighters
(28.6%) and students (49.6%) (p = .068 and p < .001,
respectively). Firefighters were less utilitarian than students
were (p = .013). The results are presented in Figure 1.

rails. One heavy loaded trolley is speeding towards five
workers as its breaks had suddenly stopped working. There is
no time for them to run away and they are going to die.
The trolley could be stopped only if a heavy object is set on its
way.
Personal/Instrumental resolution: The only thing that you can
do is to push the worker standing next to you on the platform.
He is going to fall down on the rails. Together with the tools
that he is equipped with, the worker is heavy enough to stop
the moving trolley. He is going to die but the other five
workers will be saved.
Impersonal/Instrumental resolution: The only thing that you
can do is to activate a control button and to release the safety
belt of a worker hanging from a platform above the rails. The
worker will fall onto the rails of the trolley. Together with the
tools that he is equipped with, the worker is heavy enough to
stop the moving trolley. He is going to die but the other five
workers will be saved.
Impersonal/Incidental resolution: The only thing that you can
do is to activate a control button and to release a large
container hanging from a platform. It will fall onto the rails of
the trolley. The container is heavy enough to stop the moving
trolley. On the top of the container there is a worker who will
also fall on the rails. He is going to die but the other five
workers will be saved.
Is it permissible to act as described? YES/NO

Participants and Procedure
Fourteen firefighters took part in the study. At the time of
the study, all of them worked in the same firefighter unit.
All of them are male, aged between 25 and 47 (M = 36). They
had work experience between 2 and 27 years (M = 11).
Sixteen midwives took part in the study. At the time of
the study, all of them worked in an obstetrics and
gynecology hospital in the intensive care and post-intensive
care units taking care of babies. All of them are female,
aged between 32 and 61 (M = 36), having work experience
between 10 and 38 years (M = 23).
A group of 30 students – 14 male, 16 female, with age
between 18 and 35, (M = 23) – also took part in the study.
Each participant was presented with 12 dilemmas –
4 situations (2 avoidable and 2 inevitable) each with 3
possible resolutions (personal instrumental, impersonal
instrumental, and impersonal incidental). For each
participant, the dilemmas were presented in a pseudorandomized order ensuring that the same situation never
appears in two consecutive dilemmas. In total, twelve
pseudo-randomized orderings were used.
For the midwives and the firefighters, data was collected
using paper-and-pencil questionnaires on their workplaces.
Students participated in lab settings, using computerized
administration of the stimuli and recording of responses.

Figure 1: Mean percentage of responses ‘permissible’ (YES)
for each occupational group. Error bars stand for SEM.
There was also a main effect of physical directness of
harm (F (1, 57) = 28.13, p < .001, ηρ² = .33) – impersonal
harm was judged as more permissible than personal harm
(40.0% vs. 17.5% ‘permissible’ responses). There was also
a main effect of inevitability of death (F(1, 57) = 20.89, p <
0.001, ηρ² = .27) – killing someone whose death is inevitable
was judged as more permissible than harming a person
whose death is avoidable (36.1% vs. 21.8% responses
‘permissible’). The results are presented in Figure 2. No
significant interaction effects were found.

Results
Physical Directness of Harm and Inevitability of
Death
Figure 2: Mean percentage of responses ‘permissible’ for
each dilemma type.

In the first set of analyses, we used the responses for 8 of
the 12 dilemmas. In those 8 dilemmas physical directness of

706

Females only (midwives and female students). The mean
number of responses ‘permissible’ was analyzed in a 2x2x2
mixed ANOVA with physical directness of harm (personal vs.
impersonal) and inevitability of death (avoidable vs. inevitable)
as within-subjects factors and occupation (midwives vs. female
students) as a between-subjects factor.
The analysis revealed a main effect of the occupation
(F(1, 30) = 12.5, p = 0.001, ηρ² = .29). Midwives gave fewer
responses ‘permissible’ (8.6%) than the female students
(39.8%). Data is presented in Figure 3.

The analysis revealed a main effect of the occupation
(F(1, 26) = 6.9, p = 0.014, ηρ² = .21). Male students gave
more responses ‘permissible’ (60.7%) than the firefighters
(28.6%). The results are presented in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Mean percentage of responses ‘permissible’ for
firefighters and male students.
There was also a main effect of physical directness of
harm (F (1, 26) = 14.1, p = .001, ηρ² = .35) – impersonal
harm was judged as more permissible than personal harm
(57.1% vs. 32.1% ‘permissible’ responses) and a main
effect of inevitability of death (F(1, 26) = 8.4, p = 0.008, ηρ²
= .24) – killing someone whose death is inevitable was
judged as more permissible than harming a person whose
death is avoidable (51.8% vs. 37.5% responses
‘permissible’). The results are shown in Figure 6. No
significant interaction effects were found.

Figure 3: Mean percentage of responses ‘permissible’ for
midwives and female students.
There was also a main effect of physical directness of
harm (F (1, 30) = 16.3, p < .001, ηρ² = .35) – impersonal
harm is judged as more permissible than personal harm
(34.4% vs. 14.1% ‘permissible’ responses) and a main
effect of inevitability of death (F(1, 57) = 15.7, p < 0.001,
ηρ² = .34) – killing someone whose death is inevitable was
judged as more permissible than harming a person whose
death is avoidable (31.3% vs. 17.2% responses
‘permissible’). The results are given in Figure 4. No
significant interaction effects were found.

Figure 6: Firefighters and male students. Mean percentage
of responses ‘permissible’ for each dilemma type.

Instrumentality of Harm and Inevitability of Death
For the second set of analyses, we used the responses for 8
of the 12 dilemmas. In those 8 dilemmas instrumentality of
harm and inevitability of death factors are varied resulting in
2 dilemmas for each combination of the factors’ levels. All
of those 8 dilemmas are impersonal dilemmas.
First, we analyzed data for all participants. Then we
performed separate analyses for female participants
(midwives and female students) and for male participants
(firefighters and male students) in order to control for
possible gender differences.
All participants. The mean number of responses
‘permissible’ was analyzed a 2x2x3 mixed ANOVA with
instrumentality of harm (instrumental vs. incidental) and
inevitability of death (avoidable vs. inevitable) as within-

Figure 4: Midwives and female students. Mean percentage
of responses ‘permissible’ for each dilemma type.
Males only (firefighters and male students). The mean
number of responses ‘permissible’ was analyzed in a 2x2x2
mixed ANOVA with physical directness of harm (personal vs.
impersonal) and inevitability of death (avoidable vs. inevitable)
as within-subjects factors and occupation (firefighters vs. male
students) as a between-subjects factor.

707

subjects factors and occupation (firefighters vs. midwives vs.
students) as a between-subjects factor.
The analysis revealed a main effect of the occupation
(F(2, 57) = 12.38, p < 0.001, ηρ² = .30). Post-hoc tests
showed that midwives (23.4% responses ‘permissible’) are
less utilitarian than both firefighters (57.1%) and students
(67.5%) (p = .007 and p < .001, respectively, Bonferroni
correction applied). There was no significant difference in
the responses ‘permissible’ between firefighters and
students (p = .81). The results are presented in Figure 7.

judged as more permissible than instrumental harm (53.9% vs.
34.4% responses ‘permissible’) and a main effect of
inevitability of death (F(1, 30) = 14.4, p = .001, ηρ² = .32) –
killing someone whose death is inevitable was judged as more
permissible than harming a person whose death is avoidable
(53.1% vs. 35.2% responses ‘permissible’). The results are
shown in Figure 10. No significant interaction effects were
found.

Figure 9: Mean percentage of responses ‘permissible’ for
midwives and female students.
Figure 7: Mean percentage of responses ‘permissible’ for
each occupational group.
There was also a main effect of instrumentality of harm (F (1,
57) = 12.68, p < .001, ηρ² = .18) – incidental harm was judged as
more permissible than instrumental harm (58.4% vs. 40.4%
responses ‘permissible’) and a main effect of inevitability of
death (F(1, 57) = 22.25, p < 0.001, ηρ² = .28) – killing someone
whose death is inevitable was judged as more permissible than
harming a person whose death is avoidable (58.3% vs. 40.4%
responses ‘permissible’). The data is presented in Figure 8. No
significant interaction effects were found.

Figure 10: Midwives and female students. Mean percentage
of responses ‘permissible’ for each dilemma type.
Males only (firefighters and male students). The mean
number of responses ‘permissible’ was analyzed in a 2x2x2
mixed ANOVA with instrumentality of harm (instrumental
vs. incidental) and inevitability of death (avoidable vs.
inevitable) as within-subjects factors and occupation
(firefighters vs. male students) as a between-subjects factor.
The analysis revealed a main effect of inevitability of death
(F(1, 26) = 7.7, p = .010, ηρ² = .23) – killing someone whose
death is inevitable was judged as more permissible than
harming a person whose death is avoidable (71.4% vs. 56.3%
responses ‘permissible’). The data is presented in Figure 11.
No other main effects or interactions were significant.

Figure 8: Mean percentage of responses ‘permissible’ for
each dilemma type.
Females only (midwives and female students). The mean
number of responses ‘permissible’ was analyzed in a 2x2x2
mixed ANOVA with instrumentality of harm (instrumental
vs. incidental) and inevitability of death (avoidable vs.
inevitable) as within-subjects factors and occupation (midwives
vs. female students) as a between-subjects factor.
The analysis revealed a main effect of the occupation
(F(1, 30) = 17.3, p < 0.001, ηρ² = .37). Midwives gave fewer
responses ‘permissible’ than female students (23.4% vs.
64.8%). The results are given in Figure 9.
There was also a main effect of instrumentality of harm (F
(1, 30) = 16.89, p < .001, ηρ² = .36) – incidental harm was

Figure 11: Firefighters and male students. Mean percentage
of responses ‘permissible’ for avoidable and inevitable
scenarios.

708

Summary and Discussion

occupational experience and training as well as exploration of
more diverse professional groups and better control of age
and gender of participants.

For the first time in this paper we investigated
systematically moral judgments made by representatives of
two special professions – midwives and firefighters.
The results show a striking difference in the proportion of
utilitarian responses given by midwives, firefighters, and
students in Trolley-type moral dilemmas. Midwives are the
least utilitarian: they judge the utilitarian action of
sacrificing one person to save five others to be morally
permissible in less than ten percent of the scenarios. At the
same time, students choose the utilitarian response in almost
half of the dilemmas. The firefighters are more utilitarian
than the midwives are, but they are still much less utilitarian
than the students are.
These results demonstrate a large effect of the
participants’ occupation on moral judgments. As noted
above, these professionals are regularly exposed to life
threatening situations and they are more likely to encounter
and deal with real life moral dilemmas as part of their jobrelated duties. Because of that and the related coping and
emotion management, one possible expectation was that
they would be more utilitarian in their judgments. However,
the results support the opposite hypothesis based on other
factors related to the fact that both occupations aim at
helping people, and therefore people from these professions
share higher moral values, respect more strongly individual
rights and thus, restrain from utilitarian judgements related
to life-or-death.
Overall, firefighters gave a lot more utilitarian judgments
than midwives. This could be related to the similarity of the
artificial moral dilemmas to situations firefighters encounter
in their professional activities.
The exploration of physical directness, instrumentality and
inevitability of death factors for the two professional groups
replicated the well-established effects in the general
population. Impersonal and incidental harm was judged as
more permissible than personal and instrumental harm
respectively. Killing someone whose death is inevitable was
judged as more permissible than harming a person whose
death is avoidable. No significant interactions with
occupation were present, questioning possible interference of
professional experience with these factors.
The analyses, controlling for gender, revealed a more
complex pattern of moral judgment. For female participants
(midwives and female students), all three factors mentioned
above shape their moral judgments (physical directness of
harm, inevitability of death, and instrumentality of harm).
Midwives gave fewer utilitarian responses than female
students did. For male participants (firefighters and male
students), only the physical directness of harm and
inevitability of death had the expected effects on their moral
judgments. Instrumentality of harm had no effect on
judgments. Firefighters gave fewer utilitarian responses than
male students did.
In order to shed more light on possible mechanisms of
moral judgment, future research would benefit from more
detailed measurement of different factors related to

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support by New
Bulgarian University and the invaluable help in data
collection of the following people: Iva-Maria Dineva (the
midwives’ data), and Georgi Manchev (the firefighters’ data).

References
Chappa, Olga, Gonzalez, Rebecca, & Stinger, Donna. (2013).
The path of measuring moral courage in the workplace.
SAM Advanced Management Journal, 78(2), 17.
Cignacco, E. (2002). Between professional duty and ethical
confusion: midwives and selective termination of
pregnancy. Nursing Ethics, 9(2), 179–191.
Cooper, R. (1995). The fireman: Immaculate manhood.
Journal of Popular Culture, 28(4), 139.
Garel, M., Etienne, E., Blondel, B., & Dommergues, M.
(2007). French midwives’ practice of termination of
pregnancy for fetal abnormality. At what psychological
and ethical cost? Prenatal Diagnosis, 27(7), 622–628.
Foot, P. (1967). The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine of
Double Effect. Oxford Review, 5, 5–15.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J.
M., Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment. Science,
293, 2105–2108
Hauser, M., Cushman, F., Young, L., Kang-Xing, J., &
Mikhial, J. (2007). A Dissociation Between Moral
Judgments and Justifications. Mind & Language, 22(1),
1–21.
Hristova, E., Kadreva, V., & Grinberg, M. (2014a). Emotions
and Moral Judgment: A Multimodal Analysis. In Recent
Advances of Neural Network Models and Applications
(pp. 413-421). Springer International Publishing.
Hristova, E., Kadreva, V., & Grinberg, M. (2014b). Moral
Judgments and Emotions: Exploring the Role of
'Inevitability of Death' and 'Instrumentality of Harm'. In
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 2381–2386). Austin, TX:.
Moore, A. B., Clark, B. A., & Kane, M. J. (2008). Who shalt
not kill? Individual differences in working memory
capacity, executive control, and moral judgment.
Psychological Science, 19(6), 549–557.
Sekerka, L. E., Bagozzi, R. P., & Charnigo, R. (2009). Facing
ethical challenges in the workplace: Conceptualizing and
measuring professional moral courage. Journal of
Business Ethics, 89(4), 565–579.
Thomson, J. J. (1985). The Trolley Problem. The Yale Law
Journal, 94(6), 1395–1415.

709

