Music Reading Expertise Modulates Visual Spans in both Music Note and English
Letter Reading
Tze Kwan, Li (saralis@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
627 Jockey Club Tower, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR

Susana T. L. Chung (s.chung@berkeley.edu)
School of Optometry, University of California
Berkeley, CA, USA

Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
627 Jockey Club Tower, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
Abstract
Here we investigated how music reading experience modulates visual spans in language reading. Participants were
asked to identify music notes, English letters, Chinese characters, and novel symbols (Tibetan letters) presented at random
locations on the screen while maintaining central fixation. We
found that for music note reading, musicians outperformed
non-musicians at some peripheral positions in both visual
fields, and for English letter reading, musicians outperformed
non-musicians at some peripheral positions in the RVF but
not in the LVF. In contrast, in both Chinese character and
novel symbol reading, musicians and non-musicians did not
differ in their performance at peripheral positions. Since both
music and English reading involve a left-to-right reading direction and a RVF/LH advantage, these results suggest that
the modulation of music reading experience on visual spans in
language reading depends on the similarities in the cognitive
processes involved.
Keywords: Music reading expertise; visual span; English
reading; Chinese reading; symbol reading

Introduction
Recent research has shown that experts have superior perceptual cognitive abilities than novices in meaningful tasks
related to their expertise, such as in sports (Mann, Williams,
Ward & Janelle, 2007) and in chess playing (Reingold,
Charness, Pomplun & Stampe, 2001). From these studies,
experts typically demonstrated superior response accuracy
(ACC), faster response time (RT), fewer eye fixations of
longer duration, or a larger visual span in the tasks. Visual
span has been defined as the region around the fixation
point within which visual stimuli can be recognized
(O’Regan, Lévy-Schoen & Jacobs, 1983). The size of one’s
visual span can be enlarged through expertise training as in
perceptual learning, and this can consequently improve
reading/processing speed (Chung, Legge, & Cheung, 2004).
For example, chess experts were found to have a larger visual span, fewer fixations, and faster RT in structured chess
configuration detection than novices (Reingold et al., 2001),
suggesting they are able to extract more information from
one fixation in the field of expertise than novices. Similarly,

musicians with extensive music reading experiences may
have a larger reading span than poor readers of music notation. Indeed, one study found that well-trained musicians
had a span of 6.5 notes, whereas the poorest reader only
read 3.5 notes at a time (Sloboda, 1974).
Music reading involves mapping a set of spatially distributed notes and chords in a staff to a horizontal melodic line
(Stewart, 2005). In the horizontal direction, musicians read
further ahead from left to right and focus on areas between
notes rather than a single note to ensure in-time playing
(Goolsby, 1994). In the vertical direction, musicians read
musical markings below staff without making an eye fixation, or attempt to read two staffs at the same time (such as
in piano playing). These suggest that musicians may attempt
to perceive as much information as possible through both
horizontal and vertical peripheral vision (Goolsby, 1994),
and consequently develop a larger visual span in both directions in music reading tasks.
Not only does music reading expertise influence visual
span in music reading, but it may also modulate visual span
in language reading due to similarities in the cognitive processes involved in both tasks. Both music and English are
read from left-to-right, and thus music notes and letters are
recognized in the right visual field (RVF) more often
(Brysbaert & Nazir, 2005; Wong & Hsiao, 2012). This perceptual learning results in processing advantages in the
RVF/left hemisphere (LH) (Brysbaert & Nazir, 2005). Indeed, previous studies have shown an RVF/LH advantage in
both music note (Segalowitz, Bebout & Lederman, 1979)
and English word processing (Brysbaert & d’Ydewalle,
1990). In addition, music notation reading involves note-tosound mapping, and similarly English word reading involves grapheme–phoneme correspondence (Brown, Martinez & Parsons, 2006; Hsiao & Lam, 2013). Both types of
mapping involve decomposing visual stimuli into components for mapping to sound components, and this kind of
analytic encoding process is shown to be dominant in the
LH (e.g., Bradshaw & Nettleton, 1981; Hébert & Cuddy,
2006; Hsiao & Lam, 2013; Segalowitz et al., 1979). Thus,
music notation and English word reading may share similar
underlying neural mechanisms. In support of this notion,

1499

patients with music reading deficiencies due to brain lesions
in the LH also showed word reading difficulties in alphabetic languages such as English (Hébert & Cuddy, 2006). In
short, music and English reading may share similar cognitive processes as evidenced by their similar processing advantages in the RVF/LH.
In contrast to left-to-right music and English reading, Chinese can be read in all directions (left to right, right to left,
or vertically). Moreover, due to its unique logographic orthography, each Chinese character is regarded as a morpheme and corresponds to a syllable in the pronunciation.
Since there is no grapheme-phoneme correspondence in
Chinese, decomposition of a character into components is
not required. This may account for a left visual field
(LVF)/right hemisphere (RH) advantage typically observed
in Chinese orthographic processing (e.g., Tzeng, Hung, Cotton & Wang, 1979; Tan et al., 2001; Hsiao & Lam, 2013).
Consistent with this speculation, brain imaging studies typically showed more bilateral or right-lateralized activation in
the visual area in Chinese character processing as compared
with English word reading (e.g., Tan, Laird, Li & Fox,
2005). These findings suggest that music-reading expertise
may have limited influence on Chinese reading due to the
different hemispheric lateralization and cognitive processes
involved.
In this study, we examine how music-reading expertise
modulates visual span in music reading, as well as in English and Chinese reading according to their similar/different
cognitive processes involved. We also investigate whether
music-reading expertise modulates visual span in reading
novel symbols (i.e., Tibetan letters) as a transfer effect. We
hypothesize that musicians would have a larger visual span
than non-musicians in music reading due to an expertise
effect, and that for English reading, musicians may have a
larger visual span than non-musicians in the RVF due to the
similar cognitive processes inherent in both music and English reading. More specifically, musicians who are also expert English readers may have received more training in the
RVF/LH through extensive music reading, which facilitates
perceptual processing in the RVF/LH, and may thus further
benefit English reading in the RVF. In contrast, for Chinese
character reading, musicians and non-musicians may not
display differences in visual span due to the different cognitive processes involved in music and Chinese reading. More
specifically, musicians’ RVF/LH processing advantage in
music reading may not translate to an increased visual span
in Chinese reading due to the reliance on LVF/RH processing in Chinese reading. Here we also examine if a larger
visual span of musicians in music note reading can be found
in novel symbol (i.e., Tibetan letter) reading due to a possible transfer effect. To test these hypotheses, here we conducted a visual word/symbol identity matching task, in
which participants were asked to attend to a briefly presented screen filled with music notes, English letters, Chinese
characters, or Tibetan letters, and match a target stimulus
presented at a given location afterwards. We examined how
musicians and non-musicians differ in their performance.

Methods
Participants
Participants consisted of 64 Cantonese (L1)-English (L2)
bilinguals from Hong Kong, whose ages ranged from 18 to
29 (M = 22, SD = 2.9). They had similar linguistic and college education backgrounds. They were categorized as musicians (n = 32) and non-musicians (n = 32), with 16 males
and 16 females in each group. Musicians were well-trained
pianists, who started music training at age 3-10 (M = 4.9,
SD = 1.8). All of them were either piano teachers, music
undergraduate/postgraduate students, or frequent piano
players. They had attained grade 8 or above in the graded
piano examinations of the Associated Board of The Royal
Schools of Music (ABRSM), with 8-25 years experience in
piano playing (M = 16.3, SD = 4.2) and regular music reading hours per week (M = 9.3, SD = 11.5). In contrast, nonmusicians did not receive any music training.
Aside from their music training background, musicians
and non-musicians were closely matched in other aspects
detailed as follows. All participants were right-handed,
which was assessed using the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971; musicians: M = 75.78, 5th right decile;
non-musicians: M = 70.00, 4rd right decile, t(62) = 1.295,
n.s.). Both musicians and non-musicians had normal or corrected to normal vision (20/20) as shown in the Freiburg
Visual Acuity and Contrast Test (FrACT; Bach, 2006; musicians: M = 1.27; non-musicians: M = 1.33, t(62) = -1.043,
n.s.). Both groups’ verbal and spatial working memory performance were matched in an N-back task (Lau, Ip, Lee,
Yeung & Eskes, 2013; Verbal ACC: musicians: M = 87.5%;
non-musicians: M = 79.6%, t(62) = 1.863, n.s.; Spatial
ACC: musicians: M = 81.7%; non-musicians: M = 74.0%,
t(62) = 1.746, n.s.). All participants started learning English
as a second language at age 3 (M = 3.4, SD = 1.57), and no
participants had any experience with the Tibetan language.

Materials
Materials consisted of four types of stimuli: English letters,
Chinese characters, music notes and Tibetan letters. English
lower-case letters (a-z, n = 26) were included. Chinese characters stimuli (n = 4805) were selected from the List of
Graphemes of Commonly-used Chinese Characters (Chinese Language Education Section, HKSAR, 2012), comprising Chinese characters ranging from low to high number
of strokes and frequency according to Ho’s (1998) database.
As for the music notes (n = 11), crotchets (1 beat) ranging
from D4 to G51 were selected. Tibetan letters (n = 46) were
included as novel symbols.

Design
Participants completed a visual word/symbol identity
matching task with English letters, Chinese characters, mu1

D4 to G5 ranges across one octave from the D note below the
first line to the G note above the fifth line.

1500

sic notes, and Tibetan letters in four separate progressive
blocks with 36 positions around a central fixation (Fig. 1).
In the visual word/symbol identity matching task, progressive testing started from level 1 to level 3 according to
participants’ ACC in the 36 testing positions of stimulus
identification (Fig. 1). The progression threshold for each
level was set at 50% ACC. For example, in level 1, participants proceeded to the next adjacent positions (position
8,9,14) in level 2 only if their performance in position 15
was above chance level (50%); otherwise they did not proceed to the adjacent positions at level 2 after finishing all
trials at position 15. Similar progression rules applied to
level 2 positions when advancing to level 3. The experiment
was terminated if a participant was not able to proceed to
any adjacent position.
We measured visual span in two different ways: the number of musicians and non-musicians who reached the testing
positions under this progressive testing paradigm, and participants’ ACC in the task. To ensure the readability of
stimuli, we doubled the size of stimuli in the present study
from their usual size for expert readers in daily life. For music notes, we doubled the size of a crotchet found in Grieg’s
(1888) Anitra's Dance from Peer Gynt Suite No.1, Op.46 in
Piano Pieces the Whole World Plays, which is a piano piece
for post-intermediate piano players. For English letters,
Chinese characters and Tibetan letters, we doubled the size
of an alphabet/a character/a letter found in the text of English/Chinese/Tibetan newspapers respectively.
Participants’ viewing distance was fixed at 61 cm in our
task. Under this viewing distance, a music note (crotchet)
with its corresponding five-line staff subtended a horizontal
and vertical visual angle of 1.19° x 2.25°. The 6 (horizontal)
x 6 (vertical) testing positions of music notes subtended a
visual angle of 7.10° x 13.41°. Here we included crotchets
as a single unit comparable to the other stimuli in the visual
word/symbol identity matching task (i.e., English letter,
Chinese character, Tibetan letter). English letters were displayed in Courier – a serif font with fixed width – to ensure
constant center-to-center spacing between letters. The lowercase letter ‘x’, as a reference letter without ascenders or
descenders such as letter ‘h’ and ‘g’ respectively, subtended
0.47° of visual angle horizontally and 0.50° vertically on a
rectangular background that subtended a visual angle of
0.47° x 0.76°, with 1 x standard letter spacing. The 6 (horizontal) x 6 (vertical) testing positions of English letters subtended a visual angle of 2.81° x 4.55°.
Chinese characters were presented in Microsoft DF-Hei
font, a serif font with fixed width, to ensure constant centerto-center spacing between characters. Each character subtended a horizontal and vertical visual angle of 0.72° x 0.76°
with 1x standard center-to-center character spacing. The 6
(horizontal) x 6 (vertical) testing positions of Chinese characters subtended a visual angle of 4.30° x 4.55°.
Tibetan letters were displayed in Himalaya font. The letter ‘ ’, as a reference letter without ascenders or descenders, subtended a horizontal and vertical visual angle of 0.69°
x 0.73° on a rectangular background that subtended a visual

angle of 0.72° x 1.25°, with 1x standard letter spacing. The
6 (horizontal) x 6 (vertical) testing positions of Tibetan letters subtended a visual angle of 4.30° x 7.52°.

Figure 1. A sample of 36 testing positions of Chinese characters in a 6 x 6 layout around central fixation
The average luminance of stimuli was adjusted to 3.63
cd/m2. With 73.8 cd/m2 background luminance, the Weber
contrast of the stimuli was -0.95. Experiments were conducted using SR Experiment Builder with an EyeLink 1000
eye tracker (SR Research Ltd., Canada) to ensure participants’ central fixation. A chinrest was used to reduce head
movement. Calibration and validation was performed before
the start of each block. Block order was counterbalanced
and trials were randomized across participants.

Procedure
Each trial started with a drift correction to ensure accurate
central fixation. After detecting central fixation, a screen
filled with stimuli was presented for 200 ms as the time
constraint, to allow only one fixation without eye movement
in letter recognition (Legge, Mansfield & Chung, 2001).
After a 500ms blank screen, a target stimulus was then presented at one of the 36 testing positions around central fixation at the designated level (Fig. 1); the screen remained
unchanged until participants responded (Fig. 2). Participants
had to judge whether the target stimulus was identical to the
stimulus presented earlier at the same position on the screen
filled with stimuli, as quickly and accurately as possible,
without shifting their gaze away from the central fixation
(+). Each position consisted of 10 ‘yes’ and 10 ‘no’ trials
that were randomly created without repetitions. Participants
responded by pressing buttons on a response box with both
hands. ACCs were recorded.

Figure 2. Procedure of the visual word/symbol identity
matching task
Prior to the visual word/symbol identity matching task, a
demographic and music background questionnaire, Freiburg
Visual Acuity and Contrast Test (FrACT; Bach, 2006), Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971) and an Nback task (Lau et al., 2013) were conducted to assess partic-

1501

ipants’ language and music learning background, visual
acuity, handedness and working memory capability.

Results
We first measured visual spans according to the number of
musicians and non-musicians who reached the testing positions under our progressive testing paradigm. As shown in
Figure 3, more musicians reached the 36 testing positions
than non-musicians in music note and English letter reading,
but not in Chinese character and Tibetan letter reading. For
each testing position, we used Chi-square tests to examine
whether there was a significant difference in the number of
musicians and non-musicians reaching each position under
progressive testing. For music notes, there were significantly more musicians reaching 3 level-2 positions in the lower
LVF than non-musicians, including position 20 (χ2(1) =
4.730, p = .030, φ = 0.27), 26 (χ2(1) = 4.730, p = .030, φ =
0.27), and 27 (χ2(1) = 4.730, p = .030, φ = 0.27; Fig. 3a). No
significant differences in the number of musicians and nonmusicians reaching other positions were observed.
For English letters, there was a significant difference in
the number of musicians and non-musicians reaching 7 positions in the RVF, including position 5 (χ2(1) = 6.349, p =
.012, φ = 0.32), 6 (χ2(1) = 8.349, p = .012, φ = 0.36), 12
(χ2(1) = 8.349, p = .012, φ = 0.36), 18 (χ2(1) = 4.016, p =
.045, φ = 0.25), 23 (χ2(1) = 8.333, p = .004, φ = 0.36), 28
(χ2(1) = 8.333, p = .004, φ = 0.36), and 29 (χ2(1) = 8.333, p
= .004, φ = 0.36). More musicians reached positions at level
2 in the lower RVF and positions at level 3 in the upper
RVF than non-musicians in English reading (Fig. 3b). No
significant differences in the number of musicians and nonmusicians reaching other testing positions were observed.
For Chinese characters and Tibetan letters, no significant
differences were found in the number of musicians and nonmusicians reaching the 36 testing positions (Fig. 3c, 3d).

Figure 3. The number of musicians and non-musicians reaching each testing position, and the differences between the two
groups (musicians - non-musicians) in reading (a) music
notes, (b) English letters, (c) Chinese characters, and (d)
Tibetan letters under progressive testing paradigm. (White
borders: p < .05)
To examine participants’ identification ACC, t-tests were
used to compare musicians’ and non-musicians’ ACCs in the
6 (horizontal) x 6 (vertical) testing positions in the visual
word/symbol identity matching task. In our analysis, we
substituted the ACCs below the chance level (0.5) and missing data (i.e., for participants who did not reach a position due
to their ACCs being below 0.5 in the corresponding position
at the previous level) with the chance level performance (0.5).
For music note ACC, a significant difference was found in
position 16 (t(62) = 2.469, p = .016, d = 0.63), 31 (t(62) =
2.072, p = .042, d = 0.53), and 35 (t(62) = 2.056, p = .044, d
= 0.52; Figure 4a). Musicians performed better than nonmusicians in music note reading at the central (level 1) position in the upper RVF and two positions at level 3 in the
lower LVF and RVF. For English letter ACC, a significant
difference was found in position 11 (t(62) = 2.590, p = .012, d
= 0.66), 35 (t(62) = 2.729, p = .008, d = 0.69), and 36 (t(62) =
2.425, p = .018, d = 0.62; Figure 4b). Musicians performed
better than non-musicians when English letters were presented at one position at level 2 in the upper RVF and two positions at level 3 in the lower RVF. For Chinese character ACC,
a significant difference was found in position 15 (t(62) =
2.069, p = .043, d = 0.53; Figure 4c). Musicians performed
better than non-musicians when Chinese characters were
presented at the central position in the upper LVF. For Tibetan letter reading, no significant differences were found between musicians and non-musicians, suggesting that musicians did not hold a significant advantage over non-musicians
in Tibetan letter reading (Figure 4d).

1502

Figure 4. The ACCs of musicians, non-musicians, and the
differences between the two groups (musicians - nonmusicians) in reading (a) music notes, (b) English letters, (c)
Chinese characters and (d) Tibetan letters. (White borders: p
< .05)

Discussion
Here we examined how music reading expertise influences visual span in music note, English letter, Chinese
character, and novel symbol (i.e., Tibetan) reading. For music note reading, musicians outperformed non-musicians at
the central position in the upper RVF and some peripheral
positions in both the lower LVF and RVF, suggesting that
they have a larger visual span than non-musicians. This result is consistent with previous findings that experts may
develop a larger visual span than novices in meaningful
tasks related to their expertise, as shown in a chess configuration detection task (Reingold et al., 2001) and a music
note playing task (Sloboda, 1974). The finding that musicians’ advantage could be found in both visual fields was
consistent with Proverbio, Manfredi, Zani and Adorni’s
(2012) finding that visual processing of music notes involves bilateral activations in the fusiform (BA37) and inferior occipital gyri (BA18). Note that this result is in contrast
to Segalowitz et al.’s (1979) study, which showed a RVF
advantage in a chord-playing task. This difference may be
due to the involvement of left-lateralized motor planning in
music playing tasks. Putting together, these results suggest
that lateralization of music processing may depend on the
task requirements.
For English letter reading, consistent with our hypothesis,
musicians outperformed non-musicians at several peripheral
positions in the RVF. This finding suggests that musicreading expertise may modulate visual span in English reading due to their similarities in the cognitive processes involved. Both music notations and English words are read
from left-to-right, and thus music notes and English letters
are recognized in the RVF more often (Brysbaert & Nazir,
2005; Wong & Hsiao, 2012). With extensive music reading
experience, musicians hold a processing advantage in the
RVF/ LH through perpetual learning, and this may translate
to better English reading performance in the RVF. Moreover, both the note-to-sound mapping in music reading and

the grapheme–phoneme correspondence in English reading
(e.g., Brown, Martinez & Parsons, 2006) may involve more
LH analytic processing than RH processing (Bradshaw &
Nettleton, 1981; Hébert & Cuddy, 2006; Hsiao & Lam,
2013; Segalowitz et al., 1979). Due to these similarities in
cognitive processing between music and English reading,
music-reading expertise may facilitate perceptual processing
in the RVF/LH, which further benefits English reading in
the RVF.
For Chinese character reading, musicians performed better than non-musicians at the central position in the upper
LVF, but not in any peripheral locations. This result is consistent with our hypothesis that music-reading expertise has
less influence on the visual span for Chinese character reading than English letter reading. This effect may be due to the
different cognitive processes involved in music and Chinese
reading. Contrary to left-to-right music reading, Chinese can
be read in all directions (left to right, right to left, or vertically), possibly resulting in different perceptual learning.
Moreover, Chinese has no grapheme-phoneme correspondence, and thus decomposition of a character into components is not required. As such, Chinese reading tends to be
right-lateralized (Tzeng et al., 1979) or bilateral (Tan et al.,
2001) in its orthographic processing due to its unique logographic orthography. Taken together, the different processing advantages between music (RVF/LH) and Chinese
(LVF/RH) reading may reduce the facilitation of music
reading expertise on the visual span of Chinese reading.
However, musicians’ advantage in the central upper LVF
suggests the possibility of modulation of music reading experience in Chinese character processing. Future work will
examine this possibility.
For novel symbol (i.e., Tibetan letter) reading, no
performance differences were found in any of the positions
between musicians and non-musicians. This result suggests
that the two groups have similar visual spans in novel
symbol processing. The absence of a transfer effect to novel
symbol processing suggests that the modulation of music
reading experiences on visual spans in reading is limited to
stimuli of expertise, and cannot be generalized to novel
symbols.
Note that in the current study, we measured visual span as
participants’ identification performance when the target
location within the stimulus was unknown beforehand. In
other words, the visual span was measured in a distributed
attention condition, in which participants had to pay attention to the whole stimulus without orienting their attention
to a specific location beforehand. This is in contrast to some
previous studies of visual span, in which a cue was provided
prior to the presentation of the stimulus (e.g., Legge et al.,
2001) to allow participants’ orientation of attention to the
targeted location beforehand. Future work will examine
whether similar modulation effects can be observed when a
different measure of visual span is used.
To conclude, this study examined how music reading expertise influences visual spans in reading music notes, English letters, Chinese characters, and novel symbols reading.

1503

As an expertise effect, musicians outperformed nonmusicians in music reading at some central and peripheral
positions in both visual fields. Interestingly, for English
letter reading, musicians also outperformed non-musicians
in some peripheral positions in the RVF but not in the LVF.
In contrast, in both Chinese character and novel symbol
reading, musicians and non-musicians did not differ in their
performance in any peripheral positions. These results can
be explained by both music and English processing advantages in the RVF/LH, whereas Chinese character processing is more right-lateralized or bilateral. Thus, the modulation of music-reading expertise on visual spans in language reading depends on the similarities in the cognitive
processes involved.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (ECS scheme project # HKU 758412H to J.H. Hsiao).
We thank Professor Gail Eskes for providing the n-back
program and MindSea Development Inc. for writing the
software. We also thank Dr. Sing Hang Cheung for providing useful comments and a prototype of Chinese stimuli.

References
Bach, M. (2006). The Freiburg Visual Acuity Testvariability unchanged by post-hoc re-analysis. Graefes
Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol., 245, 965-971.
Bradshaw, J. L., & Nettleton, N. C. (1981). The nature of
hemispheric specialization in man. Behav. Brain Sci., 4,
51-63.
Brown, S., Martinez, M. J., & Parsons, L. M. (2006). Music
and language side by side in the brain: a PET study of the
generation of melodies and sentences. Eur. J. Neurosci.,
23, 2791-2803.
Brysbaert, M., & d’Ydewalle, G. (1990). Tachistoscopic
presentation of verbal stimuli for assessing cerebral dominance: Reliability data and some practical recommendation. Neuropsychologia, 28, 443- 455.
Brysbaert, M., & Nazir, T. (2005). Visual constraints in
written word recognition: evidence from the optimal
viewing-position effect. J. Res. Read., 28, 216- 228.
Chinese Language Education Section, Curriculum Development Institute, Education Bureau, Hong Kong SAR
(2012). List of Graphemes of Commonly-used Chinese
Characters. Hong Kong: Education Bureau, HKSAR.
Chung, S. T., Legge, G. E., & Cheung, S. H. (2004). Letterrecognition and reading speed in peripheral vision benefit
from perceptual learning. Vision Res., 44, 695-709.
Goolsby, T. W. (1994). Profiles of processing: Eye movements during sightreading. Music Percept.,12, 97-123.
Grieg, E. (1888). Anitra's Dance from Peer Gynt Suite No.1,
Op.46. In A. E. Wier Piano Pieces the Whole World Plays
(pp. 72-74). Beijing: People's Music Publishing House.
Hébert, S., & Cuddy, L. L. (2006). Music-reading deficiencies and the brain. Adv. Cogn. Psychol., 2, 199-206.
Ho, H. H. (1998). Hong Kong, mainland China & Taiwan:
Chinese character frequency–A trans-regional, diachron-

ic survey. Retrieved January 27, 2015 from The Chinese
University
of
Hong
Kong,
Website:
http://humanum.arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Lexis/chifreq/
Hsiao, J. H., & Lam, S. M. (2013). The Modulation of Visual and Task Characteristics of a Writing System on
Hemispheric Lateralization in Visual Word Recognition—A Computational Exploration. Cognitive Sci., 37,
861-890.
Lau, E. Y. Y., Ip, M. S. M., Lee, T. M. C., Yeung, A. W.
M., & Eskes, G. A. (2013). Neurocognitive and Psychosocial Outcomes of Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Hong
Kong Chinese: Similar to or Different from Western Populations? J. Sleep Disor: Treat Care, 2: 3.
Legge, G. E., Mansfield, J. S., & Chung, S. T. (2001). Psychophysics of reading: XX. Linking letter recognition to
reading speed in central and peripheral vision. Vision
Res., 41, 725-743.
Mann, D. T., Williams, A. M., Ward, P., & Janelle, C. M.
(2007). Perceptual-cognitive expertise in sport: A metaanalysis. J. S. E. P., 29, 457.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97-113
O’Regan, J. K., Lévy-Schoen, A., & Jacobs, A. M. (1983).
The effect of visibility on eye-movement parameters in
reading. Percept. & Psychophys., 34, 457-464.
Proverbio, A. M., Manfredi, M., Zani, A., & Adorni, R.
(2013). Musical expertise affects neural bases of letter
recognition. Neuropsychologia, 51, 538-549.
Reingold, E. M., Charness, N., Pomplun, M., & Stampe, D.
M. (2001). Visual span in expert chess players: Evidence
from eye movements. Psychol. Sci., 12, 48-55.
Segalowitz, S. J., Bebout, L. J., & Lederman, S. J. (1979).
Lateralization for reading musical chords: Disentangling
symbolic, analytic, and phonological aspects of reading.
Brain Lang., 8, 315-323.
Sloboda, J. (1974). The Eye-Hand Span--An Approach to
the Study of Sight Reading. Psychol. Music, 2, 4-10.
Stewart, L. (2005). A neurocognitive approach to music
reading. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1060, 377-386.
Tan, L. H., Laird, A. R., Li, K., & Fox, P. T. (2005). Neuroanatomical correlates of phonological processing of Chinese characters and alphabetic words: A metanalysis.
Hum. Brain Mapp., 25, 83-91.
Tan, L. H., Liu, H. L., Perfetti, C. A., Spinks, J. A., Fox, P.
T., & Gao, J. H. (2001). The neural system underlying
Chinese logograph reading. Neuroimage, 13, 836-846.
Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., Cotton, B., & Wang, S. Y.
(1979). Visual lateralization effect in reading Chinese
characters. Nature (London), 282, 499-501.
Wong, Y. K., & Hsiao, J. H. W. (2012). Reading direction is
sufficient to account for the optimal viewing position in
reading: The case of music reading. CogSci 2012 proceedings, 2540-2545.

1504

