No stereotype threat effect in international chess
Tom Stafford (t.stafford@sheffield.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield
Sheffield, S102TP, United Kingdom
Abstract

players’ performance or skill acquisition which interacts
with gender.
One notable psychological phenomenon which can
influence performance is that of ‘stereotype threat’,
whereby an individuals’ awareness of a negative stereotype influences their performance. This was originally proposed for intelligence test performance and
African Americans (Steele & Aronson, 1995), and has
since been extended to other domains, most pertinently
for our purposes to women and performance in nonstereotypically feminine domains of achievement, such
as mathematics (Spencer et al., 1999).
In chess, both observational (Rothgerber & Wolsiefer,
2014) and experimental studies (Maass et al., 2008)
appear to confirm the existence of stereotype threat.
Rothgerber and Wolsiefer (2014) looked at 219 female
chess players and found evidence for stereotype threat
in the field — these players under-performed relative
to their rating when they played male players. They
report (p.79) that “Stereotype threat susceptibility was
most pronounced in contexts that could be considered
challenging: when playing a strong or moderate opponent”. It should be noted that their sample was very
young (5 – 15 years). Maass and colleagues (2008) ran
an study using internet chess, where the perceived gender of opponents was experimentally manipulated with
84 participants (half male, half female, mean age 33.5).
When believing they were playing an opponent of the
opposite gender female players were less likely to win.
If these findings generalise widely to chess performance
they have the potential to systematically undermine the
performance of female players.
A recent analysis suggests that publication bias has
exaggerated the reality of the stereotype threat phenomenon (Flore & Wicherts, 2015) (see also (Stricker,
2008; Ganley et al., 2013)). In a similar vein, there is a
possibility that a methodological confound is responsible
for some positive replications of the effect, at least in the
domain of mathematics and a gender stereotype threat
effect (Stoet & Geary, 2012).
So although an obvious disparity exists in participation
rates between men and women, there is uncertainty over
the mechanisms by which this is perpetuated. In particular, the phenomenon of stereotype threat offers a specific
psychological mechanism whereby cultural stereotypes
and the existing relative paucity of female role models
can interact with gender to hamper women’s achieve-

We examine data from over 6.6 million games of tournament chess between players rated by the international
chess authority, FIDE. Previous research has focussed on
the low representation of women in chess. We replicate and extend previous analysis (Chabris and Glickman,
2006) on an international level. We find no support for
differential variability, differential drop-out between male
and female players, or social context (in the form of proportion of female players at a national level) as drivers of
drivers of male-female differences. Further, we examine
games between mixed and same gender pairs for evidence
of a ‘stereotype threat’ effect. Contrary to previous reports, we find no evidence of stereotype threat. Though
this analysis contradicts one specific mechanism whereby
gender stereotype may influence players, the persistent
differences between male and female players suggests
that systematic factors do exist and remain to be uncovered.
Keywords: learning; chess; skill acquisition; expertise;

Introduction
Chess has an illustrious history within cognitive science (Newell et al., 1958; Chase & Simon, 1973; Charness, 1992), providing a paradigmatic example of cognitive skill, and a testbed for theories of skill acquisition
and performance. Aside from its worldwide popularity,
and historical and cultural interest, chess has the advantage of being a skill with minimal perceptual or motor
requirements, the upper-bound on an individual’s performance being their cognitive capacity in planning, and
reasoning through the complex space of possible moves.
Chess also has the advantage that players are rated using
the Elo system (Elo, 1978), which updates according
to a player’s success or failure in games against other
rated players. This provides an objective measure of
skill, which is not directly contaminated by the subjective perception of observers.
The chess playing community is predominantly male.
Previous research has explored a number of possible
competing explanations for the under-representation of
women in chess (Chabris & Glickman, 2006; Bilalić et
al., 2009). In their study, Chabris and Glickman (2006)
looked at 250,000 US tournament players and found that
men’s ratings were not more variable than women’s and
that younger players did not learn at different rates according to gender. They found that men’s ratings were
higher than women’s in areas where there were fewer
women players (and not so in areas, defined by zip code,
where at least 50% of younger players are female) — a
result which is suggestive of an effect of social context on

384

ments in chess, but has not been convincingly established
for a wide age range playing at the higher levels of the
game. This is what this study set out to do.

associated with Chess Grandmaster level.
The ratio of the standard deviation ratings for women
to men was 1.08. Like Chabris and Glickman (2006), this
shows higher variability in women’s ratings, offering no
support to the hypothesis that males are more variable in
their ability.
One possible explanation for the male advantage in
ratings is that women drop out of chess at higher rates
than men. Following Chabris and Glickman (2006), we
looked at young players (aged 5 to 25, birth years 1987–
2007) who were active in the third year covered by our
data, tracking them to see if they remained active in the
remaining years covered by our data.
The average number of days until one of these players became inactive was 553 (for 28,190 men) and 560
(for 6,510 women, a significant difference (t(34698) =
2.42, p = 0.016). Clearly higher drop-out rate among
potentially strong female players is not a plausible explanation for any male advantage in ratings.

Data and method

Differences by country
One proposed mechanism by which a gender difference
may be created, perpetuated or exacerbated is the minority status of women chess players. Considerable variation exists in the proportion of chess players who are female by nation (minimum: 2.0%, Denmark; maximum:
33.9%, Mozambique). The proportion of female chess
players at competition level could conceivably influence
younger female players, by providing role-models, mentors, or merely by lessening their perceived minority status. To investigate this issue, we compared the difference
between male and female ratings, and between male and
female time-until-drop-out, against the proportion of female chess players in each country.

Male ­ female duration difference

Our data comprise 6, 641, 158 games played by
461, 637 FIDE rated players, of which 56, 474 (12.2%)
are women. Of these players, 176, 583 were active during the 92 month period for which we have data, and for
these players we have statistics on each game they played
(and subsequent rating changes). The average birth year
for these players was 1983, with a standard deviation of
19.78.
For each player the data consists of a unique player
ID, date of birth, gender, nationality and a details of
the games they played (including the piece colour they
played as - White or Black - who they played against, the
tournament this was part of, and the outcome). The data
also contains all players’ official FIDE rating calculated
according to the Elo system. This system updates players’ ratings according to game outcomes and acts both as
a prediction system for the outcome of a match of any
two rated players and as a way of ranking any player
against the historical community of all players contained
within the system. Because Elo ratings are updated after
each game, it is possible to compare players who have
never played, and may not even be contemporaneous.
Our analytic strategy is to first confirm for our international sample the differences found in the US sample
studied by Chabris and Glickman (2006), and then to
explore in greater detail the possible influence of social
context — and particularly the availability of female role
models - has on learning and performance. Specifically,
this means to confirm a difference in ratings between
male and female players, which cannot be attributed to
differential variability in ratings or drop-out. Next, to see
if drop-out and rating differences between young male
and female players can be attributed to difference in proportion of female players at a country level. Finally, we
investigate in detail the possibility of stereotype threat, a
candidate phenomenon for reduced female performance
in stereotypically male domains. The advantage of chess
is that we are able to precisely gauge the challenge presented by individual games to each player, via comparison of player ratings.
Analysis
scripts
are
available
at
https://osf.io/aeksv. For commercial reasons
the full dataset is not available at the point of writing.

600
400
200
0

−200
−400
−600 0.0

Results
Differences in ratings and drop-out

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

proportion of female players per country

Figure 1: Difference in duration-until-inactive between
young male and female players. 95% confidence intervals shown.

The average FIDE rating of men is 1880 (standard deviation 295, and for women 1700 (standard deviation 318).
This difference is statistically significant, t(176096) =
74.31, p < 0.0001). For reference, a rating above 2500 is

385

Male ­ female rating difference

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
−100
−200 0.0

Male ­ female learning rate difference

As shown in Figure 1, there is no discernible relation
between proportion of female players in country and the
difference in drop out rates for young male and female
players (Pearson’s r = −0.15, p = 0.10).

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

−0.2
−0.4 0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

proportion of female players per country

Figure 3: Difference in average slope of linear fit to ratings over time between male and female players. 95%
confidence intervals shown but not visible at this resolution.

0.4

proportion of female players per country

Figure 2: Difference in rating between young male and
female players. 95% confidence intervals shown.
Figure 3 shows how the differing proportion of female
players relates to the average difference in slope between
male and female players. As with drop-out, there is
no clear relation between the proportion of female players and how young female players learn with respect to
young male players (Pearson’s r = 0.07, p = 0.48), although we note that as with the Chabris and Glickman
(2006) analysis of US zip codes, those countries with the
highest proportion of female players (> 30%) are conspicuous in showing no strong evidence of a difference
between learning rates for young male and female players.

As shown in Figure 2, there is not a strong relation between proportion of female players in country and the
difference in rating for young male and female players. If anything, countries with a higher proportion of
female players see a larger disparity between male and
female ratings (Pearson’s r = 0.21, p < 0.012, compare
to Chabris and Glickman, 2006, figure 4).

Differences in learning rate
So far our analysis has been restricted to using a player’s
best rating, but inspecting the change in players’ ratings
over time also allows the investigation of certain questions. Especially for younger players, we would expect
performance to improve with practice, and so be reflected
in an increase in rating over time. Previous research has
asked if performance at chess is affected by gender, it
is also possible to ask if learning is affected by gender.
Anything that affects learning will have an influence on
performance, by necessity.
Due to uncertainty over the precise model which best
fits the learning curve (Gaschler et al., 2014; Gallistel et
al., 2004) we fitted change in performance with a simple
linear regression for each player, using their Elo rating
at each time point. We restrict our analysis here again
to young players (born 1987–2007) and to those who
played at least 10 games during the period covered by
the data.
The average slope was higher for males (0.101/day,
n=21263) than for females (0.064/day, n = 5265);
a highly significant difference t(26526) = 15.95, p <
0.00001. For reference, this represents a modest average
yearly increment of 36.9 versus 23.4 Elo points.

Differences in by-game performance
Our data also allows us to look at how individual game
performance is affected by player characteristics. Figure 4 shows observed relationship between rating difference (rating of player playing White − rating of player
playing Black) against outcome (coding a win for player
playing White as 1; win for player playing Black as 0;
draw as 0.5).
As we expect, there is a clear relationship between the
relative player ratings and game outcome. Note that at
around 0 difference in player ratings the average outcome
is above 0.5 — showing, as is widely known, that the
White player has an advantage.
We can ask how this relationship changes for higher
and lower rated competitors. To do this we split the
games into five groups (quintiles) according to the average rating of the two players, so that the 1st quintile
contains games in which the average rating of the two
players is in the top 20% of all games, and so on. To
highlight how quintile affects outcome, it is helpful to

386

Average score for White

Average score for White
compared to 3rd quintile baseline

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.04

quintile by player average rating
1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

0.02
0.00

−0.02

0.2
0.0

0.06

−0.04

−600 −400 −200

0

200

400

Difference in ranking
(White ­ Black, using bin size = 125)

600

−600 −400 −200

0

200

400

Difference in rating
(White ­ Black, using bin size = 125)

600

Figure 5: Effect of player average rating on game outcome (6,641,158 games). 95% confidence intervals
shown.

Figure 4: Difference in player rating against average
game outcome (6,641,158 games). 95% confidence intervals shown.

the gender of your opponent is highly obvious. We code
all the games in our data set according to whether they
are played between two men (‘MM’), two women (‘FF’)
or mixed gender pairings, with a woman playing White
(‘FM’) or Black (‘MF’). A previous observational report
of stereotype threat in chess (Rothgerber & Wolsiefer,
2014) suggested that this effect would be most likely in
“challenging situations” and when playing someone of
a higher grade. International chess tournaments are certainly challenging, and our previous analysis is suitable
for showing how any effect changes with player rating
relative to their opponent.
As with the analysis by player average rating, we normalise the outcome by comparing our results for player
rating difference against a baseline. In this case we
choose a baseline of the games when two men played
(‘MM’). A stereotype threat effect should reduce the
probability of a woman winning when she plays a man,
compared to when a man plays a man or a woman plays
a woman. Graphically, this should appear as a lower
curve for the ‘FM’ group (where White is a woman),
and a higher curve for the ‘MF’ group (where White is a
man). In particular, following Rothgerber’s suggestions,
we would expect that this effect would manifest most
strongly when a woman plays a superior opponent (so
in the negative portion of x-axis for the ‘FM’ group and
the positive portion of x-axis for the ‘MF’ group). The
results are shown in Figure 6
As can be seen in Figure 6, there is no stereotype
threat effect observable in international chess. If anything, the opposite pattern is found – both mixed gender pairs show a relatively enhanced probability of White
winning when White is the lower rated player, and a relatively diminished probability of White winning when

‘normalise’ outcome against the effect of rating difference. To do this we plot the relative change in outcome
compared to some baseline. In this case, the baseline we
use will be the middle (3rd) quintile. The result is shown
in Figure 5.
Figure 5 shows the variation around the basic pattern
that is shown in Figure 4 which occurs as you move from
the games between the lowest rated players (5th quintile) to the highest rated players (1st quintile). For the
two higher quintiles, the curve is above the 3rd quintile when White’s rating exceed Black’s, and below that
when Black’s exceeds White’s. This shows that even for
the same absolute difference in rating, when the player’s
ratings are, on average, higher, the probability of the
higher rated player winning is greater. The opposite is
true for lower rated players – the same absolute difference in rating is less predictive of outcome. Alternatively
put, the higher rated players can make more advantage
of any absolute rating difference (note also that the effect
shows at the 0 rating difference point, meaning that the
probability of a White win when the players are evenly
matched moves further away from 50% as the players’
ratings goes up – higher rated players can make more of
a small advantage).
Finally, we can look to see if gender affects the results.
Previously female players have been shown to be at a relative disadvantage when they believed they were playing
men (Maass et al., 2008), a finding which is in line with
the literature on ‘stereotype threat’, whereby highlighting a person’s membership of a minority group can affect their performance to be in line with stereotypes associated with that group (in this case, the stereotype that
women are not as good at chess). In international chess

387

Average score for White
compared to MM pairing

0.04

quintile by player average rating
MM

MF

FM

FF

0.02
0.00

−0.02
−0.04
−600 −400 −200

0

200

400

Difference in rating
(White ­ Black, using bin size = 125)

600

Figure 6: How player gender pairing affects game outcome (6,624,273 games). 95% confidence intervals
shown.
White is the higher rated player, regardless of whether
White is a man or a women. Recall that a stereotype effect should be the opposite of that seen here for the ‘FM’
and ‘MF’ pairings — diminished chance of White winning when White is a woman and the lower rated player
(the ‘FM’ curve should move into the bottom left quadrant, which it doesn’t), and enhanced chance of White
winning when White is a man and the higher rated player
(the ‘MF curve should move into the top right quadrant,
which it doesn’t). By comparing this effect to Figure 4
you can see that it is the same as the effect of lower rated
player-pairs overall (e.g. the 4th and 5th quintiles by pair
average rating).

Discussion
We replicate and extend previous analyses of differences between male and female chess players. Like
Chabris and Glickman we find no support for the idea
that differential drop-out might explain sex differences in
achievement in the sport. Those authors concluded that
social context may be an important factor, based on a bystate analysis of US players. Our analysis used an international sample and examines by-country differences in
proportion of female players. We find no evidence that
this proportion influences the differences between men
and women in ratings, drop-out or learning rate. Our
analysis uses the international population of players, so
we might expect greater cultural variation than between
US zip codes (as in Chabris and Glickman’s analysis).
Further, our data allows us to explicitly test the idea of
stereotype threat, one candidate mechanism by which social context may effect performance. This has not been
done before for chess. We find no support for this phenomenon, contrary to previously published reports. We
note that this is consistent with other studies of stereo-

388

type threat in high-stakes real-world settings (Stricker,
2008).
We use a large population for our analysis, rather than
a sample of tens or hundreds (Rothgerber & Wolsiefer,
2014; Maass et al., 2008). It may be that the older
age of our sample, the higher playing standard and/or
the greater pressure of international competition induces
a professionalism among players that protects against
stereotype threat. Although this gives our results a strong
validity in terms of the population of FIDE rated chess
players, it does mean that we must recognise the unusually highly rated nature of our population compared to
those used in some other studies of chess players, and
particularly of younger chess players. Working with very
large datasets introduces some new opportunities for the
cognitive scientist (Stafford & Dewar, 2014; Stafford &
Haasnoot, under review). Observational studies, however large, necessarily have reduced power of causal inference compared to experimental studies. Counterbalancing this is undeniable relevance of any phenomenon
observable real-world data such as that used here.
The question of the under-representation of women in
chess remains unsolved, we have merely provided evidence that stereotype threat is an unlikely mechanism
for sustaining any difference in male-female ratings once
players have achieved a standard that allows them to hold
a FIDE rating. Some researchers (Bilalić et al., 2009;
Charness & Gerchak, 1996) suggest that the gender difference at the top of the distribution is a natural consequence of different participation rates — in other words,
that the low number of women in the highest echelons
of chess is the simple result of the much larger number
of men in the population of chess players from which
the best players are drawn. It is certainly a problem that
analysis of rated players limits the conclusions that can
be drawn because we are in effect only looking at a subset of all possible players (Vaci et al., 2014). From this
perspective the difference in participation between men
and women in chess itself may be the primary factor to be
explained, rather than any difference in ratings or maximal achievement (which may be explained sufficiently
by differential participation).
Recently, chess has been a focus for large scale analytics. (Howard, 2006; Chassy & Gobet, 2015; Leone et
al., 2014), and we see this study as part of that trend.
Future work with this data has great potential for investigating differences in change in expertise, as well as performance. Highly relevant is the observation that tournament games are actually the most significant events in
rating improvement (Howard, 2012, 2013). Future work
on chess is sure to focus on within-game dynamics as
well as the dynamics of ratings. To the end of promoting integration of existing work and further exploration
of the rich data provided by FIDE chess ratings we are

happy to make the analysis scripts for the current analysis available immediately at https://osf.io/aeksv),
and the full data available in time.

Howard, R. W. (2013). Practice other than playing
games apparently has only a modest role in the development of chess expertise. British journal of psychology, 104(1), 39–56.
Leone, M. J., Slezak, D. F., Cecchi, G. A., & Sigman,
M. (2014). The geometry of expertise. Frontiers in
psychology, 5.
Maass, A., D’Ettole, C., & Cadinu, M. (2008). Checkmate? the role of gender stereotypes in the ultimate intellectual sport. European Journal of Social Psychology, 38(2), 231–245.
Newell, A., Shaw, J. C., & Simon, H. A. (1958). Chessplaying programs and the problem of complexity. IBM
Journal of Research and Development, 2(4), 320–335.
Rothgerber, H., & Wolsiefer, K. (2014). A naturalistic
study of stereotype threat in young female chess players. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 17(1),
79–90.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999).
Stereotype threat and women’s math performance.
Journal of experimental social psychology, 35(1), 4–
28.
Stafford, T., & Dewar, M. (2014). Tracing the trajectory of skill learning with a very large sample of online
game players. Psychological science, 25(2), 511–518.
Stafford, T., & Haasnoot, E. (under review). Confirming
and quantifying sleep consolidation in skill learning: a
field study using an online game.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat
and the intellectual test performance of african americans. Journal of personality and social psychology,
69(5), 797.
Stoet, G., & Geary, D. C. (2012). Can stereotype threat
explain the gender gap in mathematics performance
and achievement? Review of General Psychology,
16(1), 93–102.
Stricker, L. J. (2008). The challenge of stereotype threat
for the testing community. In Presidential address to
the division of evaluation, measurement, and statistics. 2007 american educational research association
annual meeting.
Vaci, N., Gula, B., & Bilalić, M. (2014). Restricting
range restricts conclusions. Frontiers in psychology,
5.

References
Bilalić, M., Smallbone, K., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F.
(2009). Why are (the best) women so good at chess?
participation rates and gender differences in intellectual domains. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 276(1659), 1161–1165.
Chabris, C. F., & Glickman, M. E. (2006). Sex differences in intellectual performance analysis of a large
cohort of competitive chess players. Psychological
Science, 17(12), 1040–1046.
Charness, N. (1992). The impact of chess research on
cognitive science. Psychological research, 54(1), 4–
9.
Charness, N., & Gerchak, Y. (1996). Participation rates
and maximal performance: A log-linear explanation
for group differences, such as russian and male dominance in chess. Psychological Science, 46–51.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in
chess. Cognitive psychology, 4(1), 55–81.
Chassy, P., & Gobet, F. (2015). Risk taking in adversarial situations: Civilization differences in chess experts.
Cognition, 141, 36–40.
Elo, A. E. (1978). The rating of chessplayers, past and
present. Arco Pub.
Flore, P. C., & Wicherts, J. M. (2015). Does stereotype threat influence performance of girls in stereotyped domains? a meta-analysis. Journal of school
psychology, 53(1), 25–44.
Gallistel, C. R., Fairhurst, S., & Balsam, P. (2004). The
learning curve: implications of a quantitative analysis.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 101(36), 13124–13131.
Ganley, C. M., Mingle, L. A., Ryan, A. M., Ryan, K.,
Vasilyeva, M., & Perry, M. (2013). An examination
of stereotype threat effects on girls’ mathematics performance. Developmental psychology, 49(10), 1886.
Gaschler, R., Progscha, J., Smallbone, K., Ram, N., &
Bilalić, M. (2014). Playing off the curve-testing quantitative predictions of skill acquisition theories in development of chess performance. Frontiers in psychology, 5.
Howard, R. W. (2006). A complete database of international chess players and chess performance ratings for
varied longitudinal studies. Behavior research methods, 38(4), 698–703.
Howard, R. W. (2012). Longitudinal effects of different
types of practice on the development of chess expertise. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 26(3), 359–369.

Acknowledgements
The “Sonas 92” dataset used in this analysis
was prepared by Jeff Sonas of Sonas Consulting
(jjeff@sonasconsulting.com). Without his generosity
and advice this study would not have been possible.
Thanks also to Alberto Ara, Stephen Want and to three
anonymous reviewers and the editor for their detailed
feedback.

389

