Noisy Parameters in Risky Choice
Sudeep Bhatia (bhatiasu@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Graham Loomes (graham.loomes@wbs.ac.uk)
Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

Abstract
We examine the effect of variability in model parameters on
the predictions of expected utility theory and cumulative
prospect theory, two of the most influential choice models in
decision making research. We find that zero-mean and
symmetrically distributed noise in the underlying parameters
of these models can systematically distort choice
probabilities, leading to false conclusions. Likewise,
differences in choice proportions across decision makers
might be due to differences in the amount of noise affecting
underlying parameters rather than to differences in actual
parameter values. Our results suggest that care and caution
are needed when trying to infer the underlying preferences of
decision makers, or the effects of psychological, biological,
economic, and demographic variables on these preferences.
Keywords: Decision making; Random utility; Random
preference; Risky choice; Prospect theory

Introduction
Research on risky choice has relied heavily on the use of
deterministic models. Perhaps the two most widely used
models today are expected utility theory (EUT) (von
Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947) and cumulative prospect
theory (CPT) (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992). When their functional forms are
specified and parameterized, deterministic models can make
precise quantitative predictions. However, such models fail
to capture an important aspect of choice behavior: namely,
that choice is stochastic, and decision makers may respond
differently when given exactly the same choice problem on
more than one occasion within a short space of time (see
Rieskamp et al., 2006 for a discussion).
Modelling stochastic risky choice requires a
representation of each individual’s preferences as
probability distributions. From an early stage in the
development of the literature, there were two ways in which
this type of modelling was accomplished. One approach
involved adding some ‘error’ specification to each
individual’s deterministic ‘core’ preferences (e.g. Luce,
1959). We shall refer to this approach as Fechnerian – a
broad term which covers a number of ways in which some
form of ‘add-on’ term might be specified. Another approach
allowed the parameters of an individual’s preference
function to vary from one moment to another, thereby
opening up the possibility that if the same choice were
presented at different times in the course of an experiment,
it might be resolved differently on each occasion (Becker et

al. 1963). We shall refer to this way of modelling noise as
the random preference or random parameter (RP) approach.
To the extent that preferences can be seen as being
constructed, influenced either by contextual and
environmental cues, imperfect recall, or momentary
fluctuation of attention, it might seem that the RP approach
is conceptually more appropriate, as it permits variability in
preference through variability in the parameters of the
individual’s preference functions. However, people may
also vary in the way they record their decisions, due to
varying degrees of complexity of the stimuli, varying
degrees of motivation or engagement, ‘interference’ from
previous decisions within the session or from some other
unobservable features of the stimuli or task. Since these
factors are largely outside the core structure of people’s
preferences, they may be better modelled by some
Fechnerian noise term that operates in addition to, but
independently of, the intrinsic variability in preference (see
Birnbaum, 2011, for a discussion).
So it seems plausible that the observed variability in
individuals’ repeated choices may arise from a number of
sources which are not mutually exclusive. Despite this, the
great majority of studies inferring preference functions from
choice data use specifications which operate as if some form
of Fechnerian noise is the only stochastic component of the
decision process: very few consider the possibility of
variability in terms of interactions between an RP core and
Fechnerian factors. Yet if observed choices actually entail
multiple sources of variability, there may be serious
consequences for theoretical inference if we try to force data
into a conceptually inadequate specification.

Risky Decision Models
We can write the gambles in the choices studied in this
paper as X = (x1, p1; x2, p2), so that X can be seen as offering
rewards x1 and x2 with probabilities p1 and p2. Both EUT
and CPT describe decision makers’ preferences between
pairs of such gambles using utility functions. Using a simple
power value function formulation for the utility of any
payoff x, the utility of a particular gamble under EUT is
given as: U(X|α) = p1∙x1α + p2∙x2α. The utility for X according
to the power value function formulation of CPT, with
Prelec’s one-parameter probability weighting function, is
similarly: U(X|α,γ) = π(p1)∙x1α + (1- π(p1))∙x2α where x1 ≥ x2 ≥
0 and π(p1) =
.
α captures the shape of the subjective value function for
payoffs, with α < 1 describing concave value functions that

1943

correspond to risk averse preferences under EUT, and α > 1
describing convex value functions that correspond to risk
seeking. γ captures the shape of the probability weighting
function, with γ < 1 generating an overweighting
(underweighting) of small (large) probabilities, and γ > 1
generating the opposite. Typically, decision makers behave
as if they have both α < 1 and γ < 1 when the above gambles
are explicitly presented to them.
In binary choice, these models predict that X is chosen
over Y whenever U(X|α,γ) > U(Y|α,γ). As these models are
deterministic, they need to be modified in order to capture
probabilistic choice data. The most common approach to
doing this has been to assume that the utilities for the two
gambles are each subject to Fechnerian noise ε, with E[ε] =
0, so that X is chosen over Y whenever [U(X|α,γ) + εX] –
[U(Y|α,γ) + εY] > 0. Supposing further that εX and εY are
independent of each other, we can define ε = εX – εY. Then
the probability of choosing X is the probability that U(X|α,γ)
– U(Y|α,γ) + ε > 0. When ε is distributed according to the
Gumbel distribution, this leads to the logit choice rule
specified by Luce (1959): Pr[X chosen] = f(θ∙U(X|α,γ) –
θ∙U(Y|α,γ)), where f is the logistic function. This error
specification, when applied by itself, predicts that the modal
choice will always be the option with the higher utility
according to the deterministic core.
Now let us consider separately the effect of noise in the
decision maker’s parameters, as represented in the RP
approach. With a simple additive formulation for parameter
noise, the above equations can be rewritten with α = α* + ηα
and γ = γ* + ηγ, where ηα and ηγ are noise terms with E[ηα] =
E[ηγ] = 0 (Becker et al., 1963; Loomes & Sugden, 1995). ηα
and ηγ are liable to vary from trial to trial, and thus α and γ,
and subsequently U(X|α,γ) and U(Y|α,γ), also tend to vary
from trial to trial. However, since the expected values of α
and γ are E[α] = α* and E[γ] = γ*, α* and γ* characterize the
central tendency of a decision maker’s underlying
preferences. If variability came only from sources
represented by noisy parameters, the probability of X being
chosen would be determined by the proportion of cases
where U(X|α,γ) - U(Y|α,γ) > 0 over the range of feasible
values of ηα and ηγ, weighted by their probabilities.
However, we now suppose that RP variability is
combined with other sources of variability captured by a
Fechnerian specification of the kind proposed by Luce
(1959), we have, for each α and γ pair: Pr[X chosen] =
Pr[U(X|α,γ) - U(Y|α,γ) + ε > 0]. Now on those occasions
where the α and γ drawn from the distributions of
parameters are such that U(X|α,γ) - U(Y|α,γ) is small, there is
a relatively high chance (though still less than 0.5, of
course) that Fechnerian variability will result in choosing
the option with the lower U(.), whereas there is a smaller
chance of that happening when RP variability produces a
larger U(X|α,γ) - U(Y|α,γ) difference.
A combination of Fechnerian and RP specifications offer
a more adequate account of choice data involving
dominated gambles than each of these approaches alone.
Models with only standard Fechnerian noise predict much

higher frequencies of violations of transparent dominance
than are generally observed, while RP-only models predict
that dominance is never violated at all, contrary to the
evidence (Loomes, 2005; see also Busemeyer & Townsend,
1993). Scholars have also found that allowing for both types
of noise is necessary to provide a good quantitative account
of behavior (Blavatskyy & Pogrebna, 2010; Loomes, 2005).

Effects of Noisy Parameters
Fechnerian noise and random parameters are necessary
to characterize probabilistic choice. Yet despite this, much
empirical decision research neglects the effect of RP when
deriving predictions from deterministic models. Such
neglect is no doubt due to convenience. Luce’s choice rule
has an analytical representation, which greatly facilitates
model fits and related analyses.
This neglect may also reflect the intuition that
unsystematic variability in parameter values, independent of
Fechnerian noise, has no systematic effect on choice, so that
modal choices can be used to make qualitative inferences
about how underlying preferences rank the available
options, regardless of the randomness in underlying
parameters. This paper tests this intuition and finds that it is
incorrect. Unlike the Fechnerian noise term ε, the parameter
noise terms ηα and ηγ affect utility non-linearly. Even if they
have a zero mean and are symmetric, changing their
variance can alter both absolute choice probabilities and the
ordering of relative choice probabilities. Thus it is possible
that we observe X being chosen more frequently than Y,
with Pr[X chosen] = Pr[U(X|α,γ) - U(Y|α,γ) + ε > 0] > 0.5,
but the central tendency of the decision maker’s underlying
preferences more frequently favours Y over X, with
U(Y|α*,γ*) > U(X|α*,γ*) and Pr[U(Y|α,γ) > U(X|α,γ)] > 0.5.
Risk Attitudes
As an illustration of this, let us now consider the choice
between a risky gamble X offering a 50% chance of
obtaining $10 and a 50% chance of obtaining $0, and its
safe expected value equivalent Y offering $5 with certainty.
We assume that a decision maker’s central tendency is
described by the power form of EUT and that his choices
display both Fechnerian and RP noise. Keeping things
simple, we suppose that the Fechnerian noise is modelled
via a Luce choice function (with θ = 1) while the RP
component involves α* = 0.9 with ηα being distributed
uniformly in the interval [-0.5, 0.5]. Supposing α* < 1
implies that the decision maker’s underlying preferences
more often than not entail risk aversion. However, when
each of the possible realizations of [U(X|α,γ), U(Y|α,γ)] are
embedded in the Luce formulation, the above assumptions
give Pr[X chosen] = 0.53 > 0.5. Thus, despite underlying
preferences predominantly supporting Y, the decision maker
chooses X more frequently than Y.
This happens due to the nonlinearity of utility difference
in α. In the Luce choice rule assumed above, the probability
of choosing X is an increasing function of f(α) = U(X|α,1) –
U(Y|α,1) = 0.5∙10α - 5α. f is convex in α for the range of α we

1944

are considering. This implies that the expected value of f is
greater than f applied to the expected value of α, i.e.
E[U(X|α,1) – U(Y|α,1)] > U(X|α*,1) – U(Y| α*,1). In this
case we obtain E[U(X|α,1) – U(Y|α,1)] > 0, resulting in a
higher choice probability of X. This is despite E[α] = α* < 1,
and that subsequently U(X|α*,1) – U(Y|α*,1) < 0.
The point is expanded upon in Figure 1, where we plot
the probability of choosing X = ($10, 0.5; $0, 0.5) over Y =
($5, 1) according to power function EUT with only
Fechnerian noise (using a Luce rule with θ = 1) and
compare that with a specification where RP (with ηα
distributed uniformly in the interval [-0.5,0.5]) interacts
with Fechnerian noise. The Fechnerian-only model entails
Pr[X chosen] less than, equal to or greater than 0.5
according to whether α* is less than, equal to or greater than
1, as shown by the solid line in Figure 1. However, this is
not the case when α is noisy. As shown by the broken line in
Figure 1, there are a range of values of α* between 0.87 and
1 where Pr[X chosen] > 0.5. Over this range, the decision
maker’s expected modal choice suggests risk seeking
whereas the central tendency of his preferences, as
represented by α*, represents risk aversion or risk neutrality.

function overweights low probabilities and underweights
high probabilities. Typically the crossover point is around
0.37, with π(p) > p for p < 0.37 and π(p) < p for p > 0.37.
Such an ‘inverse-S’ function is crucial in capturing the
famous four-fold pattern of risky choice (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992).
In the positive domain considered here, this pattern
corresponds to modal choices favouring a risky gamble that
offers a high payoff with a small probability relative to a
sure option with the same expected value (which looks like
risk-seeking), while at the same time generating modal
choices favouring a sure option over a risky gamble with the
same expected value that offers a large probability of a
slightly higher payoff and a small probability of a
considerably lower payoff (which looks like risk aversion).
Thus in the choice between a risky gamble XI offering a 1%
chance of obtaining $10 and a 99% chance of obtaining $0,
and its safe expected value equivalent YI offering $0.10 with
certainty, decision makers typically choose XI. In contrast,
in the choice between a risky gamble XII offering a 99%
chance of obtaining $10 and a 1% chance of obtaining $0,
and its safe expected value equivalent YII offering $9.90
with certainty, decision makers typically choose YII.
This pattern cannot be generated by deterministic EUT or
EUT with only standard Fechnerian noise. But let us
consider a setting with both Fechnerian and RP noise. For
simplicity, we fix α = 1 so the utility function is linear, and
we allow RP noise only in the γ parameter, with ηγ being
distributed uniformly in the interval [-0.5, 0.5]. For
Fechnerian noise, we use the Luce function with θ = 1, as in
the previous section.

Figure 1. The probability of choosing a risky gamble X over its expected
value Y for varying values of α*, plotted with only Fechnerian noise (solid
line) and with both Fechnerian and RP noise (dashed line). Here we can
observe a higher choice probability of X over Y for some values of α* < 1
in the presence of RP noise.

The important point of this illustration is to show that
when there is both Fechnerian and RP noise, we cannot
make reliable inferences about the decision maker’s risk
attitude using only modal choice frequencies, even if we
assume independence between the different sources of
noise. Moreover, as we show in the next two sections, the
co-existence of Fechnerian and RP noise in conjunction
with EUT core preferences can generate patterns of choice
that have been interpreted as providing support for non-EU
models such as CPT. In related work (not reported here) we
also illustrate the pernicious effect of RP noise on parameter
recovery and quantitative model fitting.
Probability Weighting: The Four-Fold Pattern
We now turn to cases where probabilities may be
transformed nonlinearly as with CPT using the single
parameter Prelec formulation given earlier. When γ < 1, this

Figures 2a and 2b. The probability of choosing a low-probability risky
gamble XI over its expected value YI (left) and the probability of choosing
a high-probability risky gamble XII over its expected value YII (right), for
varying values of γ*. These figures are plotted with only Fechnerian noise
(solid line) and with both Fechnerian and RP noise (dashed line).

Figure 2a shows the probability of choosing XI over YI
and Figure 2b shows the probability of choosing XII over YII.
As expected, a model with Luce noise but without noisy
parameters and with γ* = 1 entails for both pairs a 0.5
chance of choosing each option. For all γ* < 1, the risky
option is the modal choice in Figure 2a while the sure
amount is the modal choice in Figure 2b. However, when γ
itself exhibits symmetric noise and when this source of
variability interacts with Fechnerian noise, the effect – as
shown by the broken line – is to shift the transformation

1945

path up in Figure 2a and down in Figure 2b: that is, the
interaction increases the choice probability of XI over YI and
for YII over XII for all γ* considered. One implication of this
is that at the point where α = 1 and γ* = 1 – that is, in the
case where the deterministic model entails a risk neutral
expected utility maximizer – the modal choices exhibit the
‘mixed attitude to risk’ typical of the data and widely
viewed as supportive of CPT with γ < 1. Indeed, there is a
range of γ* between 1 and 1.15 for which the decision
maker’s expected modal choice generates a preference for
XI over YI and for YII over XII, a behavioral pattern
associated with the overweighting of small probabilities,
whereas the central tendency of his preferences represents
an underweighting of small probabilities.
Probability Weighting: Common Ratio Effect
The probability weighting biases assumed by Prospect
Theory are also necessary for it to account for the commonratio effect (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). The classic
common-ratio case involves choices between two pairs of
lotteries. One pair offers a gamble XIII = (x, p; 0, 1-p) versus
YIII = (y, 1) where p is typically around 0.8 and where y is
equal to, or a little below, the expected value of XIII. In the
example we consider in this section, our scaled-up pair is a
choice between a risky gamble XIII offering an 80% chance
of obtaining $10 and a 20% chance of obtaining $0, and its
safe expected value equivalent YIII offering $8 with
certainty. Here decision makers typically choose YIII.
The second pair involves scaling down the probabilities
of the positive payoffs in the first pair by some factor and
correspondingly increasing the probabilities of 0 in both
options to give a choice between XIV = (x, λp; 0, 1-λp) and
YIV = (y, λ; 0, 1-λ). Scaling down XIII and YIII by a typical
factor – letting λ = 0.25 – gives XIV offering a 20% chance
of obtaining $10 and an 80% chance of obtaining $0 versus
its relatively safe expected value equivalent YIV, a 25%
chance of obtaining $8 and a 75% chance of obtaining $0.
In such scaled-down pairs, decision makers typically choose
XIV much more frequently: indeed, it is quite common for a
sample of experimental participants to make YIII the modal
choice in the first pair but make XIV the modal choice in the
second pair. This is inconsistent with EUT, which assumes
that individuals’ preferences are linear in probabilities.
Thus, scaling down the probabilities in this way reduces the
EU of each option but leaves the ordering unchanged: a risk
averse individual will prefer the Y option in both pairs,
while a risk seeking individual will consistently choose the
X options. In a deterministic world of EU maximizers,
whatever proportion of the sample chooses XIII in the scaledup pair should also choose XIV in the scaled-down pair.
As with the four-fold pattern described above, the
observed change in modal choices can be accommodated by
CPT with γ < 1, leading to the overweighting of low
probabilities and the underweighting of high probabilities.
This is illustrated by the solid lines in Figures 3a and 3b in
which we fix α = 1, assume a Luce noise term with θ = 1,
and let γ range between 0.5 and 1.5. Here a model with

Fechnerian noise but without RP noise and with γ* < 1,
entails that YIII is the modal choice in Figure 3a while XIV is
the modal choice in Figure 3b.
But now suppose we allow both Fechnerian noise and RP
noise to co-exist and interact. As above, to allow for noise
in the γ parameter, we suppose ηγ is distributed uniformly in
the interval [-0.5, 0.5]. Under these assumptions, we have a
shift in the choice probabilities so that the interaction
increases the choice probability of YIII over XIII and of XIV
over YIV for γ* in the neighbourhood of 1. Again, one
implication of this is that at the point where α = 1 and γ* = 1
– that is, in the case where the deterministic model entails a
risk neutral expected utility maximizer – the modal choices
exhibit the reversal in choice probability observed in
behavioral experiments, with a preference for YIII in the
scaled-up pair, but a preference for XIV in the scaled-down
pair. Thus we see that even though the central tendency
values of the parameters entail not just EUT but expected
value maximization, modal choices display a mixture of risk
aversion and risk seeking in a manner resembling CPT with
γ < 1. Indeed, as above, there is a range of γ* between 1 and
1.02 for which the central tendency of the decision maker’s
underlying preferences, as represented by γ*, represents an
underweighting of small probabilities, whereas the
behavioral pattern generated by these γ* is commonly
associated with the overweighting of small probabilities.

Figures 3a and 3b. The probability of choosing a scaled-up risky gamble
XIII over its expected value YIII (left) and the probability of choosing a
scaled-down risky gamble XIV over its expected value YVI (right), for
varying values of γ*. These probabilities are plotted with only Fechnerian
noise (solid line) and with both Fechnerian and RP noise (dashed line).

Discussion
Differences between Decision Makers
We have seen that it is unsafe to infer an individual’s
underlying preferences from modal choice patterns, if we
expect both RP noise and Fechnerian noise to play a role in
the choice process. What is true for individuals may also be
true for studies which draw conclusions about differences in
preferences between different groups of people based either
on differences in choice proportions or else on the basis of
‘representative agent’ assumptions. Between them, the
disciplines of psychology, neuroscience, marketing, and
economics have produced a large number of studies
examining the relationship between risk preference and a
wide variety of demographic, social, biological, cognitive,

1946

emotional and neural variables. Much of this work makes
the implicit or explicit assumption that differences in choice
probabilities between different groups reflect differences in
underlying utility/value functions and/or probability
weighting preferences.
For example, based on choice proportions, men are
considered to be more risk seeking than women (Charness
& Gneezy, 2012); Chinese are considered more risk seeking
than Americans (Hsee & Weber, 1999); the nucleus
accumbens is seen as influencing risk seeking choices
whereas the anterior insula is seen as influencing riskless
choices (Kuhnen & Knutson, 2005); high incentives are
associated with more risk aversion than low incentives (Holt
& Laury, 2002); and decision makers under high time
pressure are seen as being more risk averse than decision
makers under low time pressure (Zur & Breznitz, 1981).
Likewise stress is seen as affecting the amount of
probability weighting in gains and losses (Porcelli &
Delgado, 2009), the degree of striatal activity is assumed to
influence the overweighting of small probabilities (Hsu et
al., 2009), framing the decision as involving precaution is
assumed to lead to the overweighting of small and mediumsized probabilities (Kusev et al., 2009), and decision
feedback is considered to lead to objective probability
weighting (Jessup et al., 2008). Finally, based on one of the
most striking findings in contemporary decision making
research, it is often assumed that decision makers tend to
weigh probabilities differently when gamble payoffs and
probabilities are described compared to when these payoffs
and probabilities are experienced (Hertwig, 2015).
However, as we have shown, differences in choice
proportions may be due not to differences in central
tendency parameter values but rather to differences in the
amount of variability in those underlying parameters. To
illustrate, let us return to Figure 1. The horizontal axis in
that Figure represents varying values of α* under EUT and
the vertical axis represents the choice probability for the
gamble X corresponding with those different values of α*.
The two lines reflect varying levels of parameter noise in
the model. Suppose that a male decision maker chooses X
with frequency 0.52 while a female decision maker chooses
X with frequency 0.48. If the degree of parameter noise
were the same for both individuals, such a difference could
reasonably be attributed to differences in underlying α*,
with the male having an increased propensity for risk
seeking. But if the male’s underlying preferences involve
more parameter noise (the dotted line) than the female’s (the
solid line), then the opposite would be the case: the male’s
α* would be approximately 0.9 as compared with the
female’s α* of about 0.95. The same holds for inferences
regarding probability weighting, as in Figure 2a and 2b.
It might be argued that there is no reason to suppose that
males’ parameter values are noisier than females’ values.
But until comparisons of choice frequencies were made,
there was no strong a priori reason to suppose that gender
systematically affected risk preferences. Why should it be
preferences that are affected by gender (or age or time

pressure, etc.) rather than the variability in parameter noise?
Of course, this is not to imply that the conclusions drawn in
the above papers are necessarily wrong. Nonetheless, many
of those conclusions rely critically on the claim that it is
preferences that are driving observed behavioral differences.
To our knowledge none of this work explicitly considers the
possibility that the changes in choice proportions observed
across decision makers may be attributed to noise rather
than to underlying preference. Indeed, in some of the
settings considered above, a change to the amount of noise
displayed by decision makers might be a more compelling
explanation for observed behavioral differences, as
compared with a change in the underlying parameter values.
Other Domains
Our analysis has focused upon binary risky choice, a
domain in which within-person variability of choice has
been widely observed. However, the potential confounding
effects of interactions between sources of noise are not
limited to risky choice: such effects are liable to distort
inferences regarding underlying preferences in all non-linear
utility-based models.
Consider, for example, the exponential discounting
model (Frederick et al., 2002), which is commonly used to
model choices between rewards occurring at differing
periods of time. One of the most frequent criticisms of this
model is that it cannot account for an increased preference
for a proximate reward over a delayed reward as the lengths
of the delay diminish by some common amount. For
example a decision maker may prefer $10 in five weeks to
$5 in four weeks, but also prefer $5 immediately to $10 in
one week. This is typically attributed to hyperbolic
discounting and present-bias. However, the findings in this
paper suggest it may be possible to explain these reversals
using only Fechnerian and RP noise without assumptions of
present bias. If this is the case then it means that observed
differences in these types of decisions that have been
ascribed to demographic, biological, neural, cognitive,
emotion, social, and task-based factors, may not necessarily
reflect the impact of those factors on discount rates but
might to some extent reflect differences in the effects of
noise. Similar results may also hold for multi-attribute
choice, altruistic choice, and strategic decision making.
Beyond Deterministic Models
Models such as expected utility theory and cumulative
prospect theory are deterministic, and their predictions
depend heavily on experimenter assumptions regarding their
stochastic specifications. Many researchers have already
argued that it is as important to choose the right type of
noise as it is to choose the right core model, in order to
accurately fit choice data (see e.g. Loomes, 2005). It has
even been shown that the relationship between these
deterministic models and their stochastic implementations is
so great that it is possible to alter the relative fits of these

1947

models by altering assumptions regarding their underlying
sources of noise (Blavatskyy & Pogrebna, 2010).
In this paper we take this point further: the predictions of
deterministic utility-based models are so dependent on their
stochastic specifications that psychologically desirable
assumptions about these specifications (such as noise in
preferences) can alter the modal choice predictions
associated with these models. These effects pose a strong
challenge for utility models of preferential choice. How
useful are models like EUT and CPT if their key predictions
can be reversed by introducing some noise into the
deliberation process?
This problem is ultimately endemic to deterministic
models of choice, and cannot be remedied by the application
of more rigorous methodological tools. In our opinion it
suggests that theoretical research on decision making should
attempt to move beyond these types of models when
attempting to describe choice. There have already been a
number of advances in modelling the cognitive basis of the
stochastic choice process (see Rieskamp et al., 2006 and
Oppenheimer & Kelso, 2015). Cognitive models of
stochastic choice make explicit assumptions about how
noise enters into deliberation, and how it interacts with
preference, choice, and even decision time and confidence.
In allowing stochasticity to play a central role in choice,
these models are naturally able to capture a large range of
behavioral effects that currently lie outside the descriptive
scope of deterministic models. Indeed some of these models
even try to explain key decision making anomalies using
only unsystematic noise, rather than specific restrictions on
value functions or probability weighting (Bhatia, 2014).
Most importantly, however, the predictions of cognitive
stochastic choice models are clearly defined. Additional
assumptions about the sources of variability in choice are
not necessary, and thus do not have the potential to reverse
the key predictions of these models. Future research should
consider using these types of psychologically-grounded
stochastic choice models to understand the behavior of
decision makers.
References
Becker, G. M., DeGroot, M. H., & Marschak, J. (1963).
Stochastic models of choice behavior. Behavioral
Science, 8(1), 41-55.
Bhatia, S. (2014). Sequential sampling and paradoxes of
risky choice. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(5),
1095-1111.
Birnbaum, M. H. (2011). Testing mixture models of
transitive preference: comment on Regenwetter, Dana,
and Davis-Stober (2011). Psychological Review, 118(4),
675-683.
Blavatskyy, P. R., & Pogrebna, G. (2010). Models of
stochastic choice and decision theories: why both are
important for analyzing decisions. Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 25(6), 963-986.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field
theory: a dynamic-cognitive approach to decision

making in an uncertain environment. Psychological
Review, 100(3), 432.
Charness, G., & Gneezy, U. (2012). Strong evidence for
gender differences in risk taking. Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 83(1), 50-58.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O'Donoghue, T. (2002).
Time discounting and time preference: A critical review.
Journal of Economic Literature, 351-401.
Hertwig, R. (2015). Decisions from experience. The Wiley
Blackwell handbook of judgment and decision making,
239-267.
Holt, C. A., & Laury, S. K. (2005). Risk aversion and
incentive effects: New data without order effects.
American Economic Review, 902-904.
Hsee, C. K., & Weber, E. U. (1999). Cross-national
differences in risk preference and lay predictions.
Journal of Behavioural Decision Making, 12.
Jessup, R. K., Bishara, A. J., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2008).
Feedback produces divergence from prospect theory in
descriptive choice. Psychological Science, 19(10), 10151022.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47(2),
263-291.
Kuhnen, C. M., & Knutson, B. (2005). The neural basis of
financial risk taking. Neuron, 47(5), 763-770.
Kusev, P., van Schaik, P., Ayton, P., Dent, J., & Chater, N.
(2009). Exaggerated risk: prospect theory and
probability weighting in risky choice. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 35(6), 1487.
Loomes, G. (2005). Modelling the stochastic component of
behaviour in experiments: Some issues for the
interpretation of data. Experimental Economics, 8(4),
301-323.
Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1995). Incorporating a
stochastic element into decision theories. European
Economic Review, 39(3), 641-648.
Luce, R.D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. John Wiley
and Sons, New York.
Oppenheimer, D. M., & Kelso, E. (2015). Information
Processing as a Paradigm for Decision Making. Annual
Review of Psychology, 66, 277-294.
Porcelli, A. J., & Delgado, M. R. (2009). Acute stress
modulates risk taking in financial decision making.
Psychological Science, 20(3), 278-283.
Rieskamp, J., Busemeyer, J. and Mellers, B., (2006).
Extending the bounds of rationality: Evidence and
theories of preferential choice. Journal of Economic
Literature, 44, 631–61.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(4), 297-323.
Zur, H. B., & Breznitz, S. J. (1981). The effect of time
pressure on risky choice behavior. Acta Psychologica,
47(2), 89-104.

1948

