Not all overlaps are equal: Social affiliation and rare overlaps of preferences
Natalia Vélez (nvelez@stanford.edu), Sophie Bridgers (sbridge@stanford.edu), & Hyowon Gweon (hyo@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract
Shared preferences are a critical component of social attraction. Knowing that someone likes the same things as you do is
indicative of broader underlying similarities that support successful social partnerships. However, not all overlaps in preferences are equally informative. Here we propose that the rarity
of overlaps in preferences may be a particularly salient cue for
social affiliation. We find evidence that people are sensitive
to the rarity of overlaps in preferences and affiliate themselves
(Experiment 1) or predict others’ affiliations (Experiment 2)
with potential social partners who share a relatively rare preference. Because preferences provide information about both
what people know and what they like, we also tested the effect of overlaps in knowledge (without taste) and overlaps in
taste (without knowledge) to understand why we are drawn to
people who share our preferences.
Keywords: social categories; preferences; probabilistic reasoning, social affiliation

Introduction
We are drawn to people who are similar to us. We find them
attractive and trustworthy, and we find ourselves wanting to
befriend them and learn from them (Boer et al., 2011). Of
the many traits we might share with others, preferences exert
a particularly powerful pull. Initial conversations with potential friends are filled with exchanges of one’s likes and dislikes (Rentfrow & Gosling, 2006). We delight in discovering
overlaps in these preferences, bonding over being fans of the
same musicians or even liking the same local coffee shop.
However, not all overlaps in preferences are equally meaningful; some are better indicators of a successful friendship.
Overlaps in favorite movies may be more meaningful than
overlaps in favorite days of the week, and meeting someone
who loves your favorite movie may be more exciting than
finding someone who somewhat enjoyed your favorite movie.
While there may be many factors that modulate the personal
significance of shared preferences, here we focus on one factor that may have a general and profound influence on how we
perceive and interpret such commonalities: the prevalence, or
rarity, of overlaps in preferences.
Imagine meeting someone at a party who is raving about
his iPhone. Even though you like your iPhone, too, this coincidence might not strike you as particularly meaningful;
after all, many people also like iPhones. However, if you
met someone who is enthusing about his Raspberry Pi (a tiny
programmable computer), which you also like, somehow you
might ascribe more meaning to this shared preference. Since
Raspberry Pi users are much less common than iPhone users,
meeting someone who shares your preferences for Raspberry
Pi would also be much rarer than meeting someone who also
appreciates iPhones. Here we propose that sensitivity to the
distribution of preferences among a population informs our
reasoning about people who share these preferences.

There are reasons to believe that people might be sensitive
to the rarity of preferences. Developmental research suggests
that humans are adept statistical reasoners even from an early
age, readily differentiating between statistically common and
uncommon events. Even preverbal infants use distributions
of objects in the population to infer the likelihood of a sample from the population (Xu & Garcia, 2008; Xu & Denison,
2009), and attribute preferences or intentionality to agents
whose behaviors violate random sampling (Kushnir et al.,
2010; Gweon et al., 2010). Beyond sensitivity to the relative
frequencies of physical events, teens and adults readily estimate the frequencies of different behaviors and preferences in
the population. For example, sharing less mainstream tastes
is found to be a good predictor of stable friendships in adolescents (Selfhout et al., 2009).
Why do shared preferences occupy such a privileged place
in our social interactions? First, preferences might reveal
much deeper information about values, personality, and past
experiences than shallow similarities such as physical appearance (e.g. Rentfrow & Gosling, 2006). Second, by identifying those who like what we like, we could make better
decisions about whom to approach for more information in
the future (Fawcett & Markson, 2010). In fact, an overlap in
preferences doesn’t simply reflect shared tastes (i.e., liking);
it also implies shared knowledge. After all, in order for you
to like tinkering with Raspberry Pi, you had to know about it
in the first place. It is possible the broader commonalities we
infer from shared preferences may either be driven more by
the overlap in knowledge, or by the overlap in tastes.
Shared knowledge between two individuals may be a useful indicator of similar personal histories or shared social experiences that allowed both individuals to have acquired that
knowledge. By contrast, shared tastes alone may only reflect
a relatively narrow set of commonalities such as similar personality traits or sensory experiences. Imagine meeting someone who tells you a lot about Raspberry Pi without expressing a clear preference, and someone who has never heard of
it but after trying yours, really likes it; chances are you would
assume more common ground with the former than the latter. Thus people might consider shared knowledge as more
predictive of successful social affiliation than shared tastes.
Consistent with this idea, a recent study by Soley and Spelke
(2016) finds that children indeed place more weight on shared
musical knowledge than shared musical taste when choosing
whom to befriend.
The current study is inspired by the intuitive significance
of rare preference overlaps in our everyday lives, and is motivated by both classic and recent research on our ability to
estimate, represent, and use information about approximate
statistical properties of events and behaviors. In a series of

1985

experiments, we ask whether the distribution of preferences
in a population influences people’s reasoning about the significance of preference overlaps. Furthermore, given prior
work on the role of shared beliefs (Soley & Spelke, 2016),
we attempt to separate the effect of shared preferences into
“shared tastes” and “shared knowledge.” We predicted that
(1) rare overlaps in preferences are stronger cues for social
affiliation than common overlaps, (2) shared knowledge has
a larger impact on people’s social affiliation judgments than
do shared tastes, and (3) both the effect of shared knowledge
and tastes would be systematically modulated by prevalence.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we used a first-person paradigm to ask
whether people use the prevalence of their own preferences
as a cue for social affiliation. Participants first provided their
preferences and generated prevalence estimates for each; they
then chose someone to talk to between two agents who each
shared one of their preferences. We predicted that, even
though both agents have overlapping preferences with the
participant, the relative prevalence of these preferences would
influence the participant’s choice: namely, people might prefer agents who share rarer preferences. In Experiment 1a, we
looked at the effect of shared preferences, broadly construed;
in Experiment 1b, we used identical task structures to tease
apart the effect of shared knowledge and shared tastes.

Methods: Experiment 1a
Participants 300 adults participated in an online study on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. All participants in this and subsequent experiments had U.S. IP addresses and provided informed consent in accordance with the requirements of Stanford IRB. 50 participants provided contradictory responses
(see Procedure, below) and were excluded from the analyses.
Procedure Participants were first asked to select their favorite activity amongst three options: listening to music,
watching movies, or reading books. These domains were selected based on pilot data and past research indicating that
overlaps in these domains are stronger cues to social affiliation than overlaps in other domains such as food (Rentfrow
& Gosling, 2003). Within their favorite domain, participants
were asked to list their top five favorite items (i.e., songs,
movies, or books) in no particular order. We then asked how
“widely liked” each item is. Participants provided this popularity estimate in two steps: first, they rank-ordered each item
from most to least widely liked by dragging and dropping
each item into a list; second, they provided a numeric estimate of how many of 100 randomly selected people would
like each item. People who provided inconsistent responses
between these two questions (i.e., estimating that more people would like the lowest-ranked item than the highest-ranked
item) were excluded from analysis.
In the final trial, participants were given a binary choice
between two chat avatars of people they could talk to. Each
avatar had a prompt above it saying “I like X!”, where X was

Figure 1: Experiment 1 results. (a) Percentage of participants
who chose the agent with rare preference overlap. Asterisks
indicate deviations from chance (p < 0.05). (b) Relationship
between difference scores and friend choice: each point indicates one participant’s difference score and friend choice; line
indicates the logistic regression fit. (c) Logistic regression fits
for Shared Taste (left) and Shared Knowledge (right).
one of the items the participant had listed. Participants were
split into two between-subjects conditions. In the Common
vs. Common (C vs.C) condition, participants were given a
choice between an agent who liked the most widely-liked
item and an agent who liked the second most widely-liked
item. In the Common vs. Rare (C vs. R) condition, participants chose between an agent who liked the most widelyliked item and an agent who liked the least widely-liked item.

Methods: Experiment 1b
Participants We recruited 602 adults from Amazon mTurk.
78 participants were excluded for providing inconsistent responses (See Exp.1a Procedure).
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Exp.1a
except for a few prompts. Participants in the “Shared Knowledge” (SK, n = 269) group were asked how widely known
each item is (i.e., how many of 100 people would know about
each item). Participants in the “Shared Taste” (ST, n = 255)
group were asked how likable each item is (i.e., how many of
100 people would like each item if given a chance to watch,
listen to, or read it for the first time). Finally, participants
were given a choice between two agents who shared the participant’s knowledge (SK) or tastes (ST). As in Exp. 1a, both

1986

SK and ST groups were split into C vs. C and C vs. R conditions.

Results and Discussion
Experiment 1a We hypothesized that participants would be
more likely to choose the agent who shared their rarer preference, and this tendency would be modulated by the relative
popularity of the two items. The results were consistent with
our hypotheses. In the C vs. C condition, where the difference in popularity between the two agents’ preferences was
negligible, participants’ responses did not differ from chance
(57.14%; binomial test: p = 0.142). However, participants in
the C vs. R condition were more likely to choose the agent
who shared their rarer preferences (Figure 1(a), 60.84%; binomial test: p = 0.012).
We further examined whether participants’ social affiliations were predicted by their fine-grained estimates of how
widely shared their preferences are among the general population. For each condition, we took the difference of the
numerical estimates of popularity (henceforth “Difference
Scores”) either between the first and second most widely
liked items (C vs. C condition) or between the first and
last items (C vs. R condition) to ask if this predicted people’s choices. Even after controlling for condition, there was
a significant relationship between the difference scores and
participants’ friend choice: the higher the gap in popularity
between the two items, the more likely participants were to
choose the agent with the rarer preference (logistic regression: z = 3.446, p < 0.001; Figure 1(b)).
Experiment 1b Liking something typically means that one
also has prior knowledge of it. Under this assumption, Experiment 1b aimed to tease apart two factors that underlie the effect of shared preferences on social affiliation: shared knowledge (SK; without explicit mentioning of liking) and shared
taste (ST; without prior knowledge). The results revealed interesting differences between the two factors. Participants in
the SK group consistently chose the agent who knew about
the less widely-known item in the C vs. R condition (68.03%;
binomial test: p < 0.001); this effect was weakly present
even in the C vs. C condition (59.02%; p = 0.06) where
the difference between popularity was small. Consistent with
this preference for the rare-overlap agent across both conditions, the Difference Scores did not predict people’s choices
(z = 1.54, p = 0.12) (Figure 1(c)). By contrast, the participants in the ST group did not differ from chance in either
condition (C vs. C: 42.61%, p = 0.14; C vs. R: 47.14%,
p = 0.55); however, the difference scores still predicted their
friend choice (logistic regression: z = 25.2, p = 0.01).
Collectively, these results are consistent with our hypothesis that rare preference overlaps exert a stronger influence
than common preference overlaps on people’s judgments for
social affiliation. In Exp. 1a, we found that the degree of
rarity influenced people’s choices: participants consistently
chose the agent with the rarer preferences when the difference
in rarity of the two agents’ preferences was large (C vs. R),

but not when this difference was small (C vs. C), and the magnitude of the difference predicted people’s choices. Results
from Exp. 1b echoed and extended these results, revealing
differences between the two subcomponents of shared preferences: shared knowledge and shared tastes. Overall, shared
knowledge had a much larger influence on people’s choices
compared to shared tastes.
One unique strength of this task is that it harnessed participants’ own preferences and real-world knowledge: participants expressed their own preferences and generated their
own estimates about their prevalence among the general population. Using this naturalistic approach, we were able to confirm the intuitive significance of rare preference overlaps.
However, these strengths were accompanied by some limitations. First, we may have neglected asymmetries between
domains (music, books, movies). For example, people consider music preferences as particularly emblematic of their
personalities, followed closely by movies, but far ahead of
other domains such as food (Rentfrow & Gosling, 2003); thus
people’s prior knowledge in each domain and their beliefs
about their diagnosticity might have influenced their judgments about the significance of an overlap. Second, we had
little control over what population people used to generate
the prevalence estimates. While it is indeed fascinating to
wonder what cognitive mechanisms underlie our ability to
estimate, for example, that 95 of 100 people like the Harry
Potter books but only 8 of 100 like The Silmarillion, this
method presumably introduced some variability in the exact
nature of the population people drew from to generate these
estimates. Furthermore, the self-generated nature of these estimates limited our ability to systematically manipulate the
rarity of preferences. In Experiment 2, we use a complementary third-person task to directly address these issues.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we sought a complementary way of investigating the role of rare preference overlaps in a tightly controlled context. We introduced participants to an alien planet
whose inhabitants expressed their preferences for two novel
games. Participants were then asked to pair these aliens with
potential friends. Instead of generating their own prevalence
estimates, participants were given explicit information about
the popularity of each game, which was varied systematically
across conditions. Thus this task allowed us to eliminate the
role of people’s existing knowledge and preferences, and have
a tighter control over the prevalence information.

Methods
Experiment 2a: Methods
Participants 692 adults were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Procedure Participants were introduced to a faraway planet
called “Gazoom,” inhabited by friendly aliens ( Gazorps). Every Gazorp on the planet was asked whether they like to play
two fun games, “wumbus” and “jibboo”, and the results of

1987

Experiment 2b: Methods
Participants 1803 adults were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. 228 participants were excluded for failing a
manipulation check (see Procedure below).
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 2a except for small changes in the prompts. In the
Shared Knowledge (SK) group (N=823), Gazorps were asked
which games they knew how to play, and the census results
displayed how many Gazorps knew how to play each particular game. In the Shared Taste (ST) group (N=752), Gazorps
were asked to try two new games that they had never played
before, and the census results showed how many Gazorps
liked each game after trying it for the first time. Accordingly,
in the four test trials, participants were given the choice between potential friends who knew different games (SK) , or
liked different games after trying them (ST).
Results and Discussion

Figure 2: Experiment 2a results. (a) Example population information (75-15). (b) Trial order, showing the preferences
of the target Gazorp on each trial. (c) Percentage of participants choosing the friend who likes the rare game. Error bars
denote 95% CI. Asterisks denote significant deviations from
chance, after Bonferroni correction.
the poll were presented on two separate pages. On each page,
participants saw the logo for either wumbus or jibboo above
the gray silhouettes of 100 Gazorps, a census representing the
entire population of Gazoom. The Gazorps who liked each
game were then filled in with the color of the game to indicate
the game’s popularity. Participants were shown a reminder of
the census results throughout the study (Figure 2(a)).
In each of the four test trials, participants saw a target
Gazorp who asked the participant to “find a friend” for her
among two other Gazorps. Participants were asked to select
a friend for: (1) a Gazorp with no stated preference, (2) a
Gazorp who liked the majority-preferred game, (3) a Gazorp
who liked the minority-preferred game, and (4) a Gazorp who
liked both games (Figure 2(b)). In all trials, participants were
given the choice between a potential friend who liked wumbus or a potential friend who liked jibboo. The preferences of
all Gazorps were clearly indicated using verbal prompts and
by overlaying the game logo over the image of the Gazorp.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of nine conditions, which differed in the number of aliens (out of 100) who
liked each game: 45-45, 50-40, 55-35, 60-30, 65-25, 70-20,
75-15, 80-10, or 85-5. The order of the first and last trials
was fixed, and the two middle trials were shuffled. All other
aspects of the design were randomized, including: the logo
for the games, the game preferred by the majority, the order
in which the two polls were presented, the names of the target
Gazorps, and the position of potential friends in the test trials.

Experiment 2a We first examined participants’ responses
in the middle two trials. Because the target Gazorp had a
single, clearly stated preference, we expected participants to
select the friend who shared the target Gazorp’s preference.
Indeed, 603 of 692 participants matched target Gazorps with
friends who liked the same games in both trials; 52 matched
in one trial, and 38 matched in neither trial (χ2 (2) = 901, p <
0.001). This confirmed that the participants understood the
task, and that they robustly chose the Gazorp who shared the
target’s preference regardless of the rarity.
Our main interest was in people’s responses in the other
two trials, where the target Gazorps’ preferred games were
uninformative. We first looked at the control (45-45) condition, where the two games were equally popular (N = 84).
Given no difference in popularity, we predicted people to
choose randomly between the two friends. This allowed us
to looked for three potential sources of response bias: (1) the
friend’s position (left or right); (2) the names of the games
(wumbus or jibboo); and (3) the color of each game (blue or
purple). Across all three criteria, participants’ responses did
not differ from chance (all p > 0.10), suggesting that neither
of the two potential friends was more appealing a priori.
In the remaining 8 conditions (N = 608), we asked whether
participants’ choice of friends for the target Gazorp was influenced by prevalence information. In the first trial where the
target Gazorp’s preference was unstated, we predicted that
participants would choose the Gazorp with the more common
preference; in the last trial where the target liked both games,
we predicted that participants would choose the Gazorp with
the rarer preference. Finally, we predicted that people’s responses would be systematically influenced by the relative
differences in the popularity of the games.
As predicted, participants’ responses varied based on the
trial type (Unstated vs. Both)(Figure 2 (c and b)), suggesting
that they used the population information. Collapsing across
all conditions, in the first trial (Unstated), 79.77% of par-

1988

ticipants chose the friend with the most common preference
(485/608; binomial test: p < 0.001), and difference in the
popularity of two games did not predict participants’ choices
(logistic regression: z = 1.43, p = 0.151). By contrast, in the
last trial (Both), 63.65% of participants chose the friend with
the rare preference (387/608; binomial test: p < 0.001), and
the difference in the popularity significantly predicted these
choices (z = 1.97, p = 0.049).
Experiment 2b Our results in Exp 2b aligned well with
those in Exp 2a. In the middle two trials where the target
had a preference for one of two games, participants consistently chose the friend who knew about (Shared Knowledge)
or liked (Shared Taste) the same game. In the SK group, 618
matched in both trials, 82 in one, and 123 in none (χ2 (2) =
648, p < 0.001); in the ST group, 588 matched in both trials,
114 in one, and 64 in none (χ2 (2) = 683, p < 0.001).
When the target Gazorp’s preferences were unstated (first
trial), most participants chose the friend who knew or liked
the common game (SK: 67.83%; ST: 77.08%; binomial test:
all p < 0.001). Conversely, when the target Gazorp liked or
knew about both games (last trial), most participants chose
the friend who knew or liked the rare game (SK: 67.07%; ST:
57.45%; all p < 0.001).
We then used multinomial logistic regression to examine
whether the relative popularity of the two games affected
friend choice in the Unstated and Both trials. In the Unstated trial, participants in both SK and ST groups were more
likely to choose the friend who knew or liked the more common game as the difference in the prevalence between the two
games increased (SK: z = 3.42, p < 0.001; ST: z = 3.94, p <
0.001). In the Both trial, differences in popularity had the
opposite effect: participants were more likely to choose the
friend who liked or knew about the less common game as the
difference in the prevalence between the two games increased
(ST: z = −3.25, p = 0.001; SK: z = −4.05, p < 0.001). These
results show that when the target Gazorp knew or liked both
games, participants chose the friend who knew or liked the
rarer game. A complementary way of looking at this is to examine each level of popularity separately and to test at which
levels participants’ friend choices differed from chance (Figure 3). We accounted for multiple comparisons using Bonferroni correction (p < 0.006). This analysis revealed a striking
asymmetry between SK and ST groups. Participants in the
SK group were highly influenced by the rarity information,
choosing the friend who knew the rare game in most conditions, except when the difference between the two games
was minimal (50-40: 55.29%, p = 0.39; all other p < 0.003).
However, participants in the ST group chose the friend who
liked the rare game when the difference in popularity between
the two games was at its most pronounced (85-5: 66.67%,
p = 0.001; all other p > 0.008).

General Discussion
In a series of experiments, we found converging evidence
that overlaps in rare preferences exert a stronger influence

Figure 3: Experiment 2b results. Percentage of participants
in the SK (top) and ST (bottom) groups who chose the friend
who liked/knew about the rare game.
on social affiliation than overlaps in relatively common preferences. In Experiment 1, we found that participants preferred to affiliate with agents who shared a rare preference
with them, based on their own estimates of how widely their
preferences were shared among the general population. In
Experiment 2, we systematically manipulated the prevalence
of preferences in a novel population and asked participants
to make third-party judgments. Using this complementary
task, we again found that participants preferentially matched
agents with friends who shared the rarer preference in games.
Indeed, this was true only if the target agent had a preference
for both games; in the absence of information about his preferences, participants recommended the friend with the more
common preference. Finally, across both experiments, we
found that rare overlaps in knowledge were particularly attractive, compared to overlaps in taste without prior knowledge.
Why do we find rare overlaps in preferences significant
and indicative of social affiliation? Encountering someone
who shares a preference with you may support a statistical
inference about the causal mechanisms leading to this coincidence (see Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2007); perhaps overlaps in rare preferences signal stronger, deeper similarities
in values (Boer et al., 2011), personality traits (Rentfrow &
Gosling, 2006), and cultural knowledge (Soley & Spelke,
2016). Even though overlaps in common preferences might
also reflect similarities in particular domains, they may be
less diagnostic of a shared social history, as such preferences

1989

span a larger, potentially more heterogeneous, set of people.
For instance, a wide range of social experiences might lead
people to know about (and like) iPhones, while a much more
selective and distinctive set of experiences and values might
lead people to know about (and like) programming in Raspberry Pi. Gershman and Gweon (under review) propose that
we might use information about others’ preferences to infer
an underlying network of social connectivity between ourselves and others. Under this framework, finding someone
who shares a rare preference might indicate a tighter social
connection than finding someone with a common overlap.
Two caveats should accompany our findings. First, prior
studies showed that U.S. adults tend to prefer unique (rare)
items in a uniform group of objects compared to East Asians
(Kim & Markus, 1999), suggesting that the degree to which
item selection reflects individuals’ preferences might depend
on the shared cultural values. Thus we acknowledge that the
effect of rarity might be culturally variable. Second, while
we tried to separate knowledge from liking in our Shared
Knowledge tasks, we cannot entirely rule out the effect of
liking. The agents expressed knowledge without any references to liking the target items; however participants might
have assumed that someone who says “I know about X!” is
communicating at least a slight preference for X. The effect
of knowledge might be weaker if agents expressed an explicit
indifference, and even weaker if they expressed a dispreference. Future work should explore these possibilities.
Our results raise additional interesting questions for future
work, including how people draw estimates about the prevalence of preferences, and what factors might bias these estimates. Social psychology research has shown that adults’
estimates of the frequencies of different attitudes in a population are self-serving, and are typically biased to justify one’s
own choices (e.g., Monin & Norton, 2003). If rarity is an influential cue for social affiliation, we might also exaggerate
or underestimate the rarity of our preferences to make certain
overlaps appear more or less meaningful. Such biases are easily imagined in situations where people try to establish a bond
with another person. Consider someone on a first date on the
lookout for similarities, exclaiming: “You like pizza! What a
coincidence, I do too!” By (intentionally or unintentionally)
misconstruing an obviously common preference as rare, one
might insinuate (of convince oneself of) the possibility that
there must be many other overlaps yet to be discovered. We
look forward to further testing these intuitions.
In sum, our study shows how our real-world knowledge
(e.g., prevalence of traits, preferences) might underlie our intuitive sense of what interpersonal similarities are meaningful, and provide compelling evidence for the idea that shared
rare preferences are strong cues for social compatibility. By
combining intuitions from social psychology and cognitive
science, these results provide new insights into the hidden social structure underlying shared preferences.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Alex Shaw, Zoe Liberman, and Josh Tenenbaum for fun, helpful discussions about this work. This research was supported by NSF Graduate Research Fellowships
to S.B. and N.V., and the Varieties of Understanding grant
from the John Templeton Foundation to H.G.

References
Boer, D., Fischer, R., Strack, M., Bond, M. H., Lo, E., & Lam,
J. (2011). How shared preferences in music create bonds
between people: Values as the missing link. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1-13.
Fawcett, C. A., & Markson, L. (2010). Children reason about
shared preferences. Developmental Psychology, 46, 299309.
Gershman, S., & Gweon, H. (under review). Learning the
structure of social influence.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). From mere
coincidences to meaningful discoveries. Cognition, 103,
180-226.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (2010). Infants consider both the sample and the sampling process
in inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107, 9066-9071.
Kim, H., & Markus, H. R. (1999). Deviance or uniqueness,
harmony or conformity? a cultural analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 785-800.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young
children use statistical sampling to infer the preferences of
other people. Psychological Science, 21, 1134-1140.
Monin, B., & Norton, M. I. (2003). Perception of a fluid
consensus: Uniqueness bias, false consensus, false polarization, and pluralistic ignorance in a water conservation
crisis. Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 559-567.
Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. (2003). The do re mi’s of everyday life: the structure and personality correlates of music
preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
84, 1236.
Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2006). Message in a ballad:
The role of music preferences in interpersonal perception.
Psychological Science, 17, 236-242.
Selfhout, M. H. W., Branje, S. J. T., ter Bogt, T. F. M., &
Meeus, W. H. J. (2009). The role of music preferences in
early adolescents’ friendship formation and stability. Journal of Adolescence, 32, 95-107.
Soley, G., & Spelke, E. S. (2016). Shared cultural knowledge:
Effects of music on young children’s social preferences.
Cognition, 148, 106-116.
Xu, F., & Denison, S. (2009). Statistical inference and sensitivity to sampling in 11-month-old infants. Cognition, 112,
97-104.
Xu, F., & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 5012-5015.

1990

