Pragmatic relativity: Gender and context affect the use of personal pronouns in
discourse differentially across languages
Zeynep Azar (zeynep.azar@mpi.nl)
Radboud University, Center for Language Studies, Wundtlaan 1
6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Ad Backus (A.M.Backus@uvt.nl)
Tilburg University, Department of Culture Studies, Warendelaan
5037 AB Tilburg, The Netherlands

Aslı Özyürek (asli.ozyurek@mpi.nl)
Radboud University, Center for Language Studies, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1
6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Abstract
Speakers need to use a variety of referring expressions (REs)
(e.g. full noun phrases, pronouns or null forms) in
pragmatically appropriate ways to produce coherent
narratives. Languages, however, differ from each other in
terms of a) whether REs as arguments can be dropped or not
and b) whether personal pronouns encode gender or not. Here
we examine two languages that differ from each other in these
two aspects and ask whether the co-reference context (i.e.,
referents are maintained or re-introduced) and the gender
encoding options affect the use of REs differentially. We
elicited narratives from Dutch and Turkish speakers about
two types of three-person events, one including people of the
same and the other of mixed-gender. Speakers of both
languages followed a general principle of using full forms
such as noun phrases (NPs) while re-introducing a previously
mentioned referent into the discourse and reduced forms
(overt or null pronoun) while maintaining the same referent; a
language independent strategy in discourse production.
Turkish speakers, unlike Dutch speakers, used pronouns
mainly to mark emphasis. Furthermore, Dutch but not Turkish
speakers used pronouns differentially across the two videos.
Thus, we argue that linguistic possibilities available in
typologically different languages might tune speakers into
taking different principles into account to establish coherence
in narratives in pragmatically coherent ways.
Keywords: referring expressions; gender encoding;
pronouns; cross-linguistic comparison; discourse production

Introduction
Throughout discourse, speakers often refer to the same
entities, but they do not always use the same referring
expression (RE). It has been suggested that speakers are
sensitive to the information status of the referents: They use
fuller forms (e.g. a full noun phrase) to (re-)introduce a new,
less accessible referent, and prefer reduced forms (e.g. overt
or null pronouns) when maintaining an already given, more
accessible referent (Ariel, 1990; Chafe, 1976). A general
conclusion of these studies is that speakers encode only as
much information as their addressee needs in order to
uniquely identify the intended referent. Since an NP encodes
more semantic information, it is preferred for less accessible

referents while pronouns, which do not encode much
semantic information, are used for maintained that is for
more accessible referents. Therefore, the accessibility of a
referent and the amount of information encoded in the
referring expression that refers to it show an inverse
relation. Speakers of different languages seem to follow the
same strategy even though languages differ in the forms
they make use of, such as whether dropping arguments is
allowed or not (Azar and Özyürek, 2015; Berman and
Slobin 1994; Perniss and Özyürek, 2015; Yoshioko, 2008).
The difference between languages which do allow argument
drop (pro-drop languages) and those that do not (non-prodrop languages) surfaces mostly in contexts where referents
are maintained. The default form in non-pro-drop languages
is the overt pronoun while for pro-drop languages it is the
null pronoun (Carminati, 2002).
This picture raises the question of what function personal
pronouns has in tracking reference in different contexts,
especially in pro-drop languages. To our knowledge, there
are only a few studies comparing pro-drop to non-pro-drop
languages directly in a discourse elicitation task (e.g., AksuKoç & Nicolopoulou, 2015; Perniss and Özyürek, 2015;
Yoshioko, 2008). However, Perniss and Özyürek (2015)
collapsed NPs and overt pronouns into one category, overt
and Aksu-Koç and Nicolopoulou collapsed overt and null
pronouns into one category, pronoun. Thus there are not
enough studies showing how a specific category of RE,
especially the overt pronoun, is used across typologically
different languages in the same discourse context.
Languages also differ from each other in whether personal
pronouns encode gender, and how this affects the
organization of extended discourse across languages is not
known. It is possible that in addition to general principles of
accessibility, there might be other principles that are
differentially taken into account during the choice of a
specific RE in discourse.
To investigate these questions, we compare adult speakers
of two typologically different languages, Turkish (pro-drop)
and Dutch (non-pro-drop), in an elicited discourse study.
While Turkish has a single third person pronoun, Dutch

1295

third person singular pronouns are gender specific. We
manipulated the gender of the characters in the events in our
experimental stimuli to see whether Turkish and Dutch
speakers organize their discourse and their use of REs
differently, especially in the case of pronouns. We also
examine the specific functions of personal pronouns in
discourse narratives of Turkish speakers.

Linguistic characteristics of Turkish and Dutch
One of the differences between Turkish and Dutch that is
relevant for reference tracking is that they differ in which
specific context null pronouns are allowed. Overt realization
of arguments is normally required for grammatical
productions in Dutch. However, subject arguments may be
left unmentioned when consecutive clauses refer to
consecutive actions performed by the same subject. Null
subjects have been reported to be relatively low in Dutch
discourse narratives (e.g., 23.38% in Flecken, 2011; 12% in
Gullberg, 2006). In Turkish, however, in maintained
contexts the null pronoun is the default form. It is argued
that an overt pronoun is used only when the referent has an
emphatic or contrastive function (Enç, 1986). Some of the
studies on Turkish, however, are based on native intuitions
of the authors and not on empirical data (Enç, 1986;
Erguvanli-Taylan; 1986; Özsoy, 1987) or on written
discourse (Kerslake, 1987; Turan, 1995). A few studies with
discourse production data from adults in an experimental
setting either focused on only one RE form (e.g. Küntay,
2002, NPs only) or collapsed overt and null pronoun into
one category (Aksu-Koç & Nicolopoulou, 2015) or they had
a relatively small sample size (Azar & Özyürek, 2015).
Thus, the function of overt pronouns in relation to null
pronouns in tracking referents in adult discourse in Turkish
and especially in marking maintained and re-introduced
referents is still not very clear.
The other relevant difference between the Turkish and
Dutch is (+/-) gender encoding of the personal pronouns.
Turkish third-person pronoun (o for singular and onlar for
plural) does not encode gender and is the equivalent of he,
she, it in English. On the other hand, Dutch singular third
person pronouns hij (he) and ze/ zij (she) are gender
specific.

Predictions
Concerning the general reference tracking strategies, we
expect both Turkish and Dutch speakers to re-introduce
referents dominantly with NPs, thus with fuller forms. We
expect both groups of speakers to prefer maintaining
referents with reduced forms, null pronoun for Turkish (prodrop) speakers and overt pronoun for Dutch (non-pro-drop)
speakers. As for gender, we expect Dutch speakers to use
more overt pronouns while narrating the mixed-gender
video compared to the same-gender video, specifically in
the re-introduction context. In that context, speakers can
refer back to a previously mentioned referent with a
personal pronoun encoding gender without causing an
ambiguous interpretation of the pronoun. We hypothesize

that a personal pronoun might be more helpful for the
addressee in an event narration with mixed-gender
characters as it uniquely identifies a particular character.
This advantage is absent with same-gender characters.
Compare (1a) to (1b); personal pronouns in (1a) are
ambiguous while in (1b) the hearer can easily identify who
the personal pronouns she and he refer to. Since the third
person pronoun encodes gender only in Dutch, we expect an
effect of gender on pronoun use only for Dutch speakers but
not for Turkish speakers
(1a)
Suzan and Ellen went to college together.
She was studying math while she was studying literature.
(1b)
Suzan and Robert went to college together.
She was studying math while he was studying literature.

Method
Participants
Twenty pairs of native speakers of Dutch studying in
Nijmegen (14 female; mean age 21.5) and twenty pairs of
native speakers of Turkish studying in Istanbul (17 female;
mean age 22.2) participated in our study in return for
payment or course credits. They had normal or corrected-tonormal vision and no history of language impairment.

Stimuli
Our stimuli consisted of two short silent videos. Figure 1
illustrates stills depicting different actions from each video.
In one video three women (same-gender condition) were
engaged in cooking activities (Perniss and Özyürek, 2015).
The two women who are seen to be cutting vegetables in the
stills below had a more prominent role compared to the
woman who is standing, and both were involved in a similar
number of actions (N=10; 11). In the other video two
women and one man (mixed-gender condition) were
engaged in office activities. The woman and the man seen to
be sitting in the first still were more prominent compared to
the woman sitting behind a computer, and again each was
involved in a similar number of actions (N=15; 16). Both
videos included actions mainly performed by a single
character although the overall activity depicted in each
video (cooking and office activities) could be seen as joint.

Procedure
Participants were invited to a quiet room in pairs and
randomly assigned the role of either the speaker or the
addressee (they were not made aware of the role division).
The addressees were not confederates and were naïve to the
stimulus materials. Participants were instructed by the
experimenter in the relevant language. Speakers were
instructed to watch the videos one by one and to tell the
addressee what they had seen after each video.

1296

same-gender

clause but has been previously mentioned in the discourse
(cf. Gullberg, 2006). (2) contains four successive clauses
extracted from a single discourse narrative in our Turkish
dataset as an example of these coding categories. Subject
referents are italicized and letters donate co-referentiality.

mixed -gender

(2)
Kızi ordan kalkıyo.
Øi kitaplığın yanına gidiyo.
Çocukj kalkıyo masadan.
Oj da gidiyo kitaplığa.

Figure 1: Still frames from the same-gender (all female) and
the mixed-gender (two females; one male) video stimuli
The stimuli were presented on a computer screen. The
addressees did not see the videos. Addressees were
instructed that after each narrative, they could ask
clarification questions. They were also informed that they
would be given two short written questions about each
narrative. The purpose of this was to ensure that the
speakers included enough details in their narratives and that
the addressees pay attention to the narratives. Once the
instructions were given, the experimenter left the room and
came back with the questions for the addressee after each
narrative. The order of the two videos was counterbalanced. Each session was video recorded.

NP/re-introduction
null pronoun/ maintenance
NP/re-introduction
overt pronoun/ maintenance

Girli is standing up.
(She)i is going to the bookshelf.
The boyj is standing up off the table.
Hej is also going to the bookshelf.

Results
We analyzed a total of 1.046 Turkish main clauses (426 reintroduced and 620 maintained) and 792 Dutch main clauses
(360 re-introduced and 432 maintained) for the proportion
of subject referents encoded with an NP, overt pronoun and
null pronoun. We did not attest a systematic reason why
Turkish speakers produced more clauses than Dutch
speakers. Turkish speakers seemed to provide more details
regarding the events in the stimulus videos. We will first
present how co-reference context affects the choice of a
specific RE cross-linguistically and later whether this effect
is modulated by the gender of the characters mentioned in
the discourse.

Data coding
We coded and analyzed speech only from the speakers of
each tested pair. We transcribed the video narratives using
the standard orthography of each language with the frameby-frame video annotation software ELAN1. Each narrative
was divided into main clauses, defined as utterances with a
single subject argument and a single predicate. The subject
argument of a main clause itself could express an event or
an activity as in the case of nouns modified by a relative
clause (e.g., the woman who is cooking). We coded only
main clauses with an animate grammatical subject. Each
subject referent was coded for one of the following referring
expressions: noun phrase (NP) (bare noun, noun with a
simple modifier or relative clause modifier, etc.), overt
pronoun (personal pronoun, demonstrative pronoun,
indefinite pronoun, etc.) and null pronoun. In addition, each
main clause was coded for subject-to-subject local coreference (cf. Hickmann and Hendricks, 1999). A
Maintenance context implies that the subject referent of the
current main clause is identical to that of the immediately
preceding main clause. A Re-introduction context implies
that the subject referent of the current main clause is not
identical to the subject in the immediately preceding main
1 ELAN is an annotation tool developed at the Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen at The Language Archive
department (cf. Lausberg, H., & Sloetjes, H., 2009).

Effect of context
We calculated the mean proportion of NPs, overt and null
pronouns out of all animate subject referents in narratives.
Arcsine transformation was performed on the means before
any analyses were carried out. We report the untransformed
means.
We performed a mixed-effect analysis of variance with the
RE type (NP, overt pronoun, null pronoun) and co-reference
context (re-introduction, maintenance) as repeated measures
and language (Turkish, Dutch) as independent measure.
Bonferroni corrections were applied for multiple
comparisons to all analyses and Greenhouse-Geisser
correction was applied where the assumption of sphericity
was violated. We report the corrected degrees of freedom.
The analysis showed a significant main effect of RE type
F(2) = 16.390, p<.001, ηp2 = .301. It also showed a
significant interaction of RE type and language F(2) =
68.986, p<.001, ηp2 = .645, RE type and co-reference
context F(2) = 247.436, p<.001, ηp2 = .867 and RE type, coreference context and language F(2) = 31.891, p<.001, ηp2 =
.456.
Next, we performed a mixed-effect analysis of variance
separately for each co-reference context with RE type (NP,
overt pronoun, null pronoun) as repeated measure and
language (Turkish, Dutch) as independent measure. The
analysis for the re-introduction context showed a significant

1297

main effect of RE type F(1.240) =184.903, p<.001, ηp2 =
.830 and a significant interaction of RE type and language
F(1.240) = 7.391, p=.006, ηp2 = .163. Separate repeated
measures of analysis of variance for each language showed
a significant main effect of RE type for both Turkish
F(1.278) =109.752, p<.001, ηp2 = .852 and Dutch F(1.013)
= 87.661, p<.001, ηp2 = .996. Both groups of speakers reintroduced subject referents mostly with NPs (M=.737,
SE=.026 for Turkish; M=.767, SE=.036 for Dutch). Turkish
speakers used more null pronouns (M=.185, SE=.024) than
overt pronouns (M=.078, SE=.015). Dutch speakers showed
the reverse pattern. They used overt pronouns more
(M=.230, SE=.036) in comparison to null pronouns
(M=.003, SE=.002). Compared to Dutch speakers, Turkish
speakers used overt pronouns less t(38)= -3.875, p<.001 and
null pronouns more t(38)= 7.452, p<.001.
The analysis for the maintenance context showed a
significant main effect of RE type F(1.194) =52.922,
p<.001, ηp2 = .940 and a significant interaction of RE type
and language F(1.194) = 95.725, p<.001, ηp2 = .736.
Separate repeated measures of analysis of variance for each
language showed an effect of RE type both for Turkish F(2)
=352.838, p<.001, ηp2 = .960 and Dutch F(1.109) =39.875,
p<.001, ηp2 = .677. Turkish speakers maintained subject
referents mostly with null pronouns (M=.747; SE=.016),
p<.001 and they used NPs and overt pronouns equally often
(M=.126, SE=.013; M=.128, SE=.014). Dutch speakers on
the other hand maintained subject referents mostly with
overt pronouns (M=.699; SE=.049) p<.001, then null
pronouns (M=.236, SE=.046) and the least with NPs
(M=.065, SE=.014), p<.007). The frequency of null subjects
in maintenance contexts in Dutch is similar to the numbers
reported in previous literature on Dutch narratives; see (3)
for an example where the speaker introduces a referent into
discourse and leaves the subject referent unexpressed in the
consecutive clauses. Independent sample t-tests showed that
compared to Dutch speakers, Turkish speakers used fewer
overt pronouns t(38)= -9.135, p<.001 but more null
pronouns t(38)= 10.788, p<.001 and NPs t(38)= 3.158,
p=.003.
(3)
Die andere vrouwi staat op.
NP/re-introduction
Øi zet bureaustoel ook weer weg. null pronoun/maintenance
Øi loopt naar 'n boekenkast.
null pronoun/maintenance
Øi gaat daar staan.
null pronoun/maintenance
That other womani stands up.
(She)i put the office chair back.
(She)i walks to the bookshelf.
(She)i stands there.
As these analyses show (Figure 2), the overt pronoun is
not the preferred option for any of the contexts in Turkish,
unlike in Dutch. Further paired sample t-test showed that
Turkish speakers used more pronouns in maintenance
contexts t(19)= 2.869, p<.010 than in re-introduction

contexts. Additional analysis showed that when overt
pronouns were used in Turkish, 82% percent of the
occurrences were accompanied by the clitic -de/-da
(meaning also) which modifies the noun preceding it (see
4a). This clitic has been suggested to be a marker of focus
and emphasis (Bican, 2000). In (4a) the speaker emphasizes
that the woman is helping the man, she is also participating
in the action the man has been performing. In Dutch on the
other hand overt pronouns were used as the default form to
maintain referents and were not accompanied by an extra
emphasis marker (see 4b).
(4a)
Ondan sonra Øi oturuyor yanına.
Oi da yardım ediyor.

maintenance/null pronoun
maintenance/overt pronoun

Then (she)i is sitting next to (him).
Shei is also helping.
(4b)
En Øk gaat naast die jongen zitten. maintenance/null pronoun
En zek helpt mee.
maintenance/overt pronoun
And (she)k is sitting next to that boy.
En shek is helping along.

Figure 2: The distribution of RE types across the two coreference contexts in Turkish and Dutch. Error bars
represent standard errors of the mean.

Effect of gender
Since we found an interaction of RE type and co-reference
context, we analyzed the two contexts separately in looking
for effects of gender in the videos. We conducted a mixed
effect analysis of variance separately for each co-reference
context, re-introduction and maintenance, with RE type
(NP, overt pronoun, null pronoun) and video type (samegender, mixed-gender) as repeated measures and language
(Turkish, Dutch) as independent measure. The GreenhouseGeisser correction was applied in all analyses. We report the
corrected degrees of freedom.
The analysis for the re-introduction context did not show a
significant main effect of video type or an interaction of RE

1298

type and video type. It only showed a significant main effect
of RE type F(1.210)= 186.847, p<.001, ηp2 = .831 and a
significant interaction of RE type and language F(1.210)=
7.234, p=.007, ηp2 = .160 Therefore, contrary to our
prediction, neither Turkish nor Dutch speakers re-introduced
subject referents differently in the narratives of the two
types of videos.
The analysis for the maintenance context on the other
hand did show a significant main effect of RE type
F(1.227)=47.899, p<.001, ηp2 = .558, and language
F(1)=5.563, p=.024, ηp2 = .128. It also showed a significant
interaction of RE type and language F(2)=91.540, p<.001,
ηp2 = .707, video type and language F(1)=8.163, p=.007,
ηp2 = .177 and RE type and video type F(1.652)=11.938,
p<.001, ηp2 = .239. Separate repeated measures of analysis
of variance for each language showed an interaction of RE
type and video type only for Dutch F(1.208)=9.325, p=
.004, ηp2 = .329. Therefore further analyses were conducted
only in Dutch. Due to the interaction of RE type and video
type, we performed repeated measures of analysis of
variance for each video type separately. The analysis
showed a significant main effect of RE type for both the
same-gender F (1.164) =61.429, p<.001, ηp2 = .723 and the
mixed-gender videos F (1.196) =24.235, p<.001, ηp2 = .525.
Pairwise comparisons of RE type within each video showed
that in the same-gender narratives, Dutch speakers used
overt pronouns (M=.780, SE=.050) significantly more often
than NPs (M=.047, SE=.016) and null pronouns (M=.172,
SE=.046), p<.001, but did not differentiate between the last
two p=.057. While narrating the mixed-gender videos,
Dutch speakers again used the overt pronoun as the most
preferred RE type (M=.63, SE=.056). However, this time
they used null pronouns (M=.280, SE=.054) more frequently
than NPs (M=.09, SE=.020). Further paired sample t-tests
showed that Dutch speakers used more pronouns while
maintaining referents during the narratives of the samegender video compared to the mixed-gender video
t(19)=3.163, p=.005. Figure 3 depicts the preferred
expressions for each type of videos in maintenance context
for both languages.

Conclusion and Discussion
We have shown that speakers of typologically different
languages in general use fuller forms while re-introducing a
previously mentioned referent into the discourse and
reduced forms while maintaining the same referent. This
provides additional support to the previous theoretical and
empirical work on reference tracking that has identified this
as a language independent strategy in discourse production.
We have also provided additional cross-linguistic
evidence by directly comparing adult speakers of two
typologically different languages. This study also
investigated which reduced form (overt or null pronoun) is
preferred in each co-reference context and for what
functions. Pronouns are used differently in creating coherent
discourse in different languages.

Figure 3: The distribution of RE types in maintenance
contexts across the narratives of the two types of videos in
Turkish and Dutch. Error bars represent standard errors of
the mean.
Our findings from adult data support previous claims that
Turkish speakers use overt pronouns mainly to mark
emphasis in extended discourse and mostly in maintenance
contexts. They use null pronouns as the default form in
maintenance contexts. Dutch speakers on the other hand do
not necessarily use pronouns to mark emphasis but rather as
a default form in maintenance contexts. This current
analysis directly comparing two languages then specifies the
differential functions that pronouns might have in
typologically different languages.
A novel contribution to the existing literature on spoken
discourse production and reference tracking is our focus on
gender. By manipulating the gender of the referents to be
mentioned throughout the extended discourse, we were able
to show that whether the genders of the people mentioned in
the story are the same or not influences the reference
tracking strategies of Dutch speakers but not of Turkish
speakers. Pronoun use in Turkish is limited to pragmatic
purposes and additionally pronouns do not encode gender.
Thus using pronouns when the referents are of different
gender is not an additional discourse strategy that Turkish
speakers can use to create unambiguous references.
Differences in gender encoding, however, manifested in
different ways than we originally predicted.
We had predicted that speakers of Dutch, which encodes
gender in third person singular pronouns, will use more
overt pronouns while re-introducing referents during the
mixed-gender narratives. Although we found an effect of
gender manipulation for Dutch, we found it in the
maintenance context rather than in the re-introduction
context. We tentatively argue that it could be cognitively
more challenging for Dutch speakers to use pronouns with
mixed genders in the maintenance contexts since in order to
use the correct pronoun they need to keep track of the
gender of the character they just mentioned, on top of the
actions they are engaged in. Tracking both actions and the

1299

gender of the referents may be cognitively more demanding
and therefore the speakers might use fewer pronouns the
mixed-gender narratives compared to the same-gender
narratives. While narrating the same-gender video, on the
other hand, speakers do not have to keep track of the gender
of their referents in maintenance contexts since all the
characters in that video are female. Speakers do not
necessarily need to activate the gender of the referents;
using ‘zij/ze’ (she) is always grammatically correct and
therefore a "safe" strategy. The reason why we do not find a
similar effect in re-introduction context may be because
speakers re-introduce referents mainly with an NP in
narratives of both videos, almost all the time and thus the
use of pronoun does not seem to be a common strategy in
this context anyway.
The comparisons we provide in this study open new ways
for the "pragmatic relativity", namely revealing differential
attention (at least as measured by the use/non-use of certain
forms) to those aspects of events and contrasts across
speakers of typologically different languages to create
pragmatically appropriate and coherent narratives. Further
research needs to systematically study the interplay between
different factors and discourse contexts, drawing extended
discourse data from typologically different languages to
understand the whole mechanism underpinning how
speakers of different languages track referents and their
significance for non-linguistic cognition.

Acknowledgements
This research is funded by the Center for Language Studies,
Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands and
partially by the European Council Erasmus Staff training
grant awarded to the first author by the International Office
Radboud University. We thank Dr. Pamela Perniss for the
same-gender stimulus video. We also thank Dr. Ayşe Caner
and Dr. Nihan Ketrez for providing the location for the data
collection in Istanbul, Turkey and their help for recruiting
participants.

References
Aksu-Koç, A. & Nicolopoulou, A. (2015) Character
Reference in Young Children's Narratives: Crosslinguistic Comparison of English, Greek, and Turkish.
Lingua 155, 62-84.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents.
London: Routledge.
Azar, Z. & Özyürek, A. (2015). Discourse management:
Reference tracking in speech and gesture in Turkish
narratives. Dutch Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4(2),
222-240.
Berman, R. A., & Slobin, D. I. (1994). Relating events in
narrative: A crosslinguistic developmental study.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bican, F. Y. (2000). A computational analysis of
information structure in Turkish. In A. Sumru Özsoy,
Didar Akar, Mine Nakipoğlu-Demiralp, E. Eser

Erguvanlı-Taylan and Ayhan Aksu-Koç (Eds.) Studies in
Turkish Linguistics, (pp. 151-163).
Carminati, M. N. (2002). The processing of Italian subject
pronouns. PhD Thesis, University of Massachusetts
Amherst.
Chafe,W. L. (1976). Giveness, contrastiveness, definiteness,
subjects, topics, and point of view. In C. N. Li (Ed.)
Subject and topic (pp. 25–55). New York: Academic
Press.
Enç, Mürvet. (1986). Topic switching and pronominal
subjects in Turkish. In D.I. Slobin and K. Zimmer (Eds.)
Studies in Turkish linguistics, (pp. 195-209). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Erguvanlı-Taylan, E. (1986). Pronominal versus Zero
Representation of Anaphora in Turkish. In Slobin, Dan I.
and Karl Zimmer (Eds.), Studies in Turkish linguistics,
(pp. 206-233), Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Flecken, M. (2011). Assessing bilingual attainment:
macrostructural planning in narratives. International
Journal of Bilingualism, 15(2), 164-186.
Gullberg, M. (2006). Handling discourse: Gestures,
reference tracking, and communication strategies in early
L2. Language Learning, 56(1), 155-96.
Hickmann, M. & Hendriks, H. (1999). Cohesion and form
in children's narratives: a comparison of English, French,
German, and Mandarin Chinese. Journal of Child
Language, 26, 419-452.
Kerslake, C. (1987). In E. H. Boeschoten and L.Th.
Verhoeven (Eds.), Studies on modern Turkish:
proceedings of the third conference on Turkish linguistics
(pp. 91-104). Tilburg: Tilburg University Press.
Küntay, A. (2002). Development of the Expression of
Indefiniteness: Presenting New referents in Turkish
Picture-series Stories. Discourse Processes, 33, 77-101.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence
form. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lausberg, H., & Sloetjes, H. (2009). Coding gestural
behavior with the NEUROGES-ELAN system. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 41(3),
841-849.
Özsoy, A. S. 1987. Null Subject Parameter and Turkish. In
Hendrik E. Boeschoten and Ludo T. Verhoeven (Eds.)
Studies on modern Turkish: Proceedings of the third
conference on Turkish linguistics, Tilburg University
Press, pp. 82-90.
Perniss, P. M., & Özyürek, A. (2015). Visible cohesion: A
comparison of reference tracking in sign, speech, and cospeech gesture. Topics in Cognitive Science, 7(1), 36-60.
Turan, D. (1995). Null vs. overt subjects in Turkish
discourse: A centering analysis. PhD Dissertation,
University of Pennsylvania.
Yoshioka, K. (2008). Gesture and information structure in
first and second language. Gesture, 8(2), 236-55.

1300

