Predicting Overprecision in Range Estimation
Matthew Kaesler1 (matt.kaesler@gmail.com)
Matthew B. Welsh1 (matthew.welsh@adelaide.edu.au)
Carolyn Semmler1 (carolyn.semmler@adelaide.edu.au)
1. The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
Abstract
Overprecision (overconfidence in interval estimation) is a bias
with clear implications for economic outcomes in industries
reliant on forecasting possible ranges for future prices and
unknown states of nature - such as mineral and petroleum
exploration. Prior research has shown the ranges people
provide are too narrow given the knowledge they have – that
is, they underestimate uncertainty and are overconfident in
their knowledge. The underlying causes of this bias are,
however, still unclear and individual differences research has
shed little light on traits predictive of susceptibility. Taking
this as a starting point, this paper directly contrasts the Naïve
Sampling Model and Informativeness-Accuracy Tradeoff
accounts of overprecision – seeing which better predicts
performance in an interval estimation task. This was achieved
by identifying traits associated with these theories – Short
Term Memory and Need for Cognitive Closure, respectively.
Analyses indicate that NFCC but not STM predicts interval
width and thus, potentially, impacts overprecision.
Keywords: confidence; overprecision; need for cognitive
closure; STM; informativeness; naïve sampling model.

Introduction
Overprecision, the form overconfidence observed on
interval estimation tasks, has been described as the most
robust yet least understood form of overconfidence (Moore
& Healey, 2008). It occurs where people provide confidence
intervals (lower and upper bounds between which they are
confident, to a stated degree, that an unknown value lies). If,
over a set of questions asking for (e.g.) 90% confidence
intervals, objective accuracy levels are lower than 90%, this
is deemed overprecision (Alpert & Raffia, 1982; Moore &
Healey, 2008). It differs from overestimation, observed on
point estimates when post-item confidence judgements
exceed accuracy, as point estimate accuracy improves with
task experience, while range estimate accuracy does not,
implying different underlying processes (Hansson, Juslin &
Winman, 2008). People show pronounced overprecision on
interval estimation tasks - that is, far fewer ranges contain
the true value than expected based on the stated level of
confidence (Lichtenstein, Fischhoff & Phillips, 1982).
Overprecision is of applied significance in engineering,
mining and the oil and gas industry, which all make use of
estimates delivered in this form (Moore, Tenney & Haran,
2015), with valuation errors of hundreds of millions of
dollars resulting (Welsh, Begg & Bratvold, 2007).
The basic cause of overprecision is people generating
intervals too narrow to reflect their degree of subjective
uncertainty, failing to capture the true value as often as

expected (Alpert & Raffia, 1982). The effect is resistant to
debiasing, with participants exhorted to widen their intervals
failing to do so enough to achieve good, much less perfect,
calibration (e.g. Yaniv & Foster, 1995).
Factors contributing to overprecision, however, are poorly
understood and, while task characteristics and debiasing
techniques have attracted significant interest, individual
differences in performance have received little attention,
with only two recent studies relating individual differences
to interval estimation performance (Haran, Ritov & Mellers,
2013; Hilton, Regner, Cabantous, Charalambides and
Vautier, 2011). This study addresses this deficit by selecting
individual differences relating to two promising theories of
overprecision, the Naïve Sampling Model (NSM) and the
Informativeness-Accuracy Tradeoff (IAT; Juslin, Winman
& Hansson, 2007; Yaniv and Foster, 1995; 1997).

Naïve Sampling Model (NSM)
The NSM explains overprecision cognitively - as a
consequence of short term memory (STM) capacity. The
underlying concept being that, to create an interval, a person
calls relevant examples from long term memory (LTM). For
instance, if asked to set an interval around the population of
Nigeria, one might call to mind populations of other African
countries (or, failing that, non-African countries).
This sample, held in STM, is then used as the basis for
creating the interval estimate – for example, by taking the
10th and 90th percentiles of that sample and using these as
the low and high ends of an 80% confidence interval. The
sample drawn from LTM, however, is limited by a person’s
STM to a small number of instances and, as sampling
dispersion is a biased estimator of population dispersion,
80% coverage of the sample does not correspond to 80%
coverage of the population – leading to too narrow ranges.
Individual Differences in NSM. NSM holds that better
STM decreases overprecision due to increased interval
width - as larger samples are less likely to underestimate
population dispersion. Support for a reduction of
overprecision due to STM was found in a study involving a
learning and then a testing phase - but interval width was
not explicitly measured (Hansson et al., 2008).

Informativeness-Accuracy Tradeoff (IAT)
The IAT is a motivational explanation of people’s
preferences when receiving and generating interval
estimates (Yaniv & Foster, 1995; 1997). In interval

502

estimation terms, narrow intervals are more informative but,
holding all else equal, less likely to be accurate, while wide
intervals are less informative and more accurate. Thus, these
objectives need to be traded off against one another.
Yaniv and Foster’s (1995; 1997) participants showed a
general preference for receiving informative (narrow)
interval estimates that missed the true value rather than
uninformative (broad) estimates containing it, stating that
these were more ‘useful’ than the wider estimates.
Participants also produced intervals containing the true
value far less often than the stated 95% confidence level,
and when informed of the degree to which their intervals
would need expanding to contain the true values often
enough, opined that this would render the judgements
useless to the receiver (Yaniv & Foster, 1995; 1997).
The regulation of informativeness-accuracy thus follows
conversational norms (Yaniv & Foster, 1995; 1997) - in
providing a judgement, estimators are attempting to help the
receiver. The receiver’s purpose in soliciting a judgement
should guide the relative informativeness or accuracy of the
estimator (Yaniv & Foster, 1995; 1997).
A key contribution of this theory is the decomposition of
intervals into width (upper minus lower bound) and absolute
error (distance from the interval’s midpoint to the true
value), with width thought to reflect strategy (how
informative or precise an estimator is claiming to be) while
absolute error reflects knowledge (Yaniv & Foster, 1997).
Individual Differences in IAT. The conversational norms
explanation for regulation of informativeness-accuracy in
interval estimation has received limited support, with
attempts to manipulate receiver purpose not affecting
overprecision. Nor is it clear why communications between
experimenter and participant should induce informative
rather than accurate responses (Haran, Radzevick & Moore,
2010, cited in Moore, Tenney and Haran, 2015).
A novel explanation is that people may be predisposed to
informative or accurate judgments by innate thinking
dispositions such as Need for Cognitive Closure (NFCC) defined as the desire to answer a question rather than
sustaining further uncertainty (Webster & Kruglanski,
1994). Wide intervals are necessarily ambiguous, and it may
be that high-NFCC participants would produce narrow
intervals to avoid ambiguity and attain a feeling of closure.
Additionally, low NFCC is qualitatively similar to high
Actively Open-minded Thinking (AOT), which predicted
reduced overprecision on a single interval estimate (Haran
et al., 2013). NFCC is preferable, however, as it includes
discomfort with ambiguity, which AOT does not, and the
NFCC scales are better validated than those for the AOT.

across domains, shown to be predictive of performance
within a domain - such as, online confidence from an earlier
English test predicting end-of-year English grades (Stankov,
Lee, Luo & Hogan, 2012) - but not yet across domains.

Hypotheses
1. Better STM will result in wider intervals and reduce
overprecision. (NSM hypothesis)
2.Higher NFCC will result in narrowed intervals and
increase overprecision (IAT hypothesis).
3. Higher online confidence will predict reduced
overprecision (confidence-overprecision hypothesis).

Method
Participants
Participants (n = 49, 29 females, mean age = 31.0 years, SD
= 15.5) were drawn from University of Adelaide students
and the general population. They were highly educated, with
87% of participants having attempted a Bachelor’s degree.
Psychology 1B students participated for course credit and
others entered in a draw to win one of two $50 gift cards.

Materials
Digit Span (STM capacity) Forward digit span, adapted
from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scales (Wechlser,
2008), measured STM capacity. To ease data collection, the
task was administered in groups. Participants were read lists
of numbers as per the standard digit span procedure but
provided written rather than verbal responses. The two
response methods have been shown to produce similar
scores within subjects (Ryan, Townsend & Kreiner, 2014).
There were two trials at each span level, 16 trials in all,
ranging from two digits to nine digits in length. Each trial
number was read out, e.g. “Trial 1”, followed by a four
second break, after which the digits were read out at a rate
of one per second. Once all participants had finished writing
their response, the next trial was announced and the process
repeated until all 16 trials had been administered. A
participant’s score was the last span level at which they
were correct on at least one of the two trials.
Need for Cognitive Closure Scale 15-item. A fifteen-item
scale derived from the revised 41-item NFCC scale (Roets
& Van Hiel, 2007) was used to generate the general NFCC
factor (Roets & Van Hiel, 2011). Participants rated
statements such as “I don’t like situations that are uncertain”
on a six-point Likert scale from 1, strongly disagree, to 6,
strongly agree. Scores summed from all items give scores
from 15 to 90 with higher scores indicating greater NFCC.

Online Confidence
Given uncertainty regarding the causes of overprecision,
online confidence (OC) – the average post-item confidence
ratings from a 12-item form of the Raven’s APM test
(Arthur & Day, 1994) - was also used as a predictor in this
study. OC is thought to reflect a stable confidence trait

Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices 12-item.
Raven’s is a 36-item measure of fluid intelligence for use
with highly-educated samples but was used here to derive
OC. Arthur and Day’s (1994) 12-item version was used,
untimed, and a participant’s score was simply their number
of correct answers. After each item, participants provided

503

confidence ratings (0-100%) for the accuracy of their
answer, which were averaged as the measure of OC.
General Knowledge Interval Estimates (Overprecision).
Twenty general knowledge questions were used to assess
overprecision in interval estimation. Participants made 80%
confidence estimates in accordance with the oil and gas
industry standard (Welsh, Bratvold & Begg 2005), and saw
an example question to learn the required response format.
Four topic areas were used; geography, sport, big business
and historical events, with five questions from each topic. In
theory, question content is unimportant as optimum
performance involves scaling intervals to accord with the
precision of knowledge, not knowing exact answers to the
questions. However, participants often react with frustration
when they find questions too difficult or topics unfamiliar
(Welsh et al., 2005) and, thus, a range of topics was used.
Bias Score. Bias score was used as the measure of overall
overprecision, calculated as the given confidence level (i.e.,
0.8) minus the proportion correct. Perfect calibration would
result in a bias score of 0, overprecision a positive bias score
and underprecision a negative bias score.
Interval Width. Interval width was measured by
subtracting an estimate’s upper from its lower bound. As
width is relative to the scale of the correct answer,
participant’s ranges were ranked from widest to narrowest
(i.e. widest = 1) for each item, using average ranks for ties.
Participant’s mean rank across the 20 questions was used in
analyses. Scores closer to 1 thus indicate participant’s
intervals that were, typically, wider than other participants.
Absolute Error. This was calculated as the absolute
difference between the true value and the interval midpoint.
Absolute error was calculated as described for interval
width but values were ranked smallest to largest (i.e. least
absolute error = 1), ensuring higher interval width and
absolute errors both correspond to greater overprecision.

Procedure
Participants first completed the digit span test and gave
demographic information before undertaking the interval
estimation task. They were told to remind themselves when
reading each estimation question that they should be 80%
sure that the true value was between the low and high
bounds they provided. After the interval estimates,
participants completed the NFCC scale and then the
Raven’s APM. All tests were conducted using pencil and
paper and completion time was 30-45 minutes.

Results
Given the small sample, Efron’s (1987) BCa bootstrap
procedure with 2000 resamples was used to calculate
statistics in addition to traditional methods.

Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for all continuous
variables, revealing that participants displayed the expected
pattern of overprecision in their interval estimates, with a

mean bias score of .51. The degree of miscalibration is on
the high end of that observed in other studies, with hit rates
around 30% at a pre-stated confidence level of 80%.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for all continuous variables.
M
SD
Min.
Max.
Age
31.04 15.45
18
80
Digit Span
6.92
1.35
4
9
NFCC
57.06 10.80
38
82
Online Confidence
67.68 18.34
17.5
100
Raven’s APM
7.88
2.76
2
12
Bias Score
.51
.17
.00
.80
Interval Width
25.00
6.64
11.33
39.55
Absolute Error
25.00
5.23
14.23
42.70
Table 2 present a correlation matrix for these variables excepting between bias score, interval width and absolute
error, due to their statistical dependency.
Table 2: Correlation matrix for all continuous variables
1
2
3
4
5
1 Age
2 DS
-.10
3 NFCC
.04
-.20
4 OC
.13
-.24
-.28
5 RAPM
.20
-.36
-.34
.67
6 Bias Score
.09
-.06
-.10
-.27
.32
7 Int. Width
-.27
-.24
.30
.40
-.38
8 Abs. Err.
-.25
.13
.06
.12
-.01
Bold = p ≤ .05. DS = digit span; NFCC = need for cognitive
closure; OC = online confidence; RAPM = Ravens APM.
Looking at Table 2, one can see three major points
relating to our hypotheses. The first is that online
confidence is closely related to the people’s scores on the
Ravens (as would be expected) but not significantly related
to any of the three overprecision measures (bias, width or
error). The second is that digit span seems similarly
unrelated – although the relationship between digit span and
interval width, at -0.27, approaches significance. Finally,
NFCC is significantly correlated with the bias score and
more strongly with interval width but not absolute error.
Beyond our hypotheses, it is worth noting the significant
negative relationship between participants Ravens scores
and interval widths – due, perhaps, to the fact that age
negatively predicts people’s online confidence and Raven’s
scores and is positively related to interval width.
The above examination of correlations suggests that
NFCC predicts overprecision bias and interval width
whereas digit span and online confidence do not. This
piecemeal
approach,
however,
ignores
potential
relationships between the predictors. Therefore, multiple
regressions were conducted as a means of examining all
three potential predictors of overprecision simultaneously.

Interval Width
Table 3 displays the results of a multiple linear regression

504

conducted to test the hypotheses that: STM capacity, as
measured by digit span, would be related to the production
of wider intervals; that NFCC level would be related to the
production of narrower intervals; and that online confidence
would be related to the production of wider intervals.
The model reached significance, F(3,45) = 4.17, p< .05,
R2 = .22, with NFCC as the only significant predictor. The
hypothesis that higher NFCC score would be related to the
production of narrower intervals was supported, however
the wide bootstrap CI95 for the regression coefficient makes
the true strength of the relationship difficult to ascertain.
Table 3: Multiple linear regression analysis predicting
interval width from digit span, NFCC and online confidence

DS
NFCC
OC

-.95
.20
-.05

B
BCa CI95
[-2.30, .30]
[.07, .32]
[-.16, .09]

SE

β

t

p

.72
.07
.06

-.19
.33*
-.13

-1.43
2.39
-.99

ns
<.05
ns

In contrast, the hypothesis that high STM would result in
wider intervals was not supported. The (n.s.) relationship
observed was, in fact, opposite to that predicted. Likewise,
online confidence failed to predict interval width.

Overprecision
The above analyses support the supposition that NFCC
predicts interval width but the degree to which this results in
overprecision bias is, perhaps, more important to know.
Table 4 displays results of a multiple linear regression
conducted to test the hypotheses that: STM capacity (i.e.
digit span) would be related to reduced overprecision; that
NFCC would be related to increased overprecision; and that
online confidence would predict reduced overprecision.
The model did not reach significance, F(3,45) = 1.75, p =
.17, R2 = .10. Despite the significant correlation between
NFCC and bias score in Table 2, NFCC was not a
significant predictor of overprecision in this model - and
none of the three hypotheses found support.
Table 4: Multiple linear regression analysis predicting bias
score from digit span, NFCC, online confidence and Ravens

DS
NFCC
OC

.001
.005
.000

B
BCa CI95
[-.04 .04]
[.001, .009]
[-.003, .002]

SE

β

.021
.002
.001

.01
.32
-.02

t

p

.04
2.16
-.14

ns
ns
ns

Discussion
These results go some way in helping to decide between
two promising theories of overprecision: the Naïve
Sampling Model (NSM, Juslin et al., 2007); and the
Informativeness-Accuracy Trade-off (IAT, Yaniv & Foster,
1995; 1997) with some support offered for the latter - at

least, to the extent that one accepts that NFCC reflects an
intrinsic tendency to prefer informativeness over accuracy.
A third possible predictor of overprecision – online
confidence (Stankov et al., 2012) – showed no clear
relationship with overprecision, suggesting that these forms
of confidence and overconfidence are not closely related.

STM Capacity
The idea that superior STM causes the production of wider
intervals and thus reduces overprecision is central to the
Naïve Sampling Model (NSM: Juslin et al., 2007). Thus,
this study showing no effect of STM on interval width and
failing to replicate Hansson et al.’s (2008) finding that STM
predicted reduced overprecision presents a challenge to the
theory as described (although it does not rule out the
possibility of other sampling processes providing a sound
explanation of the interval estimation process).
These results appear not to be STM measurement issues,
as the digit span test used here produced the expected ‘seven
plus-or-minus two’ pattern of results (Miller, 1956). There
may, though, be other explanations for why this study failed
to support Hansson et al.’s (2008) assumptions and findings.
Firstly, forward digit span, as used in this study, measures
only STM. The digit span task used in Hansson et al.
(2008), however, is described as a composite (via an
unstated formula) of a passive repeat-back task (presumably
forward span) and a sequencing task, which are thought to
reflect working memory in addition to capacity (Engle,
Tuholski, Laughlin & Conway; 1999). Thus, Hansson et
al.’s (2008) scale may have measured working memory and
STM, affecting the relationship they observed. The positive
correlation Hansson et al. (2008) observed between digit
span and Raven’s APM was stronger than seen herein,
consistent with the notion that the more complex span task
may have led to a stronger relationship with working
memory, which is more closely related to Gf – as measured
by Raven’s APM (Wiley, Jarosz, Cushen & Colflesh, 2011).
Secondly, the general-knowledge interval estimation used
herein differed significantly from the laboratory learning
task used by Hansson et al. (2008) in that it did not control
for prior knowledge. Hansson et al.’s (2008) task involved a
learning phase of fictitious company data, followed by an
estimates phase wherein participants made a point estimate,
thought to reflect information successfully stored in LTM if
correct, and an interval estimate at the 80% probability
level, thought to reflect inference from STM if correct.
Their results suggested that STM capacity as assessed by
digit span was negatively related to overprecision but
proportion of correctly recalled values from LTM was not.
This was interpreted as evidence for the importance of STM
capacity as compared to information stored in LTM in
generating correct interval estimates (Hansson et al., 2008).
However, the strongest predictor of overprecision was the
variance of the values correctly recalled from LTM, which
could be assessed by comparing the values recalled to the
distribution of values from the learning phase. Those in the
low-variance group after a median split were almost twice

505

as overprecise as those in the high-variance group, pointing
to the possibility of a role for information stored in LTM.
Controlling for prior knowledge is necessary to
demonstrate the theorised dissociation between STM
capacity and LTM information storage but such a task is not
representative of real world estimation tasks.
Of interest - in light of this study’s results - is the finding
that low-variance LTM representations were associated with
increased overprecision (Hansson et al., 2008). It is possible
that when prior knowledge is not controlled, as in general
knowledge questions as used in this study, between-subjects
differences in LTM representations may obscure the
relationship between STM capacity and overprecision.
However, were STM’s predictive power to be realized only
in laboratory settings where prior knowledge is controlled,
the utility of NSM for applied settings must be questioned.

Need for Cognitive Closure
The hypothesis that higher NFCC would correlate with
production of narrower intervals was supported but the
effect of this on a person’s level of overprecision was mixed
– supported in the correlation table but not in the multiple
regression. This is, perhaps, unsurprising as overall bias is
also affected by differences in individual knowledge and
any effect on interval width is diluted by the inclusion of
errors in estimation, which NFCC does not predict.
The results offer support for interpreting the NFCC trait
as per Webster and Kruglanski (1994), which led to the
presumption that it might be linked to a preference for
informativeness over accuracy. They also support a
qualitative similarity between low NFCC and high AOT, as
low-NFCC participants in this study behaved like high-AOT
participants in Haran et al. (2013). NFCC could be
considered a complimentary construct to AOT given its
significant relationship with interval width, which was not
predicted by AOT in Haran et al. (2013).
Overall, the fact that a dispositional variable (NFCC) was
the best predictor of both interval width and, despite the
model not reaching statistical significant, overprecision,
argues for an account of overprecision including
motivational and strategic aspects rather than a purely
cognitive one. It is, thus, broadly supportive of the
principles of the Informativeness-Accuracy Tradeoff’s
overprecision explanation (Yaniv & Foster, 1995; 1997).
The theoretical link drawn here between NFCC and IAT
thus seems to have been sensible; although the mechanism
underpinning this requires elucidation, these findings should
stimulate further research into NFCC and, more generally,
the role of intrinsic motivators as drivers of the IAT.

Future Directions
Few studies have examined overprecision on interval
estimates from an individual differences perspective and, so,
these results suggest multiple directions for future research.
A first, drawing on results in Table 2, will be to nail down
the relationships between age and the various confidence,
intelligence and bias measures examined herein.

Naïve Sampling Model This study did not support NSM’s
ability to explain overprecision – at least in cases where
estimates are made in contexts without controlled prior
knowledge. Follow up research into the effects of task
features on NSM is therefore necessary to clarify its utility.
A future study could examine predictions of NSM in a
within-subjects design, with conditions having different
levels of control over prior knowledge, shedding light on the
utility of NSM outside the laboratory. Additional work
utilizing separate measures of working memory and STM
could also help disentangle possible confounds, while
investigating the ability of other sampling processes to
explain overprecision would help clarify the worth of
further developing sampling-based models of overprecision.
Need for Cognitive Closure As a new construct to the
interval estimation field, many aspects of NFCC bear further
investigation. Understanding the mechanisms underlying the
association between high NFCC, the production of narrower
intervals, and a potential relationship with increased
overprecision is important. Thus, use of the 41-item revised
scale - which includes subscales - (Roets & Van Hiel, 2007)
in future research would be a sensible starting point.
Also relevant are moderators that might affect how those
high or low in NFCC behave. The link between NFCC and
interval estimates posited here was that wide intervals are
ambiguous and high-NFCC participants would avoid
ambiguity - providing narrower intervals. However, an
alternative explanation could be drawn from the literature
on NFCC and information search. Specifically, rather than
trying to reduce affective discomfort caused by ambiguity,
participants may simply not search for enough information
to make credible estimates, as the perceived cost of
information search is too high. Research on NFCC and
information search suggests those high in NFCC search for
less information and make faster decisions but the opposite
pattern of behaviour can manifest under certain conditions
(Choi, Koo, Choi & Auh, 2008; Van Hiel & Mervielde,
2002). Variables moderating the association between NFCC
and information search should, therefore, be investigated.
For example, those low in ability to achieve closure,
perceived ability to enact strategies to fulfil epistemic needs,
and those with a low working memory capacity (WMC)
may behave conversely to that suggested by their NFCC
level, with high NFCC people prolonging information
search and suspending closure and low NFCC people
shortening it to achieve rapid closure (CzernatowiczKukuczka, Jasko & Kossowksa, 2014; Kossowska & BarTal, 2013). The apparent relevance of WMC to the NSM
and to the relationship between NFCC and information
search may, thus, provide a path to integrating motivational
and cognitive theories of overprecision.
The effect of moderators on the relationship between
NFCC and information search paints a complex picture. A
more nuanced view of the relationship between NFCC,
interval width and overprecision may appear when
moderators of NFCC behaviour are also measured.

506

Conclusion
The key finding of this paper is that NFCC, introduced as a
possible measure of a person’s preference for
informativeness over accuracy in line with Yaniv and
Foster’s (1995;1997) IAT theory does predict overprecision
in interval estimation – or, at least, the interval width aspect
of this bias. Equally interesting is its failure to support the
central assumption of the NSM account of overprecision.
The results, therefore, point to the need to consider
motivation and strategy in addition to the potential impact
of cognitive processes when examining overprecision.

Acknowledgements
MBW acknowledges the support of the CIBP member
companies: BG Group, ExxonMobil, Santos and Woodside.

References
Alpert, M. & Raiffa, H. (1982). A progress report on the
training of probability assessors. In Daniel Kahneman,
Paul Slovic & Amos Tversky (eds.), Judgment Under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge
University Press 294--305.
Arthur, W., & Day, D. V. (1994). Development of a short
form for the Raven Advanced Progressive Matrices Test.
Educational and Psych. measurement, (54), 394-403.
Choi, J. A., Koo, M., Choi, I., & Auh, S. (2008). Need for
cognitive closure and information search strategy.
Psychology & Marketing, 25(11), 1027-1042.
Czernatowicz-Kukuczka, A., Jasko, K., & Kossowska, M.
(2014). Need for closure and dealing with uncertainty in
decision making context: The role of the behavioral
inhibition system and working memory capacity.
Personality and Individual Differences, 70, 126-130.
Efron, B. (1987). Better bootstrap confidence intervals. J. of
the American statistical Association, 82(397), 171-185.
Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., & Conway,
A. R. (1999). Working memory, short-term memory, and
general fluid intelligence: a latent-variable approach. J. of
experimental psychology: General, 128(3), 309.
Hansson, P., Juslin, P., & Winman, A. (2008). The role of
short-term memory capacity and task experience for
overconfidence in judgment under uncertainty. J. of
Experimental Psychology: L.M.C., 34(5), 1027-1042.
Haran, U., Radzevick, J. R., & Moore, D. A. (2010).
Audience effects on overprecision in judgment.
Unpublished Manuscript.
Haran, U., Ritov, I., & Mellers, B. A. (2013). The role of
actively open-minded thinking in information acquisition,
accuracy, and calibration. Judgment and Decision
Making, 8(3), 188-201.
Hilton, D., Regner, I., Cabantous's, L., Charalambides, L., &
Vautier, S. (2011). Do positive illusions predict
overconfidence in judgment? A test using interval
production and probability evaluation measures of
miscalibration. J. of Behavioral Decision Making, 24(2),
117-139.

Juslin, P., Winman, A., & Hansson, P. (2007). The naive
intuitive statistician: A naive sampling model of intuitive
confidence intervals. Psych. Review, 114(3), 678-703.
Kossowska, M., & Bar-Tal, Y. (2013). Need for closure and
heuristic information processing: The moderating role of
the ability to achieve the need for closure. British J. of
Psychology, 104(4), 457-480.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & Phillips, L. D. (1982).
Calibration of probabilities: The state of the art to 1980.
In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.),
Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases, (pp.
306-334). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psych. Review, 63(2), 81.
Moore, D. A., Tenney, E. R., & Haran, U. (2015).
Overprecision in judgment. In G. Keren & G. Wu (Eds.),
Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making. New York:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Moore, D. A., & Healy, P. J. (2008). The trouble with
overconfidence. Psych. Review, 115(2), 502-517
Roets, A., & Van Hiel, A. (2007). Separating Ability From
Need: Clarifying the Dimensional Structure of the Need
for Closure Scale. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 33(2), 266-280.
Roets, A., & Van Hiel, A. (2011). Item selection and
validation of a brief, 15-item version of the Need for
Closure Scale. Personality and Ind. Diff., 50(1), 90-94.
Ryan, J., Townsend, J., & Kreiner, D. (2014). Comparison
of oral, written, and pointing responses to the WAIS-IV
Digit Span. Applied Neuropsychology: Adult, 21, 94-97.
Stankov, L., Lee, J., Luo, W., & Hogan, D. J. (2012).
Confidence: A better predictor of academic achievement
than self-efficacy, self-concept and anxiety? Learning and
Individual Differences, 22(6), 747-758.
Van Hiel, A., & Mervielde, I. (2002). Effects of ambiguity
and need for closure on the acquisition of information.
Social Cognition, 20(5), 380-408.
Webster, D. M., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1994). Individual
differences in need for cognitive closure. J. of Personality
and Social Psychology, 67(6), 1049-1062.
Wechsler, David. "Wechsler adult intelligence scale–Fourth
Edition." San Antonio, TX: NCS Pearson (2008).
Welsh, M.B., Begg, S., & Bratvold, R. (2007). Modelling
the Economic Impact of Common Biases on Oil and Gas
Decisions. In SPE Annual Technical Conference and
Exhibition. Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Welsh, M.B., Bratvold, R., & Begg, S. (2005). Cognitive
biases in the petroleum industry: Impact and remediation.
In SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition.
Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Yaniv, I., & Foster, D. P. (1995). Graininess of judgment
under uncertainty: An accuracy-informativeness trade-off.
J. of Experimental Psychology: General, 124(4), 424-432.
Yaniv, I., & Foster, D. P. (1997). Precision and accuracy of
judgmental estimation. J. of Behavioral Decision Making,
10(1), 21-32.

507

