Process Modeling of Qualitative Decision Under Uncertainty
David A. Broniatowski (broniatowski@gwu.edu)

Department of Engineering Management and Systems Engineering, 800 22nd Street NW #2700
Washington, DC 20052 USA

Valerie F. Reyna (vr53@cornell.edu)
Human Neuroscience Institute
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Abstract
Fuzzy-trace theory assumes that decision-makers process
qualitative “gist” representations and quantitative “verbatim”
representations in parallel. Here, we develop a formal model
of fuzzy-trace theory that explains both processes. The model
also integrates effects of individual differences in numeracy,
metacognitive monitoring and editing, and sensation seeking.
Parameters of the model varied in theoretically meaningful
ways with differences in numeracy, monitoring, and sensation
seeking, accounting for risk preferences at multiple levels.
Relations to current theories and potential extensions are
discussed.
Keywords: Decision making; need for cognition; risky
choice; framing effect; Allais paradox

Fuzzy-Trace Theory
Risk preferences are fundamental to psychological and
economic theory, and to decision neuroscience. We propose
a model of risk preferences that integrates theoretical
principles relevant to mental representations with individual
differences in metacognitive monitoring and risk-taking
propensity. Our model is based on fuzzy-trace theory, an
account of decision-making under risk, which posits that
decision-makers use qualitative, categorical, “gist”
representations of the meaning of decision information, in
parallel with precise, eidetic or metric, “verbatim”
representations of the exact words and numbers in that
information (for an overview, see Reyna, 2012). By
“mental representation,” we mean the manner in which a
stimulus is encoded into a subject’s memory. Decision
makers operate on these representations of the stimulus
rather than on the stimulus itself. Specifically, a gist
representation captures the basic meaning, or "essence," of a
stimulus. Furthermore, fuzzy-trace theory posits a hierarchy
of gist that is, in the domain of numbers, analogous to scales
of measurement (Reyna, 2008; Stevens, 1946). We
approximate this hierarchy with three levels of
representation: categorical, ordinal, and interval, described
below.
The outline of this paper is as follows: first we present a
motivating example. Next, we describe our novel
formalization, accounting for factors that vary with
individual-differences. Finally, we test our model’s
parsimony and predictions.

Example
Fuzzy-trace theory is motivated by the insight that one’s
representation of a decision problem can drive decision
outcomes. For example, consider a choice between:
1. winning $180 for sure; versus
2. a .90 chance of winning $250 and .10 chance of no
money.
One might represent this decision as a simple choice
between the following two options:
1. Possibility of some money
2. Possibility of some money and possibility of no money.
Given this representation, most decision makers would
favor option 1 because it promises some money without the
chance of no money. Alternatively, one could instead
represent the choice as follows:
1. More chance of winning less money
2. Less chance of winning more money and
possibility of winning no money.
This representation, although more precise, does not allow
for a clear decision to be made because most people would
prefer winning more money to winning less money, but they
would also prefer more chance of winning to less chance of
winning. Finally, one may choose a precise representation
of the problem whereby one calculates the expected value of
each option by multiplying its respective outcomes by their
probabilities, as follows:
1. Expected value of $180 (i.e., $180 * 1)
2. Expected value of $225 (i.e., $250 * 0.90 + $0 *
0.10)
This representation seems to favor option 2, since it
promises more money on average. Overall, this example
illustrates our approach to categorical gist representation.

The Decision Space
We represent the complements in these options as points
in a 2-dimensional space, representing all possible
combinations of amounts of money (or, generally, some
outcome) and probability that a decision-maker could
encounter:
Categorical representation of decision space.
The gist representation of the choice above is between:
1. Possibility of some money
2. Possibility of some money and possibility of no
money.

1667

These gists are represented in a 2-dimensional space. All
points in this space are interpreted according to the part of
the diagram in which they are located.
These gist
representations can overlap. For example, a point that falls
into the part of the space marked as “possibility of no
money” also falls into the part marked as “possibility of
some money.” Thus, multiple gist representations are
possible for some points.
The extended fuzzy-processing preference.
We model the relationship between categories as a
hierarchy in which higher elements are preferred
interpretations when compared to lower elements
(Broniatowski & Reyna, 2014). Each decision complement
is a point in our space. If we determine each complement’s
gist representation, and then locate that gist in the associated
hierarchy, the model stipulates how that decision
complement is interpreted.
Mapping problem information to categorical mental
representation. We assume that the categorical distinction
between “some” of a quantity and “none” of a quantity is
primitive. Thus, our model assumes that all points are
mapped to one of these two categories. Throughout this
paper, we assume that stimuli map to either “some” or
“none” in both the domains of outcomes chance for
scientific parsimony.
Formalizing the extended fuzzy-processing preference.
We introduced the extended fuzzy-processing preference to
enable us to differentiate between overlapping gists.
According to the extended fuzzy-processing preference,
subjects will prefer to interpret a decision option as within
the subcategory containing the fewest points– i.e., the
highest element within the associated hierarchy. We
formalize the extended version of the fuzzy processing
preference by specifying that one always prefers the
interpretation associated with the category in the decision
space with the lowest dimension (similar to Feldman’s,
1997, “maximum codimension rule”). In other words, given
a point in our space and a set of possible gist interpretations
for that point, a subject will always prefer the interpretation
that is highest in the associated hierarchy.
Importantly, a preferred interpretation, or mental
representation, is not always the same as a preferred
outcome. For example, a decision-maker may prefer to
interpret of “.10 chance of no money” as “possibility of no
money” when compared to “possibility of some money.”
Given a choice between two options, interpreted
respectively as “possibility that of some money” and
“possibility of no money,” most decision-makers would
choose the former option. Thus, once mental representations
are chosen, we must define a preference ordering over the
decision options with these interpretations.
Values map mental representations to preference.
Decision makers choose between options based on which
has the high-valued affect. The affect assigned to a given
option is a function of how that option is represented. For
example, “no money is possible” is a preferred
interpretation for the point ($0, .10, a .10 chance of no

money) when compared to “some money is possible.”
However, a prospect that is interpreted as “some money is
possible” has a high valence when compared to one that is
interpreted as “no money is possible.” Thus, a decisionmaker would choose the option with the high valence. In
order to formalize this prediction, we again use a partial
order – i.e., every pair of elements within the category
hierarchy may be less than, greater than, equal to, or
unrelated to one another in the domain of values. Full
mathematical details of this partial order are presented in the
paper by Broniatowski & Reyna (2014).
Mapping problem information to ordinal mental
representations. Fuzzy-trace theory predicts that decisionmakers use ordinal (e.g., “more” vs. “less”) in parallel with
categorical and interval representations. When mapping
problem information to ordinal mental representation,
“more” is always in the direction away from zero and “less”
is always in the direction toward zero. Importantly, points
may only be compared at the ordinal level if they exist
within a common category. For example, one may compare
“no money with .10 chance” to “$180 for sure” because
both may be represented as “possibility if some money”
(even if this is not the preferred interpretation for either
option, it is an admissible interpretation for both). Since 0 is
less than 180 and .10 is less than certainty, the
corresponding ordinal representations are “less1 money with
less2 chance” and “more1 money with more2 chance.”
Mapping
ordinal
mental
representations
to
preference. Ordinal decision-making assumes that each
dimension in the decision space has a preferred direction.
When comparing two decision options, if the ordinal
representation of one option is preferred along all
dimensions of the decision space, and is strictly preferred
along at least one dimension, then that decision option is
preferred overall. For example, “more money with more
chance” is preferred when compared to “less money with
less chance.” Otherwise, a decision cannot be made and the
ordinal representation is indifferent, such as when “more1
money with less2 chance” is compared to “less1 money with
more2 chance”.
Formalizing How Each Representation Chooses
Among Decision Options
A “gist hierarchy” is a set of mental representations
ranging in precision from a categorical gist representation to
an interval verbatim representation, and sets of rules for
making decisions that are unique to each of these
representations. At the categorical level, each point is
represented according to the extended fuzzy-processing
preference. At the ordinal level, a point is chosen if it is
weakly preferred along all dimensions and strongly
preferred along at least one such dimension. Points in
disjoint categories cannot be compared. At the interval
level, decisions options are evaluated according to their
expected values (i.e., the sum of the value of each outcome
multiplied by its probability) – the simplest interval
representation (i.e., it assumes no decision weights).
Combining Information Across Representations

1668

We address conflicts between representations in our
model by assuming that each representation casts a “vote”
for its preferred decision options. For example, given a
choice between two decision options, each of the
categorical, ordinal, and interval representations “votes” (-1
for the first option, +1 for the second option, or 0 if
indifferent) for a preferred option according to its own
particular representational logic. A sum across these votes
(i.e., a weighted sum, as explained below) determines the
final decision. We chose summation because it is the
simplest combination rule for this sort of aggregation.

An Error Theory for Risky Decision Problems
We represent error using a standard multinomial logistic
distribution. For decisions with two options, effect size
typically follows a standard logistic distribution. (In
principle, our model could be extended to decisions with
multiple options using a multinomial logistic distribution.)
For our specific application, we model the probability, P,
that a subject will choose a given decision outcome in a
risky choice gamble by:

! " =

1

1 + & -()∙+,-).

! is a three-element vector containing an entry for
each representation (categorical, ordinal, and interval), ! is
Here,

a three-element vector containing an entry for each
corresponding decision weight. We also introduce a factor,
b, capturing the risk-taking propensity of a given set of
subjects.
Thus, we account for conflict between
representations by adding weighted votes from each
representation.
Factors affecting the decision weight vector. In the
domain of decision making, two major individual difference
factors associated with metacognitive monitoring and
editing have been proposed – numeracy (e.g., Peters et al.,
2006; Liberali et al., 2012) and Need for Cognition (NFC;
Cacioppo, et al.,1996; Stanovich & West, 2008).
People who are higher in numeracy and/or NFC are more
likely to spontaneously convert and compare alternative
“framings” of a problem, reducing cognitive biases.
Numeracy. Peters and colleagues (2006) defined
numeracy as “the ability to process basic probability and
Table 1: Evaluation of Model Fit.
Model
LikeAIC
BIC
lihood
Null
-7491
14982
14987
Saturated
-6570
13491
14049
Analytic
-6672
13409
13510
Categories
Single average -6826
13676
13715
value for a and b
Note. AIC = Akaike Information Criterion; BIC =
Bayesian Information Criterion
numerical concepts” and found that more numerate subjects
were less susceptible to attribute framing effects. In

addition, Schley and Peters (2014) found that more
numerate individuals treated numbers as more linear when
making a risky decision, suggesting that they rely less on
categorical gist and more on interval (linear) representations
of probabilities and outcomes.
Need for cognition. Prior work suggests that subjects
reconcile answers to oppositely framed versions of the same
problem when both frames are presented within-subjects,
when subjects respond to multiple presentations of the same
problem, or when they are exposed to obviously factorial
design manipulations within subjects. Kahneman and
Frederick (2002) have argued that such designs can lead
subjects to focus on the variables that are being
manipulated, and to compare different versions of the same
underlying problem instead of treating each independently.
Thus, the magnitude of framing effects varies systematically
with experimental design (e.g., Stanovich & West, 2008).
The tendency to reconcile responses to different versions
(or related problems) when they are presented withinsubjects is greater for those higher in NFC. Subjects with
high NFC tend to edit their choices more than those with
low NFC, presumably because they are more likely to notice
the common structures underlying these problems (i.e., high
NFC subjects display “analytic override;” e.g., LeBoeuf &
Shafir, 2003; Stanovich & West, 2008). Furthermore,
numeracy and NFC are separate sources of individual
differences that are not correlated (Peters et al., 2006;
Liberali et al., 2012).
We model the effects of numeracy and NFC using the
decision weight vector ! . Furthermore, if we make the
simplifying assumption that all of these decision weights are

equal, we may replace ! by a scalar factor, a, which
captures the “strength” of a given set of votes. When a is
high, subjects will strongly favor one option over another,
unless different representations conflict with one another.
When a is low, subjects will tend towards indifference.
Risk-taking propensity. In addition, our model
incorporates personality differences associated with risktaking (e.g., Caspi et al., 1997), including factors related to
cross-cultural differences (e.g., Du et al., 2002) and
sensation seeking or reward-related approach (e.g.,
Zuckerman, 2007). We represent this in our model by a
linear additive risk preference, b, which, when positive, is
used to indicate a predisposition toward the higher rewards
available in the more risky option in a gamble. The linear
additive nature of this factor is based on evidence presented
by Reyna and colleagues (2011) who found evidence
supporting additive effects (i.e., additive beyond verbatim
and gist processing) of subjects’ sensation seeking on risk
taking.
A worked example. Consider the decision between a
certain gain of $180 and a 0.90 chance of winning $250 and
a 0.10 chance of no money discussed above. Recall that the
categorical representation prefers the certain option (-1), the
ordinal representation is indifferent (0), and the interval
representation prefers the risky gamble (1).

1669

where k is the total number of distinct values for a, b, and x
in a given model (e.g., the total number of analytic
categories). Similarly,

!"# = % ln (*) − 2ln [/ 0 ]

Figure 1: Process Flowchart for Between-Subjects
Condition, No Replications, Individual Representation

" = [-1,0,1] in our model. For an experiment that is
conducted with frame manipulated between subjects, ! =
[1,1,1]. Thus, ! ∙ # = -1 + 0 + 1 = 0 (indicating that the

where n is the total number of data points in our sample
(i.e., 176 data points for 88 pairs of problems, listed in the
paper by Broniatowski & Reyna, 2015). Table 1 shows the
log-likelihood, AIC, and BIC values for the models that we
tested (we tested other models as well, but none surpassed
the model with analytic categories). The model containing
analytic categories for a and b has the lowest values of both
AIC and BIC, and only the saturated (i.e., overfit) model has
a higher log likelihood.

Individual Differences Analysis

Thus,

categorical and interval representations compete). Finally,
suppose we estimate our sample’s risk propensity from prior
data to be b = 0.25, indicating a slight preference for risk.
Then, the probability that a randomly chosen subject from
our sample will choose the risky gamble option is P=
1/(1+e-0.25) = 56%, and the probability that a randomly
chosen subject will choose the certain option is 44%.

Assessing The Goodness of Fit of our Model
To demonstrate the scientific parsimony of this model, we
have adapted a technique used by Busemeyer, Wang, &
Shiffrin (2015), wherein we compare our model’s fit to a
“null” model (in which each decision option is equally
likely), a “saturated” model (in which maximum-likelihood
parameter values are separately estimated for each
replication in our sample), and a model that estimates
parameters based upon theoretically-motivated categories:
namely mathematical ability (PISA scores) and
experimental design (for the a parameter), and stimulus
type, nationality, and age (for the b parameter), with
parameter values estimated separately within each category
using a jackknife estimator. Specifically, given a model, y,
the log likelihood function for each experimental replication
in our sample of 88 is:
ln # $%

= '(,( ln (,(,( ) + '(,/ ln (,(,/ )+'/,( ln (,/,( ) + '/,/ ln (,/,/ )

where n1,1 is the number of people choosing the first
decision option in the first problem, p1,1 is the predicted
proportion of subjects choosing the first decision option in
the first problem, given model y, etc., and
ln # $

=

ln # $&
&

is the total log-likelihood of model y. Given ln[L(y)], we
may calculate the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) as follows:

!"# = 2&-2ln [, - ]

Estes and Maddox (2005) point out that aggregate data
analyses may lead to different conclusions from those
reached through individual-level analyses. This concern
does not apply to data derived from between-subjects
designs, on the other hand, we may use the results of withinsubjects designs to perform process level tests of our model.
Specifically, we examined three replications of a framing
problem for which framing was manipulated within-subjects
and individual level frequency data were reported (Frisch,
1993; Stanovich & West, 1998; LeBoeuf & Shafir, 2003).
We extracted the number of subjects that were consistent
between frames (either choosing the certain gamble or the
risk option in both frames), the number of subjects who
displayed a framing effect (choosing the certain option in
the gain frame and the risky gamble in the loss frame), and
the number of subjects who displayed reverse framing (the
risky gamble in the gain frame and the certain option in the
loss frame. These data were used to test the following
process-level accounts of our model.
Between-subjects framing. Figure 1 shows a process-level
account of a framing problem for which frame was
manipulated between subjects with a single presentation.
Here, a subject is exposed to a stimulus containing a given
frame. If they are not numerate, they choose the decision
option consistent with that frame. If they are numerate, and
they are not sensation seeking, they choose the certain
option. Otherwise, they choose the risky option. Thus, an
individual who chooses the risky option in the gain frame
would be numerate and sensation seeking according to our
model. Furthermore, we may perform aggregate-level
analysis of between-subjects data, which enables us to
replace individual choices with probabilities. Specifically,
the probability that a subject randomly chosen from our
sample would pick the risky option in the gain frame is
.!"#$% = !%'()*#+) *!-- . Similarly, the probability that a
subject would pick the certain option in the loss frame is
!"#$$ = (1 − !)*+,-./, ) + !)*+,-./, *!$$ . Furthermore, our
1
!"#$% =
1 + ) -(-#,-) and
model stipulates that

1670

Table 2: 3 Sampled Experimental Replications of Individuals’ Decisions When Frame is Manipulated Within-Subjects
% High NFC
Empirical
Predicted
Reference
N
MLE
JK
C
F
RF
C
F
RF
p
χ2
! = [±1,0,0], a=0.89, b=0.22
Frisch
99
48
59
63
29
7
71
23
6
2
0.29
(1993)
Stanovich
29
56
57
202
73
17
205
69
18
0.
0.87
& West
2
3
(1998)
LeBoeuf &
28
61
54
206
60
21
194
74
19
4
0.16
Shafir (2003)
7
Note. C = Consistent – same decision in both frames; F = Framing – certain option in gain frame & risky gamble in loss
frame; RF = Reverse Framing – certain option in loss frame & risky gamble in gain frame; MLE = Maximum
Likelihood Estimate; JK = Jackknife estimator generated by averaging across all MLE values except the one
corresponding to a given problem
1
the similarity of the two problems and remain consistent
!"#$$ =
across frames (LeBoeuf & Shafir, 2003) whereas
1 + ( -(+,-) . Finally, we may estimate the values of
individuals with low NFC will treat the second problem as if
a and b using the by averaging across the maximum
it were independent of the first. As in the between-subjects
likelihood estimates of a and b for all problems with the
case, we may replace individual choices with probabilities.
exception of the problem whose parameters we are trying to
This formulation enables us to estimate the proportions of
estimate. Thus, we have a system of two equations with two
subjects that will be consistent, exhibit framing, or exhibit
unknowns, such that
reverse framing for a given sample where frame is
1
1
!"#$%&'(% = 1 +
manipulated within-subjects. Specifically, the proportion of
-(-'/0)
-('/0)
1+,
1+,
&
subjects in a given sample that is consistent across frames is
0-)
!"" = !$%&'()*' *(1 + / )
'
given by !"#$ + !&& 1 − !"#$ !*+,-./0- , the proportion
Within-subjects framing. Figure 2 shows a process-level
of subjects that exhibiting framing behavior is given by
account of a framing problem for which frame was
1 − #$%& (1 − #()*+,-.+ )+
manipulated within subjects.
1 − $%% $%% 1 − $&'( $)*+,-./,
and the proportion of subjects exhibiting reverse framing is:
! − #$$ #$$ ! − #%&' #()*+,-.+
Process-level tests of our model.
We compare our
model’s predictions to individual level behavior (i.e.,
sequential choices) by estimating values of pnumeracy, pNFC
and pss for a given experimental sample using the equations
above. Specifically, we compare our model’s predictions to
three replications of a framing problem presented withinsubjects that are reported in the literature (Frisch, 1993;
LeBoeuf & Shafir, 2003; Stanovich & West, 1998).
Specifically, we estimated the baseline proportion of
subjects who are numerate from the problems in our sample
for which framing was manipulated between-subjects.
Specifically, we estimated the value of ! as the average of
maximum-likelihood a values for low-PISA betweenFigure 2: Process Flowchart for Within-Subjects Condition,
subjects framing problems (since all within-subjects
Individual Representation
problems are also from low-PISA countries) weighted by
Here, subjects are exposed to a stimulus containing a
the total number of subjects (recall that the first choice made
given frame in a manner analogous to a between-subjects
in a within-subjects design is analogous to a betweenframing problem: If they are not numerate, they choose the
subjects framing problem), excluding the data from
decision option consistent with that frame. If they are
Stanovich and West (1998) and LeBoeuf and Shafir (2003)
numerate, and they are not sensation seeking, they choose
from our average in order to avoid post hoc estimation
the certain option. Otherwise, they choose the risky option.
(Busemeyer & Wang, 2000), yielding a value of ! = 0.89.
The individual then makes a second choice on an
Similarly, we estimate the value of ! as the weighted
oppositely-framed version of the same framing problem (if
average of all MLE b values of the ADP when presented to
they first saw the loss frame, they now see the gain frame
comparable (i.e., non-Chinese, who are known to be more
and vice versa). Individuals with high NFC will recognize

1671

risk-taking; Du et al, 2002) college student samples, again
excluding the data from Stanovich and West (1998) and
LeBoeuf and Shafir (2003), yielding a value of ! =0.22. By
extension, pnumeracy=59% and pss=58%.
Finally, we
calculated pNFC to compare the number of subjects choosing
consistency, framing, or reverse framing with our model’s
predictions. The value of pNFC was chosen to minimize the
sum of squares between the predicted and actual numbers of
subjects within each category. Finally, we averaged across
all values of pNFC excluding the value associated with that
particular problem (i.e., using a jackknife estimator). Table
2 shows that the data do not differ significantly from our
model’s predictions in any of these three experiments.

Conclusions
This model is the first to explicitly formalize the key
concepts of gist, the gist hierarchy, and qualitative decisionmaking. Previously, (Broniatowski & Reyna, 2014; 2015)
we introduced the mathematical underpinning and error
theories underlying our model. Here, we demonstrated that
this model is both scientifically parsimonious and robust.
The structure of our model also enables it to outperform
leading theoretical alternatives, such as Cumulative
Prospect Theory (CPT; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992), which
make modal, and not precise, predictions. Thus, our
formalized theory explains a wide variety of phenomena,
integrating known effects and novel predictions.

References
Broniatowski, D. A., & Reyna, V. F. (2014). A
Mathematical Formalization of Fuzzy Trace Theory. In P.
Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society
Broniatowski, David A., & Reyna, V. F. (2015).
Formalizing Risky Choice with a Logistic Model of
Fuzzy Trace Theory. In Noelle, Dave, Dale, Rick,
Warlaumont, Anne, Yoshimi, Jeff, Matlock, Teenie,
Jennings, Carolyn, & Maglio, Paul (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Wang, Y. M. (2000). Model
comparisons and model selections based on generalization
criterion
methodology. Journal
of
Mathematical
Psychology, 44(1), 171–189.
Busemeyer, J. R., Wang, Z., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2015).
Bayesian model comparison favors quantum over
standard decision theory account of dynamic
inconsistency. Decision, 2(1), 1-12.
Cacioppo, J. T., Feinstein, J. A., & Jarvis, W. B. G. (1996).
Dispositional differences in cognitive motivation: The life
and times of individuals varying in need for cognition.
Psychological Bulletin, 119(2), 197-253.
Caspi, A., Begg, D., Dickson, N., Harrington, H., Langley,
J., Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, P. A. (1997). Personality

differences predict health-risk behaviors in young
adulthood: evidence from a longitudinal study. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73(5), 1052-1063.
Du, W., Green, L., & Myerson, J. (2002). Cross-cultural
comparisons of discounting delayed and probabilistic
rewards. Psychological Record, 52(4), 479-492.
Estes, W. K., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Risks of drawing
inferences about cognitive processes from model fits to
individual versus average performance. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 12(3), 403-408.
Frisch,
D.
(1993).
Reasons
for
framing
effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 54(3), 399-429.
Feldman, J. (1997). The structure of perceptual categories.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 41(2), 145–170.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness
revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment.
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment, 49–81.
LeBoeuf, R. A., & Shafir, E. (2003). Deep thoughts and
shallow frames: On the susceptibility to framing effects.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 16(2), 77–92.
Liberali, J. M., Reyna, V. F., Furlan, S., Stein, L. M., &
Pardo, S. T. (2012). Individual differences in numeracy
and cognitive reflection, with implications for biases and
fallacies in probability judgment. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 25(4), 361–381.
Peters, E., Västfjäll, D., Slovic, P., Mertz, C. K., Mazzocco,
K., & Dickert, S. (2006). Numeracy and decision making.
Psychological Science, 17(5), 407–413.
Reyna, V. F. (2012). A new intuitionism: Meaning,
memory, and development in Fuzzy-Trace Theory.
Judgment and Decision Making, 7(3), 332–359.
Reyna, V. F., Estrada, S. M., DeMarinis, J. A., Myers, R.
M., Stanisz, J. M., & Mills, B. A. (2011). Neurobiological
and memory models of risky decision making in
adolescents versus young adults. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37(5),
1125-1142.
Schley, D. R., & Peters, E. (2014). Assessing “Economic
Value”: Symbolic-Number Mappings Predict Risky and
Riskless Valuations. Psychological Science, 25(3), 753–
761.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998). Individual
differences in framing and conjunction effects. Thinking
& Reasoning, 4(4), 289–317.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2008). On the relative
independence of thinking biases and cognitive ability.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(4), 672695.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(4), 297–323.
Zuckerman, M. (2007). Sensation Seeking and Risk. In M.
Zuckerman, Sensation seeking and risky behavior. (pp.
51–72).
Washington:
American
Psychological
Association

1672

