Referential choice in identification and route directions
Adriana Baltaretu (a.a.baltaretu@tilburguniversity.edu)
Emiel J. Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@tilburguniveristy.edu)
Alfons A. Maes (maes@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract

aimed at helping a person navigate in an unknown environment (e.g., Allen, 1997; Michon & Denis, 2001). Procedural
information refers to a series of actions that one needs to take,
while descriptive information typically refers to environmental features (landmarks), such as buildings and their attributes
(Allen, 1997). Paired with actions (e.g., turn at X), landmarks
ground the direction change that has to be performed in the
intersection (Michon & Denis, 2001) and positively affect the
quality of the instructions and navigation performance (Tom
& Tversky, 2012). By an identification task we refer to a situation in which the speaker has to produce a unique referring
expression. The referring expression is required to be a description consisting of a set of properties that singles out a
target from similar objects (Van Deemter et al., 2012). The
focus of this study is on initial (definite) references whose
content is shaped by information available in the visual physical context. In general, these target descriptions consist of a
definite article, a head noun, and nominal modifiers.

Though communicative goals are an important element in language production, few studies investigate the extent to which
these goals might affect the form and content of referring expressions. In this study, we directly contrast two tasks with
different goals: identification and instruction giving. Speakers had to refer to a target building nearby or further away, so
that their addressee would distinguish it between other buildings (identification) or give route directions and use the same
building as a landmark (instructions). Our results showed that
irrespective of goals, the referring expressions consisted of the
same types of attributes, yet the attribute frequency and formulation differed. In the identification task, references were
longer, contained more locative and more post-nominal modifiers. In addition, referential choices were influenced by the
visual distance between the speaker and the target: when the
speaker observed the target from far, references were longer
and contained more often locative modifiers.
Keywords: communicative goals; identification task; route directions; referring expressions.

Communicative goals and referring expressions
Suppose you want to point out a building to a tourist, either
because that is the hotel he is looking for or because it is part
of the route direction you are asked to give. In both cases, you
would have to describe the building (the target) in such a way
that your addressee can distinguish it from the other buildings
(the distractors). Most probably you will have to choose between different attributes (modifiers) that single out the building (e.g., color, location, size, architectural style). Though
you need to refer to the same building, the two situations are
rather different. In the first case, the goal is to help your addressee distinguish the target from similar objects (e.g., look
at X). This is similar to an identification (or discrimination)
task where the speaker has to utter a distinguishing description in order to identify a target (Van Deemter, Gatt, van
Gompel, & Krahmer, 2012). Compared to an identification
task, focused on describing the target, when giving instructions, the distinguishing description is part of an action oriented speech act (e.g., go to X and turn left). The main goal
of the latter is helping your addressee to turn on the correct
street. The question that arises is to what extent humans tune
their referential choices when having different communicative goals (e.g., object identification, route directions)?
This paper focuses on referring expression production in
naturalistic scenes, e.g., how a speaker chooses among different attributes and how his choice is influenced by communicative goals. We define route directions as an action
oriented discourse composed of descriptive (references to
objects) and procedural information (references to actions),

The speaker’s communicative goals are an important element of language production. This observation has been often acknowledged by qualitative work on dialogue development and some experimental work on reference and spatial
language (Di Eugenio, Jordan, Thomason, & Moore, 2000;
Daniel & Denis, 2004; Vorwerg & Tenbrink, 2006). Yet,
as far as we know, there are no systematic comparisons assessing how much different referring expressions could be.
We propose to investigate the extent to which communicative
goals affect reference production, in a study that uses naturalistic scenes (depicting buildings in intersections), while taking into account a perceptual factor present in natural settings
(the distance from which the target object is being observed).
We compare the referring expressions produced when ‘identifying’ buildings, with the ones produced for the same objects
while giving ‘route directions’, and assess how these references are evaluated by addressees.
There are several studies on reference that emphasize identification as a goal in itself (for a review, see Krahmer &
Van Deemter, 2012; Van Deemter et al., 2012). These ‘identification studies’ start from a single goal and manipulate the
attributes needed to identify objects (e.g., the STARS corpus (Paraboni, Galindo, & Iacovelli, 2016); the TUNA corpus (van Deemter, van der Sluis, & Gatt, 2006); the GRE3D3
corpus (Viethen & Dale, 2008, 2011). These studies focus
on the properties of the target in contrast to other objects presented in a simple (sometimes grid-like) visual context. The
speaker’s purpose is to get the addressee pick out the target

978

object with a particular description. In general, identification is assumed to be part of a larger cooperative interaction
(e.g., Brennan & Clark, 1996). However, this interaction is
rarely modelled, and this type of studies typically report on
a narrow set of experimental tasks. This raises the question
to what extent these results would generalize when speakers
have different goals. Do speakers produce similar references
when describing an object for their addressee and when giving route directions, or do they adapt their references to the
communicative context? How would the perceptual complex
nature of the scenes influence reference production?
There are reasons to believe that different goals might affect referential choices. For example, when the participants’
goal was to negotiate, rather than just identify, the preference
for different attributes changed (Di Eugenio et al., 2000). In
the COCONUT corpus, players had to buy items on a fixed
budget, and in order to carry out this task, they had to describe
and negotiate the furniture items that they believed were relevant to the task. In doing so, the item’s price became one
of the most often used attribute. Moreover, different goals
may result in references with different levels of specification
(Yoon, Koh, & Brown-Schmidt, 2012). When speakers had
to give instructions they avoided scalar adjectives that were
unnecessary for identification, and when they had to describe
events, they referred more frequently to the objects’ size.
Not only communicative goals, but also the importance attached to them might influence the speaker’s reference production. When speakers had to identify surgeon’ ‘buttons on
a control panel, compared to click on ‘elements for another
participant, they were more likely to include detailed descriptions containing redundant attributes and location information (Arts, Maes, Noordman, & Jansen, 2011). These had ultimately helped the addressee fulfil his task faster. Similarly,
when participants had the goal of instructing someone how to
operate once an alarm clock, compared to teaching someone
that needs remember how to do this every night, their referring expressions contained more detailed information (Maes,
Arts, & Noordman, 2004).
In everyday language, ones’ communicative goals are realized through choices among the expressive means (lexical items, omissions/deletions, syntactic structure, word order, phrases and prepositions, among others; Talmy (2000, p.
346). In this study, we directly compare two tasks with different communicative goals using the same set of visual scenes.
It is conceivable that references might have a different level
of specification and the types of attributes and their distribution might be different across the two tasks. For example, as
speakers focus more on the target in the identification task,
they might mention more details about the buildings (such as
the number of windows on a façade). On the other hand, route
directions have a strong instructional focus and procedural information is arguably more important for the success of the
task. Though, referring to a landmark also requires an ‘identification’ step, it might be more important what the speaker is
trying to get the addressee to do with the utterance. As speakers need to convey two types of information, we might expect
shorter and more focused references in the route directions

than in the identification task.
Apart from communicative goals, a second factor that we
explore in relation to reference production and comprehension is related to the distance from which the participants perceive the target. A difference of distance would affect the size
of the target, the amount of visual details, and the number of
objects in the visual field. In such situations, perception and
recognition of object properties might be harder to assess for
both speaker and listener; for example, the visibility of some
object (or of one of its parts) may not be inferred with complete certainty. Distance differences seem to trigger various
strategies when producing references. For example, participants tend to point more often when close to the object and refer less to the target’s location, but use more locative phrases
when pointing becomes ambiguous (Van Der Sluis & Krahmer, 2004; Bangerter, 2004). We question when pointing is
not an available option, how would references change. When
the intersection is far, the references might be longer, due to
high ambiguity levels, however the opposite might be the case
as from close by one has access to more visual details.

Methods
Participants
Eighty native Dutch-speaking students (40 dyads) of Tilburg
University (62 women, mean age 21 years) participated in exchange for partial course credits. Participants were randomly
assigned to speaker roles (28 women). The study was carried
out in accordance with the recommendations of APA guidelines for conducting experiments, and all participants gave
written consent for use of their data.

Materials
Experimental materials consisted of 36 target objects (buildings depicted in Google Street View snapshots of intersections). These buildings were pictured from two distance
points (36 scenes taken with a camera positioned at 40m away
from the target and 36 scenes taken with a camera positioned
at 20m away from the target). This resulted in 72 experimental scenes. The target objects were buildings marked with red
squares, and placed in the corners of 4-way intersections (see
Figure 1). Targets were always placed in the corners with
highest visibility, namely on the other side the intersection.
The targets’ position was counterbalanced, so that in half of
the scenes they were placed on the left side of the intersection.
In both tasks we used the same scenes. For the route directions task, we added arrows indicating the turning direction
(see Figure 2).
In addition, 36 filler scenes were introduced in order
to present participants with a range of different navigation
scenarios, and avoid participants from relying on fixed responses. The filler scenes depicted buildings in intersections
with complex geometric structures.

Procedure
Participants worked in pairs, and completed their task on separate computers. Pointing was discouraged by placing the
computer screens in between the participants. The speaker

979

Figure 1: Experimental scenes from the description task depicting a target building near (above) and far (below)

Figure 2: Experimental scenes from the route direction task
depicting a target building near (above) and far (below)

Design
received a scene with a marked building (and an arrow indicating the route), while the listener received the same image
without any markings.

This study had a 2 x 2 design with Task (levels: D-task,
RD-task) as between participants factor and Distance (levels: far, near) as within participants factor. For the first analysis, we looked at the length of the references (number of
words). Next, we assessed the type of attributes mentioned
in relation with the target (e.g., color, location, etc), their frequency and distribution (pre / post nominal modifiers), as well
as the length of the remaining phrase after the speaker has
mentioned the noun denoting the target building (number of
words). The presence / absence of attributes coupled with the
target noun was binary coded. A phrase like the large building on the left, next to the white tower consists of a target
noun (building) and the following attributes: size (large) and
location (on the left, next to the white building). In order to
analyze the differences regarding the length of the references,
data transformations (log data) were applied due to a skewed
distribution. For ease of understanding, means and standard
deviations reported here represent untransformed data.
In order to test the observed differences, we conducted
separate statistical analyses using logit mixed model analysis
(Jaeger, 2008), following the recommendations of Barr, Levy,
Scheepers, and Tily (2013). We used the mixed logit model

Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
tasks. In the descriptions task (D-task), speakers were asked
to refer to the marked building in such a way that the listener could uniquely identify it. In the route directions task
(RD-task), speakers were asked to give route directions, and
in doing so make use of the marked building as landmark.
In order to elicit uniform responses, speakers were asked to
verbally fill in templates (a typical procedure in identification
studies, e.g., Dale & Viethen, 2009). They had to fill in the
following templates: “click on ... ” (descriptions) and “go to
... and turn left / right” (route directions). In both situations,
the listeners had to click on the correct building. Listeners
were allowed to ask questions if the speakers’ instructions
were unclear. Experimental scenes were divided in presentation lists, so that each participant would see each target object
only once. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
presentation lists. The experiment started with three practice
trials, next 72 trials (36 experimental trials and 36 filler trials)
were presented in different random orders.

980

analysis as it can correctly account for random subject and
item effects in a one-step analysis. The models were fitted
using the LMER function from the LanguageR Package in R
(version 2.15.2; CRAN project; The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2012). To determine whether the two conditions significantly differed from each other, we started by
constructing a maximal model with a full random effect structure. This had Task and Distance as fixed factors; Speakers
and Scenes as random factors; intercepts and random slopes
for Speakers and Scenes to account for between-subject and
between-item variation. In case the dependent variable was
binary coded, the factors were centered to avoid collinearity.
In case the model did not converge, we only excluded random slopes with the lowest variance until convergence was
reached. The results from the first converging model, as well
as the structure of the model are reported. The p - values were
estimated via parametric bootstrapping over 100 iterations.

Table 1: Type of attributes, examples and attribute frequency
split by task
Type
Examples
Frequency
Descriptions

location

The building across the intersection, on the left

68%

92%

color
part
of
building
decoration

The white building

42%
35%

47%
36%

11%

12%

8%
0.6%
1%
2%

7%
0.3%
0.5%
0.3%

1%
1%

1%
2%

The building with (five) balconies
/ with (red) roof / with (two) windows
The building with stripes / with
flowers pots / with hanging things
/ with flags

size
The smallest building
shape
The long building
age
The modern building
architectural The Italian building
style
materials
The brick building
evaluative The ugly building

Results

Route
Directions

In total 1440 references were produced (40 speakers * 36
scenes). Data from two dyads (one from each condition)
were discarded on the basis of task misunderstanding. The
referring expressions consisted of a noun denoting the target
object and all the phrases attached to it. In practice, in the
D-task, the references consist of all the phrases after “click
on”, and in the RD-task, they consist of all the phrases between “Go to” and “and turn”. In some cases, participants
omitted some part of the template, but kept the overall structure (e.g., The red building, and turn ...), and these cases were
included in the analysis. In fact, 91 percent of the references
had a similar structure (noun and modifiers). The remaining,
nine percent of the cases resulted in utterances with different
structure (e.g., The building is ...), evenly distributed across
the two tasks (5% cases in the D-task and 4% in the RD-task).
As this could potentially bias aspects such as word counts, we
decided to exclude these cases from the analysis.

statistically these differences. With respect to location, the
first converging model had random intercepts for Speakers
and Scenes. There was a significant difference between the
tasks regarding locative information (β = −2.573; SE = 0.81;
p < .01). There was a main effect of Distance (β = 0.535;
SE = 0.22; p < 0.01). When close to the target, speakers
referred less often to the position of the object (M = .77,
SD = 0.41), than when further away (M = .82, SD = 0.32).
There was no significant interaction between Task and Distance (p > .05).
As for the difference regarding references to the target
color, the first converging model had random intercepts for
Speakers and Scenes, and there were no main effects (p >
.05) or interactions (p > .05).

Length of referring expressions

Distribution of modifiers

The first converging model had random intercepts for Speakers and Scenes, R2 marginal = 0.10, R2 conditional = 0.56.
The length of the references was significantly influenced by
the Task (β = −0.369; SE = 0.12; p < .01). Referring expressions were longer in the D-task (M = 16.3, SD = 1.3),
than in the RD-task (M = 11, SD = 1.3). There was a main
effect of Distance (β = 0.076; SE = 0.03; p < .01). When
close to the target, speakers produced slightly shorter referring expressions (M = 13, SD = .88), than when further away
(M = 14, SD = 1.01). There was no interaction between Distance and Task (p > .05).

First there was significant difference regarding the number of
words produced after the target noun and the first converging
model had random intercepts for Speakers and Scenes (β =
−0.508, SE = 0.16, p < .01). The number of words produced
after the target noun was longer in the D-task (M = 13.62,
SD = 1.25), than in the RD-task (M = 7.81, SD = 1.25).
There was no main effect of Distance (p > .05) and no interaction between the factors (p > .05).
In general, there were more post-nominal modifiers in the
D-task (N = 1002) compared to the RD-task (N = 683).
The reversed pattern was observed for pre-nominal modifiers,
which were more frequent in the RD-task (N = 306) than in
the D-task (N = 212). In both tasks, pre-nominal modifiers
consisted mostly of location (e.g., the left building; the second
building), color (e.g., the white building) and size references
(e.g., the large building) (see Table 2). Post-nominal modifiers consisted also of location, color and size, but mostly included references to structural parts of the building that syntactically can not be framed otherwise (e.g., the building with
two balconies).

Type of attributes
Speakers described targets by referring to ten types of attributes (see Table 1). The same types were produced in both
tasks. Top three most frequent attributes in both tasks are location, followed by colour and references to structural parts
of the target (such as chimney, stairs, doors).
In the D-task, speakers mentioned more often the location
and color of the object than in the RD-task. We analyzed

981

and the design allowed a direct comparison between the references elicited in two communicative settings. Preliminary
results showed that identification as opposed to referring to
objects in route directions triggered a number of differences
regarding reference formulation, and almost no semantic differences.
First, there were no semantic differences, in both tasks
speakers used the same types of attributes to refer to buildings. This pattern of results suggests that studies, where identification is the main purpose of the interaction, could generalize to a large extent to other settings. Second, the syntactic formulation of the references was different. Descriptions
were longer and contained more post-nominal information
and more words following the target noun than references in
route directions, which suggests that speakers described the
target in more detail. Contrastively, in route directions, referring expressions were shorter and tended to contain more
pre-nominal modifiers. Previous research suggests that attributes in pre-nominal position are more efficient for identification (Rubio-Fernndez, 2016), which might suggest that
in a larger communicative act speakers ‘optimize’ their references, in such a way that the addressee can find the target
faster and more easily (see also, Clarke, Elsner, & Rohde,
2015). We plan to test how differences in information structure affect addressee performance, when one needs to find
his way in an unknown environment. Moreover, in the description task, speakers tended to pay more attention to the
location of the object. Locating an entity has been suggested
to be a robust and successful strategy in object identification
(Paraboni et al., 2016) though it could have contributed to
the increased length of the descriptions (see also Vorwerg &
Tenbrink, 2006). In addition, and unexpectedly, on the pragmatic level, we found different levels in the use of markers
of nuance and hesitation. We question whether the difference in absolute length between tasks was caused by the postnominal structures, the pragmatic hesitations, or more words
to express some attributes as with location? We assume it is
a combination of these three.
These differences could be caused by the type of discourse
elicited in the tasks. On the one hand, action related information might be more important for route directions. The
difference in length might be explained by the fact that speakers want to make sure the addressee finds the correct street,
and less so the correct building. Moreover, landmarks are
meant to improve route directions, and long complex references would doubtfully be an efficient contribution. On the
other hand, descriptions might be a more difficult and less
planned task, as suggested by a higher level of post-nominal
information and lexical fillers.
In addition, we explored if the distance between the
speaker and the target might influence referring expressions.
This factor relates to several aspects that increase the uncertainty with respect to what building is referred to. For example when the speaker is further from the target, there are more
similar buildings in the scene and the target could be partially
occluded. References were longer and contained more location information when the speaker was far from the target.

Table 2: Distribution (number of cases) of pre- and postnominal modifiers split by task.
Pre-nominal
Post-nominal
location
colour
size
other

Route Directions

Descriptions Route directions

Descriptions

151
128
21
6

116
70
17
9

434
221
28
319

270
136
27
250

Lexical Fillers
We define lexical fillers (hedges) as words or phrases that are
conventionally used for signalling hesitation, marking the reference as provisional (Brennan & Clark, 1996). The references produced in the two tasks included a different amount
of lexical fillers (see Figure 3). D-task triggered more lexical
fillers, compared to the RD-task.

Figure 3: Distribution (number of cases) of lexical fillers split
by task

Error rates
There was a small number of cases in which the addressee
clicked on wrong buildings (3 cases in RD-task and 6 in the
D-task) and relatively few clarification questions (13 questions in the D-task and 26 questions in the RD-task). These
questions mostly asked for simple clarifications (e.g., a big
building?) to which speakers mostly uttered a short confirmation (e.g., yes).

Conclusions and Discussion
In this study, we questioned to what extent different communicative goals (object identification, giving route directions)
influence reference production, while using complex naturalistic scenes and taking into account a perceptual factor, the
visual distance from which a target object is observed. The
referring expressions were elicited using real-world scenes,

982

However the differences between the two conditions, as well
as the effect size, were rather small.
In sum, when comparing the effects of different communicative goals on reference production an interesting pattern
of results emerges. In line with studies focused exclusively
on identification, we noticed a stable preference for the same
type of attributes. Yet, different communicative goals seem
to shape the information structure of the references and influence the frequency of some of the attributes.

Maes, A., Arts, A., & Noordman, L. (2004). Reference
management in instructive discourse. Discourse Processes,
37(2), 117–144.
Michon, P.-E., & Denis, M. (2001). When and why are visual
landmarks used in giving directions? In D. R. Montello
(Ed.), Spatial information theory (pp. 292–305). Berlin:
Springer.
Paraboni, I., Galindo, M. R., & Iacovelli, D. (2016). Stars2: a
corpus of object descriptions in a visual domain. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 1–24.
Rubio-Fernndez, P. (2016). How redundant are redundant
color adjectives? an efficiency-based analysis of color
overspecification. Frontiers in Psychology, 7(153). doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00153
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics (Vol. 1). MIT
press.
Tom, A. C., & Tversky, B. (2012). Remembering routes:
streets and landmarks. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
26(2), 182–193.
Van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van Gompel, R. P., & Krahmer, E.
(2012). Toward a computational psycholinguistics of reference production. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(2), 166–
183.
van Deemter, K., van der Sluis, I., & Gatt, A. (2006). Building a semantically transparent corpus for the generation of
referring expressions. In Proceedings of the fourth international natural language generation conference (pp. 130–
132). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Van Der Sluis, I., & Krahmer, E. (2004). The influence of
target size and distance on the production of speech and
gesture in multimodal referring expressions. In S. Kim &
D. Youn (Eds.), Proceedings of international conference on
spoken language processing (p. 1005-1008). Korea: ISCA.
Viethen, J., & Dale, R. (2008). The use of spatial relations in referring expression generation. In W. Michael,
N. Crystal, & M. David (Eds.), Proceedings of the fifth
international natural language generation conference (pp.
59–67). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Viethen, J., & Dale, R. (2011). Gre3d7: A corpus of distinguishing descriptions for objects in visual scenes. In
B. Anja, E. Roger, G. Albert, & S. Kristina (Eds.), Proceedings of the ucnlg and evaluation: Language generation and
evaluation workshop (pp. 12–22). Stroudsburg, PA, USA:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vorwerg, C., & Tenbrink, T. (2006). Discourse factors influencing spatial descriptions in english and german. In
T. Barkowsky, M. Knauff, G. Ligozat, & D. Montello
(Eds.), Spatial Cognition V Reasoning, Action, Interaction
(pp. 470–488). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Yoon, S. O., Koh, S., & Brown-Schmidt, S. (2012). Influence
of perspective and goals on reference production in conversation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19(4), 699–707.

References
Allen, G. L. (1997). From knowledge to words to wayfinding: Issues in the production and comprehension of route
directions. In S. C. Hirtle & A. U. Frank (Eds.), Spatial
Information Theory A Theoretical Basis for GIS (pp. 363–
372). Berlin: Springer.
Arts, A., Maes, A., Noordman, L., & Jansen, C. (2011).
Overspecification facilitates object identification. Journal
of Pragmatics, 43(1), 361–374.
Bangerter, A. (2004). Using pointing and describing to
achieve joint focus of attention in dialogue. Psychological
Science, 15(6), 415–419.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language,
68(3), 255–278.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6),
1482-1493.
Clarke, A. D. F., Elsner, M., & Rohde, H.
(2015).
Giving good directions: order of mention reflects visual salience. Frontiers in Psychology, 6(1793). doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01793
Dale, R., & Viethen, J. (2009). Referring expression generation through attribute-based heuristics. In E. Krahmer &
M. Theune (Eds.), Proceedings of the 12th european workshop on natural language generation (pp. 58–65). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Daniel, M.-P., & Denis, M. (2004). The production of route
directions: Investigating conditions that favour conciseness
in spatial discourse. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 18(1),
57–75.
Di Eugenio, B., Jordan, P. W., Thomason, R. H., & Moore,
J. (2000). The agreement process: An empirical investigation of human–human computer-mediated collaborative
dialogs. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 53(6), 1017–1076.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 434–
446.
Krahmer, E., & Van Deemter, K. (2012). Computational generation of referring expressions: A survey. Computational
Linguistics, 38(1), 173–218.

983

