Relation between bimanual coordination and whole-body balancing on a slackline
Kentaro KODAMA (kkodama@kanagawa-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of Economics, Department of Economics, Kanagawa University
3-27-1, Rokkakubashi, Kanagawa-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, Japan

Yusuke KIKUCHI (ykikuchi@fun.ac.jp)
Future University Hakodate
116-2, Kamedanakano-cho, Hakodate-shi, Hokkaido, Japan

Hideo YAMAGIWA (somatolearning@gmail.com)
Tokyo Metropolitan Tobu Medical Center
3-3-25, Shinsuna, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Abstract
To reveal the fundamental skills involved in slacklining,
this study examined a hypothesis regarding single-leg
standing on a slackline. In the field of practice,
instructors teach learners how to maintain balance on a
swinging flat belt (slackline), such as by moving their
hands in parallel. We hypothesized that bimanual
coordination in the horizontal direction might
contribute to dynamic balancing on a slackline. In our
pilot study, two participants at different skill levels
were asked to maintain their balance on a slackline as
long as possible. The dynamic stability of bimanual
coordination was assessed by a nonlinear time series
analysis (cross recurrence quantification analysis), then
compared among the participants. Bimanual
coordination stability was higher in the experienced
player than in the novice player. The results suggest
that the single-leg standing skill might be correlated
with bimanual coordination stability. Further
investigations are expected to clarify this notion in the
future.
Keywords: slackline; balance sport; dynamic stability;
whole-body coordination; self-organization

Introduction
Slacklining
A slackline is a flat belt that is fixed between two anchor
points. Because it bounces and swings in all directions, it is
very difficult for beginners to maintaining balance on it.
Slacklining exists in two main forms, as balance training
and as a competitive balance sport. The latter form first
started around 2007 in Europe and has spread to other parts
of the world. International contests have been held in which
the competitors display various acrobatic skills. Slacklining
has also received much attention as a method of balance
training, not only for top-level athletes (e.g., Olympic ski
jumpers), but also for the elderly or those with motor
disorders and are participating in rehabilitation (one of the
present authors has used slackline training for rehabilitation).
Compared with traditional balance training with a balance
ball or beam, we consider, slackline training is enjoyable as
a sport or leisure pursuit and can be a sustainable lifelong
activity.

Although slacklining has progressed in both its training
and competitive forms, academic research on the topic has
been limited. Most existing research has examined the effect
of slackline training on balancing ability (e.g., Granacher et
al., 2010). Although these studies are important to obtain
evidence on the effects of slackline training on balance
abilities, the skills involved in slacklining remain unclear.
Beginners in slackline training experience considerable
difficulty in understanding how to start and develop their
skill. One study addressed questions of skill but only
through a case study that investigated the specific situation
of balance recovery after perturbation (Huber & Kleindl,
2010). The fundamental skills required for slacklining have
not yet been investigated rigorously.
In this study, we assumed that single-leg standing on the
slackline is an essential skill for successful slacklining. This
is the first ones used when being instructed in slackline
training (e.g., Keller et al., 2012). In practical training, after
mastering this ability without support, beginners are
encouraged to proceed to the next step, such as walking on a
slackline. Therefore, in the present study we chose to
experimentally investigate the single-leg standing task as a
fundamental skill for slacklining.

Whole-body dynamic balancing
With regard to maintaining postural balance, one might
argue that a static balancing strategy, involving the absolute
straining of muscles and fixing of joints as if one’s body
were an inanimate object consisting of rigid materials, is
one possible approach. In fact, traditional postural balance
studies have assumed such a static model and have often
used a quiet standing task to evaluate balancing ability (e.g.,
Winter, 1995). Those studies have also applied static
indexes such as the trajectory length of the center of
pressure, concluding that shorter lengths are more stable.
According to such a static model and indexes, less
movement is interpreted as indicating greater stability of the
human postural system (e.g., Horak, 1989).
This static balance model, however, is not in accordance
with the fact that living systems always fluctuate in various
time scales at different levels, from the microscopic level
(e.g., the cell) to the macroscopic level (e.g., the skeleton).
Such an intrinsic fluctuation can be observed even in a quiet

794

standing task (Balasubramaniam & Wing, 2002). Recent
studies of human postural balance have demonstrated the
relevance of dynamic balancing (e.g., Delignières, Torre, &
Bernard, 2011; Michael a Riley & Turvey, 2002). In these
studies, human postural sway is regarded not as meaningless
random noise at the musculoskeletal level but as having a
meaningful structure emerging from interactions among
components in the body-environment system.
Furthermore, it is difficult to investigate whole-body
dynamic balancing by means of the quiet standing task
paradigm, because quiet standing does not require
participants to actively use their whole-body including the
upper limbs. In our daily behavior, we often stand and walk
on various unstable environments (e.g., sloped ground,
bumpy roads, suspension bridges, and so on). Such unstable
environments require us to maintain balance dynamically
with whole-body coordination, including bimanual
coordination of the upper limbs. While one is on a slackline,
dynamic balancing with whole-body coordination is more
critical because the fluctuation generated by one’s own body
movement can easily cause amplification of the line’s
fluctuation, causing one to fall off. Explaining how one
maintains balance on a slackline by a static balance strategy
is difficult, given the intrinsic fluctuation of an embodied
system consisting of so many non-rigid components at
different timescales.

Emergence of stable coordination pattern
The human body has a vast range of components (i.e.,
degrees of freedom: DoFs), from the microscopic cell level
(1014) to the macroscopic joint level (102) (Bernstein, 1967;
Turvey, 1990). The DoF problem suggested that the large
number of independently controllable DoFs places a
computational burden on the central nervous system
(Turvey, 1990). This indicates the limitations of the
unidirectional top-down motor control model, represented
metaphorically in terms of computer information processing.
In addition, with regard to whole-body movement, solving
the DoF problem becomes more difficult because many
DoFs need to be considered in a whole-body system.
Bernstein, who proposed the DoF problem, suggested as a
possible solution that each component (DoF) is coordinated
and coupled with other components to organize a functional
structure (i.e., synergy) rather than being controlled
separately (Bernstein, 1967).
Subsequent to Bernstein’s suggestion of synergy, an
alternative derived from self-organization theory, known as
the dynamical systems approach, has been widely applied to
human movement studies and in other areas of cognitive
science. Compared to the traditional cognitive approach that
assumes internal computation and prescription in the brain,
dynamical systems approach focuses more on interactions
between the body (including the brain), environment, and
task. Movement or coordination patterns are then theorized
as emerging through interactions among several constraints
within organism, environment, and task (Davids, Button, &

Bennett, 2008; Newell, 1986). The large number of DoFs in
an embodied system can be reduced in order to satisfy these
constraints. Thus, the functional structure (i.e., synergy) to
achieve the task emerges as a particular coordination pattern.
The individual organism regulates its behavior in order to
satisfy the task demands that must be performed in a
specific environment.
Indeed, in the framework of synergetics (Haken, 1978), a
self-organization theory, a system’s low-dimensional spatial
temporal patterns at the macroscopic level emerge through
interactions among components (DoFs) at the microscopic
level under constraints from the system’s environment or
embedded context. The macroscopic pattern also constrains
the components’ behavior at the microscopic level to keep
the pattern stable (Kelso, 1995). Kelso and his colleagues
applied synergetics to the modelling of bimanual
coordination (Haken, Kelso, & Bunz, 1985). The model can
describe the qualitative change of pattern within a system by
using the concepts of synergetics. Rhythmic coordinated
behaviors, such as inter-limb coordination, can be modeled
as a motion equation (Haken et al., 1985). Recently,
dynamical systems approach has not only provided a
theoretical framework but also obtained evidence by
analytical tools (e.g., fractal analysis and recurrence
analysis) based on nonlinear dynamics theory (Holden,
Riley, Gao, & Torre, 2013; Van Orden & Riley, 2005). The
present study also applies these frameworks and techniques
to investigate dynamic balancing skill in slacklining.

Current hypotheses
Based on slackline instructors’ experience, here, we
propose three hypotheses related to the skill of single-leg
standing on a slackline. To maintain whole-body balance in
an unstable environment (i.e., on the slackline), the overall
task is regarded as keeping the center of mass (COM) above
the base of support (i.e., the place where one’s foot contacts
the line)(Shumway‐Cook & Woollacott, 2013). To satisfy
this task demand, components of the embodied system are
supposed to self-organize. The hypothesized control
strategy proceeds as follows:
1) in a horizontal direction, one should raise both hands
high and coordinate them in parallel in order to
regulate the COM’s position above the line;
2) in the vertical direction, one should flexibly bend
his/her knee to compensate for the line’s fluctuations;
3) in the anteroposterior direction, one should maintain a
straight back to keep the center of gravity vertically
balanced over the sole of the foot standing on the line.
These three hypotheses are depicted by the three pictures
in Figure 1. In the current article, we focused on the first
hypothesis. As shown in Figure 1 (4), we hypothesize that
fluctuations from the line might be canceled or absorbed by
compensating strategy between both hands and the COM
positions. According to this hypothesis, if the position of

795

COM moves to right, coupled both hands move to left so as
to counter-balance. Such strategy enables one to regulate
whole-body balance flexibly using two DoFs (both hands
and COM positions) against the line fluctuations. We
suppose that such a compensating relation realizes a
functional unit as a synergy (Latash, 2008). Furthermore, at
this moment, bimanual coordination is supposed to play an
important role, because if left and right hands move
individually, both hands’ position cannot compensate the
COM’s position efficiently. So we consider bimanual
coordination in terms of coupled oscillator that can be
regarded as a single system and its dynamic stability as the
hypothesized variable to test the first hypothesis. The
current article reports partial results of testing it.

Figure 1 Current hypotheses:
regulating whole-body posture in the 1) horizontal, 2)
vertical, 3) anteroposterior direction, 4) compensational
relation between both hands and COM against the line.

Method
Participants
Two participants, an experienced player (age 40, male)
and a novice player (age 30, male), were recruited to make
possible comparisons between slacklining performances at
different skill levels. The experienced player had more than
three years of experience in slacklining, whereas the novice
player had just started slacklining. The experimental
procedures were approved by the research ethics committee
of Kanagawa University, where the experiment was
conducted. Each participant provided informed consent to
participate in this study.

Apparatus
Slacklining was performed on SLACKRACK300
(GIBBON SLACKLINES, 300 cm length, 30 cm height). A
3D motion capture system (OptiTrack V120: Trio,
NaturalPoint, Inc.) was used to measure participants’ body
movement (sampling frequency: 120 Hz). Nine reflective
markers ware attached to the top of the head, the front of the
head, the tips of the index fingers, the COM (around the
hip), the tops of the knees, and the ankles. Threedimensional time series data of each marker were smoothed
by a second-order Butterworth low-pass filter with a 12 Hz
cutoff frequency.
Procedure
The experimental task was to perform single-leg standing
while on a slackline. Participants were required to maintain
balance on the slackline for as long as possible, using their
preferred leg. Each trial lasted for three minutes, including
rest breaks. Participants underwent five trials.
Data Analysis
To evaluate single-leg standing skill, we calculated
persistence time, or how long the participant could stay on
the line before falling off, by the following procedure. If he
maintained the task for at least five seconds, it was regarded
as a success; if he fell off before five seconds had passed,
that effort was a failure. For each instance of success, the
length of time on the line was measured. It was expected, of
course, that the experienced player would have a longer
persistence time than the novice.
To analyze 3D motion capture data quantitatively, time
series data were processed as follows. Among the instances
of success, those when the player stayed on the line for at
least 15 seconds were defined as steady. The first five and
the last five seconds of each steady instance were omitted
because participants were more likely to have balance
difficulties in the initiating and ending phases of each
attempt, with the result that the data from these phases were
often not steady. Finally, the remaining time series data on
the steady attempts were divided into five seconds section.
After we had collected all data satisfying the above
conditions, the data were smoothed and analyzed by the
following nonlinear time series analysis method.
To quantify stability of movement (i.e., bimanual
coordination), cross-recurrence quantification analysis
(CRQA; Zbilut, Giuliani, and Webber, 1998) was applied.
This is a nonlinear time series analysis method that captures
the recurring properties and patterns of a dynamical system
that results from two streams of information interacting over
time (Zbilut et al., 1998) and quantifies how similarly the
two observed data series unfold over time (Shockley, 2005).
Recurrence quantification analysis was originally developed
to uncover subtle time correlations and repetitions of
patterns, and it is relatively free of assumptions about data
size and distribution (Zbilut & Webber, 1992). In CRQA,
two time-delayed copies of the original time series were
used for embedding the data in higher dimensional space,

796

reconstructing the phase space, to analyze the recurrent
structure between them (Zbilut et al., 1998).
Within the framework of dynamical systems approach,
for inter-limb rhythmic coordination, two CRQA measures
are regarded as significant indexes of stability of movement
(Pellecchia, Shockley, & Turvey, 2005; Shockley, 2005).
The percent recurrence (%REC) in CRQA corresponds to
the ratio of the actual number of shared locations to the
number of possible shared locations in phase space. It
provides an index of the magnitude of stochastic noise in the
system (Pellecchia et al., 2005); a higher %REC indicates
less noise in the system. The other measure was related to
the line structure calculated from the recurrence plot,
Maxline (MAXL). MAXL is the longest shared trajectory in
phase space and the length of the maximum diagonal line on
the plot (Webber & Zbilut, 2005). MAXL is a measure of
the stability of the shared activity (Shockley, 2005). It is
supposed to provide an index of the system’s sensitivity to
perturbations (i.e., the strength of the attractor against
perturbations) (Pellecchia et al., 2005).
We performed CRQA using the R package “crqa”
(version 1.0.6) (Coco & Dale, 2014) after determining the
optimal values for the input parameters (e.g., time delay,
embedding dimensions, radius) with reference to the
standard guidelines of the RQA method (Webber & Zbilut,
2005).Consequently, we chose parameters of 20 for time
delay, 3 for embedding dimensions, and 25 for radius (with
z-score normalization and maximum distance rescaling;
Webber & Zbilut, 2005).

Results
Figure 2 presents the persistence time in the single-leg
standing task for each participant. The average persistence
time was longer for the experienced player (107.25 sec) than
for the novice player (20.39 sec), reflecting the experienced
player’s far greater skill.

Figure 3 represents sample raw data from 20-second time
series of both hands in the horizontal direction for each
participant: top, experienced player, bottom, novice player.
The x- and y-axes represent time [sec] and position [m],
respectively. Black rigid and dashed lines represent leftand right- hand motion, respectively. Blue rigid line shows
the COM’s motion.

Figure 3 Sample 20 sec. time series of both hands for the
two participants (top: experienced player, bottom: novice)
Figure 4 shows %REC for each participant in bimanual
coordination. %REC was higher for the experienced player
(22.95%) than for the novice player (17.01%). Figure 5
shows MAXL for each participant in bimanual coordination.
MAXL was longer for the experienced player (126.37) than
for the novice player (70.67).

Figure 4 Percent recurrence for each player
(Error bar: Standard deviation)

Figure 2 Persistence time in the single-leg standing task
(Error bar: Standard deviation)

797

Figure 5 Maxline for each player
(Error bar: Standard deviation)

Discussion
As shown in Figure 2, the experienced player had greater
single-leg standing skill than the novice player. This result
is consistent with the prediction that persistence time should
be longer for high-level than for low-level players. It
confirms that the two players were at different skill levels.
As shown by the sample time series of both hands (Figure
3), it seems that the experienced player could maintain a
more stable bimanual coordination pattern in parallel than
the novice player. In other words, the experienced player
can move their hands in the same way keeping a constant
relation between hands. Whereas their hands move in the
opposite way to the COM motion as if compensating each
other or counter-balancing. Although bimanual movement
of the experienced player seems to be apparently larger than
that of the novice player, it moves more rhythmically or
oscillatory than that of the novice player. In other words,
bimanual movement of the experienced player seems to be
more dynamically stable. On the other hand, the novice
player could not consistently maintain a particular bimanual
coordination pattern; in fact, he broke his bimanual
coordination pattern and crossed the hands twice. Bimanual
movement of the novice player seems to move less
rhythmically and be less dynamically stable. The COM
position of the novice player is also more variable than that
of the experienced player. As a result of comparing two
participants’ behaviors, our hypotheses on compensating
relation between both hands and COM positions (Figure 1)
seems to be supported as far as observed in sample time
series of Figure 3.
The CRQA for bimanual coordination found that %REC
and MAXL were greater in the experienced player than in
the novice player. These results indicate that bimanual
coordination during the single-leg standing task was more
stable in the experienced player than in the novice player in
terms of both the magnitude of noise in the system and the
system’s sensitivity to perturbations. This fact supports our

first hypothesis. Further experiments should be conducted to
obtain more samples and test the hypothesis quantitatively.
It will also be necessary to investigate the relation between
bimanual coordination and whole-body dynamic balancing
by quantifying the coupling between bimanual coordination
and the line as well as the actual COM horizontal position.
Although the causal relation between bimanual coordination
and whole-body balancing is also important and should be
examined, it might not be so simple. It is difficult to reveal
whether bimanual coordination causes whole-body
balancing and otherwise because such a phenomenon might
have an emergent property that cannot be reduced to a
particular factor simply.
Although our pilot study is a case study recruiting only
two participants, the results suggest that dynamic balancing
skill on a slackline is correlated with bimanual coordination
stability. Thus, our hypothesis seemed to be partially
supported. In the future, we intend to examine a specific
relationship among the skill and hypothesized variables
quantitatively. That is, we wish to investigate whether
bimanual coordination contributes to dynamic balancing on
a slackline and, if so, how it contributes and how
experienced players acquire this skill. We plan to conduct
an experiment comparing two groups of different skill levels
(i.e., expert vs. novice) with more samples. The future
experiment should conduct not only statistical test
comparing two groups but also analysis of relation between
bimanual coordination and whole-body balancing.
In the practical fields of sports training and rehabilitation,
slacklining is expected to improve dynamic balancing skill
(Kodama, Yamagiwa, & Kikuchi, 2015). Slacklining
requires one to activate inner muscles, that supports a
fundamental level of action and involves the regulation of
muscle tone (Bernstein, 1996), rather than outer muscles.
We suppose that slackline balance training might improve
the sensitivity to dynamic changes in the environment and
in one’s own body in terms of haptic perception based on
muscle sense (Carello, Silva, Kinsella-Shaw, & Turvey,
2008). If so, slacklining can contribute to improvement of
haptic perception system through the body. Even though
this notion is a matter of speculation, if the present study
can reveal the skill for slacklining, we believe it can have
implications for the practical fields regarding how to
develop dynamic balancing skill based on sensitive haptic
perception system.

Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to reveal the fundamental
skills required for slacklining. We examined a hypothesis
regarding the dynamic balancing skill for slacklining. In the
practice of slackline training, instructors impart their
knowledge of how to develop this skill to learners, such as
by moving their hands in parallel. We hypothesized that
bimanual coordination in the horizontal direction might

798

contribute to dynamic balancing on a slackline. In our pilot
study, participants at different skill levels were required to
maintain single-leg standing on a slackline for as long as
possible. The dynamic stability of bimanual coordination
was assessed by nonlinear time series analysis (i.e., crossrecurrence quantification analysis) and compared between
participants. As expected, persistence time on the line was
longer in the experienced player than in the novice player.
Also, bimanual coordination stability was higher in the
experienced player than in the novice player, in terms of
both the magnitude of stochastic noise in the system
(i.e., %Recurrence) and the system’s sensitivity to
perturbations (i.e., Maxline). These results suggest that
skilled performance of single-leg standing on a slackline is
correlated with bimanual coordination stability. We suppose
that bimanual coordination contributes to whole-body
dynamic balancing on a slackline. Further investigations are
expected to clarify this notion in the future.

References
Balasubramaniam, R., & Wing, A. M. (2002). The
dynamics of standing balance. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6(12), 531–536.
Bernstein, N. A. (1967). The Co-ordination and regulation
of movements. Pergamon Press Ltd.
Bernstein, N. A. (1996). Dexterity and Its Development.
Psychology Press.
Carello, C., Silva, P. L., Kinsella-Shaw, J., & Turvey, M. T.
(2008). Muscle-based perception: theory, research and
implications for rehabilitation. Revista Brasileira de
Fisioterapia, 12(5), 339–350.
Coco, M. I., & Dale, R. (2014). Cross-recurrence
quantification analysis of categorical and continuous
time series: an R package. Frontiers in Psychology, 5,
510.
Davids, K., Button, C., & Bennett, S. (2008). Dynamics of
Skill Acquisition: A Constraints-led Approach. Human
Kinetics.
Delignières, D., Torre, K., & Bernard, P.-L. (2011).
Transition from persistent to anti-persistent
correlations in postural sway indicates velocity-based
control. PLoS Computational Biology, 7(2), e1001089.
Granacher, U., Iten, N., Roth, R., & Gollhofer, a. (2010).
Slackline training for balance and strength promotion.
International Journal of Sports Medicine, 31(10),
717–723.
Haken, H. (1978). Synergetics: an introduction :
nonequilibrium phase transitions and selforganization in physics, chemistry and biology.
Springer-Verlag.
Haken, H., Kelso, J. A. S., & Bunz, H. (1985). A theoretical
model of phase transitions in human hand movements.
Biological Cybernetics, 51(5), 347–356.
Holden, J. G., Riley, M. A., Gao, J., & Torre, K. (Eds.).
(2013).
Fractal
Analyses:
Statistical
and

Methodological Innovations and Best Practices,
Frontiers E-books.
Horak, F. (1989). Components of postural dyscontrol in the
elderly : a review . Neurobiol Aging Components of
Postural Dyscontrol in the Elderly : A Review.
Neurobiology of Aging, 10(6), 727–738.
Huber, P., & Kleindl, R. (2010). A case study on balance
recovery in slacklining. ISBS-Conference Proceedings
Archive, (1990), 1–4.
Keller, M., Pfusterschmied, J., Buchecker, M., Müller, E., &
Taube, W. (2012). Improved postural control after
slackline training is accompanied by reduced Hreflexes. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and
Science in Sports, 22(4), 471–477.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns: The Selforganization of Brain and Behavior. MIT Press.
Kodama, K., Yamagiwa, H., & Kikuchi, Y. (2015). Effects
of slackline training on dynamic postural balancing.
Proceedings of Second International Workshop on
Skill Science, 48–49.
Latash, M. L. (2008). Synergy. Oxford University Press,.
Newell, K. M. (1986). Constraints on the development of
coordination. Motor Development in Children:
Aspects of Coordination and Control, 34, 341-360.
Pellecchia, G. L., Shockley, K. D., & Turvey, M. T. (2005).
Concurrent cognitive task modulates coordination
dynamics. Cognitive Science, 29(4), 531–57.
Riley, M. a, & Turvey, M. T. (2002). Variability of
determinism in motor behavior. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 34(2), 99–125.
Shockley, K. D. (2005). Cross recurrence quantification of
interpersonal postural activity. In M. Riley & G. Van
Orden (Eds.), Tutorials in contemporary nonlinear
methods for the behavioral sciences (pp. 142–177).
Shumway‐Cook, A., & Woollacott, M. H. (2013). Motor
Control: Translating Research Into Clinical Practice.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Turvey, M. T. (1990). Coordination. American Psychologist,
45(8), 938–953.
Van Orden, G. C., & Riley, M. A. (Eds.). (2005). Tutorials
in Contemporary Nonlinear Methods for the
Behavioral Sciences. National Science Foundation.
Webber, C. L., & Zbilut, J. P. (2005). Recurrence
quantification analysis of nonlinear dynamical
systems. In M. Riley & G. Van Orden (Eds.),
Tutorials in contemporary nonlinear methods for the
behavioral sciences (pp. 26–94).
Winter, D. (1995). Human balance and posture control
during standing and walking. Gait & Posture, 3(4),
193–214.
Zbilut, J. P., Giuliani, A., & Webber, C. L. (1998).
Detecting deterministic signals in exceptionally noisy
environments using cross-recurrence quantification.
Physics Letters A, 246(1-2), 122–128.
Zbilut, J. P., & Webber, C. L. (1992). Embeddings and
delays as derived from quantification of recurrence
plots. Physics Letters A, 171(3-4), 199–203.

799

