Explanations in Causal Chains:
Selecting Distal Causes Requires Exportable Mechanisms
Jonas Nagel (jnagel1@uni-goettingen.de)
Simon Stephan (sstepha1@uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen,
Gosslerstr. 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany
Abstract

in a gym class (C) on the pupils’ gender (A) from fictional
covariation data. Subjects indicated strong agreement with
the claim that, within the observed sample, a pupil’s gender
was crucial for his or her grade. In a second learning phase,
half of the subjects learned that the A → C relationship was
mediated by a genetically determined physiological process
(B1 ), while the other half learned that it was mediated by the
gender preferences of the teacher (B2 ). Afterwards, subjects
in the physiological mechanism condition continued to endorse the statement that a pupil’s gender was crucial for this
pupil’s grade (indicating that B1 was interpreted as a mediator of the original A → C relationship), while subjects in the
teacher mechanism condition devalued gender as crucial explanation for the grades (indicating that B2 was interpreted as
an alternative explanation for C).
Both conditions were equivalent in terms of objective
causal structure and observed dependency patterns, so it
seems the difference in interpretation results from some aspect of the manifold content-related differences between both
contrasted mechanisms. One salient hypothesis is that intentional agents, like the teacher, might be seen as initiators
of causal sequences (unmoved movers) and therefore always
screen off the influence of upstream physical preconditions
of their actions from downstream effects. Blind physical processes like genetics, by contrast, may not have this quality
and may thus be regarded as mere mediators of the influence of upstream root causes. In a second experiment, Nagel
and Stephan (2015) ruled out this hypothesis. They presented
their subjects with a scenario in which a physical signal (A)
was picked up by a human agent who deliberately reacted to
the signal (B) to produce a final outcome (C). Subjects repeatedly observed this deterministic causal chain in all conditions. Half of the participants learned that the agent had a
benign motivation in implementing the A → C chain, while
the other half learned that he had a malevolent motivation.
Afterwards, they were asked to what extent it was appropriate
to state that the original signal (A) vs. the agent’s reaction (B)
was crucial for the occurrence of the outcome (C). It turned
out that in case of the benign agent, both the distal signal and
the proximal action were judged to be equally crucial for the
occurrence of C. The distal physical cause thus retained its
explanatory power and was seen to bring about the outcome
by means of human agency. By contrast, if the agent had a
morally dubious motive, the distal cause was devalued as explanation despite a perfect dependency relation with the outcome in the observed sample; proximal human agency served

When A causes B and B causes C, under what conditions is
A a good explanation for the occurrence of C? We propose
that distal causes are only perceived to be explanatory if the
causal mechanism is insensitive to inessential variations of
boundary conditions. In two experiments, subjects first observed deterministic A → B → C relationships in a single exemplar of an unknown kind. They judged A to be crucial for
C by default. However, when they subsequently learned that
the causal mechanism fails to generate the A → C dependency
in other exemplars of the same kind, subjects devalued A as
a crucial explanation for C even within the first exemplar. We
relate these findings to the idea that good explanations pick out
portable dependency relations, and that sensitive causes fail to
meet this requirement.
Keywords: explanation; causal mechanisms; causal chains;
sensitivity; portability

Introduction
Causal relationships are implemented by causal mechanisms
(Machamer, Darden, & Craver, 2000). If we say that one
event (A) causes another event (C), we generally assume that
there is some process leading from A to C that can principally be discovered, even if we do not yet know what the
actual mechanism is. Accordingly, the causal arrow in notations such as A → C is sometimes interpreted as a “mechanism placeholder” (Pearl, 2000).
When mechanism knowledge about a particular causal relationship (e.g., A → C) is made explicit, the resulting causal
model takes the form of a causal chain (e.g., A → B → C,
where B is an intermediate cause implementing the mechanism). The current research asks how such integration of
mechanism knowledge affects people’s conceptualization of
the original causal relationship. More specifically, the question is which properties of mechanism B can affect people’s
impression of the importance of A for explaining C.
Intuitively, there are two ways to interpret the causal role
of B in causal chains. First, B could be seen as a mediator implementing the causal influence of A on C. Under this reading, A continues to be seen as explanatory for C, even though
its causal influence is completely mediated via B. Second, it
could be seen as an alternative explanation for the occurrence
of C, screening off the influence of A on C. The fact that, if
we know the value of B, A adds nothing to explaining C, provides a reason to devalue A as appropriate explanation of C
under this interpretation.
Nagel and Stephan (2015) showed that both interpretations can arise when subjects learn that different mechanisms
implement one and the same type-level causal relationship.
They had their subjects learn a strong dependency of grades

806

as alternative explanation for the outcome instead. This finding strongly suggests that it is not an agent’s intentionality per
se that leads to devaluation of upstream causes as explanations for downstream effects, but rather some other property
that is related to the motivation of the agent. In the remainder of this paper, we will outline and test the hypothesis that
this property does not reside exclusively in moral qualities
of intentional agents, but quite generally reflects inferences
about whether the mechanism can be expected to generalize
to other, inessentially different contexts.

within the observed sample.
The mechanisms compared by Nagel and Stephan (2015)
differed on many dimensions other than sensitivity, including intentional agency and moral abnormality. Our goal in
the present experiments is to isolate the sensitivity of the mediating mechanism. We created new experimental material
from the domains of biology and physics in which we manipulated a given mechanism’s sensitivity purely in statistical
terms. We first presented subjects with a single exemplar of
an unknown natural kind or artifact and let them discover a
deterministic A → B → C chain within this entity. In a subsequent learning phase, we showed subjects the same exemplar
again, but this time in the company of several other exemplars of the same kind with identical appearance. One half of
the subjects saw that the new exemplars behaved just like the
first exemplar in terms of the A → B → C dependency pattern. The other half saw that only the first exemplar once
again showed the same dependency pattern, while in all other
exemplars the presence of A failed to lead to the presence
of B (and, hence, C). Subjects in both conditions were then
asked how appropriate it was to say that A was crucial for the
presence of C within the first exemplar only which had constantly displayed perfect dependency relations in both conditions. We predicted reduced appropriateness ratings in the
condition in which the dependence of C on A did not generalize to other exemplars of the same kind.
In the first experiment, we tested and confirmed these predictions in the domain of biology. In the second experiment,
we replicated the findings in the domain of artifacts and additionally controlled for the relative complexity of the potentially explanatory variables A and B.

Sensitivity and Explanatory Relevance
Woodward (2006) investigated the human practice of making
causal claims. He noted that causal claims require not only
that the effect be counterfactually dependent on the cause,
but also that this counterfactual dependence continue to hold
under varied boundary conditions. Causal relationships that
do not fulfill this second requirement are called sensitive, and
Woodward (2006) argues that sensitive causal relationships
are regarded as deficient despite a strong dependence relationship under the conditions in which they do obtain. Good
causes are those that not only bring about their effects in the
narrow context of actually observed circumstances, but would
continue to do so in different contexts. The requirement for
good causes to be insensitive resonates with philosophical
and psychological accounts of explanation. Many theorists
have argued that good explanations tend to pick out factors
that are generalizable beyond the concrete set of observations
that presently is to be explained (Garfinkel, 1981; Hitchcock,
2012; Lombrozo & Carey, 2006). This ensures that the generated explanation will be useful for making predictions and for
planning interventions in future similar situations (Lombrozo,
2010).
One reason for high sensitivity of causal relationships is
that the mediating mechanism works reliably only under quite
specific boundary conditions, but is easily disturbed in other,
similar situations. We propose that whenever people find
out that an observed causal relationship is implemented by
a mechanism that is highly sensitive in this sense, they devalue the distal cause as explanation for the terminal effect.
To illustrate, consider again the scenarios used by Nagel and
Stephan (2015). If the influence of gender on grades is mediated by a genetically determined physiological mechanism,
this implies that the relationship will continue to hold in
future observations with different samples of pupils, which
makes the A → C relationship insensitive. The teacher mechanism, by contrast, implies that this relationship depends on
the presence of highly peculiar boundary conditions which
will rarely be met in other, similar situations (as most other
teachers, hopefully, will not exhibit the same bias). This
makes the observed A → C relationship highly sensitive—it
will break down as soon as we leave the narrow context of
the class that was actually observed in the sample. It is recognized that gender will not generally influence grades and
is therefore considered a poor explanation for the grades even

Experiment 1
Participants
The experiment was conducted as an online study. A
total of 150 subjects were recruited from a panel
(www.pureprofile.com), 44 of which (29%) were removed
prior to the analyses because they did not complete the survey
or failed to solve a simple attention check question at the end.
The mean age of all included subjects (N = 106, 80 women)
was 37 years (SD = 8.16). Included subjects received a payment of £ 6 per hour.

Design, Materials, and Procedure
Subjects were randomly allocated to the conditions (Sensitivity: Sensitive vs. Insensitive). They were asked to take the
perspective of a marine biologist who discovered a single exemplar of deep sea fish and called it “Fish #1”. Their task
was to test whether noise (A) leads to activity in the brain of
the fish (B) and finally to an illumination of the fish’s antenna
(C). We then presented our subjects an animation of Fish #1
(see Figure 1). When participants pressed the “Play” button,
they saw sound waves coming out of the speaker. About half
a second later, the brain activity device’s monitor displayed a
flickering amplitude moving across the screen. Finally, about

807

one second later, the fish’s flash bulb turned from blue to yellow. If participants hit the stop button, all variables returned
to their initial state. Subjects could (de-)activate the loudspeaker as often as they wished.

Fish #1, while in the sensitive condition, none of the other fish
reacted to the activation of the loudspeaker with brain activity or antenna lightning. This manipulation was intended to
confirm in the insensitive condition the assumed prior expectation that the A → C dependence is exportable from Fish #1
to the whole kind, while subjects in the sensitive condition
should conclude that the A → C dependence is not exportable
beyond the narrow context of Fish #1.
After having made these additional observations, subjects
were asked to reconsider the results of their previous experiment with Fish #1 only and to answer the same two questions again in light of their new knowledge about the whole
swarm of fish. The appropriateness ratings (A → C)post and
(B → C)post were measured exactly as the baseline ratings described above. Our central prediction for the sensitive condition was that the (A → C)post ratings should drop considerably because the A → C dependency is not exportable beyond
the context of Fish #1. The (B → C)post appropriateness ratings, by contrast, should not be reduced by the swarm information. Brain activity remains a good predictor of antenna
flashing across the whole swarm. In the insensitive condition, of course, neither of the ratings should be affected by
the swarm data.
Finally, we wanted to make sure that participants encoded the contingencies between the variables accurately
both within Fish #1 and across the whole swarm of fish. On a
first screen, participants were prompted to recall what they
had learned about Fish #1 and were asked six conditional
probability questions concerning Fish #1 only. For example,
P(C|A) was assessed with the question “How likely is it for
Fish #1’s antenna to lighten up given that sound waves are
present?” and an 11 points rating scale ranging from 0 (impossible) to 100 (certain). Analogous questions were asked
for P(C|¬A), P(B|A), P(B|¬A), P(C|B), and P(C|¬B). On
a second screen, the same six questions were repeated with
the whole swarm as reference class. These twelve estimates
were used to compute contingency estimates (∆P) for each of
the three causal relationships both at the exemplar level and
at the swarm level. Equally high contingency estimates at the
exemplar level for A → C and B → C would demonstrate that
the expected effects on the appropriateness ratings would not
be due to different dependency assumptions within the exemplar, but rather due to sensitivity of the A → C relationship
across the whole kind.

Figure 1: Screenshot of the animation used in the first learning phase of Experiment 1 while all three variables are active.
Letters A, B, and C were not shown to participants.
When participants felt they had learned enough about the
relationships, they proceeded to the first question screen on
which they were asked how appropriate the following statements were for describing the observations they had just made
of Fish #1. The first statement was “The presence of sound
waves is crucial for Fish #1’s antenna to lighten up” (appropriateness rating [A → C]pre ), and the second statement was
“Activity of the brain area is crucial for Fish #1’s antenna to
lighten up” (appropriateness rating [B → C]pre ). We used two
independent rating scales to allow participants to judge both
causes as equally explanatory, while at the same inviting them
to see both statements as contrastive alternatives by using the
word “crucial”. Participants provided their judgments on 11
point rating scales ranging from “0 = not at all appropriate”
to “10 = very appropriate” for each statement. We expected
equally high ratings for both statements, indicating that brain
activity is seen as a mediator and sound waves are seen to be
explanatorily relevant.
The experimental manipulation was applied after subjects
had given their baseline ratings. All participants read that they
had caught nine additional exemplars of the same kind of fish.
On the next screen, they saw a large animation showing all ten
fish (consecutively labelled Fish #1 to Fish #10), each in the
same set-up as shown in Figure 1. Below the ten fish, there
was a device with a play- and stop-button which they could
use to (de-)activate all ten loudspeakers simultaneously. In
both conditions, Fish #1 again reacted exactly as in the first
learning phase. The crucial difference between both conditions was the behavior of the additional nine fish exemplars.
In the insensitive condition, all other fish behaved exactly like

Results
The descriptive results for the appropriateness ratings are displayed in Figure 2a. We conducted a three-way 2 (Sensitivity: Sensitive vs. Insensitive, between-subjects) × 2 (Relationship: A → C vs. B → C, within-subject) × 2 (Rating Position: Pre vs. Post, within-subject) mixed ANOVA.
We obtained a significant two-way Sensitivity × Position
interaction, F 1, 104 = 8.61, p < .01, η2g = .014, indicating that
the swarm information affected appropriateness ratings in
the sensitive condition more than in the insensitive condition. More importantly, this interaction was qualified by a

808

Sensitive

Appropriateness Rating

b

Sensitivity
Insensitive

10
9
8
7

Relationship
A−>C
B−>C

6
5
Pre

Post

Pre

Post

Sensitivity

Contingency Estimate (Delta P)

a

Sensitive
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Insensitive

Relationship
A−>C
B−>C
A−>B
Exemplar

Rating Position

Kind

Exemplar

Kind

Reference Class

Figure 2: Group means (error bars = 95% CI) of appropriateness ratings (a) and contingency estimates (b) in Experiment 1.

Discussion

marginally significant three-way Condition × Position × Relationship interaction, F 1, 104 = 3.64, p < .06, η2g = .003, indicating that the selective decrease of ratings from pre to post in
the sensitive condition was more pronounced for the A → C
relationship than for the B → C relationship, as predicted by
our account.
To assess subjects’ contingency estimates for the three
relationships, we calculated each subject’s ∆P estimate for
each relationship both within Fish #1 and across the whole
swarm of fish. For example, the contingency estimate for the
A → C relationship within Fish #1, ∆P(A → C)Exemplar , was
calculated by subtracting each subject’s P(C|¬A)Exemplar rating from the same subject’s P(C|A)Exemplar rating. The contingency estimates across the whole swarm were calculated
analogously using the conditional probability judgments for
the whole swarm. The descriptive results are summarized
in Figure 2b. Most importantly, the ∆P(A → C)Exemplar estimates in the sensitive condition were not lower than the
∆P(B → C)Exemplar estimates. This finding rules out the alternative explanation that the selective drop in the (A → C)post
appropriateness ratings in the sensitive condition results from
selectively decreased dependency estimations within Fish #1
for this particular relationship.1

In this experiment, we have demonstrated that sensitive
mechanisms reduce the explanatory relevance of distal causes
in causal chains. Our subjects first learned that, within the
narrow context of a single exemplar of a biological kind,
cause A deterministically produced effect C, and that this
causal relationship was always mediated by mechanism B.
At this point, they interpreted the B to be a mediator of the
observed A → C relationship and correspondingly found that
A and B were equally crucial for the occurrence of C. However, if they subsequently found out that cause A failed to activate mechanism B in all other exemplars of the same kind,
this affected their representation of the perfect dependency
relation within the initially observed exemplar. Even within
this exemplar, they now judged A to be less crucial for the
occurrence of C than the more proximal B, indicating that
A became deficient as explanation for C, despite the perfect
A → C dependency relation that was observed throughout for
this exemplar.

Experiment 2
In the second experiment, our main goal was to replicate the
findings from Experiment 1 in the domain of artifacts. Furthermore, we made the contents of causes A and B more similar to each other in order to rule out alternative explanations
for their differential treatment in the post-ratings. In Experiment 1, A was a simple, physical variable external to the
system under study, while B was a complex, physiological
variable internal to the system. In Experiment 2, we used
only internal, physical variables that varied in complexity. We
counterbalanced the assignment of the simple and the complex variable to the positions of distal cause A and proximal
cause B. We expected the same pattern of results as in Experiment 1 under both assignments, showing reduced explanatory
relevance of the distal cause results from mechanism sensitiv-

1 The surprisingly low ∆P(B → C)
Kind estimate in the sensitive
condition resulted from very low P(C|B)Kind ratings. The observation that in Fish #1 (the only exemplar in which brain activity was
ever recorded) brain activity reliably led to antenna illumination did
not suffice to make subjects generalize this relationship across the
whole kind. Hesitance to generalize from sparse data, however, is
different from gathering positive evidence for sensitivity. The finding that subjects continued to regard brain activity as the crucial explanatory factor within Fish # 1 despite low kind-general contingency estimates thus does not directly disprove our hypothesis, but
is certainly a finding that needs further investigation.

809

ity per se, regardless of its surface characteristics.

Participants
We recruited and compensated 331 subjects as in Experiment
1. 115 (35%) were removed prior to analysis according the
same criteria as above. The mean age of all included subjects
(N = 216, 109 women) was 40 years (SD = 8.36).

A

B

C

Design, Materials, and Procedure
Subjects were randomly allocated to one of four conditions
that resulted from a 2 (Sensitivity: Sensitive vs. Insensitive) × 2 (Complexity of Mechanism: Complex vs. Simple)
between-subjects design. They encountered an exemplar of
an unknown machine, “Machine #1”, with three visible devices: a single rack wheel, a complex system of rack wheels,
and a fan (see Figure 3). Subjects in the complex mechanism
condition saw the three devices in the arrangement shown in
Figure 3, while for subjects in the simple mechanism condition, the positions of the single wheel and the complex
system of wheels were reversed. The procedure was analogous to Experiment 1. In a first learning phase subjects set
the leftmost device in motion and observed that this was followed by movement of the device in the middle, which was in
turn followed by movement of the fan on the right. Switching off the leftmost device resulted in subsequent inertia of
all variables. On the next screen, we assessed appropriateness ratings (A → C)pre and (B → C)pre as in Experiment 1.
In the second learning phase, subjects were shown Machine
#1 again together with five additional machines with identical surface features, consecutively labelled “Machine #2” to
“Machine #6”. They could separately intervene on each machine’s leftmost device as often as they wished. In the Insensitive condition, all six machines behaved just as Machine
#1 in the first learning phase. In the Sensitive condition, Machine #1 also worked just as before, but in none of the additional machines did the device in the middle or the fan ever
turn on. On the following screens, subjects again indicated
their (A → C)post and (B → C)post appropriateness ratings as
well as their exemplar-specific and kind-general conditional
probability judgments analogous to Experiment 1.

Figure 3: Screenshot of the animation used in the first learning phase of Experiment 2. Devices A and B were reversed in
the Simple Mechanism condition. Letters A, B, and C were
not shown to participants.
post in the sensitive condition was more pronounced for the
A → C relationship than for the B → C relationship, just as in
Experiment 1. The assignment of the single wheel and the
complex system of wheels to distal cause (A) vs. proximal
cause (B) did not affect the results, nor did this factor interact
with any of the other variables in the design. The data shown
in Figure 4 is therefore collapsed across this factor.

Sensitivity
Appropriateness Rating

Sensitive

Results
The descriptive results for the appropriateness ratings are displayed in Figure 4. We conducted a four-way 2 (Sensitivity:
Sensitive vs. Insensitive, between-subjects) × 2 (Relationship: A → C vs. B → C, within-subject) × 2 (Rating Position:
Pre vs. Post, within-subject) × 2 (Complexity of Mechanism:
High vs. Low, between-subjects) mixed ANOVA. We again
obtained a significant two-way Sensitivity × Position interaction, F 1, 212 = 13.02, p < .001, η2g = .01, indicating that the information about the additional machines affected appropriateness ratings in the sensitive condition more than in the insensitive condition. More importantly, this interaction was again
qualified by a significant three-way Sensitivity × Position ×
Relationship interaction, F 1, 212 = 12.23, p < .001, η2g = .003,
indicating that the selective decrease of ratings from pre to

Insensitive

10

Relationship
9

A−>C

● B−>C
8
7

●
●

●

●

6
5
Pre

Post

Pre

Post

Rating Position
Figure 4: Group means (error bars = 95% CI) of appropriateness ratings in Experiment 2.
Subjects’ contingency estimates were analyzed analogous to Experiment 1 and yielded analogous effects. The
∆P(A → C)Exemplar estimates in the sensitive condition were
again as high as the ∆P(B → C)Exemplar estimates. As before,
this rules out that the selective drop in A → C appropriateness
ratings results from decreased A → C dependency estimates
within the focal entity.

810

Discussion

nism (e.g., moral abnormality; see Nagel & Stephan, 2015).
The fact that sensitive mechanisms lead to a decrease in explanatory relevance of the distal cause A (rather than to an increase in relevance of the proximal cause B) suggests that the
following psychological process might underlie the observed
phenomenon. When sensitive mechanisms are observed, it
becomes necessary to assume the influence of an additional,
latent variable that interacts with the distal cause A to produce proximal cause B in a few but not all contexts (e.g., an
abnormal preference structure of the teacher, or a genetic abnormality in Fish #1) in order to capture the structure of the
complete situation. The apparent necessity of this additional
variable for producing B (and, hence, C) makes it obvious
that A is not sufficient in producing B (and, hence, C) even
within the focal entity. Sufficiency, in turn, has been shown
to be closely linked to explanatory relevance (e.g. Hilton,
McClure, & Sutton, 2009; Kominsky, Phillips, Gerstenberg,
Lagnado, & Knobe, 2015). Future studies might aim to test
this hypothesis more specifically.

In this experiment, we have shown that the finding that sensitive mechanisms lead to devaluation of distal causes generalizes to the domain of artifacts. If setting a physical device in
motion (A) leads to movement of a second device (B), which
in turn sets in motion a third device (C), both A and B are
seen as equally crucial for the movement of C. However, if
it is later learned that this dependency does not generalize to
other exemplars of the same kind of machine, people revise
their interpretation of the chain even within the first exemplar.
They now judge the distal cause to be less crucial for the occurrence of the effect than before, and as less crucial than the
more proximal cause that mediates the relationship. The effects were even cleaner than in Experiment 1, despite the fact
that we made causes A and B more similar to each other and
even counterbalanced their contents. This supports our hypothesis that high sensitivity of mechanisms per se leads to
an interpretation of the mechanism as alternative explanation
rather than as a mediator of the original relationship.

Acknowledgments

General Discussion

We thank York Hagmayer, Jana Samland, and Michael Waldmann for helpful discussions.

In two experiments, we have demonstrated that sensitive
mechanisms tend to be seen as alternative explanations of
their effects rather than as mediators of the causal influence
of a distal cause. When people learn about a new indirect
causal relationship in a single context, their default intuition
seems to be that the distal cause is a crucial contributor to the
terminal effect. However, if they afterwards realize that the
mechanism generating the dependency between distal cause
and terminal effect breaks down in most other similar contexts, they revise this intuition and devalue the causal contribution of the distal cause. The information that the mediating mechanism requires highly specific, uncommon boundary
conditions makes clear that the observed A → C dependency
is highly sensitive (Woodward, 2006). Sensitive causes, in
turn, tend to be regarded as somewhat deficient, presumably
because they fail to support future predictions and interventions in similar cases (Lombrozo, 2010; Lombrozo & Carey,
2006). As Garfinkel (1981) put it, if we want to explain the
occurrence of a particular outcome, our real object of explanation is never just the occurrence of that particular outcome.
Instead, we search for stable causes that explain the occurrence of a whole equivalence class of inessentially different
outcomes. If we find out that a mechanism relates a cause to
a to-be-explained effect in only a small subset of cases within
the relevant equivalence class (e.g., it only works reliably in a
small number of exemplars of an otherwise apparently homogeneous kind), the cause does not provide a stable explanation
for this kind of effect. The discovered mechanism then turns
into an alternative explanation for the outcome that screens
off the influence of the distal cause from the explanandum.
This explanation captures not only the present data, but also
previous findings in which sensitivity of the mechanism was
not directly manipulated in statistical terms, but rather implied by qualitative characteristics of the described mecha-

References
Garfinkel, A. (1981). Forms of explanation: Rethinking the
questions in social theory. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Hilton, D. J., McClure, J., & Sutton, R. M. (2009). Selecting
explanations from causal chains: Do statistical principles
explain preferences for voluntary causes? European Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 383–400.
Hitchcock, C. (2012). Portable causal dependence: A tale of
consilience. Philosophy of Science, 79, 942–951.
Kominsky, J. F., Phillips, J., Gerstenberg, T., Lagnado, D., &
Knobe, J. (2015). Causal superseding. Cognition, 137,
196–209.
Lombrozo, T. (2010). Causal–explanatory pluralism: How
intentions, functions, and mechanisms influence causal ascriptions. Cognitive Psychology, 61, 303–332.
Lombrozo, T., & Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation
and the function of explanation. Cognition, 99, 167–204.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 1–25.
Nagel, J., & Stephan, S. (2015). Mediators or alternative explanations: Transitivity in human-mediated causal chains.
In D. C. Noelle et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1691–
1697). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causation: Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Woodward, J. (2006). Sensitive and insensitive causation.
The Philosophical Review, 115, 1–50.

811

