Semantic, Lexical, and Geographic Cues are used in Geographic Fluency
Janelle Szary (jszary@indiana.edu)
Michael N. Jones (jonesmn@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Semantic fluency tasks have increasingly been used to probe
the structure of human memory, adopting methodologies from
the ecological foraging literature to describe memory as a trajectory through semantic space. Clusters of semantically related items are often produced together, and the transitions between these clusters of semantically related items are consistent with theories of optimal foraging, where the search process exhibits a balance between exploration and exploitation
behaviors (Hills, Jones, & Todd, 2012). Here, we use a semantic fluency memory task in which subjects recall geographic
locations. For each pairwise transition, we measure temporal, geographic, semantic, lexical, and phonetic distances. In
general, the dimensions are loosely but reliably correlated with
each other. Segmentation of the retrieval sequence into patches
supports the notion that subjects strategically leave patches as
within-patch resources diminish, but also suggests that subjects may shift their attention between different sources of information, perhaps reflecting dynamically changing patch definitions.
Keywords: Memory search; Semantic fluency; Optimal foraging; Spatial search

Introduction
In general, effective search strategies require a balance of
both exploration and exploitation. The searcher, whether it be
a bumblebee searching for nectar, or a child searching for hidden Easter eggs, needs to know when to stop looking in one
place and start looking in another. Too much exploration, in
the later example, would be a situation in which the child runs
wildly around the yard, but never stops to looks behind any
leaves (where the Easter eggs would be hidden); Too much
exploitation, on the other hand, might be a situation in which
the child, finding one egg hidden in the rose bushes, spends
the afternoon meticulously sorting through the roses for more
eggs, and fails to search the rest of the yard. Although this example is exaggerated, it illustrates the importance of finding
an appropriate balance between the two strategies: At either
extreme, the child will do very poorly in an Easter egg hunt.
A successful search process relies on appropriately modulating between exploration and exploitation.
The same principle applies to search in the cognitive domain: At one end of the extreme, a lack of focus would make
it hard to retrieve relevant information, and, at the other end of
the extreme, perseveration on one piece of information would
also be ineffective. The parallel between search in physical
space and cognitive space is not coincidental. Significant evidence suggests that the neural and molecular processes that
evolved to govern search in physical space have been exapted
to control goal-directed behaviors in other, cognitive modalities (reviewed in Hills, 2006). For example, the dopaminergic pathways of the basal ganglia control both cognitive

attention and movement, and increases in dopamine have
been associated with exploitation of resources and highly focused behaviors, while reductions in dopamine have been associated with exploratory or inattentive behaviors (see Hills,
2006). The exaptation hypothesis has led to the idea that there
are general cognitive search mechanisms that control goaldirected search behaviors in both internal and external spaces
(Hills, Todd, & Goldstone, 2008). As evidence for this claim,
Hills et al. (2008) demonstrated that priming certain physical
search strategies can influence cognitive search behavior.
Further support for the exaptation hypothesis comes from
the successful application of models from the animal foraging literature to cognitive search behavior. For example, in
the foraging literature, a search process is considered optimal
when it follows the marginal value theorem (MVT; Charnov,
1976), in which a forager should continue exploiting a patch
of resources while it continues to provide relative rewards,
but should leave and switch to a new patch once the rate of
rewards (for the given patch) drops below a long-term average. Hills et al. (2012) used the semantic fluency task,
in which subjects are asked to name as many items from a
given category as possible, to show that cognitive search is
well described by MVT, where patches are clusters of semantically related items. As a subject’s relative success in
a given semantic cluster decreases, the subject is more likely
to switch to a new semantic cluster. Models of optimal foraging in semantic memory based on MVT have been successful
in matching human performance, but they rely on the construction of appropriate semantic spaces and patches, which
can be done in different ways with differing results (see discussion in Hills et al., 2015; Abbott, Austerweil, & Griffiths,
2015).
Anecdotally, the similarity between physical and cognitive
search is supported by the fact that we often describe our internal, cognitive representations of information as networks
or maps (Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005; Tolman, 1948). Further, there is growing support for the embodied cognition
perspective that cognitive knowledge is grounded in physical space. Montez, Thompson, and Kello (2015) asked participants to spatially organize a set of items produced during a previous semantic fluency task, and found that the spatial distances correlated with the previously observed temporal distances: Subjects spatially organized items the same
way they had previously organized them during semantic
retrieval. Louwerse and colleagues (Recchia & Louwerse,
2014; Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009) have shown that from the
statistics of language we can extract a great deal of information, such as the locations and sizes of cities.

1397

Using an extended semantic fluency task where subjects
spent twenty minutes retrieving the names of cities and towns
from their home state of California, Szary, Kello, and Dale
(2015) showed that the temporal structure of retrieval sequences captured the geographic structure of cities in physical space. Although the task is known as a ‘semantic fluency’ task, previously we could only infer semantic information from the timing of the retrieval process. Here, we build
upon the study presented in Szary et al. (2015) by computing
semantic, lexical, and phonetic measures to compare to the
existing geographic and temporal measures. The new analyses allow us to formulate new research questions. Consider
the hypothesis that internal search is exapted from external
search, and relies on a balance between exploration and exploitation. Because physical space has a finite number of dimensions, it is quite easy to measure exploration versus exploitation behaviors in external search. By comparison, it is
less straightforward how one should characterize exploration
or exploitation behaviors in the high-dimensional cognitive
space of an internal search. Here, we re-investigate semantic
fluency data along a number of dimensions: temporal, geographic, semantic, lexical, and phonetic. In this exploratory
study, we show that retrieval sequences do indeed contain
structure along each of these dimensions. That is, when remembering geographic information, people do, indeed, use
the embodied physical structure of the information, but we
can also measure their use of semantic, lexical, and even
phonetic information. With regards to the optimal foraging
perspective, these metrics may reflect different dimensions in
which patches exist, highlighting a number of open questions
for future work, as discussed in the conclusion.

just say it out loud. You can be as specific or as general as
you wish. For example, if the category were Food you could
say ‘Fruit’, and you could also say ‘Orange’ or ‘Mandarin
Orange’. But keep in mind that your goal is to recall as many
different items as possible. If you are unsure if an item does
or does not belong to the category, just say it anyhow, don’t
spend time worrying about whether something counts or not,”
(adapted from Rhodes & Turvey, 2007).
Audio Transcription The speech recordings were loaded
into Praat audio analysis software for annotation, and were
transcribed as in Szary et al. (2015). That is, each recalled
item was transcribed, and onset times of items were marked.
Repeated items were removed. Incorrect items (“Reno”,
which is in Nevada, not California), geographic landmarks
(“Monterey Bay” bay, “Sierra Nevadas” mountains), and nonspecific areas (”Bay Area”, which refers to several locations
around the San Francisco Bay) were removed. Pronunciation
errors (“Rancho Cucamongo” instead of the correct “Rancho
Cucamonga”) and common abbreviations (“L.A.” instead of
the official “Los Angeles”) were corrected. Districts, neighborhoods, planned communities and census-designated areas
with names recognized by the U.S. Geological Survey (e.g.
“Hollywood”, “Downieville”; United States Board on Geographic Names, 2016) were retained.

Measures
For each dataset, inter-retrieval intervals (IRIs) are measured
as the amount of time (in milliseconds) between consecutive recall events cityi and cityi+1 , and represent the temporal
distances we observed. For each transition (cityi to cityi+1 ),
we compute additional distances using geographic, semantic,
phonetic, and lexical measures.

Methods
Experimental Procedure
Participants Participants were recruited from a subject
pool of University of California, Merced undergraduate students who participated for course credit (4 male, 8 female;
mean age = 19.92 years, SD = 1.08 years), and reported being native or proficient English speakers. All but two participants reported living in California for their whole lives, while
the other two reported living in California for the majority
of their lives (15 of 19 years, and 16 of 18 years, respectively). Subjects were comfortably seated by themselves at a
table in small experiment room, and wore Shure microphone
headsets. Speech was collected using an M-Audio MobilePre
recording interface and Audacity software.
Task Subjects completed two recall tasks, presented in
counterbalanced order, each of which lasted for twenty minutes. In one task subjects recalled items from the category
of cities and towns in California, and in the other they recalled from the category of all animals. For the purposes of
the present paper, we discuss only results from the category
of cities and towns in California. Subjects were given the following instructions: “Your goal [is] to think of as many items
from [the] category as you can. When you think of an item,

Geographic Distance The latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates for most cities were provided by the world.cities
dataset, in the maps package for the R programming language
(Becker, Wilks, Brownrigg, Minka, & Deckmyn, 2016).
Missing values were added by hand, and were retrieved
from Wikimedia’s GeoHack tool (Wikimedia Tool Labs GeoHack, 2016). Geographic distances (GDs) are measured as
the number of miles between consecutively recalled cities.
GDs are calculated using the Haversine formula, which gives
the great-circle distance between two points on an sphere
(Sinnott, 1984).
Semantic Distance Semantic similarity was calculated using vector representations obtained by a Word2Vec model
from the gensim package for Python (Řehůřek & Sojka,
2010), which was trained on the full English Wikipedia
dataset, available from dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki, 2016.
The cosine between the vectors representing two city names
is taken as a measure of the semantic distance between those
cities.
Lexical Distance The standard Levenshtein distance,
which measures the number of edits required to transform one

1398

175

Frequency of retrieval rate

150
125
100
75
50
25
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

Retrieval rate per city
Figure 2: City locations and their retrieval rates.

Figure 1: The number of cities that has each retrieval rate.
string into another, is used as a measure of lexical distance.
Phonological Distance Finally, as an exploratory measure
of phonological difference, we converted city names into their
four-digit soundex codes, which are approximate representations of how words sound. We then compute the Levenshtein
distance between these codes, which serves as our measure of
phonological distance.

Results
Across all participants, a total of 323 unique city names were
retrieved. On average, each participant retrieved 67 cities
(SD = 28). Many of the cities (n = 171) were retrieved only
once, and only 4 cities were retrieved by all 12 subjects. Figure 1 shows the number of cities with each retrieval rate. To
visualize the structure in these highly variable retrieval rates,
Figure 2 shows the locations of retrieved cities along with
their retrieval frequencies.

Distance Measures
Across all transitions in our dataset, our distance measures
tended to be subtly correlated. Replicating the findings from
Szary et al., 2015, geographic similarity was positively correlated with temporal proximity across all observed pairwise
transitions, as measured by −IRIs, r(787) = 0.16, p < 0.001.
In addition, we found that geographic similarity captured semantic similarity, r(787) = 0.13, p < 0.001. Figure 3 shows
the positive correlations between geographic distance measures and both semantic and temporal distance measures. As
evident in this graph, semantic and temporal distances are
also closely related, with r(787) = 0.17, p < 0.001. While
temporal distance has slight positive correlations to both lex-

ical and phonological distance, r(787) = 0.12, p < 0.001
and r(787) = 0.08, p = 0.02, respectively, neither lexical nor
phonological distances are correlated with geographic distance. Finally, although lexical and phonological distances
are correlated, r(787) = 0.21, p < 0.001, they have different relationships to the semantic distance measure. Semantic and phonological distances are positively correlated,
r(787) = 0.18, p < 0.001, but semantic and lexical distances
actually show a slight negative correlation, r(787) = −0.09,
p < 0.01.
Observed Versus Randomized Distances To make sure
that the distance measures differ from those that would be
observed by chance, we shuffled each subject’s retrieval sequence 100 times, and compared this to simulated data. For
each metric, distances were greater for the shuffled data as
compared to the original data, as seen in Figure 4. Geographic distances were greater in the shuffled data (M = 172.7
miles) than the observed data (M = 115.0 miles), t(813) =
−12.76, p < 0.001. Semantic distances were also greater in
the shuffled data (M = 0.71) than the observed data (M =
0.63), t(798) = −12.9, p < −.001. Lexical distances were
greater in the shuffled data (M = 8.15) as compared to the
observed data (M = 8.39), t(836) = −2.81, p < 0.01. Finally, phonetic distances were greater in the shuffled data
(M = 3.26) as compared to the observed data (M = 3.35),
t(804) = −2.94, p < 0.01.

Patch Transitions
Kernel density estimation was used to determine a segmentation threshold (at the first local minimum) for each participant’s IRI sequence (M = 28, SD = 10 seconds). This thresh-

1399

Geographic

Lexical

Phonetic

Semantic

Temporal

W

W

W

W

1.00

0.75

Distance (scaled)

Distance (scaled)

0.3

Semantic

0.0

Temporal

0.50

0.25

−0.3

0.00

−0.6
0

100

200

300

W

400

B

B

B

B

B

Geographic distance (miles)
Figure 3: Semantic and temporal distances as a function of
geographic distance. For visibility (but not in the analyses),
semantic and temporal ranges are scaled and normalized, and
geographic extremes are removed. A loess smoothing curve
is fit to remaining datapoints to show trends.

Simulated
Observed
100

150

Mean geographic distance
Simulated
Observed
0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

Mean semantic distance
Simulated
Observed
3.2

3.3

3.4

Mean phonetic distance
Simulated
Observed
7.5

8.0

8.5

9.0

Mean lexical distance

Figure 4: Boxplots showing the differences in mean distances
between the simulated and observed datasets.

Figure 5: Boxplot of group means comparing pairwise transitions that occurred within patches (”W”) to pairwise transitions that occurred between patches (”B”). Distance measures are scaled to share a common axis for illustration purposes only.
old was used to segment retrieved items into patches. Our
datasets had an average of 11.4 (SD = 4.7) patches. While
most patches were small (median size = 2), some were quite
large (maximum size = 51; M = 5.8, SD = 9.2).
Figure 5 compares pairwise transitions that occurred within
patches to the pairwise transitions that occurred at patch
boundaries (switches). Mean semantic and geographic distances were both significantly higher between patches (at the
transition points) as compared to within patches. For semantic distances, Mbetween = 0.71 and Mwithin = 0.62, t(211) =
5.80, p < 0.001; For geographic distances Mbetween = 162.2
miles and Mwithin = 105.5 miles, t(181) = 4.56, p < 0.001.
Lexical distance was slightly but significantly higher between patches (M = 8.68) as compared to within patches
(M = 8.05), t(194) = 2.94, p < 0.005. Finally, phonetic distance was also slightly higher between patches (M = 3.44)
as compared to within patches (M = 3.23), t(235) = 3.10,
p < 0.005.
Figure 6 shows this same data, but instead of averaging
across all within-patch distances, considers the transitions immediately preceding patch switches. Specifically, it shows averages for the switches (index = 0) and the 9 transitions preceding switches. While patch switches have higher average
distances on each metric, Figure 6 suggests that there may be
patterns leading up to patch switches, perhaps reflecting the
depletion of resources available through a given metric.

1400

Geographic

Lexical

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Phonetic

Semantic

Temporal

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Distance (scaled)

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

(−) Index with respect to patch switch

Figure 6: Bar heights show scaled averages for each distance metric at the 9 transitions preceding a patch switch, and the switch
itself (index = 0).

Although we focus primarily on summary statistics in this
paper, our larger goal is to explore how different cues (geographic, semantic, lexical, phonetic) interact dynamically
during retrieval processes. Although a detailed quantitative
analysis is beyond the scope of the present paper, Figure
shows the evolution of all 4 distance metrics over the course
of the trial for each subject, in service of our larger goal.
While there are some similarities across participants (such
as geographic distance being relatively lower than other measures), there are also striking differences in the way the measures unfold over time for the different participants. This observation is consistent with the idea that distances may reflect
the cueing strategies underlying the search process, where geographic cues would lead a subject to retrieve geographically
proximal items, resulting in low geographic distances. Consider, as a simple example, the phonetic and semantic distances for Subject 12. Over the course of the task, semantic
distances show a relative increase, while phonetic distances
show a relative decrease. From the perspective that our distance metrics (in some loose way) reflect the cueing strategies
at work, we see that Subject 12 initially uses a semantic cueing strategy, thinking of items that are semantically related
to one another (perhaps listing affluent cities with colleges:
“La Jolla... Berkeley... Stanford”). But, as semantically related resources are depleted, the subject switches to a phonetic strategy (perhaps “Stanford... Stanton... Winton”).

General Discussion
Overall, most of our distance metrics were positively correlated with each other. Temporal distances were correlated
with geographic, semantic, lexical, and phonetic distances.
Additionally, geographic distances were correlated with semantic distances, but not with lexical or phonetic distances.

Semantic distances were correlated positively with phonetic
distances, but negatively with lexical distances. Still, lexical
and phonetic distances were positively correlated.

Distance (scaled)

Shifting Strategies

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Trial duration (scaled)
Geographic

Lexical

Phonetic

Semantic

Figure 7: Loess curve fits to each metric (scaled) for each
subject.
To test whether there is geographic, semantic, phonetic, or
lexical structure in the sequence of retrieved items beyond
what would be observed by chance, we compared distances
from the observed sequences to distances from sequences of
the same items in shuffled orders, as in Szary et al. (2015).

1401

For each of our distance measures, simulated datasets with
randomized orders showed greater distances. That is, there
is structure in the sequence of retrieved items beyond what
would be expected for a random sampling of items, or if a
given distance metric were unrelated. This suggests that subjects use each source of information to cue their retrieval processes. In the actual datasets, but not shuffled datasets, pairwise transitions include items that are closely related (on one
or more metric).
We also find that each distance metric spikes at the transitions between patches, and tends to increase in the transitions
leading up to patch transitions (seeFigure 6). While a quantitative analysis is beyond the scope of the current paper, this
finding is consistent with the notion that semantic search utilizes an optimal foraging policy. A hypothesis consistent with
optimal foraging would predict that, as a forager retrieves
the resources within a given semantic patch, the availability of additional resources becomes depleted, which may be
reflected by increases in the the amount of time to find additional items in the transitions preceding patch switches. Here,
we use an automatic clustering algorithm applied to the temporal sequence to define patches. While temporal distances
are used to define the patch switches, it is difficult to draw
conclusions about how they may effect those switches. Visual inspection of the other metrics, however, is consistent
with the idea that patches are becoming increasingly sparse
(across multiple dimensions) in the time leading up to the decision to switch.
For the argument that search is a generalized cognitive process which relies on the appropriate balance between exploration and exploitation, the word appropriate is key. What
makes the balance appropriate is known to change depending on search context, such as whether you’re searching for
randomly distributed or highly clustered resources, but it can
also change dynamically over the course of a search process,
such as when the resources in a given patch have been depleted. An open question, then, is how the different dimensions of relatedness (geographic, semantic...) interact in what
we think of as ‘patches’. In order to accurately characterize the line between exploration and exploitation in cognitive space, future work must address how these information
sources combine in patches. For example, how does a forager
incorporate multidimensional information? Are the patches
themselves multidimensional? Or do we move, orthogonally,
through cue-strategies and information patches, respectively?
As increasing evidence suggests that search strategies are a
domain-general process, across a number of cognitive contexts (Hills, Todd, & Goldstone, 2010; Rhodes & Turvey,
2007), a complete understanding of how we leverage different cues to sift through the information in semantic memory
becomes increasingly important.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to Fatemeh Torabi Asr and Rick Dale for assistance with data collection and analysis.

References
Abbott, J. T., Austerweil, J. L., & Griffiths, T. L. (2015).
Random walks on semantic networks can resemble optimal
foraging. Psychological Review, 122(3), 558-569.
Becker, R. A., Wilks, A. R., Brownrigg, R., Minka, T. P.,
& Deckmyn, A. (2016). maps: Draw geographical
maps (R package version 3.1.0 ed.). Retrieved 2016, from
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=maps
Charnov, E. L. (1976). Optimal foraging, the marginal value
theorem. Theoretical Population Biology, 9(2), 129-136.
dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki.
(2016).
Retrieved from
https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/latest/
Hills, T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of goaldirected cognition. Cognitive Science, 30, 3-41.
Hills, T., Jones, M. N., & Todd, P. M. (2012). Optimal foraging in semantic memory. Psychological Review, 119(2),
431-440.
Hills, T., Todd, P. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2008). Search
in external and internal spaces: Evidence for generalized
cognitive search processes. Psychological Science, 19(8),
802-808.
Hills, T., Todd, P. M., Lazer, D., Redish, A. D., Couzin, I. D.,
& Group, T. C. S. R. (2015). Exploration versus exploitation in space, mind, and society. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(1), 46-54.
Louwerse, M. M., & Zwaan, R. A. (2009). Language encodes
geographical information. Cognitive Science, 33, 51-73.
Montez, P., Thompson, G., & Kello, C. T. (2015). The role of
semantic clustering in optimal memory foraging. Cognitive
Science, 39(8), 1925-1939.
Recchia, G., & Louwerse, M. (2014). Grounding the ungrounded: Estimating locations of unknown place names
from linguistic associations and grounded representations.
In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th annual conference of the
cognitive science society (p. 1270-1275). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Řehůřek, R., & Sojka, P. (2010, May 22). Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges
for NLP Frameworks (pp. 45–50). Valletta, Malta: ELRA.
(http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en)
Rhodes, T., & Turvey, M. T. (2007). Human memory retrieval
as lévy foraging. Physica A: Satistical Mechanics and its
Applications, 385(1), 255-260.
Sinnott, R. W. (1984). Virtues of the haversine. Sky and
Telescope, 68(2), 159.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: Statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78.
Szary, J., Kello, C., & Dale, R. (2015). Memory foraging in a
spatial domain. In Proceedings of the 37th annual conference of the cognitive science society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychological Review, 55, 189-208.
United states board on geographic names. (2016). Retrieved
from geonames.usgs.gov
Wikimedia tool labs geohack. (2016). Retrieved from
https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/GeoHack

1402

