Singular Interpretations Linger During the Processing of Plural Noun Phrases
Nikole D. Patson (Patson.3@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1465 Mount Vernon Avenue
Marion, OH 43302 USA

Abstract
Plural nouns do not strictly refer to more than one object, which
suggests that they are not semantically marked to mean “more than
one” and that plurality inferences are made via a scalar
implicature. Consistent with that hypothesis, recent evidence using
a picture-matching paradigm supports founds that participants
were equally fast to respond to a picture of a single object as a
picture of multiple objects after reading a sentence containing a
plural. This suggests that comprehenders activate both a semantic
(i.e., singular) and a pragmatic interpretation (i.e., plural). The
current study found that even after a 1500 ms delay,
comprehenders still maintain activation of both meanings after
reading a sentence containing a plural. This suggests that the
activation of the singular meaning may not be due to the
processing of a scalar implicature, but rather may be due to the
nature of plural conceptual representations.
Keywords:
plurals;
semantics;
pragmatics;
scalar
implicature;
language
comprehension;
conceptual
representations

Introduction
There is a well-known puzzle regarding the interpretation
of plural noun phrases. Consider the following set of
examples.
1a) Ben fed a shark.
1b) Ben fed sharks.
1c) Ben fed more than one shark.
2a) Ben didn’t feed a shark.
2b) Ben didn’t feed sharks.
2c) Ben didn’t feed more than one shark.
For most people, 1b & 1c are essentially the same in
meaning, and distinct from 1a. However, in the negated
cases, 2a and 2b are usually judged as equivalent and
distinct from 2c (Sauerland et al., 2005; Tieu et al., 2014).
This suggests that “more than one” is not always the
appropriate interpretation of a plural noun phrase. Because
of this pattern of interpretations, linguists have argued that
the plural is semantically unmarked, or weakly marked, for
number, while the singular is strongly marked for number.
If the plural is semantically unmarked (or weakly marked)
for number, then linguistic theory must account for the fact
that, in many contexts, most people interpret plural nouns to
mean “more than one”. One hypothesis is that when
comprehending a plural, comprehenders make a kind of
pragmatic inference known as a scalar implicature (e.g.,
Spector, 2007; Tieu et al, 2014). A scalar implicature is a
type of inference that arises when a weak expression is used
instead of a stronger expression. For example, a sentence

like Zoe ate some of the cookies is typically interpreted as
meaning Zoe ate some but not all of the cookies. However,
logically that does not have to be the case. If Zoe ate all of
the cookies, it is also true that she ate some of the cookies.
Thus, the statement that Zoe ate some of the cookies does
not logically rule out the possibility that Zoe in fact ate all
of the cookies. Nevertheless, comprehenders seem to
assume that speakers use the strongest labels that are
compatible with their intended meaning and interpret the
fact that a weaker expression was used to indicate that the
stronger meaning was not appropriate (Grice, 1975). Thus,
they assume that if a speaker intended to indicate that Zoe
indeed ate all of the cookies, they would have used the
quantifier all because that would be the strongest way to
communicate that state of affairs. Applying this logic to
plural noun phrases, a scalar implicature account assumes
that the literal, semantically defined interpretation of the
plural is something like “at least one” and an implicature
must be made to arrive at the “more than one”
interpretation. The logic of the implicature is as follows: a
plural can refer to a single entity, but if the speaker intended
to refer to only one entity they would have used a stronger
form (i.e., the singular) to express that.
Using a truth-value judgment task (e.g., T/F: Does a dog
have tails?), Tieu et al. (2014), provided evidence for a
scalar implicature account of plurality. Tieu et al. found that
both adults and children interpreted plural nouns as meaning
“more than one” more often in positive contexts (or upwardentailing environments) than negative contexts (or
downward-entailing environments). This is consistent with
typical scalar implicature patterns (e.g., Chierchia, 2004;
Levinson, 2000). Additionally, Tieu et al. found that
children were less likely to compute plural inferences than
adults, which is also consistent with previous work showing
that children are typically less likely to compute scalar
implicature inferences than adults (e.g., Noveck, 2001).
Recently, Patson (in press) provided experimental
evidence that is consistent with the hypothesis that
comprehenders compute a scalar implicature when
comprehending a plural. Patson (in press) used a picturematching paradigm designed to probe the conceptual
representation of plural noun phrases (e.g., Patson, George,
& Warren, 2014). Using this picture matching paradigm,
Patson, George and Warren (2014) had participants read a
sentence that contained either a singular noun (as in 3), a
plural definite description (as in 4), or a two-quantified
plural (as in 5).
3) The parent handed the child the crayon.
4) The parent handed the child the crayons.

1188

5) The parent handed the child the two crayons.
After reading the sentence, participants pressed a button
and then they saw a picture of exactly one object, exactly
two objects, or multiple (3-6) objects. Participants were
instructed to decide whether or not the picture was of an
object(s) that was mentioned in the sentence. They were
instructed and trained to ignore the number of objects and
base their judgment on object identify alone. Patson et al.
measured how quickly participants responded affirmatively
to the picture. When number was explicit (e.g., singular NP,
two-quantified NP), participants were faster to judge a
picture when the number matched. For example, after
reading a singular noun phrase participants were faster to
accurately decide that the picture was of an object that was
mentioned in the sentence when there was only one object
pictured compared to when multiple objects were pictured.
This finding is straightforward: When number information
is made explicit comprehenders have a detailed conceptual
representation that contains that number information.
Interestingly, for the plural definite description conditions,
there were no judgment time differences based on picture
type. That is, participants did not show a preference for
pictures that depicted more than one object compared to
pictures that depicted a single object. Patson et al.
interpreted this finding as consistent with the theory that
plurality is semantically unmarked for number. That is,
because number information is not semantically explicit in a
plural noun phrase, comprehenders do not explicitly
represent number information when building a conceptual
representation of a plural noun phrase. Therefore, they
showed no preference for pictures of multiple objects over
pictures of a single object.
Patson (in press) followed up this work and suggested that
the lack of preference for a picture depicting multiple
objects compared to a picture depicting a single object is
due to the computation of a scalar implicature. In Patson (in
press) comprehenders read sentences that contained plural
noun phrases. The sentences were written to evoke a
particular spatial configuration for the plural set. For
example, in the first experiment, the sentential context either
described a spatial configuration where the individual items
that comprised the plural were spread out (e.g., the wind
scattered the leaves) or the items were gathered closely
together (e.g., a pile of leaves). After reading the sentence,
comprehenders were shown a picture that matched the
spatial configuration, mismatched the configuration, or was
a single object. Patson found that participants were faster to
respond to a picture when it matched the spatial
configuration implied in the sentence than when it did not
(cf. Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001). Importantly, participants
were also faster to respond to a picture of a single item than
to a picture that mismatched the spatial configuration
implied in the sentence. Patson interpreted the match
finding as indicating that comprehenders do not leave
number information conceptually unspecified for plural
noun phrases. Instead, comprehenders interpret plural noun
phrases as meaning “more than one” and create highly

detailed conceptual representations that contain information
about how the individual entities that make up the plural set
are arranged. Furthermore, Patson argued that this
interpretation came about via a scalar implicature. This
argument was based on the finding that even though
comprehenders created highly detailed conceptual
representations, they had activated a singular representation
as evidenced by the finding that participants were faster to
respond to the picture of a single object than the picture that
mismatched the sentential context. Patson argued that this
pattern of findings could be explained by assuming that
during comprehension both the literal, semantic meaning
(“at least one”) and the pragmatic scalar implicature (“more
than one”) are computed during the processing of a plural.
At the end of the sentence, both the semantic meaning and
the pragmatic meaning are still active in memory, so
participants are equally fast to respond to a picture that is
consistent with the semantic meaning (e.g., a picture of a
single object) as well as a picture consistent with the
pragmatic meaning (e.g., a picture that matches the
sentential context). This interpretation was based on
findings presented by Kaup, Lüdtke, and Zwaan (2006).
Kaup et al. had comprehenders read negated sentences and
then presented them with pictures that either matched the
affirmative state of affairs or the negated (actual) state of
affairs. For example, participants read sentences like: The
umbrella was not open. Then they saw a picture of either an
open umbrella (affirmative state of affairs) or a closed
umbrella (negated, or actual, state of affairs). In their first
experiment, Kaup et al. presented the pictures immediately
after the sentence. In that experiment participants were
equally fast to respond to the affirmative picture as the
negated picture. In the second experiment, Kaup et al.
inserted a 1500 ms delay between the sentence and the
presentation of the picture. In that experiment, participants
were faster to respond to the negated picture than to the
affirmative picture. Kaup et al. argued that comprehenders
create conceptual representations for intermediate stages
(e.g., the affirmative state of affairs) of linguistic processing
and that those intermediate stages are still active at the end
of the sentence. Furthermore, those intermediate stages get
suppressed or deactivated over time and the comprehender
is left with a conceptual representation that adheres to the
actual state of affairs described in the sentence. While Kaup
et al. interpreted their findings with respect to mental
simulations comprehenders were performing during
comprehension, these findings might also hold for scalar
implicature processing. Specifically, this account predicts
that during the processing of a scalar implicature,
comprehenders compute and conceptually represent both the
literal, semantic meaning of the scalar term as well as the
pragmatic, implicature –derived meaning. Thus, given a
delay between the end of the sentence and the presentation
of a picture, comprehenders should show a preference for
the pragmatic, implicature-derived meaning and not
preference for the literal, semantic meaning. The current
study tests this prediction.

1189

Whether or not the singular interpretation maintains
activation over a delay is an important question for
understanding how plural noun phrases are conceptually
represented. Very little work has been done to investigate
how plural nouns phrases are conceptually represented (e.g.,
Patson, 2014). Given that number is a fundamental aspect of
language processing, it is important to understand how
language comprehenders represent it conceptually.
Although little work has been done to explicitly probe the
conceptual representation of plural noun phrases, some
theorist have speculated about what those conceptual
representations might look like. For example, Johnson-Laird
(1983) argued that the conceptual representation for large
quantities could contain a small set of objects or may be a
single token. Under this hypothesis, it is possible that when
comprehenders conceptually represent a plural they
represent the plural at both the level of the set and also
represent a single token of the individuals that make up the
plural. Activating a representation of both the set and the
individuals that make up the set would be logical given that,
depending on the context, the set or the individuals may be
more relevant.
The current study was designed to investigate whether the
activation of the singular meaning during the
comprehension of plural noun phrases (Patson, in press;
Patson, George, & Warren, 2014) persists after a 1500 ms
delay. If the activation of the singular interpretation is due
to the computation of a scalar implicature, then
comprehenders should not show a reduced reaction time for
a singular picture compared to a plural picture that
mismatches the context after a delay (e.g., Kaup et al.,
2006). If a reduced reaction time for a singular picture
persists after a delay, it suggests that the activation of the
singular interpretation was not due to the computation of a
scalar implicature, but rather may be due to the nature of
plural conceptual representations.

Method
Fifty four native speakers of American English volunteered
to participate. Participants were recruited from the
Columbus Center of Science and Industry (COSI).

Design and Stimuli
The experiment had a 2x3 repeated measures design. The
first factor was the implied distribution of entities in the
plural set. The sentences either implied that the entities
within the plural set were spatially gathered (as in 6) or
spatially spread out (as in 7).

The sentences used in the current study were a subset of
the sentences used in Patson (in press). The sentences were

Figure 1. Pictures (in greyscale) used in the Experiment.
Forty two experimental items were divided into six lists
such that each list contained one condition from each
experimental item. Each participant viewed one list. Each
list also contained the same set of 42 filler sentences. Filler
sentences were structured exactly like the experimental
sentences; however, in all of the filler items, the picture that
followed the sentence was not of an item mentioned in the
sentence. The filler pictures contained a mixture of singular
objects, spatially grouped objects, and spatially distributed
objects. The correct answer for the sentence-picture
matching judgment was “no” for all 42 filler items and
“yes” for all 42 experimental items.

Apparatus

Participants

6) The gardener raked up the leaves.
7) The breeze scattered the leaves.

normed to ensure they evoked the correct spatial
configuration.
The second factor was the picture type (see Figure 1 for
examples). The picture was either spatially gathered (e.g., a
pile of leaves), spatially distributed (e.g., spread out leaves),
or a single object. The pictures used in the current study
were a subset of the pictures used in Patson (in press). In
order to verify that all three picture types were similarly
easy to identify, Patson (in press) ran a norming study in
which participants were shown a label (e.g., leaves) and
asked to judge whether a picture was a good match for that
label. There were no response time differences based on
picture type indicating that any response time differences in
the Experiment are not due to differences in how the
pictures are visually processed.

The trials were presented using E-Prime v.2 experimental
software (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002). A
Dell P2412H 24-inch monitor (1920 X 1080 pixels)
displayed stimuli with a screen refresh rate of 60 Hz.
Keyboard presses were used to log responses and record
reaction time.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually or in pairs. After they
provided informed consent, they were given a verbal
introduction to the experiment. Then the computer guided
them through example trials followed by four practice trials
with feedback. As in Patson et al. (2014) and Patson (in
press), the instructions and practice indicated that
participants’ judgments should be based on object identity.
That is, participants were instructed to answer “yes” when
they saw a singular picture even when the sentence

1190

contained a plural noun phrase. A left-justified fixation
cross signaled the beginning of each trial. When participants
pressed the spacebar, the cross was replaced by a sentence.
Participants read the sentence at their own pace and pressed
the space bar. The sentence disappeared and a blank screen
appeared for 1500 ms. After the 1500 ms delay, a picture
appeared in the center of the screen. Participants decided
whether or not the picture was of an object mentioned in the
sentence by pressing ‘Y’ for yes and ‘N’ for no on the
keyboard. The picture disappeared only when participants
made their response. The participants’ button presses and
response times were recorded.

Results
Overall, accuracy on the task was high (M = 96%, SD =
4%). One participant was dropped from the analysis due to
extremely long reaction times (over 3 SDs greater than
mean RTs).
The mean reaction times for correct trials are presented in
Figure 2.

Figure 2. Mean (standard error) picture judgment time by
sentence and picture type.
The main effect of picture type was significant, F1(2,
104)= 13.09, MSe = 24556.73, p < .001; F2(2, 82) = 10.72,
MSe = 40179.22, p < .001. Neither the main effect of
sentence type nor the interaction was significant, all ps >
.10.
Planned comparisons indicated that participants were
faster to respond accurately to the picture when the picture
matched the sentential context than when it did not, t1(52) =
3.89, p < .001; t2(41) = 3.60, p = .001. Additionally,
participants were faster to respond to the singular picture
than to the picture that mismatched the sentential context,
t1(52) = 4.53, p <.001; t2(41) = 3.88, p <.001.

Discussion
The results reported here replicate and extend the results
reported by Patson (in press). When comprehenders read
sentences containing plural noun phrases they are faster to
respond accurately to a picture that matches the sentential

context than to a picture that does not. Additionally,
comprehenders are faster to respond to a picture of a single
object than to a picture that does not match the sentential
context. What is new in this experiment is that these effects
occur even after a 1500 ms delay. This suggests that the
singular interpretation that gets activated by the plural is not
an intermediate stage of processing, but rather is part of the
conceptual representation comprehenders build for plural
noun phrases.
Importantly, these data do not undermine the scalar
implicature account of plural noun phrases. Indeed, if the
singular activation were due to the computation of a scalar
implicature, it was predicted that participants in this
experiment should not have shown a preference for the
singular picture over the picture that mismatched the
sentential context. However, the finding that participants did
show a preference for the singular picture does not indicate
that a scalar implicature was not computed. Instead, it
suggests that the activation of the singular meaning was not
due to the semantic content of the plural noun phrase, but
rather may be due to the nature of how plural nouns are
conceptually represented (as I will describe in more detail
below). Furthermore, Patson (in press) argued that the
semantic meaning of a plural noun phrase is something like
“at least one”. However, there are linguistic patterns that
suggest this may not be the definition of the plural. For
example, the sentence I have zero dogs, the meaning “at
least one dog” would be incompatible with the intended
meaning of the sentence. This issue is beyond the scope of
this paper, but does suggest that the activation of the
singular meaning may not have come from the semantic
content of the plural noun phrase.
The data reported here suggest that during the
comprehension of a plural noun phrase, comprehenders
activate a representation of a single token of the objects that
make up the plural and that activation persists over a 1500
ms delay. This suggests that the activation of the single
token is an important part of the plural conceptual
representation. This is reasonable given the fact that
depending on the context the set or the individuals may be
more relevant during the comprehension of plural noun
phrases (e.g., Patson, 2014; Patson & Warren, 2010). For
example, plural noun phrases can have either a collective (as
in 8) or a distributed reading (as in 9).
8) Together the girls ate a cookie.
9) Each of the girls ate a cookie.
In the collective case (8), the predicate is applied to the set
making the set is the most relevant referent for the plural
noun phrase. In the distributed case (9), the predicate is
applied to the individuals that make up the set, making the
individuals the more relevant referent. Given that either the
set or the individuals that make up the set can be more or
less relevant (and that this relevance can shift throughout a
discourse) it is reasonable that the conceptual representation
would contain an explicit representation of both the set and
the individuals that make up the set.

1191

There is still an open question about why comprehenders
represent a single token rather than multiple distinct entities
when representing the individuals that make up the plural
set. One possibility is that the single token representation is
a way in which the conceptual representation is left
indeterminate (e.g., Barsalou, 1999). For example, in
discussing how a tiger’s stripes may be simulated in a
conceptual representation, Barsalou1 argued that there are
two ways in the conceptual image might be indeterminate.
First, the stripes may be blurry, such that they cannot be
counted. Second, they might be extracted from the
representation of the tiger such that they appear in a patch.
The data reported here are consistent with Barsalou’s
second suggestion for indeterminacy. With respect to the
plural, the individuals that make up the plural set may be
represented by extracting a single token from the plural set
to represent each of the individuals. Future work will be
necessary to fully investigate how plural noun phrases are
conceptually represented.
Additionally, future work should be aimed at
investigating how context influences the conceptual
representation of plurals. Recently, Zwaan (2014) argued
that different contexts may require different levels of
conceptual representation. Given that context can influence
the relevancy of the individuals that make up the plural set
(e.g., Patson, 2014; Patson & Warren, 2010), the strength of
the singular representation may be influenced by the context
in which the plural appears.
Furthermore, scalar implicatures are more likely to be
computed in some contexts compared to other contexts
(Degen & Tanenhaus, 2015). Thus, given the linguistic
evidence that plurals derive their number information via a
scalar implicature (Tieu et al., 2014), future work aimed at
investigating how context influences the conceptual
representations of plural noun phrases must take into
account how likely scalar implicatures are to be computed.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted at the Buckeye Language
Network Language Sciences Lab at the Center of Science
and Industry in Columbus, Ohio. I would also like to thank
Ciara Corielle and Elaina Hill for assistance collecting data.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity
phenomena, and the syntax/pragmatics interface. In
A. Belletti (Ed.), Structures and Beyond. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

1

Barsalou (1999) and Zwaan (2014) argue for embodied
representations. The arguments here are fully consistent with an
embodied account of language processing. However, the
arguments here do not rely on an assumption that language
processing is embodied.

Degen, J. and Tanenhaus, M.K. (2015). Processsing scalar
implicature:
a
Constraint-Based
approach.
Cognitive Science, 39, 667-710.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. Syntax and
Semantics, 3, 41-58.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kaup, B., Lüdtke, J., & Zwaan, R. A. (2006). Processing
negated sentences with contradictory predicates: Is
a door that is not open mentally closed?. Journal of
Pragmatics, 38, 1033-1050.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive meanings. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar
implicature. Cognition, 78, 165-188.
Patson, N. D. (2014). The processing of plural expressions.
Language and Linguistics Compass, 8, 319-329.
Patson, N.D. (in press). Evidence in support of a scalar
implicature account of plurality. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition.
Patson, N. D., George, G.E., and Warren, T. (2014). The
conceptual representation of number. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67, 13491365.
Patson, N. D., and Warren, T. (2010). Evidence for
distributivity effects in comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 36, 782-789.
Sauerland, U. (2003). A new semantics for number. In
Semantics and Linguistic Theory (pp. 258-275).
Sauerland, U, Anderssen, J. & Yatsushiro, J. (2005). The
plural is semantically unmarked. In Stephan Kepser
& Marga Reis (eds.), Linguistic evidence, de
Gruyter.
Schneider, W., Eschmann, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime user’s guide. Pittsburgh, PA: Psychology
Software Tools, Inc.
Spector, B. (2007). Aspects of the pragmatics of plural
morphology: On higher-order implicatures. In Uli
Sauerland & Penka Stateva (eds.), Presuppositions
and Implicature in Compositional Semantics,
Palgrave.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on
picture recognition. Psychological Science, 12,
153-156.
Tieu, L., Bill, C., Romoli, J., & Crain, S. (2014). Plurality
inferences are scalar implicatures: Evidence from
acquisition. Proceedings of SALT, 24.
Zwaan, R. A. (2014). Embodiment and language
comprehension: reframing the discussion. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 18, 229-234.

1192

