Spatial Memory and Foraging: How Perfect Spatial Memory Improves Foraging
Performance
Bryan Elvis Kerster (bkerster@ucmerced.edu)
Christopher T. Kello (ckello@ucmerced.edu
Cognitive and Information Science, 5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343, USA

Abstract
Foraging is a search process common to all mobile organisms.
Spatial memory can improve foraging efficiency and efficacy,
and evidence indicates that many species—including
humans—actively utilize spatial memory to aid in their
foraging, yet most current models of foraging do not include
spatial memory. In this study, a simple online foraging game
was used to attempt to replicate and extend findings from a
recent study (Kerster, Rhodes, & Kello, 2016) to further
investigate the role of spatial memory in foraging. The game
involved searching a simple 2d space by clicking the mouse
to try and find as many resources as possible in 300 clicks.
Spatial information was displayed that provided complete
information about search history in order test how “perfect”
spatial memory improves search performance. Over 1000
participants were recruited to participate in the task using
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, which allowed this test to be
performed across a wide parameter space of different resource
distributions. Results replicated many of the findings of
earlier studies, and demonstrated that spatial memory can
have a dramatic effect on search performance.
Keywords: Foraging; spatial memory; Lévy walks; area
restricted search; crowdsourcing

Introduction
Foraging is ubiquitous amongst living organisms, as it is a
key task required for survival and procreation. Foraging is
the process of searching an environment for resources, such
as food or mates. While, foraging generally refers to a
physical search process across a landscape, the principles
involved are shared across many types of search processes,
including memory search, visual search, and problem
solving (Cain, Vul, Clark, & Mitroff, 2012; Rhodes, Kello,
& Kerster, 2014; Rhodes & Turvey, 2007).
Some researchers have theorized that animal foraging
behaviors are memory-less processes known as Lévy walks.
Lévy walks are a random walk model where movement
lengths are drawn from a Lévy distribution. It is unlikely
that animal searches are literally random walks (Pyke,
2015), but the model captures an important aspect of
foraging behavior. The distribution of path lengths, which
are the lengths of straight movements made before stopping
or switching directions, have been observed to follow a
power law distribution. This indicates a clustered pattern of
movement where a large number of smaller movements are
interspersed with occasional larger movements across
different scales. Lévy distributions have been observed in
the foraging movements of a variety of different animals
including albatrosses (Viswanathan et al., 1996), a variety

of different fish species (Sims et al., 2008), and have been
identified in memory search (Rhodes & Turvey, 2007) and
visual search (Rhodes et al., 2014)..
Marginal value theory is an alternative approach to
modeling foraging animal movements. This approach treats
resources as a series of patches of varying sizes, and
abstracts away the direct physical movement aspect of
foraging while concentrating on optimizing the time a
forager spends in a patch before moving on to another one.
Marginal value theorem states that foraging can by
optimized by comparing the rate of resource gain per unit
time to the average rate. When the rate dips below the
average, the forager should seek a new patch (Charnov,
1976).
One of the current leading models of animal foraging
expands on marginal value theory by removing the spatial
abstractions and implementing a model that attempts to
optimize how an organism moves through the environment
by relating turning rates to time since the last resource was
found (Hills, 2006). Shortly after resources are found, the
model turns more frequently keeping it within the resource
patch. As resources become sparser, the model will turn
less, propelling it on until it finds another resource and
presumably another patch. This approach, known as arearestricted search, has recently been successful at modeling
real world animal foraging data, and has been shown to
generate movement patterns very similar to those generated
by Lévy flight models (Hills, Kalff, & Wiener, 2013;
Kareiva & Odell, 1987).
A number of studies have demonstrated that while there
are some fundamental differences between animal foraging
and cognitive search tasks, there are also enough similarities
that findings related to foraging can be applicable to more
abstract cognitive tasks. For example, Rhodes & Turvey
(2007) demonstrated that times between word utterances in
a category recall task follow a power law distribution as
would be predicted by a Lévy walk model. Similar work has
also been done from an optimal foraging perspective (Hills,
Jones, & Todd, 2012). Visual search also provides a task
whose constraints are similar to a foraging task, and
unsurprisingly strong similarities in behavior between the
tasks has been observed (Wolfe, 2013).
The successes of Lévy walks, marginal value theorem,
and area-restricted search notwithstanding, spatial memory
does not play a role in guiding search movements in any of
these theories, i.e. there is no memory for past search
locations. The exclusion of spatial memory stands in

1865

contrast with studies of animal foraging—a number of
animals have been observed to utilize spatial memory for
such tasks including monkeys, primates, and octopi (Garber,
1989; Mather, 1991). The lack of spatial memory in leading
models of foraging helps them to be simple and tractable to
analyze, but it appears that organisms with well-developed
spatial memories bring those faculties to bear when
engaging in a task as inherently spatial as foraging.
Additionally, if spatial memory proves important to human
foraging it may be informative for theories of visual search
as well.
Recent work has shown evidence that humans utilize
spatial memory in their search strategies. Kerster, Rhodes,
& Kello (2016) demonstrated a significant effect of
landmarks in a virtual foraging task. In that task,
participants were presented with either a blank screen or a
Hubble space image and were asked to click anywhere on
the screen to search for hidden resources. Resources were
non-renewing and were not correlated to the background
images. Analyses of performance showed that participants
were able to find significantly more resources when the
Hubble images were present. The authors concluded that the
images served as landmarks for searchers, aiding their
spatial memory. Kerster et al. (2016) formulated a foraging
model that utilizes spatial memory as one of its key features.
The model produced search patterns similar to those
generated by human participants, in terms of the effects of
resource density and clustering on performance and search
trajectories. One important difference between human
participants and the model was that, even though the relative
patterns of performance were similar, the model was able to
find many more resources on average. The authors
conjectured that this difference may be due to the model
utilizing perfect spatial memory.
In the present study, we expand on Kerster et al. (2016)
by testing human foraging performance under experimental
conditions that mimic perfect spatial memory, akin to the
foraging model that they formulated. We test whether
providing a complete history of a player’s past search
locations and resources found will improve performance to
level of the model, and how search trajectories might
change with perfect spatial memory.

anywhere on the screen and were given visual and audio
cues when they selected a location with a resource.
Resources were hidden from view until found and were nonrenewing. See Figure 1 for an example of what the game
looks like during play.
Each participant was presented a single trial from one of 9
different resource conditions. Resources conditions were
manipulated in a 3x3 design between resource density and
clustering. Resource density corresponded with the total
amount of resources, and was set to 100, 600, or 1100
resources. Clustering of resources was controlled using a
recursive algorithm that produces power law distributions of
resource clusters with varying degrees of clustering from
very clustered to uniform random. The parameter
controlling degree of clustering was set to three distinct
levels—highly clustered (0.1), less clustered (0.3), and
random i.e. not clustered (0.5).
Prior to beginning of the foraging game, each participant
was presented with a short text briefing that provided
instructions and framed the experiment as “space
exploration.” This was followed by a display showing an
example distribution of resources. The example was drawn
from the same condition as what they would encounter in
the game, but the particular distribution shown was different
than the one used during the game. Participants were also
informed that, if they received a high score, they would
have an opportunity to add their initials to the high score
list. A high score list was used to increase participant
engagement in the game. Participants then had a short
practice trial (15 foraging clicks) before the game began.
The whole experiment generally took less than five minutes
to complete.

Methods
The experimental design used here is based on the foraging
game described in Kerster et al. (2016). 1034 participants
played a browser-based game written in Adobe Flash.
Participants were recruited using Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk and were paid $0.25 for their time and participation.
All data was collected during a single 24 hour period.
Participants were shown a 1280 x 1024 pixel black screen
with a score counter in the top left corner which displayed
the number of resources found, and a “fuel” display in the
top right which displayed how many clicks they had
remaining in text and with a depleting meter.
Participants were instructed to find as many resources as
they could in 300 clicks, and they were able to click freely

Figure 1: An example of the game’s appearance during play.
Squares indicate where the player has foraged thus far.
White squares indicate nothing was found at that location,
and red squares indicate that resources were found, with
brighter shades indicating higher values. The number of
resources found is shown in the upper left, and the number

1866

of foraging clicks remaining is shown in the upper right (in
numerical and bar form).

Results

The foraging game in this experiment differed from the
one used in Kerster et al. (2016) in two important ways.
First, the search area was divided into an invisible grid of 15
x 15 pixel squares. Each square was searched by clicking
over it, and each square could be searched only once. This
restriction ensured that that there was no search area overlap
among clicks, and therefore no wasted clicks searching in
previously searched locations. By contrast, the game used
by Kerster et al. (2016) allowed participants to click on
locations that were partially or entirely searched already.

Figure 2: Pseudocode for the recursive algorithm used to
generate clustered resources. The probs_split parameter
corresponds to a number between 0 and 0.5 and determines
the degree of clustering, where 0 would create a single
cluster, and 0.5 creates a uniform random distribution.
(Kerster et al, 2016)
The other difference between Kerster et al. (2016) and the
present study was the display of participant’s previous
searches. In the present study, a square was placed after
each click on the corresponding location on the grid, and
color coding was used to indicate the number of resources
found, or no resources found. In particular, the range of
brightness/hue levels was normalized by setting the
brightest color to the maximum number of resources
available in any given square, and setting white to mean that
no resources were found. The restriction against overlapping
clicks, plus the displayed information about previous
locations foraged, effectively created a perfect external
spatial memory for participants.
The game was otherwise the same as in Kerster et al.
(2016), so we compare the results of the two experiments
directly.

Path length measures were computed using the same
method described in Kerster, et al. (2016). Euclidean
distances were calculated between each successive pair of
clicks, and distances were summed into single path lengths
for consecutive segments that had less than 10˚ of change
between them. The angle threshold was used so that
consecutive clicks in a relatively straight line were treated as
a single path length. Each play yielded 203 path lengths on
average, out of 300 clicks in total. By contrast, the average
number of path lengths was 165 in Kerster et al. (2016). The
increase in numbers of path lengths is likely the result of
changes in foraging strategies between the two experiments
(see below), as well as the transition to a fixed grid.
Path length distributions were analyzed to investigate
whether they demonstrated heavy tailed properties. A
number of studies have shown that the path length
distributions of various foraging animals can be quantified
in terms of the functional forms of their tails. Exponential,
lognormal, and power law functions are commonly used,
where the latter two functions feature heavier tails than
exponential. Specifically, maximum likelihood methods
suggested that foraging animals are sometimes best fit by
power laws or truncated power laws (Humphries et al.,
2010; Humphries, Weimerskirch, Queiroz, Southall, &
Sims, 2012), and other times by lognormal or stretched
exponential functions (Breed, Severns, & Edwards, 2015;
Edwards, Freeman, Breed, & Jonsen, 2012). Additionally
lognormal distributions have been fit to human foraging
movements as well (Kerster, Kello, Rhodes, & Bien-Aime,
2013; Kerster et al., 2016). These heavy tailed distributions
are indicative of spatial clustering in the search movements.
Additionally, it has been argued that power law functions
with exponents near two indicate Lévy walks, which are
optimal under a certain set of assumptions (Viswanathan et
al., 1999), although Lévy walks have been criticized as
being overly simplified models of foraging by others (Pyke,
2015).
Aikaike’s Information Criterion (Akaike, 1974) was
applied to the path length distributions provided by each
subject using the same methods described in Kerster et al.
(2016) to determine which function best fit each
distribution. Like in Kerster et al. (2016) the vast majority
of distributions were best fit by the lognormal (92%). The
estimated exponents also replicated, and were near the
theoretically optimal exponent of 2 for Lévy walks. These
findings indicate that people produced search trajectories
that were inherently clustered.

1867

Table 1: Comparison of resources found and estimated
exponents across conditions between the two experiments.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

This experiment replicates many of the key findings of
the earlier foraging game, which then raises the question:
What effect did changes in the experiment have? The model
described in Kerster et al. (2016) also replicated many of
these findings, but demonstrated much higher search
efficiency as measured by their normalized score, i.e.
proportion of available resources found. Kerster et al.
proposed that the difference in score between human
participants and the model was due to the model having a
perfect spatial memory, and non-overlapping foraging
locations. The present experiment conferred the same
benefits upon human participants, so we expected a large
increase in score between this experiment and Kerster et al.
(2016).
As predicted, participants demonstrate much higher
scores in the current experiment (M=16%, SD=19%)
compared to the previous experiment (M=7%, SD=8%) as
confirmed by a Welch’s t-test (t(7142)=15.5, p < 0.0001). A
qualitative look shows that scores in all conditions except
the uniform random distribution of resources were
substantially higher (see Table 1). Score is normalized by
dividing the total number of resources found by the number
of available resources in the condition, so that scores may be

% found

Density
Sparse
Medium
Dense

Current
Experiment
22.8%
(0.87)
28.2%
(0.80)
32.6%
(0.75)

Kerster
et al.,
2016
9.9%
(0.81)
11.3%
(0.90)
13.2%
(0.88)

Est exponent
Current
Experiment
1.93
(0.11)
1.97
(0.12)
2.06
(0.15)

Kerster
et al.
2016
1.84
(0.16)
1.95
(0.19)
2.00
(0.16)

Clustering
55.6%
21.7% 1.95
1.97
(0.20)
(0.57)
(0.10)
(0.16)
15.9%
7.4%
2.04
2.00
Less
(0.28)
(0.23)
(0.14)
(0.17)
7.0%
5.5%
1.98
1.81
Random
(0.14)
(0.17)
(0.14)
(0.18)
directly compared across distributions. The small difference
observed for the random condition is because knowledge of
prior resource locations provides no information about
where to find other resources, thus spatial memory should
only be useful in preventing repeated search of the same
Most

Figure 3: Path length distributions for each trial. A histogram with 10 logarithmically spaced bins was created for each
trial. All trials are plotted together for each condition, separated by density and clustering. Axis labels are only displayed
once, but each plot has the same axes.

1868

location.
As mentioned earlier, two key changes were made
between this experiment and the one reported in Kerster et
al, 2016. Without further controls it is difficult to precisely
determine how much of the increases in score were due to
improvements in spatial memory, and how much were due
to increased search efficiency because search locations
could no longer overlap. Nevertheless, we developed a
simple method to control for search efficiency by scaling
normalized score by the number of unique pixels visited.
This allows for the relative comparison of scores accounting
for inefficiency due to repeatedly searching the same area.
This analysis revealed that, for each condition except the
random conditions, the majority of observed performance
increases (about 70-80%) were due to improvements in
spatial memory (see Table 2).
The observed increases in performance raise the question
of how search trajectories changed in the present experiment
due to perfect externalized spatial memory. To address this
question, we used spatial Allan Factor analysis to test
whether trajectories were more or less clustered in the
present study compared with Kerster et al. (2016). Allan
Factor analysis is designed to measure nested clustering in
point processes (Allan, 1966), and was used to measure
clustering in previous search tasks (Kerster et al., 2016;
Rhodes, Kello, & Kerster, 2014).
Table 2: Relative increases in scores accounted for by
search efficiency (lack of overlap) and perfect spatial
memory

Density
Sparse
Medium
Dense
Clustering
Most
Less
Random

%
increase
due to search
efficiency
23.2%
24.5%
26.5%

% increase
due to perfect
memory
76.8%
75.5%
73.5%

20.3%
30.7%
77.9%

79.7%
69.3%
22.1%

Allan Factor analysis works by tiling the space with
squares of side length L, and counting the number of points
N (in this case foraged locations) within each square i. The
differences between adjacent squares are averaged together,
and then normalized by twice the mean.
The Allan factor statistic A(L) provides a measure of
spatial variance across a number of given scales L. If
foraged locations are randomly distributed then A(L) ~ 1 for
all L. If locations are clustered across scales then A(L) > 1
and increases with L. If the clusters are hierarchically nested
across scales then A(L) ~ Lɑ where ɑ > 0. This can be
expressed as a linear relationship in log-log coordinates.
Allan Factor values A(L) were regressed across scales (L)
on each distribution in log-log coordinates to produce a

slope value. These values were then compared between the
two experiments. Slope values are significantly higher
(Welch’s two-sided T(7142)=10.7, p < 0.0001), in the
current experiment (M=1.12, SD=0.74) than in the
distributions produced in Kerster et al. (2016) (M=0.86,
SD=0.50) (see figure 4). This indicates that perfect spatial
memory led to an increase in the clustering of their searches
across scales.

Discussion
The current study is a direct extension of recent work
using an online foraging game to explore human foraging
behavior while controlling for variables that would be very
difficult to control using other methods. The previous study
by Kerster et al. (2016) provided evidence that spatial
memory is a key feature of human foraging, and the current
study confirms and extends those findings. The model used
in that study uses perfect memory as a simplification as
opposed to trying to implement a particular more realistic
type of memory. The manner in which we give perfect to
participants is also not meant to mimic any particular theory
of spatial memory, but to instead explore how performance
is constrained by limitations in memory. Our results
demonstrated the magnitude by which foraging performance
can be increased when spatial memory is improved. As long
as available resources are not randomly located in the
environment, search performance can be effectively doubled
by providing perfect spatial memory.

Figure 4: Comparison of Allan Factor slopes across
conditions between the two experiments. Both experiments
demonstrate similar patterns across condition, but the
current study has higher values in all conditions, indicating
more nested clustering in foraging movements.
The current study also replicated a number of important
findings in the foraging literature. Notably participants
generated clustered path length distributions that resemble
Lévy walks. This is consistent with observations of foraging
animals (Sims et al., 2008), as well as cognitive foraging
tasks (Rhodes et al., 2014; Rhodes & Turvey, 2007).

1869

In fact, Allan Factor analyses revealed that participants
with perfect spatial memory showed significantly greater
clustering across scales in their movements. Improved
spatial memory allowed searchers to exploit information
about the environment better as they uncovered it through
searching. The increased clustering we observed in their
movements is likely a result of improved exploitation of the
clustering in the environment.
Interestingly, the increases in clustering occurred both as
the resource environment became clustered, and as the
density increased. The interaction effect observed here is
somewhat different from that observed in Kerster, et al.
(2016) and may be the result of some factors specific to the
task. Further work is necessary to understand exactly how
resource density, clustering, and movement constraints
interact.
The simple foraging task used here is designed to have
constraints in common with a variety of foraging and search
tasks, and the findings presented here could be applied to
many of these tasks. Some of the more interesting
ramifications lie in cognitive tasks, such as visual and
memory searches. Both the natural world and our memories
are non-randomly distributed, which implies that knowledge
of previously searched locations could be a crucial factor in
efficient cognitive search.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part by a grant from the
National Science Foundation, BCS 1031903.

References
Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model
identification. Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions
on, 19(6), 716.
Breed, G. A., Severns, P. M., & Edwards, A. M. (2015).
Apparent power-law distributions in animal
movements can arise from intraspecific interactions.
Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 12(103),
20140927.
Cain, M. S., Vul, E., Clark, K., & Mitroff, S. R. (2012). A
Bayesian Optimal Foraging Model of Human Visual
Search. Psychological Science, (August).
Charnov, E. (1976). Optimal foraging, the marginal value
theorem. Theoretical population biology, 9(2), 129–
136.
Edwards, A. M., Freeman, M. P., Breed, G. A., & Jonsen, I.
D. (2012). Incorrect Likelihood Methods Were Used
to Infer Scaling Laws of Marine Predator Search
Behaviour. PLoS ONE, 7(10).
Garber, P. A. (1989). Role of spatial memory in primate
foraging patterns: Saguinus mystax and Saguinus
fuscicollis. American Journal of Primatology, 19(4),
203–216.
Hills, T. T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of
goal-directed cognition. Cognitive science, 30(1), 3–
41.
Hills, T. T., Jones, M. N., & Todd, P. M. (2012). Optimal

Foraging in Semantic Memory. Psychological review.
Hills, T. T., Kalff, C., & Wiener, J. M. (2013). Levy
Processes and Area-Restricted Search in Human
Foraging. PLoS ONE, 8(4), 1–7.
Humphries, N. E., Queiroz, N., Dyer, J. R. M., Pade, N. G.,
Musyl, M. K., Schaefer, K. M., … Sims, D. W.
(2010). Environmental context explains Lévy and
Brownian movement patterns of marine predators.
Nature, 465(7301), 1066–9.
Humphries, N. E., Weimerskirch, H., Queiroz, N., Southall,
E. J., & Sims, D. W. (2012). Foraging success of
biological Lévy flights recorded in situ. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 109(19), 7169–74.
Kareiva, P., & Odell, G. (1987). Swarms of predators
exhibit“ preytaxis” if individual predators use arearestricted search. American Naturalist, 130(2), 233–
270.
Kerster, B. E., Kello, C. T., Rhodes, T., & Bien-Aime, R. J.
(2013). Adaptive Foraging : Effects of Resource
Conditions on Search Paths in a Web-Based Foraging
Game. The Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Kerster, B. E., Rhodes, T., & Kello, C. T. (2016). Spatial
memory in foraging games. Cognition, 148, 85–96.
Mather, J. a. (1991). Navigation by spatial memory and use
of visual landmarks in octopuses. Journal of
Comparative Physiology A, 168(4), 491–497.
Pyke, G. H. (2015). Understanding movements of
organisms: It’s time to abandon the Lévy foraging
hypothesis. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 6(1),
1–16.
Rhodes, T., Kello, C. T., & Kerster, B. (2014). Intrinsic and
extrinsic contributions to heavy tails in visual
foraging. Visual Cognition, 22(6).
Rhodes, T., & Turvey, M. (2007). Human memory retrieval
as Lévy foraging. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications, 385(1), 255–260.
Sims, D. W., Southall, E. J., Humphries, N. E., Hays, G. C.,
Bradshaw, C. J. a, Pitchford, J. W., … Metcalfe, J. D.
(2008). Scaling laws of marine predator search
behaviour. Nature, 451(7182), 1098–102.
Viswanathan, G., Afanasyev, V., Buldyrev, S., Murphy, E.,
Prince, P., & Stanley, H. E. (1996). Lévy flight search
patterns of wandering albatrosses. Nature, 381(6581),
413–415.
Viswanathan, G., Buldyrev, S. V., Havlin, S., Luz, M. G. E.
da, Raposo, E. P., & Stanley, H. E. (1999).
Optimizing the success of random searches. Nature,
401(6756), 911.
Wolfe, J. (2013). When is it time to move to the next
raspberry bush? Foraging rules in human visual
search. Journal of Vision, 13, 1–17.

1870

