Spatializing emotion: A mapping of valence or magnitude?
1

1,2

Benjamin Pitt
(bpitt@uchicago.edu)

Daniel Casasanto
(casasanto@uchicago.edu)

1

2

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5848 S. University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Grossman Institute for Neuroscience, University of Chicago, 5812 S. Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract

People implicitly associate different emotions with different
locations in left-right space. Which dimensions of emotion do
they spatialize? Across many studies people spatialize
emotional valence, mapping positive emotions onto their
dominant side of space and negative emotions onto their nondominant side. Yet, other results suggest a contradictory
mapping of emotional intensity (a.k.a., emotional magnitude),
according to which people associate more intense emotions
with the right and less intense emotions with the left, regardless
of valence. To resolve this apparent contradiction, we first
tested whether people implicitly spatialize whichever
dimension of emotion they attend to. Results showed the
predicted valence mapping, but no intensity mapping. We then
tested an alternative explanation of findings previously
interpreted as showing an intensity mapping; these data may
reflect a left-right mapping of spatial magnitude, not emotion.
People implicitly spatialize emotional valence, but there is no
clear evidence for an implicit lateral mapping of emotional
intensity.
Keywords: conceptual metaphor theory; emotion; magnitude;
mental metaphor; valence

Introduction
People implicitly associate different emotions with different
locations in left-right space, mapping points along an
imaginary continuum of emotions onto an imaginary lateral
spatial axis. Which dimensions of emotion do people
spatialize? In this study we explore two contrasting mappings
between space and emotion that have been proposed, a
Valence Mapping and an Intensity Mapping, and suggest a
resolution to the apparent contradiction between them.
According to many studies, people implicitly spatialize
emotional valence, mapping positive-valence emotions onto
their dominant side of space and negative-valence emotions
onto their non-dominant side. Right-handers, therefore, tend
to associate positive emotions (e.g., happiness) with the right,
and negative emotions (e.g., anger) with the left (Casasanto,
2014, for review). This “Valence Mapping” appears to be
shaped by the physical experiences we have with our hands:
right-handers come to associate “positive” with the side of
space on which they can usually act more fluently with their
dominant hand, and “negative” with the side on which they
act more clumsily, with the non-dominant hand (Casasanto &
Chrysikou, 2011; see also Oppenheimer, 2008).
This body-based Valence Mapping has been observed
across a variety of populations: in children as well as adults
(Casasanto & Henetz, 2012), in members of Western and
non-Western cultures (de la Fuente, et al., 2015), and in both

neurotypicals and patients with compromised motor systems
(Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011). A “good is right” mapping
has also been found using a variety of methods, ranging from
questionnaires and diagram tasks (Casasanto, 2009) to
memory tasks (Brunyé, Gardony, Mahoney, 2012), motor
training tasks (Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011), and analyses
of spontaneous gestures (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2010).
Of particular interest for the present study, the Valence
Mapping also produces space-valence congruity effects in
reaction time (RT) tasks. Across multiple experiments, rightand left-handers were faster to classify centrally-presented
words as positive when responding with their dominant hand,
and faster to classify words as negative when responding with
their non-dominant hand (de la Vega et al., 2012; de la Vega,
et al., 2013; Kong, 2013). A similar pattern was found when
people judged positive and negative emotional faces (Kong,
2013). In sum, these results provide strong and generalizable
evidence for an implicit left-right Valence Mapping.
Is valence the only dimension of emotion that people
implicitly spatialize on the lateral axis? According to one
study, people spatialize emotional intensity (which the
authors refer to as “emotional magnitude”), associating less
intense emotion with the left and more intense emotion with
the right (Holmes & Lourenco, 2011; hence H&L).
Participants responded to photographs of emotional faces that
varied in both valence (e.g., happy vs. angry) and intensity
(e.g. happy vs. extremely happy). As indexed by their RTs,
participants appeared to associate less intense emotions with
the left and more intense emotions with the right – regardless
of whether the emotional valence was positive or negative
(H&L, Experiment 2).
These data of H&L’s are consistent with their proposal that
people implicitly associate emotional intensity with left-right
space: an “Intensity Mapping.” However, these data conflict
with the Valence Mapping. Whereas an Intensity Mapping
predicts that very negative emotions (e.g. extremely angry)
should be associated with the right (because they are more
intense), the Valence Mapping predicts that these negative
emotions should be associated with the left, in right-handers,
(because they have negative valence).
Here we conducted three experiments to resolve this
apparent contradiction. In Experiments 1 and 2, we explored
the possibility that people have both a Valence Mapping and
an Intensity Mapping available in long-term memory, and
spatialize emotion according to whichever dimension of
emotion is more salient in context (broadly consistent with
suggestions of H&L’s). To preview our results, we found
evidence for the Valence Mapping but no evidence of an

1056

Intensity Mapping. Therefore, in Experiment 3, we tested an
alternative explanation for H&L’s findings based on the
spatial magnitude (as opposed to the emotional magnitude)
of a salient feature of their stimuli.

Experiment 1: Do people spatialize whichever
dimension of emotion they attend to?
In Experiment 1, we tested whether orienting participants
toward either valence or intensity would cause them to show
the corresponding spatial mapping. Participants responded to
emotional words and judged them according to either their
valence or their intensity, by pressing buttons on the left or
right of a keyboard.

Method
Participants Thirty-two right-handed adults from the
University of Chicago community who spoke fluent English
participated in the main experiment for payment or course
credit. Half were randomly assigned to make speeded valence
judgments (n=16) and the other half to make speeded
intensity judgments (n=16). Twenty-four other participants
from the same community completed a questionnaire used to
measure normative judgments of the stimulus words’
meanings.
Materials Four emotional words were selected, on the basis
of a previous experiment in French speakers (Carbé &
Gevers, 2013), which varied in their valence and intensity:
“horrible” (very negative), “bad” (negative), “good”
(positive) and “perfect” (very positive).
In order to quantify differences among these words we
asked a group of participants (N=24) who did not participate
in the main experiment to rate the four words on intensity and
valence. For this norming task, the words appeared in a
vertical column along the midline of a printed page. Each
participant judged the emotional valence of the words on a
scale from -5 (most negative) to 5 (most positive) and, on
another page, the emotional intensity of the words on a scale

from 0 (least intense) to 10 (most intense). They wrote their
ratings on a horizontal line to the right of each word, all using
their right hand. The position of the words on the page and
the order of valence and intensity judgments was
counterbalanced across participants.
Procedure In both the valence and intensity tasks, the four
stimulus words appeared one at a time in black text in the
center of a computer screen. Participants in the valence task
judged whether each word connoted a “positive emotion” or
“negative emotion.” Participants in the intensity task judged
whether each word connoted a “more intense emotion” or
“less intense emotion.” Participants were instructed to
respond as quickly and accurately as possible by pressing one
of two keys (the “z” and the “?” keys on the English-US
QWERTY keyboard) using the index finger of each hand. If
no response was given, trials automatically ended after two
seconds. In one block of trials, participants pressed the key
on the left to indicate a negative/less intense emotion and the
key on the right to indicate a positive/more intense emotion.
In a second block, this mapping was reversed, and the order
of blocks was counterbalanced across participants.
Participants performed 8 practice trials at the start of each
block, after which the four stimulus words were presented in
random order 24 times each, composing a total of 192 critical
trials per participant over two blocks.
After testing, participants were debriefed to determine
whether they were aware of the experimental hypothesis, and
they then completed a language history questionnaire and the
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (EHI; Oldfield, 1971).

Results & Discussion
Ratings of emotional word stimuli Mean valence ratings
ranged from “horrible” (-4.48 +/- .15) to “bad” (-1.89 +/- .43),
“good” (2.20 +/- .33), and “perfect” (3.91 +/- .44). Mean
intensity ratings ranged from “good,” (4.21 +/- .44), the least
intense, to “bad” (5.04 +/- .42), “perfect” (7.92 +/- .64), and
“horrible” (8.21 +/- .49).

Figure 1. Results of Experiment 1. Left: Significant Valence Mapping in the valence task. Right: Non-significant
Intensity Mapping in the intensity task. Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

1057

Accuracy Four subjects failed to follow instructions and
were replaced. The error rate was higher in the valence task
(5.6%) than in the intensity task (4.3%; χ2(1)=6.08, p=.01).
Inaccurate trials were excluded from the RT analyses.
RTs: Valence Judgments RTs greater than 2.5 standard
deviations from subject means were removed, (2.69% of
accurate responses). To evaluate whether participants
implicitly spatialized the four words according to their
valence, we adopted the technique typically used to evaluate
the SNARC effect (e.g. Fias, Brysbaert, Geypens &
d’Ydewalle, 1996), like H&L. For each participant and word,
we calculated the RT difference between hands (dRT=right left hand RT) and regressed these dRTs over the mean
valence rating of each word. The slope of the resulting
regression line provides a continuous index of each
participant’s Valence Mapping. On average, participants in
the valence task associated the negatively valenced words
with left space and the positively valenced words with right
space, as indexed by the negative slope (M=-14.59 ms/unit
valence; t(15)=-2.49, p=.02; Figure 1, left), demonstrating a
clear Valence Mapping.
RTs: Intensity Judgments RTs greater than 2.5 standard
deviations from subject means were removed (2.52% of
accurate responses). Analogous to our analysis of the Valence
Mapping, we regressed participants’ dRTs over the mean
intensity rating of each word. Although the relationship
between intensity and dRT showed a slight trend in the
direction predicted by an Intensity Mapping, this trend did
not approach significance (M=-6.13 ms/unit intensity;
t(15)=-1.03, p=.32; Figure 1, right). Participants did not show
an Intensity Mapping, even though the task required them to
make explicit judgments of emotional intensity.
RTs: Comparison of Valence and Intensity Effects To test
the difference between the significant Valence Mapping
observed in the valence task and the nonsignificant Intensity
Mapping observed in the intensity task, we used a linear
mixed-effects regression. RTs were predicted by response
hand, standardized valence and intensity ratings, and task,
with random slopes and intercepts for participants. The 3-way
interaction between response hand, ratings, and task was
marginally significant (χ2(1)=2.93, p=.09).

Experiment 2: A second test of Valence and
Intensity Mappings
In Experiment 1, we predicted that if a Valence Mapping and
an Intensity Mapping are both available to participants in
long-term memory, then participants would (i.) implicitly
spatialize valence when making speeded valence judgments
(consistent with de la Vega, et al., 2012; de la Vega et al.,
2013; Kong, 2013), and (ii.) implicitly spatialize emotional
intensity when making speeded intensity judgments
(consistent with the conclusions of Holmes & Lourenco,
2011). Only the first prediction was upheld. The goal of
Experiment 2 was to test the same predictions with greater
power, generalizability, and sensitivity.
To increase power, we doubled the number of participants
and octupled the number of items; increasing the sample of

items from 4 to 32 also increased the generalizability of the
results. To increase sensitivity, we collected word ratings
from each participant, after the RT task, and predicted dRTs
on the basis of these subject-specific word ratings.

Method
Participants Sixty-four right-handed adults from the
University of Chicago community participated for payment
or course credit. Half were randomly assigned to the valence
task (n=32) and the other half to the intensity task (n=32).
Materials The set of 4 emotional words from Experiment 1
was expanded to include 32 words for which valence
(positive, negative) was crossed with emotional intensity
(high intensity, low intensity): beloved, brilliant, capable,
courteous, determined, devastated, disliked, drowsy, ecstatic,
energized, exhausted, good, gorgeous, gregarious, hated,
hesitant, hideous, horrible, idiotic, ignorant, insulting,
obstinate, perfect, pleased, prepared, rested, unattractive,
unhappy.
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Experiment
1 except for the following changes. Participants performed 32
practice trials at the start of each block (one for each word),
after which these words were presented in random order 5
times, composing 320 critical trials over two blocks. After
this speeded RT task, participants rated the valence and
intensity of each word. Words appeared on the computer
screen one at a time in randomized order and participants
spoke aloud their numerical ratings, on the same scales used
in Experiment 1. The order of the valence rating and intensity
rating tasks was counterbalanced across participants.

Results
Valence judgements Trials in which no response was given
(0.55%) were removed as were RTs greater than 2.5 standard
deviations from subject means (3.2% of responses).
We regressed each participant’s mean dRTs over their
standardized valence ratings for each word. As in Experiment
1, participants in the valence task associated the negatively
valenced words with left space and the positively valenced
words with right space, as indexed by a negative slope (M=10.92 ms/unit valence; t(31)=2.60, p=.01), demonstrating a
clear Valence Mapping.
Intensity judgments Trials in which no response was given
were removed (1.30%) as were RTs greater than 2.5 standard
deviations from subject means (2.9% of responses). We
regressed each participant’s mean dRTs over their
standardized intensity ratings for each word. We found no
systematic association between intensity and side of space
(M=5.58 ms/unit intensity; t(31)=.54, p=.59). The mean
slope did not differ significantly from a slope of zero, but
notably its sign was positive, inconsistent with the predicted
Intensity Mapping.
Comparison of valence and intensity effects To test the
difference between the significant Valence Mapping
observed in the valence task and the nonsignificant Intensity
Mapping observed in the intensity task, we used a mixedeffects model with random slopes and intercepts for

1058

participants and words. The 3-way interaction between
response hand, standardized word ratings, and task was
significant, indicating that the Valence Mapping was reliably
stronger than the Intensity Mapping (χ2(1)=7.82, p=.005).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 replicated the results of
Experiment 1, extending them to a larger sample of
participants and a larger set of words: we found a significant
Valence Mapping but no significant Intensity Mapping.
Experiment 2 also supports an inference that was only weakly
supported in Experiment 1. Although the effect of valence on
dRT was clearly significant, and the effect of intensity on
dRT was clearly nonsignificant, the difference between these
two effects was only marginal in Experiment 1. This
between-task difference was significant in Experiment 2,
indicating that the Valence Mapping was statistically
stronger than the (nonsignificant) Intensity Mapping.
In summary, the results of Experiments 1 and 2 showed a
highly significant Valence Mapping, consistent with previous
results (Casasanto, 2014, for review). They contrast with
H&L’s results, however, which were interpreted as showing
an Intensity Mapping. In Experiment 3, we tested a possible
explanation for this apparent contradiction.

Experiment 3: Emotional or spatial
magnitude?
Why did H&L find an Intensity Mapping whereas we did
not? A potential answer comes from an examination of
H&L’s stimuli. For the two experiments in which H&L
reported an Intensity Mapping (their Experiments 1 and 2),
the stimuli were photographs of six actors making facial
expressions that varied in their emotional intensity (what
H&L called emotional magnitude): neutral, happy, very
happy, extremely happy, etc. When classifying the gender of
these faces using left- and right-hand response keys,
participants showed a pattern of RTs that was consistent with
an Intensity Mapping.
However, as acknowledged by H&L, these findings might
also be “due to specific facial features that varied across the
range of stimuli, rather than the magnitude of emotional
expression per se” (p. 318). One such feature was the “size of
the mouth; more happy faces had a larger mouth opening than
less happy faces” (p. 318).
Although H&L dismiss this confound between emotional
intensity and physical space, it is of concern for two reasons.
First, across cultures, people tend to focus on the mouths of
emotional faces, as much or more than other parts of the face
such as the eyes (Jack et al., 2009; Koda & Ruttkay, 2014; cf,
Blais et al., 2008), and this tendency is particularly strong in
US participants (Jack, Caldara & Shyns, 2012; Yuki,
Maddeux & Masuda, 2007). Second, and crucially, previous
data show that people implicitly spatialize area along a leftto-right continuum. In one experiment, participants were
faster to make speeded judgments on smaller circles with the
left hand and larger circles with the right hand (Ren, Nicholls,
Ma & Chen, 2011), producing a dRT effect much like H&L’s.

Given that (a) people implicitly associate smaller spatial
areas with the left and larger areas with the right, and (b)
H&L’s more intense faces appear to have larger mouths, it
seems possible that the emotional magnitude effect H&L
reported was, in fact, a spatial magnitude effect. To test this
alternative explanation, here we calculated the mouth areas
of the faces in H&L’s stimulus set and used them in place of
emotional intensity to predict dRTs in H&L’s Experiment 2,
the experiment that provided the strongest evidence for an
Intensity Mapping. (We discuss alternative explanations for
the results of H&L’s Experiments 1 and 3 in the General
Discussion.)

Method
H&L’s Experiment 2 used 30 faces from the NimStim
database (Tottenham, et al., 2009). The photographs depicted
six actors making each of five emotional expressions, which
H&L labeled as neutral, happy, angry, extremely happy, and
extremely angry. A coder blind to the experimental
hypotheses used Adobe Photoshop to select and measure the
area of the mouth (including the lips) of each face.

Results and discussion
Analysis of Mouth Areas After the mouth areas were
measured, measurements were averaged for each emotional
expression (reported in units of 1000 pixels): Neutral
(M=3.27; +/- .27); Happy (M=3.64; +/- .40); Angry (M=2.26
+/- .20); Extremely happy (M=10.53; +/- .75); Extremely
angry (M=6.75 +/- .85). A first analysis confirmed that the
mean mouth area varied significantly across the emotional
expressions (F(1, 28)=36.3, p=.000000004; Figure 2).
A second analysis tested whether mouth area covaried with
emotional intensity. For each image, the mouth area (from
our measurements) was used to predict the intensity rating
(i.e., “emotional magnitude” ratings, obtained from H&L).
Mouth area reliably predicted emotional intensity ratings
(F(1, 28)=17.9 p=.0002).

1059

angry

neutral

happy

extremely
angry

extremely
happy

Figure 2. Top: Examples of face stimuli used in H&L
Experiment 2, with measured mouth area highlighted in
black. Bottom: Relative mouth area (black circles) and
standard errors (dotted lines) by emotional expression.

Predicting dRT from Mouth Area The finding of a
correlation between mouth area and emotional intensity
confirms that spatial magnitude could, in principle, explain
an Intensity Mapping. To test whether mouth area can, in fact,
explain H&L’s effects, we conducted a further analysis,
analogous to H&L’s, using mouth area instead of emotional
magnitude ratings to predict dRTs. For each participant and
image, dRTs (obtained from H&L) were regressed over
standardized mouth area (from our measurements) to produce
a spatial magnitude slope for each participant. The mean
slope differed significantly from zero (M=-10.14 ms/unit
area; t(45)=2.72, p=.009), suggesting an implicit mapping of
spatial magnitude (i.e. mouth size) onto left-right space (a
Spatial Magnitude Mapping). Moreover, when we controlled
for mouth area, emotional magnitude slopes no longer
differed from zero (M = -10.48 ms/unit intensity; t(45) =
1.40, p = .17); the Intensity Mapping disappeared. When we
controlled for emotional magnitude, the effect of mouth area
also no longer differed from zero (M = -3.31 ms/unit
intensity; t(45)=0.73, p=.47).
These findings show that the effects observed in H&L’s
Experiment 2 can be explained by the spatial magnitude of a
salient aspect of their stimuli. That is, participants may have
been spatializing emotional faces either according to their
relative emotional intensity or according to the relative size
of their mouths; the data cannot distinguish between these
two alternatives.

General Discussion
In three experiments, we investigated how people spatialize
different aspects of emotion. We sought to reconcile an
apparent contradiction between previous studies showing an
implicit left-right mapping of emotional valence (Casasanto,
2014, for review) with the results of a study positing an
implicit left-right mapping of emotional intensity (Holmes &
Lourenco, 2011). In Experiments 1 and 2, we tested whether
people can implicitly spatialize emotion according to either
valence or intensity, depending on the context. When judging
the emotional valence of words, participants reliably showed
the Valence Mapping typical of right-handers. By contrast,
when judging emotional intensity, participants showed no
evidence of an Intensity Mapping, inconsistent with the
findings of H&L. Experiment 3 provided a possible
explanation for this discrepancy. In H&L’s stimuli,
emotional intensity was confounded with spatial magnitude:
Faces expressing greater emotional intensity also had larger
mouths. Mouth area reliably predicted the pattern of RTs
reported by H&L, and controlling for mouth area eliminated
the effect of emotional intensity. Together, these experiments
(a) extend the evidence for an implicit lateral mapping of
emotional valence, (b) provide no evidence for the implicit
lateral mapping of emotional intensity posited by H&L, and
(c) provide an alternative explanation for the RT effects that
H&L interpreted as evidence for an Intensity Mapping.
Is there any evidence for an Intensity Mapping?
In light of our findings, what is the evidence that people
implicitly spatialize emotional intensity on a left-right

continuum? Currently, the evidence for this claim rests on a
paper by H&L, whose three experiments we address in turn.
In H&L’s Experiment 1, participants classified faces
whose emotional expressions varied from neutral to
extremely happy. As acknowledged by H&L, this experiment
cannot, in principle, distinguish between a Valence Mapping
and an Intensity Mapping, since both mappings make the
same predictions for positive emotions.
In H&L’s Experiment 2, the findings are consistent with an
Intensity Mapping and inconsistent with a Valence Mapping.
However, here we show that these findings are also consistent
with a Spatial Magnitude Mapping, in which smaller area (i.e.
mouth size) is associated with the left and larger area is
associated with the right (see our Experiment 3). To the
extent that participants were spatializing mouth size rather
than emotional intensity or valence, the results of H&L’s
Experiment 2 do not bear on the spatialization of any
dimension of emotion.
Although H&L interpreted the results of their third
experiment as evidence of an Intensity Mapping, the data do
not support this interpretation. Participants in H&L’s
Experiment 3 classified faces on either happiness (happy/not
happy) or anger (angry/not angry). The pattern of RTs
depended on the type of judgment participants made: those
who judged happiness associated the angriest faces with the
left and the happiest faces with the right; those who judged
anger showed the opposite mapping, associating the happiest
faces with the left and the angriest faces with the right.
Although H&L interpreted these two patterns as evidence
of the flexibility of an “emotional magnitude line,” both
patterns are inconsistent with any linear mapping of
emotional magnitude (i.e., intensity) onto left-right space.
Whereas an Intensity Mapping predicts that people should
associate the angriest and happiest faces with the same side
of space, participants in H&L’s Experiment 3 mapped
extremely happy and extremely angry faces onto opposite
sides of space. These results are, therefore, incompatible with
the proposed emotional magnitude line.
Instead, these findings may be readily explained by
polarity alignment (Proctor & Cho, 2006), also called
markedness (Clark 1969; Dolscheid & Casasanto, 2015;
Lakens, 2012; Lynott & Coventry, 2014). Like many other
analog continuums in language and mind, happiness and
anger are both bipolar (or marked) continuums. That is, they
consist of a +polar (or unmarked) endpoint (happy, angry)
and an opposing –polar (or marked) endpoint (unhappy, not
angry). Lateral space is also a bipolar continuum, where right
has +polarity and left has –polarity, at least for right-handers
(see Huber et al., 2014).
In polarity alignment effects, participants show faster RTs
when the poles of two continuums align than when they
misalign (see Clark, 1969; Proctor & Cho, 2006). This is
exactly the effect that H&L observed in their Experiment 3:
participants responded faster when the poles of the
designated emotion aligned with the poles of the lateralized
response (happy/angry: right; unhappy/not angry: left) than
when they misaligned (happy/angry: left; unhappy/not

1060

angry: right). The results of H&L’s Experiment 3, therefore,
provide no evidence for an Intensity Mapping, but rather
show what appears to be a classic polarity alignment effect
(Clark, 1969; Proctor & Cho, 2006).
In sum, none of the three experiments presented by H&L
provide any clear evidence for an Intensity Mapping
(although, in principle, future studies could reveal such a
mapping, in some contexts). Instead, previous results may
reflect emotional valence (in H&L’s Experiment 1), spatial
features of the stimuli (i.e., mouth size in H&L’s Experiment
2), and polarity alignment (in H&L’s Experiment 3).

Conclusions
In two experiments, we show that people implicitly map
emotional valence onto left-right space, but we find no spatial
mapping of emotional intensity. In a third experiment, we
provide an alternative explanation for previous data
interpreted as support for an Intensity Mapping. The idea of
an Intensity Mapping was motivated by the search for a
generalized magnitude system for representing multiple
prothetic domains (Holmes & Lourenco, 2011). The Valence
Mapping shown here provides no evidence for such a
generalized magnitude system because valence is not a
prothetic domain (e.g., “happy” is not more valence than
“sad”). Rather, the present results extend the evidence for the
broadly generalized tendency to spatialize our abstract
concepts, whether or not they are prothetic, according to the
specifics of our physical and social experiences.

Acknowledgments
Research supported by a James S. McDonnell Foundation Scholar
Award (#220020236) and NSF grant (BCS #125710) to DC. Thanks
to Wim Gevers and Katia Carbé for helpful discussions, to Katia
Carbé and Nikolai Maximay for help with data collection, to
Geoffrey Brookshire, Laura Staum Casasanto, Tom Gijssels, and
Ché Lucero for discussion of the analyses, and to Kevin Holmes and
Stella Lourenco for their collegiality and for sharing their data.

References
Blais, C., Jack, R. E., Scheepers, C., Fiset, D., & Caldara, R. (2008).
Culture shapes how we look at faces. PLoS One, 3(8).
Brunyé, T. T., Gardony, A., Mahoney, C. R., & Taylor, H. A.
(2012).
Body-specific
representations
of
spatial
location. Cognition, 123(2), 229-239.
Carbè & Gevers (2013). Investigating the spatial representation of
magnitude information and emotional valence concepts. Paper
presented at The 32nd European Workshop on Cognitive
Neuropsychology, Bressanone.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts: Good and
bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 138(3), 351-367.
Casasanto, D. (2014). Bodily relativity. In L. Shapiro
(Ed.), Routledge handbook of embodied cognition (pp. 108-117).
New York: Routledge.
Casasanto, D., & Chrysikou, E.G. (2011). When left is "right":
Motor fluency shapes abstract concepts. Psychological Science,
22(4), 419-422.
Casasanto, D., & Henetz, T. (2012). Handedness shapes children's
abstract concepts. Cognitive Science, 36, 359–372.

Casasanto, D., & Jasmin, K. (2010). Good and bad in the hands of
politicians: Spontaneous gestures during positive and negative
speech. PLoS ONE, 5(7).
Clark, H. H. (1969). Linguistic processes in deductive reasoning.
Psychological Review, 76(4), 387.
de la Fuente, J., Casasanto, D., Román, A., & Santiago, J.
(2015). Can culture influence body-specific associations between
space and valence? Cognitive Science, 39, 821-832.
de la Vega, I., De Filippis, M., Lachmair, M., Dudschig, C., & Kaup,
B. (2012). Emotional valence and physical space: limits of
interaction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 38(2), 375.
de la Vega, I., Dudschig, C., De Filippis, M., Lachmair, M., & Kaup,
B. (2013). Keep your hands crossed: The valence-by-left/right
interaction is related to hand, not side, in an incongruent hand–
response key assignment. Acta Psychologica, 142(2), 273-277.
Dolscheid, S., & Casasanto, D. (2015). Spatial congruity effects
reveal
metaphorical
thinking,
not
polarity
correspondence. Frontiers in Psychology, 6(1836), 1-11.
Holmes, K. J., & Lourenco, S. F. (2011). Common spatial
organization of number and emotional expression: A mental
magnitude line. Brain and Cognition, 77(2), 315-323.
Huber, S., Klein, E., Graf, M., Nuerk, H. C., Moeller, K., &
Willmes, K. (2014). Embodied markedness of parity? Examining
handedness effects on parity judgments. Psychological Research,
1-15.
Jack, R. E., Blais, C., Scheepers, C., Schyns, P. G., & Caldara, R.
(2009). Cultural confusions show that facial expressions are not
universal. Current Biology, 19(18), 1543-1548.
Jack, R. E., Caldara, R., & Schyns, P. G. (2012). Internal
representations reveal cultural diversity in expectations of facial
expressions of emotion. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 141(1), 19.
Koda, T., & Ruttkay, Z. (2014). Eloquence of eyes and mouth of
virtual agents: cultural study of facial expression perception. AI
& Society, 1-8.
Kong, F. (2013). Space–valence associations depend on
handedness: evidence from a bimanual output task. Psychological
Research, 77(6), 773-779.
Lakens, D. (2012). Polarity correspondence in metaphor congruency
effects: structural overlap predicts categorization times for
bipolar concepts presented in vertical space. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology:
Learning,
Memory,
and
Cognition, 38(3), 726.
Lynott, D., & Coventry, K. (2014). On the ups and downs of
emotion: testing between conceptual-metaphor and polarity
accounts
of
emotional
valence–spatial
location
interactions. Psychonomic Bull. & Review, 21(1), 218-226.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 12(6), 237-241.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity correspondence: A
general principle for performance of speeded binary classification
tasks. Psychological Bulletin, 132(3), 416.
Ren, P., Nicholls, M. E., Ma, Y. Y., & Chen, L. (2011). Size matters:
non-numerical magnitude affects the spatial coding of
response. PLoS One, 6(8), e23553.
Tottenham, N., et al. (2009). The NimStim set of facial expressions:
judgments from untrained research participants. Psychiatry
research, 168(3), 242-249.
Yuki, M., Maddux, W. W., & Masuda, T. (2007). Are the windows
to the soul the same in the East and West? Cultural differences in
using the eyes and mouth as cues to recognize emotions in Japan
and the United States. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 43(2), 303-311.

1061

