Spatial Meaning is Retained in Emotion Metaphors: Some Evidence from Spanish
César Riaño (ce.riano557@uniandes.edu.co)
Department of Psychology, Universidad de los Andes
Bogotá, Colombia

Florencia Reali (f.reali96@uniandes.edu.co)
Department of Psychology, Universidad de los Andes
Cra 1a # 18a-12, Bogotá, Colombia
Centro de Investigación Básica en Psicología (CIBPSI) UdelaR,
Montevideo, Uruguay.
relationships – should be involved in affective evaluation
(e.g., Crawford, Margolis, Drake & Murphy, 2006; Margolis
& Crawford, 2008).
Evidence of the perceptual nature of emotion concepts has
been recently provided. For example, people represent anger
as being red (Fetterman, Robinson & Meier, 2012). Others
have shown that positive and negative valence of emotion are
associated to spatial metaphors (Crawford et al, 2006;
Houser, Carter & Meier, 2009; Margolis & Crawford, 2008;
Reali & Arciniegas, 2015), including up and down
representations (Richardson, Spivey, Barsalou & McRae,
2003).
In this paper we assess the proposal that when emotion is
metaphorically described in terms of a spatial relation
between a located entity and a reference ground, the way
people perceive certain aspects of the emotion – namely,
control – depends on whether the emotion is described as a
located entity in the person´s body (e.g., real happiness is in
her) or, alternatively, as the ground in which the person´s
body stands (she´s in a state of real happiness).

Abstract
Previous work has shown that the abstract use of the prepositions in
and on retains spatial meaning, such as containment and support that
includes the control relationship between a located object (the
figure) and a reference object (the ground). We extend these ideas
to the case of metaphorical descriptions of emotion in Spanish –
some of them featuring the emotion as a located entity in the
person´s body, and some of them featuring emotion as the ground in
which the person´s body stands. Two rating experiments show that
people judge emotions as more “controllable” when they are
described as located entities (the figure) than when they are
described as grounds.
Keywords: conceptual metaphors; emotion; spatial language;
emotion; Spanish.

Introduction
Linguistic framing influences a range of cognitive domains
such as time perception (Casasanto, 2010), social cognition
(Landau, Meier & Keefer, 2010), memory (Fausey &
Boroditsky, 2010; Fausey & Boroditsky, 2011), problem
solving (Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011) and political
attitudes (Landau, Sullivan & Greenberg, 2010; Matlock,
2012; Matlock et al., 2012). For example, the wording of
political messages affects political attitudes (Fausey &
Matlock, 2012) and the metaphorical framing of social
concepts such as crime, affects people´s opinion about how
to solve the problem (Fausey & Boroditsky, 2011). Emotion
concepts are no exception: metaphorical framing has been
shown to shape the way we evaluate them (e.g., Reali &
Arciniegas, 2015; Richardson, Spivey, Barsalou & McRae,
2003).
We begin from the assumption that emotions are abstract
concepts that are endowed with a complex conceptual
structure grounded on basic perceptual schemas (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980). Certain schemas are embodied on
physiological or physical experience – such as temperature
rise or increased heart beat – providing grounding for the
conceptual representation of emotion (e.g., Kövecses, 2010;
Lakoff, 1987).
Linking emotions to image-like schemas provides a useful
scaffolding for understanding them. If abstract emotions are
grounded on concrete domains then their semantic structure
will be aligned with the concrete features of perceptual
schemas. For example, if emotions were represented in
spatial terms, then spatial features – such as geometrical

Spatial Meaning in Abstract Use of Prepositions
Certain linguistic expressions such as the prepositions in and
on in English are used to establish spatial relationships
between concrete entities (e.g., the fly is on/in the tailor´s
hand). The prepositions in and on correspond to the
preposition en in Spanish (e.g., la mosca está en la mano del
sastre), which will be our case study here.
Abstract uses of prepositions are metaphorical because
they go beyond the words´ concrete, literal meaning. Recent
work has contributed to the understanding of abstract
extensions of prepositions and how they relate to spatial
meaning (e.g., Boers, 1996; Jamrosik & Gentner, 2015),
including the use of prepositions in ontological metaphors in
which events and other abstract notions are conceived as
containers (e.g., she´s in a state of fury) (e.g., Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980).
A number of studies have shown that the literal use of in
and on to describe spatial events determines functional
relations between the figure (e.g., the fly) and the ground
(e.g., the tailor´s hand) (e.g., Coventry & Garrod, 2004; Feist
& Gentner, 2003; Garrod et al., 1999).
The terms figure and ground (e.g., Talmy, 1983) are used
to describe participants in the relationship named by the in

426

and on prepositions in English and the proposition en in
Spanish. For example, the fly (the located entity, the figure)
is in the soup (the ground).
Crucially, the use of the prepositions in and on is based on
the principle of control of the figure by the ground. The basic
idea is that functional relations, such as containment, entail
inferences beyond geometric relations: if a figure is contained
by a ground it can be inferred that if the ground moves, the
figure moves with it (Garrod & Sanford, 1989; Jamrozik &
Gentner, 2015). In English, because the use of in denotes
geometric inclusion or containment, it involves greater
ground control than does on (Coventry & Garrod, 2004;
Garrod, et al, 1999).
Garrod and Sanford (1989) and, more recently, Jamrozik
and Gentner (2015) proposed that the functional relations of
containment and support might be extended to non-spatial
(abstract) uses of in and on (e.g., she´s in a risky situation).
They proposed that the metaphorical use of in and on helps
establish the relative degree of control between an abstract
object (the figure) and an abstract reference object (the
ground).
A natural proposal that follows from these studies is that
when the prepositions in and on are used to describe emotions
certain control relations may be inferred. Garrod and Sanford
(1989) even suggested that metaphorical framing of emotion
(e.g., she´s in a bad mood), follows the same pattern. To our
knowledge, however, this proposal has not been empirically
tested for the case of emotion. The goal of this study is to
assess empirically if spatial meaning – namely, the control
relationship between the figure and the ground – is retained
when metaphorical expressions of emotion are used.

(you must/should not fall into despair) (Reali & Arciniegas,
2015, p. 28). In this example, “despair” corresponds to the
ground and “you” corresponds to the figure. Conversely,
consider “Gracián corrió hacia la iglesia totalmente
enloquecido lleno de odio” (Gracián ran towards the church
totally insane, full of hate) (Reali & Arciniegas, 2015, p. 30).
In this example hate corresponds to the entity (the figure)
inside Gracián (the ground).

Figure 1. Emotions as located objects (the figure) in a
ground (the person´s body) (left) and emotions as places
(the ground) in which the person´s body (the figure) stands
(right).
Expressions of this kind are common in Spanish, providing
a nice case study to test the proposal that concrete properties
of physical ground-figure settings – namely the control
relationship between the figure and the ground– is preserved
in the semantic structure of emotion. That is precisely the aim
of this paper.
The prediction to be tested is the following: if spatial
meaning is retained in metaphors of emotion, then when
emotion is described as a located entity contained in the
person´s body, a higher perception of emotion controllability
should be found than when emotion is described as a ground
in which the person´s body stands. Two questionnaire
experiments were conducted to assess this hypothesis. To
preview, the results show that metaphorical forms in which
emotion is described as the located figure is associated to
higher ratings of controllability.

Figure/Ground Relation in Metaphors of Emotion
The studies described above suggest that the control
relationship between the figure and the ground are mapped
from concrete to abstract domains. In this paper we use the
Spanish preposition en to frame emotion metaphorically
either as a located entity (the figure) in a ground (the body of
the person´s experiencing the emotion) vs. as a place (the
ground) containing a located object (the person´s body). We
assess whether metaphor framing affects how controllable
people judge emotion to be.
Lakoff (1987) proposed that emotions are grounded on
primary metaphors such as THE BODY IS A CONTAINER FOR
EMOTIONS and EMOTIONS ARE BOUNDED SPACES. The first
metaphor conveys emotions as located entities (the figure) in
a container (the person´s body), while the second conveys
emotions as grounds in which the person stands. Figure 1
depicts a sketch of possible conceptual schemas associated
with these two primary metaphors. Because of the concrete
nature of spatial schemas, these are good metaphor examples
to study the effect of image-like representations on the
conceptualization of emotion.
Corpus analyses have shown that linguistic instantiations
of these metaphors are quite common in Spanish (e.g., Reali
& Arciniegas, 2015; Reali, Soriano & Rodriguez, in press).
Consider the expression “no has de caer en la desesperación”

Study 1
Study 1 was designed to explore whether the instantiations of
emotion-as-ground vs. emotion-as-figure metaphors
influence people’s judgments of emotion control. The
experiment was inspired by Jamrozik & Gentner (2015).
Participants saw sentences describing situations involving a
person experiencing a certain emotion as well as a cause or
context. They were asked to rate the degree of control they
thought the person had over the emotion. The metaphorical
framing of emotion was manipulated so that emotion was
described as the located figure (emotion-as-figure condition)
or as the ground (emotion-as-ground condition).

427

used in the experimental items and had a different (not
metaphorical) structure as the twelve experimental items. The
questionnaire was presented on paper and the data was
annotated manually.

Method
Participants A hundred and eight undergraduate students
from Universidad de los Andes (Bogotá, Colombia)
volunteered to participate in this Study or received extra
course credits in exchange of their participation. All
participants were 18 years-old or older and declared that their
native language was Spanish.

Results of Study 1
One of the participants was removed from the sample
because he did not complete the questionnaire. This was a
within subject design (each subject was exposed to both
conditions) and conditions were counterbalanced across
items. Each participant was exposed to one version of the
item only. Ratings of perceived control were higher in the
emotion-as-figure condition (M = 3.86; SD= .86) than in the
emotion-as-ground condition (M = 3.68; SD=.85), and the
difference was significant both by subjects (two-tailed t(107)
= 2.36; p=.02) and by items (two tailed t(11) = 2.33; p =.04).
As predicted, the results of Study 1 suggest that
participants rated emotions as more controllable when they
are described as figures in grounds compared to when they
are described as grounds holding figures.

Materials For both experiments the stimuli consisted of
twelve sentence items gathered in one questionnaire. Each
participant was presented with one of two version of each
item, which consisted on a description of a fake situation of
a person experiencing an emotion as well as a context for it.
The two versions of each item differed only in the choice of
metaphorical framing. In one condition, the emotion was
framed as a located entity (the figure) in the human body (the
ground), and in the second condition it was described as the
place (the ground) in which the human body (the figure) is
located. Each item included one of the following emotions:
alegría (joy), ansiedad (anxiety), enamoramiento
(infatuation), esperanza (hope), felicidad (happiness), furia
(fury), ira (anger), locura (madness), miedo (fear), serenidad
(serenity), tristeza (sadness), verguenza (shame). Example
(1) illustrates a sentence item in the two conditions (a full list
is included in the appendix).
(1)
a. La oscuridad del monte se acentuaba por la falta
de luz de luna; había en Elena un gran miedo. (tr. The
darkness in the woods was accentuated by the lack of
moonlight; there was great fear in Elena)
b. La oscuridad del monte se acentuaba por la falta
de luz de luna; Elena se encontraba en un estado de gran
miedo. (tr. The darkness in the woods was accentuated by the
lack of moonlight; Elena was in a state of great fear)

Study 2
A possible caveat of Study 1 is that emotion valence was
not manipulated in a systematic manner. It could be the case
that evaluation of emotion controllability differs significantly
depending on whether the emotion is positive or negative in
valence. Moreover, Study 1 materials included 5 positive
emotions and 7 negative emotions, thus hindering fair
comparisons between ratings per valence. Study 2 was
designed to address this problem: intended as an improved
replication of Study 1, the set of materials included 12
positive and 12 negative emotions. Additionally, items were
rated for naturalness in an independent control experiment.
Study 2 followed a 2x2 design; Factor 1 Metaphor Framing
(emotion-as-figure/ emotion-as-ground) and Factor 2
Valence of Emotion (positive/negative). Valence of Emotion
was varied between subjects, and Metaphor Framing was
varied within subjects as in Study 1.

Sentence 1a corresponds to the first condition (emotion-asfigure condition) while sentence 1b corresponds to the second
condition (emotion-as-ground condition).

Method

Procedure Two questionnaire lists with twelve experimental
items were created. Questionnaires were randomized across
participants and the two conditions were counterbalanced
across lists so that each participant only saw one version of
each item. The order of items were pseudo-randomized
across participants to avoid order effects.
Participants were asked to rate the situation described in
each sentence on a scale from 1 to 7. They were instructed to
judge, for each situation described, the degree of control the
person had on the emotion. The scale was defined so that 1
indicated “the person has very little control over their
emotion” and 7 “the person has total control over their
emotion”. The questionnaire began with a page of
instructions asking participants to make their judgments
based on first impressions without reading each sentence
more than once. In the instructions, participants were given
two practice items. The practice included two emotions not

Participants A hundred and twenty four undergraduate
students from Universidad de los Andes (Bogotá, Colombia)
volunteered to participate in this study or received extra
course credits in exchange of their participation. All
participants were 18 years-old or older and declared that their
native language was Spanish.
Materials The stimuli consisted of twelve sentences each
describing a person experiencing a negative emotion and
twelve sentences describing a person experiencing a positive
emotion. Sentences describing positive and negative
emotions were gathered in two different questionnaires. Each
participant was presented with one of these two
questionnaires. As in Study 1, there were two versions of
each sentence, varying on the choice of metaphorical
framing. In one condition, the emotion was framed as a

428

Emotion was also significant (F (1,121) = 68.1; p <.0001; η2
= .36). However, the interaction between Valence of Emotion
and Metaphor Framing was not significant (F<.5; p=.9).

located figure in a container (the person´s body), while in the
second condition it was metaphorically described as a ground
in which the person is. The twelve negative emotions were:
angustia (anguish), ansiedad (anxiety), decepción
(disappointment), desconsuelo (desolation), desesperanza
(hopelessness), entusiasmo (enthusiam), furia (fury), ira
(anger), locura (madness), miedo (fear), resignación
(abandonment), tristeza (sadness) verguenza (shame). The
twelve positive emotions were the following: alegría (joy),
alivio (relief), enamoramiento (infatuation), esperanza
(hope), exaltación (excitation), felicidad (happiness), júbilo
(rejoice), orgullo (pride), satisfacción (satisfaction),
serenidad (serenity), tranquilidad (tranquility). A full list of
items is included in the appendix.
Additionally, Study 2 sentence items were controlled for
naturalness of sentences in the two metaphor conditions using
an independent sample. We collected naturalness ratings of
the twenty four sentences in a separate test. One hundred and
twelve participants (who did not participate in the
experimental task) rated the naturalness of the 24
experimental sentences. Each participant saw one version of
each sentence and conditions were counterbalanced across
subjects. Participants rated each sentence’s naturalness on a
scale from 1 (not at all natural) to 7 (extremely natural). The
sentences did not differ in their naturalness (M (emotion-asfigure) = 4.70, SD = 1.27, M (emotion-as-ground) = 4.74, SD =
1.28, t(111) = 0.83, p = .40).

Control Rating

5
4
3
2

Negative emotions

emotion-figure

Positive emotions

emotion-ground

Taken together, the results of Study 1 and Study 2 suggest
that participants rate emotions as more controllable when
they are described as figures in grounds than when they are
described as grounds. Additionally, people rate positive
emotions as more controllable than negative, but this effect
seems to be independent of the metaphorical mapping on
figure/ground settings.

Discussion
The data suggests that the metaphorical framing of emotions
affects the participants´ evaluation of degree of control. This
is consistent with the proposal that the spatial relationships in
figure/ground schemas are retained in abstract
representations of emotion: when emotion is described as a
located entity in the human body, the emotion is rated as more
controllable.
One implication of these findings is related to the effect of
the abstract use of prepositions on semantic structure. In line
with studies of the abstract use of in and on in English (e.g.,
Jamrazik & Gentner, 2015), our data provides empirical
evidence that the metaphorical use of en in Spanish preserves
spatial meaning of functional relations such as control.
More generally, the data provides support to the view that
perceptual schemas underlie the abstract concepts of
emotion. This is consistent with accumulating work linking
emotions to perceptual, image-like schemas (e.g., Crawford,
Margolis, Drake & Murphy, 2006; Margolis & Crawford,
2008), adding to the evidence of the perceptual nature of
emotion representation (Crawford et al, 2006; Fetterman,
Robinson & Meier, 2012; Houser, Carter & Meier, 2009;
Margolis & Crawford, 2008; Reali & Arciniegas, 2015;
Richardson, Spivey, Barsalou & McRae, 2003).
Finally, this work supports the view that thought is shaped
by language. It adds to the many papers showing that
linguistic framing influences a range of cognitive domains
from perception to social cognition (e.g., Landau, Meier &
Keefer, 2010; Fausey & Boroditsky, 2010; Fausey &
Boroditsky, 2011; Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011; Matlock,
2012).
In sum, different aspects of spatial meaning embedded in
figure-ground relationships seem to be retained in the way

Procedure Four questionnaire lists with twelve experimental
items were created, two containing sentences featuring
positive emotion and two containing sentences featuring
negative emotions. Questionnaires were randomized across
participants and the two conditions were counterbalanced
across lists so that each participant only saw one version of
each item. As in Study 1, the order of items were pseudorandomized across participants to avoid order effects. Other
aspects of the procedure and instructions were the same as in
Study 1.

Results of Study 2
One of the participants was removed from the sample because
he did not complete the questionnaire. As in Study 1,
Metaphor Framing was a within-subject condition. Emotion
valence was a between subject condition since each
participant was exposed to one questionnaire containing
either positive or negative emotions.
Results are shown in Figure 2. The main finding of Study
1 was replicated: ratings of perceived control over emotions
were higher in the emotion-as-figure condition (M=4.33;
SD=1.08) than in the emotion-as-ground condition (M= 4.15;
SD=1.05). Also, ratings were higher for positive emotion
(emotion-as-figure, M= 4.94; SD=0.93; emotion-as-ground,
M=4.76; 0.94) than negative emotions (emotion-as-figure,
M= 3.72; SD=0.87; emotion-as-ground, M=3.53; 0.80). A
repeated measures ANOVA revealed that the effect of
Metaphor-Framing condition was significant (F (1,121) =
8.97; p = 0.003; η2= .07) and that the effect of Valence of

429

concepts of emotion are construed.

Kövecses, Z. (2010). Metaphor and culture. Acta Univesitatis
Sapientiae Philologica, 2, 197–220.

Acknowledgments
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire and dangerous things.
Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
Landau, M. J., Meier, B., & Keefer, L. (2010). A metaphorenriched social cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 136,
1045–1067.
Landau, M.J., Sullivan, D., & Greenberg, J. (2009). Evidence
that self-relevant motivations and metaphoric framing
interact to influence political and social issues.
Psychological Science, 20, 1421–1427.
Lleras, M., Reali, F. & Alviar, C (2014). The metaphors we
speak with affect how we think about time and space. In
Bello P., Guarini, M., McShane M. & Scassellati B. (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1258-1264). Austin TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Margolis, S.O., & Crawford, L.E. (2008). Event valence and
spatial metaphors of time. Cognition & Emotion, 22, 1401–
1414.
Matlock, T. (2012). Framing political messages with
grammar and metaphor. American Scientist, 100, 478–483.
Matlock, T., Sparks, D., Matthews, J. L., Hunter, J., &
Huette, S. (2012). Smashing new results on aspectual
framing: How people describe car accidents. Studies in
Language, 36, 700–721.
Reali, F. & Arciniegas, C. (2015). Metaphorical
conceptualization of emotion in Spanish: Two studies on
the role of framing. Metaphor and Social World, 5(1), 2042.
Reali, F., Soriano, T., & Rodríguez, D. (in press). How we
think about depression: The role of metaphorical framing.
To appear in Revista Latinoamericana de Psicología.
Richardson, D. C., Spivey, M. J., Barsalou, L. W., & McRae,
K. (2003). Spatial representations activated during realtime comprehension of verbs. Cognitive Science, 27, 767–
780.
Thibodeau, P., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we think
with: the role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS ONE 6(2):
e16782.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. Pick
& L. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: Theory,
research, and application. New York: Plenum Press.

We thank Debora Shambo as well as other members from the
Language and Cognition lab at Universidad de los Andes for
their help on the data recollection process. This research was
funded by the Fondo de Apoyo para Profesores Asistentes
(FAPA), Vicerrectoría de Investigaciones, Universidad de
Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.

References
Boers, F. (1996). Spatial prepositions and metaphor: A
cognitive semantic journey along the up-down and the
front-back dimensions. Tubingen, Germany: Gunter Narr
Verlag.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphorical structuring:
understanding special metaphors. Cognition, 75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body and
mind in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13(2),
185-189.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for thinking. In B. Bergen, V.
Evans & J. Zinken (Eds.), Language, cognition and space:
State of the art and new directions (pp. 453–461). London:
Equinox.
Crawford, L. E., Margolis, S. M., Drake, J. T., & Murphy, M.
E. (2006). Affect biases memory of location: Evidence for
spatial representation of affect. Cognition & Emotion, 20,
1153–1169.
Fausey, C. M., & Boroditsky, L. (2011).Who dunnit? Crosslinguistic
differences
in
eye-witness
memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 150–157.
Fausey, C. M., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Subtle linguistic
cues influence perceived blame and financial liability.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(5), 644–650.
Fausey, C. M., & Matlock, T. (2011). Can grammar win
elections? Political Psychology, 32, 563–574.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (2003). Factors involved in the use
of in and on. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsh (Eds.),
Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual meeting of the
cognitive science society (pp. 390–395). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Fetterman, A.K., Robinson, M.D., & Meier, B.P. (2012).
Anger as “seeing red”: Evidence for a perceptual
association. Cognition & Emotion, 26, 1445–1458.
Gentner, D. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Whither Whorf.
In D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds), Language in
mind: Advances in the study of language and thought.
Cambrige, MA: MIT Press.
Hauser, D. J., Carter, M. S., & Meier, B. P. (2009). Mellow
Monday and furious Friday: The approach-related link
between anger and time representation. Cognition &
Emotion, 23, 1166–1180.
Jamrozik, A. & Gentner, D. (2015). Well-hidden regularities:
Abstract uses of in and on retain an aspect of their spatial
meaning. Cognitive Science, 39, 1881-1911.

APPENDIX
Experimental sentences used in Study 2. Those marked
with a star (*) are the items used in Study 1.
emotion-as-ground condition:
X se encontraba en un estado de gran Y
X (person) was in a state of great Y (emotion)
emotion-as-figure condition:
Había un gran Y en X
There was great Y (emotion) in X (person)

430

4. Había sido víctima de un robo colosal; Roberto se
encontraba en un estado de gran desesperanza/ había en
Roberto
una
gran
desesperanza.
X=Roberto,
Y=desesperanza (hopelessness)
5. Los resultados de sus exámenes de sangre no estaban
listos; Lucía se encontraba en un estado de gran angustia/
había en Lucía una gran angustia. X=Lucía, Y=angustia
(anguish)
*6. Faltaban cinco minutos para que salieran a luz los
resultados del examen; Camilo se encontraba en un estado de
gran ansiedad/ había en Camilo una gran ansiedad.
X=Camilo, Y=ansiedad (anxiety)
*7. La muerte de su perro fue inesperada; Salomé se
encontraba en un estado de gran tristeza/ había en Salomé
una gran tristeza. X=Salomé, Y=tristeza (sadness)
8. Su novia mostraba desinterés frente a un posible futuro
juntos; Jaime se encontraba en un estado de gran decepción/
había en Jaime una gran decepción. X=Jaime, Y=decepción
(disappointment)
9. La falta de soluciones a sus problemas era evidente;
Rocío se encontraba en un estado de gran resignación/ había
en Rocío una gran resignación (abandonment).
*10. La infidelidad de su esposa salió a la luz; Marcos se
encontraba en un estado de gran furia/ había en Marcos una
gran furia. X=Marcos, Y=furia (fury)
*11. El fallo de la corte había sido injusto; Ximena se
encontraba en un estado de gran ira/ había en Ximena una
gran ira. X=Ximena, Y=ira (anger)
12. Sus enemigos lograron acabar con su compañía; Martín
se encontraba en un estado de gran desconsuelo/ había en
Martín un gran desconsuelo. X=Martín, Y=desconsuelo
(desolation)

Positive valence items
1. Las notas finales reflejaron su esfuerzo; María se
encontraba en un estado de gran satisfacción/ había en María
una gran satisfacción. X = María, Y= satisfacción
(satisfaction)
2. La policía recuperó la mayoría de sus pertenencias;
Alison se encontraba en un estado de gran alivio/ había en
Alison un gran alivio. X = Alison, Y= alivio (relief)
3. Se acercaba su fiesta de cumpleaños por fin; Freddy se
encontraba en un estado de gran exaltación/ había en Freddy
una gran exaltación. X = Freddy, Y= exaltación (excitement)
*4. Llegaron buenas noticias por fin; Malena se encontraba
en un estado de gran alegría/ había en Malena una gran
alegría. X = Malena, Y= alegría (joy)
*5. Finalmente se confirmó el embarazo; Solange se
encontraba en un estado de gran felicidad/ había en Solange
una gran felicidad. X = Solange, Y= happiness (felicidad)
6. Su buen desempeño en la competencia rindió frutos;
Mateo se encontraba en un estado de gran orgullo/ había en
Mateo un gran orgullo. X = Mateo, Y= orgullo (pride)
7. Su difícil situación económica finalmente se solucionó;
Gabriel se encontraba en un estado de gran tranquilidad/
había en Gabriel una gran tranquilidad. X = Gabriel, Y=
tranquilidad (tranquility)
*8. Eran dos almas gemelas; Bernardo se encontraba en un
estado de gran enamoramiento/ había en Bernardo un gran
enamoramiento. X = Bernardo, Y= enamoramiento
(infatuation)
*9. No se rendía frente a las circunstancias adversas;
Selena se encontraba en un estado de gran esperanza/ había
en Selena una gran esperanza. X = Selena, Y= esperanza
(hope)
10. Se acercaban las vacaciones en la costa; Julián se
encontraba en un estado de gran entusiasmo/ había en Julián
un gran entusiasmo. X = Julián, Y= entusiasmo (enthusiasm)
11. Su hijo mayor le contó que se había comprometido;
Ximena se encontraba en un estado de gran júbilo/ había en
Ximena un gran júbilo. X = Ximena, Y= júbilo (rejoice)
*12. Tantos años de meditación valieron la pena; Ramiro
se encontraba en un estado de gran serenidad había en
Ramiro una gran serenidad. X = Ramiro, Y= serenidad
(serenity)
Negative valence items
*1. Al subir al estrado se tropezó y se cayó frente al
público; Alejandra se encontraba en un estado de gran
vergüenza/ había en Alejandra una gran vergüenza. X=
Alejandra, Y= vergüenza (shame)
*2. El delirio se comenzaba a manifestar en sus palabras;
José se encontraba en un estado de gran locura/ había en José
una gran locura. X=Alejandra, Y=locura (madness)
*3. La oscuridad del monte se acentuaba por la falta de luz
de luna; Elena se encontraba en un estado de gran miedo/
había en Elena un gran miedo. X= Elena, Y= miedo (fear)

431

