Stereotype-Based Intuitions: A Psycholinguistic Approach to Experimental
Philosophy’s ‘Sources Project’
Eugen Fischer (E.Fischer@uea.ac.uk)
School of Politics, Philosophy, Language and Communication Studies, University of East Anglia
Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK

Paul E. Engelhardt (p.engelhardt@uea.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of East Anglia
Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK

Abstract
Experimental philosophy’s ‘sources project’ seeks to develop
psychological explanations of philosophically relevant
intuitions which help us assess their evidentiary value. This
paper develops a psycholinguistic explanation of intuitions
prompted by brief philosophical case-descriptions. For proof
of concept, we target intuitions underlying a classic paradox
about perception (‘argument from hallucination’). We trace
them to stereotype-driven inferences automatically executed
in verb comprehension. We employ a forced-choice
plausibility-ranking task to show that contextually
inappropriate stereotypical inferences are made from less
salient uses of the verb “to see”. This yields a debunking
explanation which resolves the philosophical paradox.
Keywords: Experimental philosophy; Sources Project;
stereotype-driven inference; graded salience.

Introduction
Philosophical Research Context: This paper presents work
that pioneers the use of psycholinguistic methods in
experimental philosophy’s ‘Sources Project’. Experimental
philosophy is a currently much-discussed and potentially
transformative movement that imports methods from
psychology into philosophy (for reviews see, Alexander,
2012; Knobe & Nichols, 2014). Philosophers frequently
conduct thought experiments which revolve around the
consideration of hypothetical cases. Intuitive judgments
about such cases are elicited by verbal case-descriptions and
play key roles in philosophy: A ‘standard justificatory
procedure’ uses such intuitions as evidence for/against
philosophical theories (Bealer, 1996; Cath, in press); clashes
of intuitions with each other or background beliefs generate
influential philosophical paradoxes and problems (Fischer,
2011; Papineau, 2009). Experimental philosophers employ
surveys and experimental methods from psychology to
elicit, explain, or assess such intuitions.
The strand of the movement that currently attracts most
philosophical attention is the ‘Warrant Project’ (for a review
see, Stich & Tobia, 2015). This project seeks to assess the
evidentiary value of philosophically relevant intuitions and
philosophers’ warrant for accepting them. Up to now, the
project mainly employs questionnaire-based surveys to
study the sensitivity of intuitions to demographic parameters
like gender, age, personality type, or cultural or socio-

economic background (Weinberg et al., 2001), as well as
questionnaire-based experiments to investigate order and
framing effects (e.g., Petrinovich & O’Neill, 1996,
Weinberg et al., 2012). The standard approach has
experimental philosophers make inferences from such
sensitivity or effects to lack of evidentiary value. Many of
these inferences are philosophically problematic (for a
review see, Fischer & Collins, 2015), and various studies
have failed to replicate previous results about sensitivity to
demographic factors (e.g., Nagel et al., 2013;
Seyedsayamdost, 2015a,b). It is therefore timely to pursue
the philosophically crucial aims of the Warrant Project with
fresh approaches.
The most ambitious strand of the Warrant Project,
known as ‘Sources Project’ (Pust, 2012) or ‘cognitive
epistemology’ (Fischer et al., 2015), explores such
approaches: It seeks to develop and experimentally test
psychological explanations of intuitions that help us assess
their evidentiary value. One promising approach is to look
for explanations that trace intuitions back to largely
automatic cognitive processes that are generally reliable but
predictably engender cognitive illusions, under specific
circumstances. The most prominent line of such research
traces intuitive knowledge attributions back to a ‘mindreading’ capacity subject to specific biases (Alexander et al.,
2015; Gerken & Beebee, 2016; Turri, 2015).
Our research breaks new ground by examining whether
philosophically relevant intuitions are generated or
influenced by routine language processes, viz., by automatic
inference processes that routinely occur in text
comprehension and production. This approach seems
worthwhile for the many philosophical relevant intuitions
that are elicited by verbal descriptions of hypothetical cases.
Elsewhere (Fischer et al., 2015; Fischer & Engelhardt
2016), we have argued that the routine process of
stereotype-driven amplification (Levinson, 2000; cf. Garrett
& Harnish, 2007) is generally reliable but engenders
cognitive illusions, under specific vitiating circumstances.
This paper explores the role of this process in generating
intuitions at the root of influential philosophical paradoxes
about perception, known as ‘arguments from hallucination’.
We show that vitiating circumstances obtain in their
formulation. This finding debunks the intuitions and helps
resolve the paradoxes.

526

Philosophical Application: Together with ‘arguments
from illusion’, arguments from hallucination engender the
classic ‘problem of perception’ (Smith, 2002), which has
again become a focus of debate (Brewer, 2011; Crane, 2015;
Fish, 2009; Robinson, 2001). Both arguments lead to the
conclusion that when people use their five senses, they are
(directly) aware only of subjective perceptions or sensedata. The philosophical problem is that of reconciling this
conclusion with the common-sense conviction that we see
and otherwise perceive physical objects and public events.
Philosophers typically formulate arguments from
hallucination without world-knowledge about the
phenomenon, assume merely that it is possible that ‘one
‘perceives’ a physical object which is not there at all’ (Ayer,
1956/1990, pg. 90), and proceed from brief descriptions of
hypothetical cases. Analytic philosophers formulating the
argument typically distinguish between different senses of
perception-verbs like see: The relevant case-descriptions,
they explain, use these verbs in a purely ‘phenomenal’ sense
which serves merely to describe people’s experiences and
which lacks the existential and spatial implications see, etc.
ordinarily have. Here is a classic statement:
‘Let us take as an example Macbeth’s
visionary dagger: since we are concerned only
with what is possible, the fact that this episode
may be fictitious does not matter. There is an
obvious [ordinary] sense in which Macbeth
did not see the dagger; he did not see the
dagger for the sufficient reason that there was
no dagger there for him to see. There is
another [viz., phenomenal] sense, however, in
which it may quite properly be said that he did
see a dagger; to say that he saw a dagger is
quite a natural way of describing his
experience. But still not a real dagger; not a
physical object; not even the look of a physical
object, if looks are open to all to see. If we are
to say that he saw anything, it must have been
something that was accessible to him alone,
something that existed only so long as this
experience lasted; in short a sense-datum.’
(Ayer, 1956, pg. 90)
The second half of the argument then postulates that in this
possible scenario the subject’s experience is qualitatively
indistinguishable from the experience of seeing a physical
object; it assumes that qualitatively indistinguishable
experiences involve awareness of the same kind of object;
and it concludes that all cases of perception involve
awareness of sense-data. This second half has been widely
criticized (for a review see, Smith, 2002).
Already the argument’s first half, however, involves a
curious mistake: The verb see is explicitly used here in a
phenomenal sense: He saw a dagger is to mean ‘He had an
experience as of / like that of / seeing a dagger’. An
experience is being described by comparing it to that of
seeing a certain physical object. This does not require that
the object ‘seen’ be around, when the subject has the

experience thus described. So we can say that Macbeth saw
a physical dagger if his experience ‘is like that of seeing a
solid, physical dagger’ (rather than, say, like that of seeing a
strangely translucent dagger-image). The case-description
explicitly makes this postulate (Ayer 1956, pg. 90), and the
second half of the argument crucially depends upon it
(above). Of course, only Macbeth ‘sees’ the dagger at this
point, and he ‘sees’ it only in the phenomenal sense. But
what he ‘sees’ in this sense is still ‘a real dagger’ – e.g., the
very dagger now sticking in the king’s corpse next door.
What is ‘special’ is the sense in which the argument uses the
verb see, but not the object ‘seen’. So why did generations
of competent philosophers (e.g., Price 1932, pg. 28-9; Ayer
1956, pg. 90; Smith 2002, pg. 194-5), including
philosophers who stress that the use of see and its cognates
is special (viz., phenomenal), conclude that the object seen
is special (namely, non-physical)?
One key factor, we submit, is a spontaneous inference
from ‘Macbeth sees a dagger’ to ‘there is something for
Macbeth to see in his vicinity, before his eyes’. This
Intuition (I) has thinkers take for granted that the
‘something’ must be around for Macbeth to see, disregard
that Macbeth is (in the phenomenal sense) aware of a real
dagger (which currently is not in his physical vicinity), and
think that the only way of avoiding the ‘preposterous …
claim that a hallucinating person is aware of nothing
whatever’ (Smith, 2002, 195) is to ‘recognize a non-normal
object of awareness’ (ibid.), which is in the subject’s range
of vision, before his eyes: Thinking in terms of an intuitive
dichotomy between external and internal perception
(introspection), proponents of the argument immediately
conclude that the thing seen must be before the subject’s
inner eye, in his mind. I.e.: We submit the argument rests on
intuition (I), and (I), in turn, on inappropriate spatial
inferences from the phenomenal use of see.
Psycholinguistic explanation: Both nouns (Hare et al.,
2009) and verbs (Ferretti et al., 2001; Harmon-Vukic et al.,
2009) are associated with stereotypes. Verbs can be
associated with typical features of events, agents, and
patients, which jointly form structured stereotypes (a.k.a.
‘generalized situation schemas’). E.g., manipulators are
typically cunning and shrewd, and their victims naïve and
gullible, so the verb manipulate is associated with ‘cunning’
and ‘shrewdness’ as agent-properties, and ‘naiveté’ and
‘gullibility’ as patient-properties. Such associations guide
spontaneous inferences from those expressions. Within a
neo-Gricean framework, their interplay with integration
processes (see below) is captured by the I-heuristic
(Levinson, 2000; cf. Garrett & Harnish, 2007): In the
absence of explicit indications to the contrary, infer that
situations talked about conform to stereotypes associated
with the nouns and verbs used!
Stereotypical inferences are supported by automatic
activation processes in semantic memory (McRae & Jones,
2013). According to the well-supported graded salience
hypothesis (Fein et al., 2015; Giora, 2003), a linguistic
stimulus activates all semantic and stereotypical features

527

associated with the expression, in any of its uses or senses.
The speed and strength of initial activation depends upon
the ‘salience’ of the sense or use. This is a function of
familiarity, conventionality, frequency, and prototypicality.
Features associated with the expression’s most salient use
are activated regardless of context. E.g., the ambiguous
stimulus mint activates the probe ‘candy’ rapidly and
strongly, even where it is clearly used in a less frequent
sense (prime: All buildings collapsed except the mint)
(Simpson & Burgess, 1985; Till et al., 1988). This facilitates
contextually inappropriate inferences from less salient uses
of words. Such inferences need not go through, since
processes including reinforcement and decay (Oden &
Spira, 1983), and suppression (Faust & Gernsbacher 1996)
mitigate initial preferential activation of contextually
inappropriate stereotypical associates, namely, in the light
of contextual cues, explicit indications of deviation from
relevant stereotypes, and explicit marking of less salient
uses (Givoni et al., 2013). Where one use is very much more
salient than another, and the stereotypical association with
certain features particularly strong, inappropriate
stereotypical inferences may, however, go through, even in
the face of explicit indications to the contrary (Giora 2003).
We hypothesize that this happens in the argument from
hallucination. The verb see is used in at least three senses:
an ordinary, literal, visual sense (Bob saw the builders fixing
the road), a metaphorical, epistemic sense (Jane saw Joe’s
point), and an extended phenomenal sense (Hitting his head,
Jack saw stars). According to our first hypothesis,
H1
The literal, visual sense of see is much more
salient than the metaphorical, epistemic sense;
this, in turn, is much more salient than the
phenomenal sense.
This non-salient sense is employed in the casedescriptions that serve as first premises of the argument
from hallucination. We hypothesize further that proponents
of the argument then make contextually inappropriate
stereotype-driven inferences from those premises: We
assume that the most salient visual sense of see has a strong
stereotypical association with spatial patient-properties: S
sees X is strongly associated with ‘X is in front of S’ and ‘X
is before S’s eyes’ (directional implications) as well as with
‘X is around (S) to be seen’ and ‘X is within S’s range of
vision’ (proximity implications). On this basis we
hypothesize that
H2
Competent speakers infer spatial patientproperties stereotypically associated with the
visual sense of see also from less salient
epistemic and phenomenal uses.
Such a stereotypical inference, we submit, leads
proponents of the argument from hallucination from such
initial premises as ‘When hallucinating, Macbeth sees a
dagger’ to the intuitive judgment (I) that there is a dagger
around for Macbeth to see, before his eyes (see above). H1
and H2 could jointly explain the intuition (I) we identified as
the intuitive source of the argument from hallucination.

In following up H1, we bear in mind that salience is a
function of familiarity, conventionality, frequency, and
prototypicality. We think it unlikely that the visual and
epistemic uses of see will attract different familiarity- or
conventionality-ratings, and suggest salience differences are
due to differences in frequency and prototypicality. A
corpus study to establish frequency is still ongoing. First
evidence for prototypicality differences is provided by a
production study. 13 participants were asked to provide up
to 10 written completions of 4 sentence stems containing
either see or aware (e.g. Jane sees____; Bob saw____). To
discourage mono-topical response strategies, participants
were instructed to ‘try to give varied responses’. We coded
responses as either perceptual (e.g. the handsome American)
or non-perceptual (e.g. fresh opportunities). Results showed
that completions of see were 94% perceptual use (by
contrast, 51% for aware). This suggests that visual cases of
‘seeing’ are by far the most prototypical of this category,
and that the literal, visual sense of see is by far the most
salient. Non-perceptual completions involved mainly
epistemic uses. Phenomenal uses were absent. This is
consistent with H1. We then used a forced-choice
plausibility-ranking task to examine H2 and, specifically,
explore spatial (directional and proximal) inferences from
metaphorical/epistemic uses of see.

Methods
Participants
Fifty undergraduate psychology students from the
University of East Anglia were recruited through the
participant pool and received course credit for participating.

Materials
We administered a paper-and-pencil questionnaire that had
120 minimal pairs. There were 48 critical items and 72
fillers. Twenty-four critical items contrasted see and aware.
(Aware can be used in both perceptual and non-perceptual
contexts and lacks directional implications in either.) The
other 24 critical items contrasted see and think of. (Think of
lacks proximity implications in all uses). The see-aware
items consisted of single sentences, the see-think of items
consisted of pairs of sentences (see Tables 1 and 2).
Table 1: Example items for testing spatial inferences and
specifically, directional inferences (e.g. in front of).

Visual, Stereotype-Consistent
1a. Mona sees the drivers ahead of her in the queue.
1b. Mona is aware of the drivers ahead of her in the queue.
Visual, Stereotype-Inconsistent
2a. Ben sees the friend walking right behind him.
2b. Ben is aware of the friend walking right behind him.
Epistemic, Stereotype-Consistent
3a. Emma sees the challenges facing her.
3b. Emma is aware of the challenges facing her.

528

Epistemic, Stereotype-Inconsistent
4a. Jim sees the scheming going on behind his back.
4b. Jim is aware of the scheming going on behind his back.
Table 2: Example items for testing proximity inferences (i.e.
around to be see, within the range of vision).
Visual, Stereotype-Consistent
1. Megan spent the week at home. She saw/thought of her
parents a lot.
Visual, Stereotype-Inconsistent
2. Sitting in the office, John sees/thinks of Peter. Peter is on
holiday in Turkey.
Epistemic, Stereotype-Consistent
3. Joan sees/thinks of fresh opportunities. Some
opportunities are around.
Epistemic, Stereotype-Inconsistent
4. Joe sees/thinks of ways to solve the problem. There are
no solutions around.
There were two manipulations. The first concerns the use of
the verb see (literal/visual vs. metaphorical/epistemic).
More specifically, it turns on whether the direct object of the
main verb is a visible physical object (e.g. drivers, friends,
etc., in the literal/visual condition) or an abstract object (e.g.
challenges, scheming, etc., in the metaphorical/epistemic
condition). The second variable manipulated was whether
the remainder of the sentence was either consistent or
inconsistent with the hypothesized stereotypical inferences,
viz. directional and proximity inferences: In the stereotypeconsistent condition, the patient of see and aware is said or
clearly implied to be in front of the agent or before the
agent’s eyes; in the stereotype-inconsistent condition, the
patient is placed behind the agent. Similarly, the patient of
see and think of was placed in the vicinity or visual field of
the agent, in the stereotype-consistent condition, and outside
this field, in the stereotype-inconsistent condition. The
critical verb in the see/think of items could occur in either
first or second sentence (see Table 2).

graphical purposes, we coded see responses as 1 and aware
and think of responses as 0. Thus, high bars indicate greater
preference for see.
Participants were presented with pairs of sentences or
short two-sentence pairs, which differ only in one critical
word (i.e. minimal pairs). Participants were asked to
indicate which of the two versions they thought was more
plausible, and to make a judgment even if they did not have
a clear preference. By noting how often participants
preferred one version over the other, we can measure the
consistency of plausibility judgments, and which of the two
verbs have stronger stereotypical associations with the
targeted spatial properties

Results
See vs. Aware
Results showed that both main effects were significant
(visual/epistemic F(1,48) = 171.75, p < .001 and sconsistent/s-inconsistent F(1,48) = 662.78, p < .001). The
interaction was also significant F(1,48) = 226.76, p < .001
(see Figure 1). With visual direct objects, see was preferred
over aware 96% of the time, when contexts were sconsistent, but only 5% of the time when contexts were sinconsistent. With epistemic direct objects, see was
preferred 44% of the time when contexts were s-consistent
but only 8% of the time when contexts were s-inconsistent.
The comparison of s-consistent and s-inconsistent was
significant for both visual (t(48) = 45.35, p < .001) and
epistemic (t(48) = 9.26, p < .001) senses. The preference for
aware in the epistemic/s-consistent condition was not
significantly different from chance t(48) = 1.90, p = .06.

Design and Procedure
The design of the study was 2 × 2 (visual/epistemic × sconsistent/s-inconsistent). The visual/epistemic variable
refers to the direct object (visual vs. abstract) of the critical
verb.
S-consistent/s-inconsistent
refers
to
the
‘consistency/inconsistency with spatial (directional and
proximity) implications from literal/visual use of see’ and
was contained in further contextual information in the
sentence. Separate repeated-measures ANOVAs (with
follow-up t-tests) were run on see/aware and see/think of
separately. In line with our hypothesis H2, we expected see
to be preferred with visual direct objects in s-consistent
contexts, and aware and think of to be preferred with both
visual and abstract direct objects in s-inconsistent contexts.
The critical condition occurred when the direct object was
abstract and invoked epistemic sense and the context was sinconsistent with directional and proximity inferences. For

Figure 1: Results showing proportion of “see” responses
with visual and epistemic objects.
See vs. Think of
Results showed that both main effects were significant
(visual/epistemic F(1,48) = 92.93, p < .001 and sconsistent/s-inconsistent F(1,48) = 817.33, p < .001). The
interaction was also significant F(1,48) = 93.53, p < .001

529

(see Figure 2). With visual objects, see was preferred over
think of 95% of the time when contexts were s-consistent,
but only 2% of the time when contexts were s-inconsistent.
With epistemic objects, see was preferred 58% of the time
when contexts were s-consistent, but only 5% of the time
when contexts were s-inconsistent. The comparison of sconsistent vs s-inconsistent was significant for both visual
t(48) = 43.83, p < .001 and epistemic t(48) = 12.75, p < .001
senses. The preference for see in the epistemic/sinconsistent condition was significantly above chance t(48)
= 1.99, p = .053. Thus, there was a marginal see preference.

Figure 2: Results showing proportion of “see” responses
with visual and epistemic objects.

Discussion
These results are consistent with our key hypothesis H2 that
competent speakers infer spatial patient-properties
stereotypically associated with the visual sense of see also
from epistemic and phenomenal uses. H2 implies that in
epistemic contexts which are s-inconsistent, competent
speakers will reject see in favor of verbs that work equally
well in epistemic contexts but lack spatial implications. This
is precisely what we found: As long as items were sconsistent, participants had no pronounced preference for
aware or think of over the evidently metaphorical use of see
– all three verbs were deemed to work roughly equally well
in these contexts. By contrast, participants had a very
pronounced preference for aware and think of in epistemic
contexts which were inconsistent with the (evidently
irrelevant) spatial implications of see. This suggests that
participants made spatial inferences from the verb even in
these inappropriate contexts, resulting in perceived
inconsistencies with the context, which in turn lower
subjective plausibility.
In conjunction with previous evidence that (H1) visual
uses of see have higher salience than epistemic and
phenomenal senses, this is also consistent with the graded
salience hypothesis. This hypothesis could explain our key
finding (see Introduction) and let us extend it: Speakers/

hearers are the more likely to infer features stereotypically
associated with the most salient use of a word also from its
less salient uses, the greater the difference in salience is
(Simpson & Burgess, 1985). Since the phenomenal use of
see is even less salient than the epistemic use (see
Introduction), it stands to reason that competent speakers
will be even more prone to make inappropriate spatial
inferences from phenomenal than from epistemic uses.
This conclusion can help resolve the targeted
philosophical paradox (argument from hallucination), by
debunking the intuition at its root, viz., that when Macbeth
sees the dagger, there is something around for him to see,
before his eyes. Our conclusion suggests that stereotypedriven inferences from the most salient visual use of see
have philosophers leap to this intuitive judgment from prior
case-descriptions which use see in a phenomenal sense. The
intuition is thus due to a contextually inappropriate
stereotypical inference. More generally, we have identified a
vitiating circumstance: The generally reliable process of
stereotype-driven amplification (Levinson, 2000) misfires
where a word with strong stereotypical associates of a
highly salient use is employed in a much less salient sense.
Future directions: We intend to garner further evidence
for H1 through a computer-based rating experiment asking
participants to rate ‘how good examples of seeing are
afforded by the following cases’, whose descriptions include
the three uses distinguished. To collect further evidence for
H2 we intend to replicate the current results with a less
artificial task, using pupillometry (Engelhardt et al., 2010).
A more comprehensive explanation of the targeted
intuitions will take further linguistic theories into account,
such as head-driven phrase structure grammar (Pollard &
Sag, 1994): When accessing a verb, we retrieve all
associated syntactic information, including the grammatical
roles (e.g., see requires a patient-role) and selectionrestrictions on role-fillers (e.g., physical objects and public
events). This may account for the intuition that Macbeth
sees something. This paper explains how this ‘something’
gets endowed with spatial features – which exclude any
absent physical objects as patients of see. The situation from
which the present intuition arises is not rare in philosophy:
Philosophers often give familiar words special uses which
are less salient than those in ordinary language. It bears
investigating to what extent these uses prompt contextually
inappropriate inferences and unwarranted intuitions.

Conclusion
Psycholinguistic methods and findings can be profitably
used to identify and explain automatic inferences that
generate philosophically relevant intuitions. For proof of
concept, this paper showed how psycholinguistic data can
contribute to debunking explanations of intuitions that
engender philosophical paradoxes.

References
Alexander, J. (2012). Experimental Philosophy. Cambridge:
Polity.

530

Alexander, J., Gonnerman, C., & Waterman, J. (2015).
Salience, and epistemic egocentrism. In J. Beebe (ed.),
Advances in Experimental Epistemology. London:
Bloomsbury.
Ayer, A.J. (1956). The Problem of Knowledge. Repr. 1990.
London: Penguin.
Bealer, G. (1996). On the possibility of philosophical
knowledge, Philosophical Perspectives 10, Metaphysics,
1-34.
Brewer, B.(2011). Perception and Its Objects. Oxford: OUP
Cath, Y. (in press). Reflective Equilibrium. In H. Cappelen
und T. Gendler (eds.): The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophical Methodology. Oxford: OUP.
Crane, T. (2015). The problem of perception. In N. Zalta
(ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Summer 2015.
Engelhardt, P.E., Ferreira, F., & Patsenko, E.G. (2010).
Pupillometry reveals processing load during spoken
language comprehension. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63, 639-645.
Faust, M., & Gernsbacher, M.A. (1996). Cerebral
mechanisms for suppression of inappropriate
information during sentence comprehension. Brain and
Language, 53, 234-259.
Fein, O., Yeari, M., & Giora, R. (2015). On the priority of
salience-based interpretations: the case of sarcastic
irony. Intercultural Pragmatics, 12, 1-32.
Ferretti, T., McRae, K., & Hatherell, A. (2001). Integrating
verbs, situation schemas, and thematic role concepts.
Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 516-547.
Fischer, E. (2011). Philosophical Delusion and its Therapy.
New York: Routledge.
Fischer, E., & Collins, J. (2015) (eds.): Experimental
Philosophy, Rationalism and Naturalism. Rethinking
Philosophical Method. London: Routledge.
Fischer, E., & Engelhardt, P. E. (2016). Intuitions’ linguistic
sources: Stereotypes, intuitions, and illusions. Mind &
Language, 31, 65-101.
Fischer, E., Engelhardt, P.E., & Herbelot, A. (2015).
Intuitions and illusions. From explanation and
experiment to assessment. In: Fischer and Collins
(2015), pp. 259-292.
Fish, W. (2009). Perception, Hallucination, and Illusion.
Oxford: Oxford University Press
Garrett, M., & Harnish, R.M. (2007). Experimental
pragmatics: testing for implicatures. Pragmatics and
Cognition, 17, 245-262
Gerken, M., & Beebe, J. (2016). Knowledge in and out of
contrast. Nous, 50, 133-164.
Giora, R. (2003). On Our Mind. Salience, Context, and
Figurative Language. Oxford: OUP.
Givoni, S., Giora, R., & Bergerbest, D. (2013). How
speakers alert addressees to multiple meanings, Journal
of Pragmatics, 48, 29-40.
Hare, M., Jones, M., Thomson, C., Kelly, S., & McRae, K.
(2009) Activating event knowledge. Cognition, 111,
151-167.

Harmon-Vukić, M., Guéraud, S., Lassonde, K.A. &
O’Brien, E.J. (2009). The activation and instantiation of
instrumental inferences.Discourse Processes,46,467-490
Knobe, J., & Nichols, S. (eds.) (2014). Experimental
Philosophy: Volume 2. New York: OUP.
Levinson, S.C. (2000). Presumptive Meanings. The Theory
of Generalized Conversational Implicature, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
McRae, K., & Jones, M. (2013). Semantic memory. In D.
Reisberg (ed.), Oxford Handbook of Cognitive
Psychology, Oxford: OUP.
Nagel, J., Juan, V. S., & Mar, R. A. (2013). Lay denial of
knowledge for justified true beliefs. Cognition, 129,
652-661.
Oden, G.G., & Spira, J.L. (1983). Influence of context on
the activation and selection of ambiguous word senses.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 35, 5164.
Papineau, D. (2009). The poverty of analysis. Aristotelian
Society Supplementary Volume, 83, 1-30.
Petrinovich, L., & O'Neill, P. (1996). Influence of wording
and framing effects on moral intuitions. Ethology and
Sociobiology, 17, 145-171.
Pollard, C., & Sag, I. (1994). Head-Driven Phrase Structure
Grammar. University of Chicago Press.
Price, H.H. (1932). Perception. 2nd ed. London: Methuen.
Pust, J. (2012). Intuition. In: E.N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2012/entries/intuition/
Robinson, H. (2001). Perception. London: Routledge.
Seyedsayamdost, H. (2015a). On Normativity and
Epistemic Intuitions: Failure of Replication. Episteme,
12, 95-116.
Seyedsayamdost, H. (2015b). On gender and philosophical
intuition: Failure of replication and other negative results
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 28, 642-673.
Simpson, G.B., & Burgess, C. (1985). Activation and
selection processes in the recognition of ambiguous
words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 11, 28-39
Smith, A.D. 2002: The Problem of Perception. Cambridge,
Mass: Harvard UP
Stich, S., & Tobia, K. (2015). Experimental philosophy and
the philosophical tradition. In J. Sytsma and W.
Buckwalter
(eds.),
Blackwell
Companion
to
Experimental Philosophy. Wiley Blackwell: Malden.
Till, R.E., Mross, E.F., & Kintsch, W. (1988). Time course
of priming for associate and inference words in a
discourse context. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behaviour, 16, 283-298.
Turri, J. (2015). Skeptical appeal: the source-content bias.
Cognitive Science, 39, 307-24
Weinberg, J. S., Nichols, S., & Stich, S. (2001). Normativity
and epistemic intuitions. Philosophical Topics,29,429.
Weinberg, J. M., Alexander, J., Gonnerman, C., & Reuter,
S. (2012). Restrictionism and reflection. The Monist, 95,
200-222.

531

