Structural Alignment in Incidental Word Learning
Ruxue Shao (ruxueshao2018@u.northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (genter@northwestern.edu)
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA

Abstract
Young children can sometimes acquire new vocabulary words
with only limited, indirect exposure (Carey & Bartlett, 1978).
We propose that structural alignment processes lead to fluent
detection of commonalities and differences that facilitate
incidental word learning. To test this, we adapted the Carey and
Bartlett paradigm, varying the alignability of the objects that 4year-olds saw while hearing the novel word chromium. In
Experiment 1, children in the High-Alignment condition were
significantly better than those in the Low-Alignment condition
at identifying chromium objects in a subsequent task. In
Experiment 2, we ruled out an alternative account by
equalizing the overall amount of information presented to the
two groups. We also found that the advantage of high
alignment persisted after two-to-four days. These results
suggest that structural alignment is a mechanism by which
children can learn word meanings even in incidental word
learning situations.
Keywords: incidental word learning; structural alignment;
alignable differences

Introduction
Children acquire vocabulary words in many ways.
Sometimes, a helpful adult points to an object of interest and
gives a clear label for it. For example, the teacher might point
to a rubber duck and tell the child “Look, a duck!” Yet these
instances of explicit word learning are far from the whole
picture. Children also learn many words spontaneously
through daily conversation, media consumption, joint
reading, and so on (e.g. Akhtar, Jipson, & Callanan, 2001;
Krcmar, Grela, & Lin, 2007; Senechal & Cornell, 1993).
Carey and Bartlett (1978) conducted a classic study on
young children’s incidental word learning. They exposed 3.5year-olds to a new color term (chromium) for an unfamiliar
color (dark olive green). Children saw two trays that were
identical on every dimension except color (see Figure 1), and
were asked to “Give me the chromium one, not the red one.”
Even with such limited input, approximately half of the
children were able to demonstrate some knowledge of the
word chromium at a later time.
Carey and Bartlett’s findings have inspired many
researchers to further investigate this question from multiple
perspectives (e.g. Bion, Borovsky, & Fernald, 2013;
Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Bailey, & Wenger, 1992; Heibeck &
Markman, 1987; Wagner, Dobkins, & Barner, 2013). Our
interest here is in what processes enabled children to learn a
new word from such minimal, indirect exposure. We propose
structural mapping as a mechanism that can lead to rapid
spontaneous learning.

According to Structure Mapping Theory, comparison
involves a process of structural alignment between two
representations (Gentner, 1983, 2010). This process not only
reveals commonalities, but also highlights alignable
differences—differences that play the same role in the shared
structure. Alignable differences emerge easily and quickly
when comparing items that are high on overall similarity
(Sagi, Gentner, & Lovett, 2012). Both children and adults
find it easier to generate differences for high-similarity object
pairs than for low-similarity ones (e.g. Gelman, Raman,
Gentner, 2009; Gentner & Gunn, 2001; Markman & Gentner,
1994). Thus, for high-similarity pairs, alignable differences
emerge quickly and spontaneously.
From this perspective, the Carey and Bartlett (1978)
findings can be interpreted as follows. Children were asked
to ‘give me the chromium one, not the red one,” and their goal
(we assume) was simply to comply with this request (which
they may have interpreted simply as “give me the one that’s
not red”). However, when they saw two highly similar trays,
a spontaneous alignment process took place, and the
alignable difference between the two trays (their color)
popped out. Thus, even without overt effort to learn a new
word, the children may have associated this newly
highlighted color with the new word, chromium.

Figure 1: Trays shown in the Carey and Bartlett (1978)
study
To test this claim, we adopted a paradigm similar to the
one used by Carey and Bartlett (1978), but varied the
similarity (and thus the alignability) of the objects pairs
presented. The question is whether children will learn the
meaning of the term chromium from indirect exposure, and
whether alignability will be a determining factor.

Experiment 1
We presented children with a pair of objects that were either
high in alignment (HA) or low in alignment (LA). Children
were asked to “point to the chromium one—the chromium
one, not the blue one.” After a short delay, we assessed
whether they could identify chromium objects in a yes-no
task. We predicted that children in the HA condition would
show better understanding of the word chromium than those
in the LA condition.

1038

Methods

Results

Participants Sixty-three 4-year-olds (mean age=54.05
months, SD= 3.28 months, range= 48-59 months)
participated in the study. Among them, thirty-two 4-year-olds
were assigned to the High-Alignment (HA) condition and the
remaining to the Low-Alignment (LA) condition. An
additional five children were tested but excluded, one due to
showing a yes bias, one for failing to complete the
experiment, and three due to experimenter error. All children
were recruited from the greater Chicago area through a
voluntary participant pool or from local preschools.

In the Initial Exposure phase, all children were able to
correctly pick out the chromium object on the first attempt.
However, as predicted, significant differences were found
between the HA and LA groups in the Meaning Assessment
task. The HA group was able to correctly identify more
chromium objects (more hits) than the LA group (MLA = 1.77,
MHA= 2.50, max =3.0; t(61) = 8.81, p = .004, one-tailed t test).
There was no difference in the number of false alarms
(identifying non-chromium objects as chromium) made by
the two groups (MLA = 1.23, MHA = 1.77, max=5.0; t(61) =
2.78, n.s. one-tailed t test). Thus the difference in hit rate was
not due to an overall inclination of the HA group to respond
more positively.

Initial Exposure As a warm-up, children first received two
simple two-alternative-forced-choice trials (e.g. “point to the
cow, not the lion”). Then they received the key Initial
Exposure trial. Children in the HA group saw two highly
similar (readily alignable) objects (as in the Carey and
Bartlett study), while those in the LA group saw a less
alignable pair (Figure 2). All figures were made from foam
and were approximately the same size. Both groups were
asked, “Look at these two! Can you point to the chromium
one? The chromium one, not the blue one.” Importantly, all
children (in both the HA and LA groups) were able to
correctly pick out the chromium object during the initial
exposure.

Figure 4: Mean number of hits (max = 3) and false alarms
(max = 5) made by the LA and HA groups in Experiment 1.

Figure 2: Experiment 1 Initial Exposure objects.
Meaning Assessment Approximately 10 minutes after the
initial exposure, children were assessed on whether they had
learned the meaning of chromium. They were shown eight
geometric figures, each with a unique combination of color
and shape. Among the figures, three were chromium and five
were of other colors (See Figure 3). For each group, there was
one previously-seen chromium figure and two new ones.
(Children in the HA group had seen the chromium square,
while those in the LA group had seen the chromium circle.)
In addition, all children had seen the blue square in the Initial
Exposure trial and the maroon triangle during the warm-up
trials.
Children were shown the objects one at a time, and asked,
“Look at this one! Is this a chromium one?” Based on the
child’s answer, the object was placed in either a Yes Box or
a No Box. If the child failed to answer, or indicated that (s)he
did not know, the experimenter repeated the question. No
participant required more than three requests to answer a
question.

Figure 3: Experiment 1Meaning Assessment objects

We also found a difference between the two groups when
comparing their performance to chance. Children in the HA
condition scored significantly better than chance (1.5) at
identifying chromium objects (t(31)=7.42, p<.001).
However, performance in the LA group did not differ from
chance (t(30)=1.33, n.s. one-tailed t test).
Our hypothesis is that for the HA group, a spontaneous,
non-deliberate alignment process resulted in children’s
noticing the alignable difference in color. However, it is also
possible that the difference between the two groups lay in
differential forgetting. Perhaps children in the LA group had
more difficulty remembering the initial chromium object. To
test this possibility, we statistically controlled whether
children were able to successfully identify the Initial
Exposure object as chromium during the Meaning
Assessment task. When we compared performance on the
other objects in the Meaning Assessment Task, we found the
same pattern as before, indicating that the performance gap
in the Meaning Assessment task cannot be attributed to
differential item memory for the initial item.

Discussion
Children in the HA condition were significantly more likely
than those in the LA condition to discern the meaning of the
word chromium. Although both groups were able to “point to
the chromium one, not the blue one” when shown the two
initial objects side by side, only the HA group showed

1039

evidence of being able to differentiate chromium objects from
non-chromium ones in a subsequent task. These findings are
consistent with our predictions based on the structural
alignment account.
We believe that the HA group was able to “pick up” the
word chromium without a deliberate intention to learn a new
word. For children in the HA condition, the chromium color
was highlighted during the Initial Exposure when it emerged
as an alignable difference from the familiar color, blue. This
provided participants with a perceptual sensation that could
attach to the new word. In other words, we suggest that highalignment comparison essentially made the mapping of
chromium to the color ‘dark olive green’ effortless.
However, before embracing this account, we need to assess
an alternative possibility. Children may have been actively
trying to learning the meaning of the novel word. In this case,
the overall amount of information available to them becomes
very important. For the HA group, the two objects shown
during the Initial Exposure differed in only one dimension –
color. In contrast, the LA group saw objects that differed in
both color and shape. From a hypothesis-testing point of
view, the LA children had to consider two possible
hypotheses for the meaning of chromium—a color hypothesis
(dark olive green) and a shape hypothesis (round). In
contrast, the HA children only had to consider one
hypothesis: that chromium refers to dark olive green. Thus,
the advantage shown by the HA group over the LA group
could have resulted from the differential amount of
information available to the two groups, rather than from the
greater ease of alignment.
Experiment 2 was designed to distinguish between these
two accounts. We again created two groups—HA and LA—
but gave children in both groups two trials, to equate the
amount of information they received. In addition, we wanted
to assess the strength of the word-meaning link formed here.
In Experiment 1, children were tested on the meaning of
chromium 10 minutes after the Initial Exposure, with a
collection of geometric shapes similar to those used in the
Initial Exposure. In Experiment 2, we asked whether we
would still find evidence of learning if the delay was longer
and the set was larger. In the same spirit, we also asked
whether children would be able to transfer their learning to a
very different set of items.

Participants
Forty 4-year-olds (M=53.63 months, SD= 3.56 months,
range= 48-59 months) participated in Experiment 2. Nineteen
of them were placed in the High-Alignment (HA) condition
and twenty-one in the Low-Alignment (LA) condition.
Children were recruited through the same methods used in
Experiment 1.

Day 1
Materials and Procedure The procedure for Day 1 was
highly similar to that of Experiment 1. Children received a
warmup trial, and then encountered the word chromium and
its referent color. However, instead of just one exposure, they
were given two chances to form the mapping between word
and color, as described below. They then took a short break,
and afterwards revisited the word and color in a sorting task.
On each of the Initial Exposure trials, children saw a blue
object and a chromium object side by side. The experimenter
asked, “Can you point to the chromium one? The chromium
one, not the blue one.” The Initial Exposure trials were not
presented consecutively—a foil trial (similar to the warmup
trial) separated the two.
The trials were designed to permit the LA group to rule out
the shape hypothesis, leaving them with only the color
hypothesis— and thus removing the informational advantage
of the HA group. On Initial Exposure Trial 1, the LA group
saw two objects differing in color and shape, leaving two
possible hypotheses for the meaning of chromium:
(1) chromium = dark olive green color
(2) chromium = cross shape
One Trial 2, the LA group saw two new objects. Crucially,
the ‘chromium’ object (the non-blue object) was now a
different shape (an upside-down triangle) but retained the
same color. Thus, children in the LA condition could rule out
the shape hypothesis and arrive at the correct meaning.

Experiment 2
The goals of Experiment 2 were (1) to assess the effects of
alignability in incidental learning while equating the overall
amount of information given; and (2) to explore the
robustness of the learning effect. To equate the information
given to the two groups, we provided both the HA and LA
groups with two exposure trials during the Initial Exposure.,
such that both groups could logically rule out shape as the
meaning of chromium and settle on color. We then assessed
children’s knowledge of the word chromium on the day of the
exposure (Day 1), and also two-to-four days later (Day 2).
Day 2 featured both a retention task and a transfer task.

Figure 5: Experiment 2, Day 1: Initial Exposure Objects
Children in the HA condition also received two trials,
designed so that the chromium objects were the same as those
seen by the LA group. However, to facilitate structural
alignment, these objects were paired with another object of
the same shape within each trial. The HA group saw a
chromium square and a blue square on one trial, and a
chromium circle and a blue circle on the other. As in
Experiment 1, the objects were identical on every dimension

1040

except for color. Figure 4 shows the Initial Exposure for
Experiment 2, Day 1.
A new and extended set of 14 geometric shapes was used
in this experiment for the Meaning Assessment task (Figure
6). There were five chromium objects—including two that
had been previously seen by both groups—and nine nonchromium objects. The procedures for the Meaning
Assessment Task in Experiment 2 Day 1were exactly the
same as those for Experiment 1.

these two! Can you point to the chromium one? The
chromium one, not the blue one!” All children were
successful on this task. After the Reminder, children engaged
in the Transfer Task. The Transfer Task used the same format
as Day 1’s Meaning Assessment task, except that all of the
objects being sorted were picture cards of different colored
and shaped fish. The fish cards consisted of 14 line drawings
of fish. Similar to the set shown in Figure 6, five of the fish
were chromium, four were blue, and the rest were of various
colors.
Results Although the Retention task’s pattern of results
suggested that the HA group made more hits than the LA
group, the difference between the two groups did not reach
significance (see Figure 7). There was no difference between
the two groups in the number of false alarms.
When provided with a Reminder exposure to the word
chromium and the color dark olive green, all children were
able to pick out the correct chromium object on the first
attempt, consistent with the pattern in the Initial Exposure
task in both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 Day 1.
In the Transfer Task, the HA group again showed an
advantage over the LA group: they identified a significantly
higher number of dark olive green fish as chromium than the
LA group (MLA= 3.52, MHA= 4.53, max= 5.0; t(38)=1.84,
p=0.037, one-tailed t test). The number of false alarms made
by the two groups did not differ, once again mirroring
previous results.

Figure 6: Experiment 2: Figures Used in Meaning
Assessment (Day 1) and Retention Task (Day 2)
Results As in Experiment 1, all children in the HA and LA
groups were able to correctly pick out the chromium object
during the Initial Exposure.
In the Meaning Assessment task, children in the HA
group were able to correctly identify more chromium
objects (more hits) than those in the LA group (MLA= 3.71,
MHA= 4.63, max = 5.0; t (38)= 2.18, p=.020, one-tailed t
test). Also similar to Experiment 1, there was no difference
in the number of false alarms made (MLA= 1.76, MHA= 1.32,
max = 9.0; t(38)=0.70, n.s., one-tailed t test).

Discussion

Figure 7: Experiment 2: Mean number of hits (max=9) on
Day 1 Meaning Assessment task, Day 2 Retention Task, and
Day 2 Transfer Task.

Day 2: Retention and Transfer
Materials and Procedure After two to four days (M= 2.45,
SD= 0.75), children returned to the lab for Day 2 of the
experiment. Children in the HA and LA groups went through
the same procedure: a Retention Task, a Reminder, and a
Transfer Task.
The goal of the Retention Task was to assess how well
children retained whatever meaning they had assigned to
chromium on Day 1. Thus, the Retention Task was an exact
duplicate of the Meaning Assessment task on Day 1. After
the Retention Task, children were presented with a Reminder
similar to the Initial Exposure on Day 1. All children saw the
same two cards side by side, one depicting a blue fish and the
other a chromium fish. The experimenter asked, “Look at

The findings of Experiment 2 replicated and extended those
of Experiment 1. On Day 1, children in both the HA group
and LA group received sufficient information to rule out
shape and settle on color as the meaning of chromium. Yet
we found the same performance pattern as in Experiment 1:
although all children were able to correctly pick out the
chromium object in the Initial Exposure, the HA group did
significantly better than the LA group on a subsequent
Meaning Assessment task. These results argue against a
difference in information as the explanation for the HA
group’s advantage. Instead, the greater fluency of structural
alignment seems to be the key distinguishing factor here.
On Day 2, children were assessed on the meaning of the
word chromium using the same objects that they had seen on
Day 1 (the Retention Task). Although we did not find
significant HA advantage in the Day 2 Retention task, the HA
group went on to significantly outperform the LA group in
the Transfer task: Children in the HA group demonstrated
better understanding of the word chromium than those in LA
group on the new items shown in the Transfer Task.

General Discussion
The current studies provide evidence supporting the
hypothesis that spontaneous structural alignment promotes
incidental word learning. In Experiment 1, we manipulated
the alignability of the objects that children saw during the
Initial Exposure. Although all children in both groups readily

1041

picked out ‘the chromium one, not the blue one’, the two
groups differed dramatically in how much they learned from
this experience. Children in the HA condition were able to
differentiate between chromium objects and non-chromium
objects in a subsequent task, while those in the LA condition
performed at chance. In Experiment 2, we equalized the
amount of information presented to the two groups during the
Initial Exposure and still found an advantage of the HA group
over the LA group. This advantage persisted two to four days
after the Initial Exposure, as evidenced in the Transfer
Task—the HA group (but not the LA group) was able to
transfer their understanding to a very different set of objects.
We suggest that the high overall similarity between the
initially shown objects benefitted the HA group in two ways.
First, it invited spontaneous comparison, initiating a
structural alignment process. Second, the high alignability of
the two objects made structural alignment fast and essentially
effortless, so the alignable difference of color “popped out”
and was easily detected. Structural alignment allowed
children to quickly and easily “pick up” a perceptual
placeholder for the new word chromium, even without any
conscious intentions of decrypting it.
We suggest that in this task, children were simply engaging
in a social interaction with the experimenter, and their goal
was to comply with the experimenter’s request. Nevertheless,
given the fortunate learning situation presented to the HA
group, they were able to learn the meaning of a new word
chromium without any prior intention of doing so.
For the LA group, who saw objects that were dissimilar,
structural alignment did not spontaneously occur. Thus,
although they were able to correctly pick out the chromium
object when given the verbal contrast “the chromium one, not
the blue one,” there was no evidence that they formed a link
between the novel word chromium and its corresponding
property.
Of course, we note that either group could have focused on
the color hypothesis for linguistic reasons. The syntax of the
request-- ‘the chromium one, not the blue one”—would have
allowed an adult to infer that the key dimension of difference
was probably color. However, it’s not clear that 4-year-olds
understand this convention. Indeed, the poor performance of
the LA group suggests that they did not benefit from such an
insight. We aim to shed light on this issue in further research
These results are consistent with prior work showing that
structural alignment processes support children’s learning
(Childers & Paik, 2009; Ferry, Hespos, & Gentner, 2015;
Gentner, Anggoro & Klibanoff, 2011; Waxman & Klibanoff,
2000). Explicit instructions to compare exemplars can
promote learning in both adults as well as children
(Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gick & Holyoak, 1983;
Loewenstein et al., 1999; Markman & Gentner, 1993).
Evidence for such effects has been found across perceptual
and conceptual domains, including spatial configurations
(Christie & Gentner, 2010), mathematics (Richland, Zur, &
Holyaok, 2007; Richland, Holyoak, & Stigler. 2004; RittleJohnson & Star, 2007; Thompson & Opfer, 2010), word
learning (e.g., Graham et al., 2010), part-learning (Gentner,

Loewenstein, & Hung, 2007), and science education (Jee et
al., 2010; Kurtz & Gentner, 2013). However, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study that examines the role
of structural alignment in incidental learning situations.
Incidental learning experiences are clearly an important
part of children’s language learning, yet they are almost
invisible in nature. Such experiences can occur at different
times and places, with no necessary pedagogical intention on
the part of the adult, nor any intention to learn on the part of
the child. They depend on the learner noticing the new
information for himself or herself. The current studies show
that structure mapping is a powerful mechanism for
incidental learning. When the target information is
highlighted as an alignable difference, it is more likely that
spontaneous learning will take place.

Acknowledgments
We thank the children, families, and preschools that
participated in the study, Emma Bulzoni and Katherine Cha
for their help in conducting the experiments, and members of
the Project on Children’s Thinking for their insightful
suggestions. This work was supported by NSF SLC Grant
SBE-0541957 awarded to the Spatial Intelligence and
Learning Center (SILC), and by ONR Grant N00014-13-10470 to Dedre Gentner.

References
Akhtar, N., Jipson, J., & Callanan, M. A. (2001). Learning
words through overhearing. Child Development, 72(2),
416-430.
Bion, R. A., Borovsky, A., & Fernald, A. (2013). Fast
mapping, slow learning: Disambiguation of novel word–
object mappings in relation to vocabulary learning at 18,
24, and 30 months. Cognition, 126(1), 39-53.
Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new word.
Proceedings of the Stanford Child Language Conference,
15, 17-29.
Childers, J. B., & Paik, J. H. (2009). Korean-and Englishspeaking children use cross-situational information to learn
novel predicate terms. Journal of Child Language, 36(1),
201-224.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3), 356-373.
Ferry, A. L., Hespos, S. J., & Gentner, D. (2015).
Prelinguistic relational concepts: Investigating analogical
processing in infants. Child Development,86(5), 13861405.
Gelman, S., Raman, L., & Gentner, D. (2009). Effects of
language and similarity on comparison processing.
Language Learning and Development, 5, 147-171.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (200
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure‐Mapping: A Theoretical
Framework for Analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5),
752-775.

1042

Gentner, D., Anggoro, F. K., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2011).
Structure-mapping and relational language support
children’s learning of relational categories. Child
Development, 82(4). 1173-1188.
Gentner, D., & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory and
Cognition, 29(4), 565-577.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007).
Comparison facilitates children's learning of names for
parts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8(3), 285307.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2006). Relations, objects, and the
composition of analogies. Cognitive Science, 30(4), 609642.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural alignment
in comparison: No difference without similarity.
Psychological Science, 5(3), 152-158.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52(1), 45.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65(2), 263-297
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14(4),
487-513.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15(1), 1-38.
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bailey, L. M., & Wenger,
N. R. (1992). Young children and adults use lexical
principles to learn new nouns. Developmental Psychology,
28(1), 99
Graham, S., A., Namy, L. L., Gentner, D., & Meagher, K.
(2010). The role of comparison in preschoolers' novel
object categorization. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 107. 280-290.
Heibeck, T. H., & Markman, E. M. (1987). Word learning in
children: An examination of fast mapping. Child
Development, 1021-1034.
Jee, B. D., Uttal, D. H., Gentner, D., Manduca, C., Shipley,
T., Sageman, B., Ormand, C. J., & Tikoff, B.
(2010). Analogical thinking in geoscience education.
Journal of Geoscience Education, 58 (1), 2-13A
Krcmar, M., Grela, B., & Lin, K. (2007). Can toddlers learn
vocabulary from television? An experimental approach.
Media Psychology, 10(1), 41-63.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (2013). Detecting anomalous
features in complex stimuli: the role of structured
comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 19(3), 219.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 586-597.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology,
25(4), 431-467.
Richland, L. E., Holyoak, K. J., & Stigler, J. W. (2004).
Analogy use in eighth-grade mathematics classrooms.
Cognitiion and Instruction, 22, 37-60.

Richland, L. E., Zur, O., & Holyoak, K. J. (2007). Cognitive
supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom.
Science, 316, 1128-1129.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2007). Does comparing
solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural
knowledge? An experimental study on learning to solve
equations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 561–
574.
Sagi, E., Gentner, D., & Lovett, A. (2012). What difference
reveals about similarity. Cognitive Science, 36(6), 10191050.
Senechal, M., & Cornell, E. H. (1993). Vocabulary
acquisition through shared reading experiences. Reading
Research Quarterly, 360-374.
Thompson, C. A., & Opfer, J. E. (2010). How 15 hundred is
like 15 cherries: Effect of progressive alignment on
representational changes in numerical cognition. Child
Development, 81(6), 1768-1786.
Wagner, K., Dobkins, K., & Barner, D. (2013). Slow
mapping: color word learning as a gradual inductive
process. Cognition, 127(3), 307-317.
Waxman, S. R., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2000). The role of
comparison in the extension of novel adjectives.
Developmental Psychology, 36(5), 571.

1043

