Sub-Categorical Properties of Stimuli Determine the Category-Order Effect
Jordan Schoenherr (psychophysics.lab@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada

Robert Thomson (robert.thomson@usma.edu)
Army Cyber Institute, United States Military Academy
2101 New South Post Road, West Point, NY, 10996
presentation rate of the stimuli or by using articulatory
suppression (Greene & Lasek, 1994). Greene and Lasek
(1994) further explored whether the order of recall of the
stimuli (i.e. input or output position) was a factor in the
category-order effect. To test their hypothesis, participants
were asked to either recall items in forward or backward
order. In the backward condition, items were to be recalled
in reverse order that they were presented in. Although recall
order did affect overall accuracy and memory span, both
forward and backward recall exhibited a significant input
position COE, with improved full-list recall when the more
readily categorized items were presented in the first half of
the list.
In a series of experiments directed toward examining
the subcategorical properties of the COE, Schoenherr and
Thomson (2008) also found the effect using both successive
and simultaneous split-list presentation. In their study, lists
consisted of four non-repeating letters and four nonrepeating numbers. Letters were from one of four
categories: 1) four letter words, 2) four letter pseudowords
(CVCVs), 3) four rhyming letter nonwords, or 4) four
random letter sets. Their results indicated that a COE was
exhibited when stimuli with more sub-categorical properties
(i.e., letters making up words or pseudowords) were
presented before stimuli that had fewer subcategorical
properties (i.e., random letters, rhyming letters, and
numbers).
Most interestingly, Schoenherr and Thomson conducted
a serial-order analysis comparing within-category accuracy
based on input position, and found evidence that only the
accuracy for the category presented first improved rather
than both presented categories, and only for the word and
pseudoword categories. Further support for the
contributions of subcategorical properties to the COE was
evidenced in results from an oscillator-based connectionist
model (Schoenherr & Thomson, 2009) wherein the
manipulation of a distinctiveness parameter produced COElike effects. Thus, while categorical information no doubt
contributes to recall, a COE-like effect can be obtained by
means of the manipulation of subcategorical information.

Abstract
The category-order effect (COE) is observed when the
categorical properties of items within the first half of a given
list affect recall performance in a mixed-list serial-recall task.
The present study examines whether the advantage is due to
other sub-categorical properties (e.g., orthographic similarity
and word frequency) rather than an artifact of stimuli used in
previous studies (e.g., numbers vs. nouns). Participants were
presented with numeric stimuli and nouns from a variety of
semantic categories while their orthography and word
frequency were systematically manipulated. The results
suggest that a large portion of the COE can be attributed to
the sub-categorical properties of the items.
Keywords: memory, category-order effect, recall

Introduction
In serial recall tasks, item information activates both shortterm (e.g., order) and long-term (e.g., semantic) memory
components (e.g., Healy, 1974; Lashley, 1951; Nairne &
Kelley, 2004). These components affect the extent to which
participants can rehearse and retrieve to-be-recalled items.
In the present study, we examined the contribution of longterm memory representations by varying stimulus properties
associated with category membership (e.g., semantic
similarity) as well as those that are associated with
individual stimuli (e.g., word frequency).

The Category-Order Effect
Brooks and Watkins (1990) referred to the dependency of
recall performance on the order in which items from a
particular category are presented in a list as the categoryorder effect (or COE). Category-order effects have been
established across several word categories, including when
higher-frequency words precede lower-frequency words
(Watkins & Watkins, 1977), semantically-related words
precede semantically-unrelated words, rhyming words
precede non-rhyming words (Brooks & Watkins, 1990), and
when numeric digits precede words (Greene & Lasek, 1994;
Brooks & Watkins, 1990). Greene and Lasek concluded that
the COE arises when a relatively smaller, homogenous
category is presented before a relatively larger,
heterogeneous category. Given that category set-size has
proven to determine recall accuracy and response times, this
appears to be a reasonable set of assumptions.
There is evidence that the category effect can be
mediated by other factors such as rehearsal strategy. For
instance, the COE can be eliminated by decreasing the

Semantic Similarity and Recall
Semantic similarity could help explain the COE as
evidenced in the literature on immediate recall. For instance,
Crowder (1979) presented participants with 10 item lists
consisting of similar or dissimilar words. He observed

147

enhanced recall for similar words relative to dissimilar ones
(see also Saint-Aubin, Ouellette, & Poirier, 2005).
Moreover, research has also found that the probability of
correctly recalling an item is inversely proportional to the
number of associates for that item in a given list (for a
review, see Nelson, 1989). A straightforward explanation of
these findings is that once a word is presented, it activates
both its representation and similar stimuli (with overlapping
semantic or contextual information) in long-term memory.
As activation increases, semantically related units also
become active thereby becoming candidates for recall,
creating proportionally higher interference for items with a
greater category size or items seen in more contexts than
items with a smaller category size; known as the fan effect
(Anderson & Reder, 1999; West, Pyke, Rutledge-Taylor, &
Lang, 2011).
Earlier evidence of the fan effect was observed by
Crannell and Parrish (1957). They examined the effect of set
sizes and semantic categories on immediate serial recall.
More specifically, participants were asked to remember sets
consisting of digits (1-9; set size = 9), letters (from the full
set of letters), letters (from a limited set of letters ‘a’ to ‘i’),
three-letter words (from a set comprised of 286 members),
and three-letter words (from a set comprised of 9 members).
Overall, Crannell and Parrish found that digits led to the
highest recall and that letters were recalled more accurately
than words. Thus, it appears that the category set size
explains only part of the advantage for digits relative to
letters and words in general and that another stimulus
property stored in long-term memory contributes to the
recall advantage.

numbers are presented as Indian-Arabic numerals, this
difference might enhance recall performance resulting in an
additional release from proactive interference solely from
orthographic properties.

Present Study
Previous studies of the category-order effect and related
phenomena have frequently used number-word lists as
stimuli (Brooks & Watkins, 1990; Greene & Lasek, 1994;
Young & Supa, 1941). Although this paradigm has been
viewed as contrasting a small, homogeneous set of items
(i.e., numbers) against a larger, heterogeneous set of items
(i.e., animals), several properties of the stimuli prohibit such
a direct interpretation. First, number stimuli have been
presented as digits resulting in a decreased load during
visual encoding of a single item (e.g., 4) relative to an
equivalent word (e.g., four). Second, number stimuli have a
higher frequency than the word stimuli used in the recall
lists. Examining these values reveals that within the
Brysbaert and New Corpus1 there is a greater occurrence for
the number words (WFBN = 4.10) than animal words (WFBN
= 3.12) used in previous studies. Given this potential
methodological confound, the present experiments use an
immediate serial recall task to assess the effect of item (e.g.,
word frequency; orthography) and order (e.g., number-word
vs. word-number) information on recall performance.

Experiment 1A
In Experiment 1A, we sought to replicate the CategoryOrder Effect with the materials used by Brooks and Watkins
(1990) while also examining the effects of orthographic
properties (i.e., letter case; numeric digits vs. words) on
encoding.

Sub-Categorical Properties and Recall
Despite the evidence for recall facilitation resulting from the
availability information stored within long-term memory, it
is not necessarily the case that this information need be
categorical (West et al., 2011). Sub-categorical information
can be used as the basis for grouping exemplars. As Howes
and Solomon (1951) first observed, the frequency of words
in a language corpus is negatively correlated with their
response threshold. McGinnies, Comer, and Lacey (1952)
later demonstrated that word length affects performance
independently of word frequency (see also Postman & AdisCastro, 1957). This finding is of considerable importance
for COE experiments considering that word stimuli used in
those studies (e.g., goose, dog, sheep, ox) have more
characters than digit stimuli (e.g., 1, 6, 9) which has
previously been shown to affect recall (Cowan et al., 1992).
This could explain Schoenherr and Thomson’s (2008/9)
results whereby letters forming words or pseudowords
exhibited relatively higher recall rates when compared
against numeric digits.
Moreover, studies have also found that orthographic
properties affect recall performance. For example, it has
been found that lowercase words are reported more
accurately than uppercase words (e.g., Perri et al., 1996;
Jordan, Redwood, & Patching, 2003; cf. Smith et al., 1969).
Given that words are reported in lowercase type set and

Method
Participants
Twenty-three Carleton University students participated in
the experiment receiving 1% toward their final grade in an
introductory psychology class.
Materials
Stimuli consisted of monosyllabic numbers and animal
names (nouns) used in previous studies of the COE (Brooks
& Watkins, 1990; Greene & Lasek, 1994; Young & Supa,
1941). These include the related animal words dog, horse,
goose, cow, cat, ox, hen, pig and sheep, in addition to the
numeric digits 0-9 excluding the number 7 and their word
equivalents (e.g., zero, one). Words were presented in both
lowercase and uppercase formats.
Procedure
Similar to the procedure of Schoenherr and Thomson
(2008), participants were told that an eight-item sequence of
four letters and four numbers would be presented on the
computer monitor. Each item was presented for 1s and was
1

Word counts retrieved November, 20, 2011. WFBN is given by
adding one and taking the log10 of the SUBTLx word count.

148

immediately replaced with the subsequent item in the list.
After all items were presented, the screen was cleared and a
response cue of either FORWARD or BACKWARD was
presented following a 250 ms inter-stimulus interval. If the
cue indicated FORWARD, participants were instructed to
write the items down in the order that they were perceived.
Alternatively, if the cue indicated BACKWARD then
participants were required to respond with the order of the
categories reversed while preserving the order of the items
within the category (see Figure 1). This was similar to the
procedure used by Greene and Lasek (1994) to preserve
within-category integrity between study and recall.

the lack of a significant interaction between Category-Order
and Number Format implies that the effect of subcategorical properties on the COE might be limited.

Experiment 1B
Experiment 1B further examined the influence of word
frequency on the COE. Experiment 1A found that number
format influenced recall accuracy, however this only had a
limited influence on the COE. However, number stimuli are
represented at a higher frequency than word stimuli. If the
COE was due to sub-categorical properties such as word
frequency (rather than categorical properties such as
categorical similarity) then one would predict that the COE
might be largely attenuated or completely eliminated by
controlling for word frequency. As such, lists of high- and
low-frequency words were created from two categories
based on word norms and these were paired with high- (e.g.,
one and two) and low-frequency (e.g., twenty and thirty)
numbers printed as words.

BACKWARD

FORWARD

C A T S
1
CATS
L A M B
4
LAMB
D O G S
3
DOGS
C
A
L
F
2
CALF
1
C
A
T
S
1
4
L A M B
4
3
D O G S
3
2
C A L F
2
Figure 1. Sample of FORWARD and BACKWARD
response for stimuli from Experiment 1.

Method
Participants
Twenty-two Carleton University students participated in the
experiment receiving 1% toward their final grade in an
introductory psychology class.

Instructions emphasized both speed and accuracy.
Participants completed 20 training trials and 48
experimental trials. No feedback was provided after training.

Materials
Two sets of high- and low-frequency words were created to
exclude the possibility that one semantic category was more
salient than another. One high frequency set consisted of
terms pertaining to familial relatives (son, mom, father,
aunt, uncle, sister, brother) whereas the other consisted of
terms pertaining to units of time (second, minute, hour, day
week, month, year). One low frequency set consisted of
colour terms (maroon, aqua, violet, tan, grey, purple,
orange) whereas the other consisted of items used in
carpentry (nail, wrench, wood, ruler, hammer, drill, screw).
This resulted in high- (M = 4.10) and low-frequency (M =
2.62) word sets.
Two sets of numbers were also created, high-frequency
(M = 4.10; two, three, four, five, six, eight, nine) and lowfrequency (M = 2.64; twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, eighty,
ninety). The number one and ten were removed from the list
to balance number-word frequency with category-word
frequency. An important feature of the present study is that
by constraining the items in the word list, the total set-size
of the items available for participants to recall is reduced
while category set-size increases for numbers relative to
Experiment 1A. Sets were matched for mean word length.

Results
A mixed ANOVA with 2 Category-Order (number-word vs.
word-number) x 2 Number Format (digits vs. nouns)
repeated-measures factors were conducted on the proportion
of items recalled, with 2 Recall Order (forward vs.
backward) x 2 Letter Case (uppercase vs lowercase) as
between-subjects factors. There was no main effect of Letter
Case on accuracy, nor was it present in any higher
interaction. As such, the Letter Case factor was collapsed.
Replicating the findings of earlier studies, we obtained
what has traditionally been the explanation of the COE, F(1,
21) = 5.704, MSE = .013, p = .026. Participants recalled
more items in Number-Word lists (M = .6812, SD = .1806)
than in Word-Number lists (M = .6403, SD = .1706).
Importantly, we also observed a significant effect of
Number Format, F(1, 21) = 18.783, MSE = .006, p < .001.
Supporting our hypothesis that encoding fluency affected
recall, we found that participants recalled more items in
number lists written as digits (M = .6863) than number lists
written as words (M = .6352). This suggests that the COE is
influenced by sub-categorical properties of the stimuli such
as orthography rather than solely categorical information.

Procedure
Experiment 1B replicated the procedure of Experiment 1A.

Discussion

Results

While we were able to replicate the category-order effect
seen in prior literature (Brooks & Watkins, 1990; Greene &
Lasek, 1994), we also identified a significant influence of
sub-categorical properties (namely the orthography of
numerical digits vs words) on recall performance. That said,

Data from one participant was removed prior to analysis for
failing to conform to task demands. A repeated-measures 2
Category-Order (number-word vs. word-number) x 2 Word
Frequency (high-frequency vs low-frequency) x 2 Number

149

Frequency (high-frequency vs low-frequency) ANOVA was
conducted on the proportion of items recalled with Recall
Order (forward vs. backward) included as a betweensubjects measure.
The most revealing effect of this study was the lack of
an effect of Category-Order alone, F(1,17) = 1.007, MSE =
.009, p = .33, nor was Category-Order significant in any
interactions. This suggests that the COE might in fact be a
result of sub-categorical properties that were not controlled
in previous studies, such as the aforementioned set-size and
word frequency. Supporting this interpretation, we obtained
a significant main effect of Number Frequency, F(1,17) =
27.63, MSE = .016, p < .001. More items were recalled in
lists containing high-frequency numbers (M = .707) relative
to low-frequency numbers (M = .598).
In addition, we obtained a significant interaction
between word frequency and recall order, F(1,17) = 5.135,
MSE = .003, p = .037. Table 1 demonstrates that recall
performance was highest (and significantly different, only)
for forward recall. This suggests that items that have
numerous traces stored in long-term memory benefit from
relatively early activation as a result of presentation (i.e.,
input) order.

Experiment 2
To better understand what categorical properties might
underlie the COE, in the present study we control for
category-relatedness and set-size, in addition to using
numeric digits and number words as in Experiment 1A to
replicate previous COE studies. One aspect of previous
studies examining the category-order effect for numbers and
words is that the categories used for comparison were very
large and very small (animals vs numbers, respectively). In
the present study, we identified natural categories used in
the categorization literature (e.g., birds, tools) and used
latent-semantic analysis (Dumais, 2004) to determine which
words within these categories were highly (and
equivalently, when possible) related.
Moreover, the fact that multiple lists were used from
different categories should ensure long-term memory
activation does not change considerably for any given list.
To avoid the influence of the word-length effect, we only
used four letter words. This procedure allowed us to create
more principled categories and stimulus sets. Words were
then divided into exemplar lists (e.g., owls, hawk) from the
same category and related words (e.g., wing, claw, beak).
If category size facilitates performance in the initial
positions of a list, both number words and number digits
should produce highest recall performance when in the
initial list positions. Similarly, if frequency of exposure to
the stimuli facilitates performance in the initial positions of
a list, then number stimuli regardless of format should
produce highest recall performance.

Table 1. Mean proportion recalled and standard error
in forward and backward orders for high and low word
frequency conditions.
Recall Order
Word
Proportion Recall
Frequency
High
.695 (.053)
Forward
Low
.662 (.052)
High
.623 (.062)
Backward
Low
.630 (.061)

Method
Participants
Thirty-two Carleton University students participated in the
experiment receiving 1% toward their final grade in an
introductory psychology class.

Interestingly, one effect that was not found in contrasts
was that when high-frequency items were in the first input
positions (e.g., high-frequency numbers followed by lowfrequency words, or high-frequency words followed by lowfrequency numbers) there was still no equivalent to a
category-order effect (M = .663 for High-Low vs M = .658
for Low-High).

Materials
Stimuli sets were created by selecting six sets of words of
similar frequencies (M = 2.5) using the same calculation as
Experiment 1B, and inter-category relatedness (M = .45)
using LSA co-occurrence compared to category label (birds,
fish, clothing, tools, trees, and vehicles). For instance, from
the set bird (features) was peck, sing, flew, claw; while bird
(examples) was jays, hawk, duck, kiwi. The same number
stimuli were used as in Experiment 1A.

Discussion
Experiment 1B also provides evidence for an explanation of
the category-order based on subcategorical properties. One
reason for this lack of effect might be that only number
words were used rather than digits, which, as we observed
in Experiment 1A, provided the strongest COE. The
increased performance for higher frequency words
(regardless of whether they represented categories such as
numbers, tools, or units of time) is consistent with the view
that category-order effects were not necessarily due to
category set-size or other categorical properties (e.g.,
similarity), but instead were driven in part by subcategorical properties (orthography and word frequency).
However, by allowing word length to vary, Experiment 1B
might have eliminated another important orthographic
feature associated with the expression of the COE.

Procedure
Experiment 2 replicated the procedure of Experiment 1A
with the following differences. Participants completes both
backwards and forwards recall conditions in separate blocks.

Results
Data from one participant was removed prior to analysis for
failing to conform to task demands. A repeated-measures 2
Category-Order (number-word vs. word-number) x 2
Number Format (number digit vs word) x 2 Recall Order
(forward vs. backward) was performed.

150

Unlike Experiment 1A but similar to Experiment 1B
there was no main effect of Category-Order, F(1, 30) =
.034, MSE = .034, p = .855, but similar to Experiment 1A
there was a main effect of Number Type, F(1, 30) = 39.07,
MSE = .019, p = .001. Again, lists containing numeric digits
were recalled with higher accuracy than lists containing
number-words (M = .634 vs M = .557). As seen in Figure 2,
the interaction of Category-Order and Number Format was
significant F(1, 30) = 5.438, MSE = .018, p = .027. While
not significant, it was interesting that there was higher
overall accuracy for the Word-Number condition with
numeric digits (i.e., 1), but the effect reversed when
numbers were presented at words (i.e., one) which was the
opposite pattern to Experiment 1A.

Word-Number or the backward Number-Word condition)
recall performance is highest. Errors bars represent 1 SE.

Discussion
The present experiment did not replicate the main categoryorder effect from Experiment 1A, however, a pattern of
improved overall recall was still present for numeric digits
over numbers represented as words. Additionally, unlike
prior studies, the effect of recall order did not show a
category-order effect based on input position, but instead
indicated that words exhibited relatively higher recall when
recalled first, that is, for forward recall with the WordNumber category order and for backward recall with the
Number-Word category order. The main difference in word
stimuli in this study is that words were controlled for length,
category-relatedness, and were from smaller category-sets
than the stimuli from Brooks and Watson (1990).
One possible explanation for these findings is that, in
the short-term, the lexical and phonotactic properties of the
stimuli facilitate recall but when more time is allowed to
pass, the activation of associated items in long-term memory
creates competition during retrieval and decreases recall
accuracy. If recall can proceed immediately, related words
can be recalled with little interference. If participants are
required to recall these items last, as more time passes a
greater number of alternative candidates could be activated
in long-term memory creating greater interference
(Anderson, 1974).

0.75
Number-Word
Word-Number

Proportion Correct Recall

0.70

0.65

0.60

0.55

0.50
Digits

Words

Number Format

Figure 2. The effect of Number Format on the CategoryOrder Effect. Encoding fluency influences the nature of the
effect rather than being due to numbers preceding words.
Errors bars represent 1 SE.

General Discussion
Brooks and Watkins (1990) and Greene and Lasek (1994)
both proposed the existence of a category-order effect
whereby full-list recall is improved when numbers precede
words in a mixed-list design. The original interpretation of
the COE attributed this finding to the categorical properties
of the number and word stimuli: number stimuli were drawn
from a smaller, more homogenous category than word
stimuli.
The results of two experiments revealed the conditions
in which item and order information interact to increase
recall performance in serial recall tasks in which the items
belong to two different categories. In Experiment 1A, we
replicated the findings of previous experiments. More items
were recalled from lists which presented number items prior
to words (Brooks & Watkins, 1990; Greene & Lasek, 1994;
Young & Supa, 1941). Experiments 1A, however, extended
these results. It was also observed that number format (digit
vs word) and orthographic properties of list halves also
contribute to the COE. In general, the greater the
orthographic differences there were between the lists halves,
the greater the increase in recall performance.
Experiment 1B further extended these results by
eliminating the COE once word-frequency was controlled.
Experiment 2 also eliminated the main effect of COE once
category set-size, word length, and within category
similarity was controlled. In fact, the trend evidenced a
contrasting pattern of results: once the categorical and sub-

The interaction of Category-Order and Recall Order
was also found to be significant, F(1,30) = 14.767, MSE =
.02, p = .001. As seen in Figure 3, recall was relatively
higher for Word-Number lists over Number-Word lists
when recalled in forward recall order compared to backward
recall order.
0.75
Number-Word
Word-Number

Proportion Correct Recall

0.70

0.65

0.60

0.55

0.50
FORWARD

BACKWARD

Recall Order

Figure 3. The effect of Recall Order on the Category-Order
Effect. When words are recalled first (i.e., in the forward

151

Crannel, C. W., & Parrish, J. M. (1957). A comparison of
immediate memory span for digits, letters, and words. Journal of
Psychology, 44, 319-327.
Crowder, R.G. (1979). Similarity and order in memory. In G.
Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol.
13, pp. 319-353). New York: Academic Press.
Dumais, S. T. (2004). Latent semantic analysis. Annual review of
information science and technology, 38(1), 188-230.
Greene, R. L., & Lasek, R. (1994). Category-order effects in
memory span. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1391-1395.
Healy, A. F. (1974). Separating item from order information in
short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal
Behavior, 13, 644-655.
Howes, D. H., & Solomon, R. L. (1951). Visual duration threshold
as a function of word-probability. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 41, 401-410.
Jordan, T. R., Redwood, M., & Patching, G. R. (2003). Effects of
form familiarity on perception of words, pseudowords and
nonwords in the two cerebral hemispheres. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15, 537-548.
Lashley, K.S. (1951). The problem of serial order in behaviour. In
L. A. Jefress (Ed.), Cerebral Mechanisms in Behaviour: the
Hixon Symposium. Wiley.
McGinnies, E., Comer, P. B., & Lacey, O. L. (1952). Visualrecognition thresholds as a function of word length and word
frequency. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44, 65-69.
Nairne, J. S., & Kelley, M. R. (2004). Separating item and order
information through process dissociation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 50, 113-133.
Nelson, D. L., Keelean, P. D., & Negrao, M. (1989). Wordfragment cuing: The lexical search hypothesis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
15, 388-397.
Perri, R., Bartolomeo, P., & Silveri, M. C. (1996). Letter dyslexia
in a letter-by-letter reader. Brain and Language, 53, 390-407.
Postman, L., & Adis-Castro, G. (1957). Psychophysical methods in
the study of word recognition. Science, 125, 193-4.
Schoenherr, J. R. & Thomson, R. (2009). Modeling the CategoryOrder Effect with an Oscillator-Based Connectionist Network.
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Amsterdam, ND.
Schoenherr, J. R. & Thomson, R. (2008). Category Properties and
the Category-Order Effect. Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Washington, USA.
Smith, F., Lott, D., & Cronnell, B. (1969). The effect of type size
and case alternation on word identification. The American
Journal of Psychology, 82, 248-253.
Saint-Aubin, J., Ouellette, D., & Poirier, M. (2005). Semantic
similarity and immediate serial recall: Is there an effect on all
trials? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(1), 171-177.
Watkins, M. J. (1977). The intricacy of memory span. Memory &
Cognition, 5, 529-534.
West, R. L., Pyke, A. A., Rutledge-Taylor, M. F., & Lang, H.
(2010). Interference and ACT-R: New evidence from the fan
effect. In D. D. Salvucci & G. Gunzelmann (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Cognitive Modeling (pp.
277-281). Philadelphia, PA: Drexel University.
Young, C. W., & Supa, M. (1941). Mnemonic inhibition as a factor
in the limitation of the memory span. The American Journal of
Psychology, 54, 546-552.

categorical properties of the word stimuli was more
comparable to those of the number stimuli, the trend was for
more items recalled when words preceded numbers. The
fact that a COE-like effect was observed in Experiments 1A
and 2 wherein word length was allowed to vary might
suggest that orthographic properties reduce proactive
interference giving rise to previous results interpreted as
COE.
The relative gain for recall performance of digit-word
lists relative to word-digit lists is only one demonstration of
a category-order effect. This does, however, illustrate that
what previous authors have construed as categorical
properties might in fact be partly due to sub-categorical
properties shared by the stimuli. For instance, the robust
finding that high-frequency words are better recalled than
low-frequency words in no way implies that high-frequency
and low-frequency words are represented as contrasting
categories in an individual’s memory. Instead, categories
would seem to require additional inter-item associations
such as physical similarity of exemplars (e.g., whales and
fish or whales and mammals), as seen in Experiment 2.
Traditionally, the COE was assumed to arise from an
interaction between categorical properties of stimuli
(numbers rather than words) and the order in which they
were presented (numbers before words). When participants
are presented with stimuli, a trace is created in short-term
memory. Information associated with those stimuli is
activated in long-term memory. When items share category
membership, the associations between items in a list
generally enhance recall performance (Saint-Aubin et al.,
2005). However, when categories are large, the resultant
spread of activation to other category members creates
interference (Nelson et al., 1989).
The results of our experiments lead us to question
previous assumptions about the COE. Namely, although
order and item information do contribute to recall
performance, and that categorical properties of the stimuli
likely affect recall performance, the initial detection
threshold of the stimuli appears to account for more recall
performance once it has been controlled. This finding also
has implications for studies in that perceptual effects appear
to contribute more to recall performance than knowledge
effects.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1974). Retrieval of propositional information
from long-term memory. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 451-474.
Anderson, J. R. & Reder, L. M. (1999). The fan effect: New results
and new theories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 128, 186-197.
Brooks, J. O., & Watkins, M. J. (1990). Further evidence of the
intricacy of memory span. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 1143-1141.
Cowan, N., Day, L., Saults, J. S., Keller, T. A., Johnson, T., &
Flores, L. (1992). The role of verbal output time in the effects of
word length on immediate memory. Journal of Memory and
Language, 31, 1-17.

152

