Syntactic Flexibility in the Noun: Evidence from Picture Naming
Nicholas A. Lester (nlester@umail.ucsb.edu)
Fermín Moscoso del Prado Martín (fmoscoso@linguistics.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics
University of California, Santa Barbara, South Hall 3432
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
Abstract

sorts of tasks. However, to our knowledge, no study has
specifically addressed whether a noun's retrieval depends on
the diversity of its syntactic distributions. Are nouns that
exhibit greater syntactic flexibility easier or harder to
produce?

Does syntactic information affect the production of bare nouns?
Research into this issue has explored word-specific features (e.g.,
gender). However, word-independent syntactic distributions may
also play a role. For example, studies of word recognition have
uncovered strong effects of the diversity of a word's syntactic
distribution – its syntactic flexibility – on response times in the
lexical decision paradigm. By contrast, studies of sentence
production have produced strong but conflicted effects of syntactic
flexibility. We propose that syntactic flexibility also affects
production of individual words. We reanalyze a database of
previously collected timed picture naming data using two novel
measures of syntactic flexibility, one based on the relations
stemming from the noun, and one based on the relations extending
to the noun. Our results show that nouns that project a diverse
array of structures are produced faster, and those that are integrated
into a diverse array of structures are produced slower.

Syntactic Aspects of Lexical Access

Keywords: syntactic flexibility; word production; picture
naming; entropy

Introduction
Language production is fast – very fast – but the speed of
the system is not without variability. One source of
variability is the diversity of options available for encoding
a given message. Most mainstream models of speech
production rely on the notion of interactive competition,
whereby the presence of alternatives delays encoding (socalled interference effects; e.g., Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer,
1999). Such effects have been observed at the level of word
production with respect to shared syntactic features of
competitors: It takes longer to produce a word if other
syntactic competitors are simultaneously active. Some
studies have investigated similar issues at the sentence level.
In one study, the number of sentence structures allowed by a
given arrangement of words – their syntactic flexibility –
was shown to correlate negatively with speech onset
latencies (V. S. Ferreira, 1996). However, more recent
research has reported the opposite findings: greater syntactic
flexibility produced traditional interference effects, with
slower production onsets for clauses with greater syntactic
flexibility (Myachykov et al., 2013).
The clause-level studies have focused on the arrangement
of arguments into abstract syntactic frames. One question
that has not been addressed is how the syntactic flexibility
of nouns affects their accessibility in production. Much
work has been devoted to outlining the representation of
syntactically relevant features of nouns, such as gender, as
well as the time course of their activation across different

All models of word production posit associations between
individual lexical items and syntactic information
(Caramazza, 1997; Dell, 1986; Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer,
1999). However, they differ with respect to the time-course
and directionality of activation between word-level and
syntax-level nodes. For the most part, this research has
focused on whether words share access to abstract
specifications of gender and whether these genderspecifying nodes feed back to the lexical nodes during
lexical retrieval. These studies typically rely on the pictureword interference task. In this task, participants are asked to
name an image while ignoring a distractor word. The word
either matches or conflicts with the target name with respect
to its gender. The results have been split. If participants are
asked to produce the picture name in a syntactic frame that
requires access to the noun's gender (e.g., die Katze), then
targets with matched-gender distractors are produced slower
than mis-matched pairs (e.g., Schriefers & Teruel, 2000).
Effects of this kind are typically attributed to competition
between the distractor and target for access to a shared
gender node. By contrast, when participants are asked to
name a picture with a bare noun in the same task (e.g.,
Katze), then no interference effect is observed in the
matched condition (La Heij, Mark, Sander, & Willeboorsde,
1998). This has led some to conclude that syntactic features
are accessed preferentially during syntactic (i.e. phrasal), as
opposed to purely lexical, production. However, a small
number of studies eliciting bare-noun names in Romance
languages have uncovered interference effects in the gendermatched condition (e.g., Cubelli et al., 2005). Thus, there is
some support for activation of grammatical features in the
picture-naming task, regardless of whether the form of the
response requires that information.
Further support for universal access of syntactic features
in bare-noun picture naming comes from a similar
phenomenon – the mass/count distinction in English nouns
(Gregory, Varley, & Herbert, 2012). In English, the
mass/count noun distinction controls determiner type. For
example, in their singular form, count nouns such as cat can
take the determiner each (each cat), while mass nouns such

2585

as flour cannot (?*each flour). Gregory et al. (2012) found
that bare-noun picture naming of count and mass nouns was
facilitated by a grammatically congruent determiner prime.
They attribute this finding to pre-activation of the syntactic
feature shared between the determiner prime and the target
word.
So far, we have seen that grammatical classes are relevant
for word processing in production. Less clear is the extent to
which syntactic relations – the scaffolds into which words
are fit – impact lexical retrieval. To make this contrast more
clear, consider that grammatical classes such as gender have
consequences for the formal properties of words and their
dependents (e.g., different patterns of agreement). However,
they do not constrain the syntactic distributions of words.
For example, the German words Katze and Hund belong to
two different gender classes which take different forms of
the definite determiner (die vs. der), along with different
patterns of agreement elsewhere in the grammar.
Nevertheless, both can occur with definite determiners,
whatever their form. Going further, both may occur with
adjectives, as subjects of sentences, as objects of
prepositions, and so on. Crucially, gender does not dictate
the availability of these relations, only the forms of the
relata1. If information about grammatical class is activated
when we access nouns for production, even when it doesn't
impact the form of the utterance, then it is possible that
other abstract syntactic information is likewise activated.
Some recent research from comprehension supports this
possibility.
Baayen et al. (2011) showed that the shape of a noun's
(partially lexicalized) syntactic distribution impacts the time
it takes to recognize that noun in visual lexical decision.
They collected all trigrams of the form preposition +
determiner + noun (for example, on the table). They then
measured the diversity of the prepositions occurring with
each noun and correlated this measure with lexical decision
latencies. Nouns that occurred more evenly across a wider
array of prepositions were recognized faster than words that
skewed toward a limited array of prepositions. While
interesting, these results speak only indirectly to the
question raised above. This is because the trigrams used in
the study do not contrast syntactic types, but rather lexical
types (prepositions) within a single syntactic relation
(prepositional object). Moreover, the proximity of the
preposition and the noun opens the possibility that the
facilitatory effect might actually be semantic in nature.
Variability in small-scale co-occurrence windows is often
assumed to reflect or indeed to constitute the meaning of
words (Bullinaria & Levy, 2007).
In a follow-up study, Lester and Moscoso del Prado
Martín (2015) compared the distributions of nouns across
1

Other grammatical classes may constrain the syntactic
possibilities of nouns. For example, English mass nouns like water
may function as their own phrase in non-metalinguistic contexts
(Water is wet) while count nouns typically cannot (*Cat is furry).
However, these constraints are likely to be relatively minor. As the
examples above demonstrate, syntactic distributions are at least
partially independent of grammatical class.

prepositional phrases within a parsed corpus of English
writing. Crucially, the distance between noun and
preposition could be of any size. First, they replicated the
negative correlation between diversity and response time. To
investigate the source of the effect in more detail, they
compared the syntactically defined diversity space with a
semantically-defined space (based on Latent Semantic
Analysis vectors). They found almost zero correlation
between the two. Second, they found that words with
similar distributions in the syntactic space did not prime one
another in an overt semantic priming task, while words with
similar distributions in the semantic space did. Third, they
showed that increasing average distance between the nouns
and their prepositions reduced the strength of the
facilitation, but did not eliminate or overturn it. That is,
small-scale co-occurrence does seem to contribute
something to our measure: when nouns tend to occur closer
the prepositions, the facilitation is increased. However, it
alone cannot explain the continued facilitation at longer
distances. These findings suggest that something other than
meaning must be contributing to the facilitation. A natural
candidate is syntax.
These studies show that words encode abstract
distributional information about their use and that this
information becomes active in comprehension, even for
isolated words. However, no study has yet compared
syntactic types; the two studies above only treat the relation
between a preposition and its object. Consequently, no study
has measured diversity at a purely syntactic level, that is,
without regard for the particular lexical types that anchor
that relation opposite the target noun. Recall that the
operationalizations of diversity outlined above included
explicit reference to particular prepositions (e.g., how many
times table occurs with on vs. near vs. at vs. ...). Finally, no
study has yet examined how such effects play out in word
production.
In the present study, we address these shortcomings by
considering how flexibility across the entire set of
grammatical relations afforded by a noun affects onset
latencies in picture naming. We refer to this measure as the
total flexibility. We further use the functional contrast
between syntactic heads and dependents to decompose the
total syntactic flexibility. On the one hand, we take the
diversity of syntactic relations through which a noun serves
as a dependent to some other head. Essentially, this measure
captures how easily a noun can be integrated into a syntactic
structure. We refer to this measure as dependent flexibility.
On the other hand, we take the diversity of syntactic
relations for which a noun can serve as head. This measure
captures the structure-building potential of the noun. We
refer to this measure as head flexibility. Importantly, all
three of our measures are taken over abstract syntactic
relations; they make no reference to any words besides the
targets.

2586

because they were collected using the bare-noun naming
paradigm. This means that any effect of syntax that we
observe cannot be attribute to features of the task (e.g., the
fact that a speaker was required to activate a particular
syntactic scaffold when responding).

Hypotheses
We contrast two general predictions regarding the behavior
of our measures. We base these predictions on findings from
sentence production as no comparable data exist for lexical
access.

Data

― The opportunistic hypothesis: Nouns with greater
syntactic flexibility will be produced faster.
The first possibility derives from what Myachykov et al.
(2013) termed the opportunistic hypothesis. The
opportunistic hypothesis states that syntactic flexibility is
generally facilitative. The assumption is that production
operates most smoothly when the speaker has the most
options for completing the current syntactic scaffold.
Therefore, syntactically diverse nouns should be produced
faster than syntactically limited nouns. Indirect support for
this hypothesis comes from research on sentence
production, which has shown that people will start speaking
sooner when they have more syntactic options available for
translating a scrambled word list into a grammatical
sentence (V. S. Ferreira, 1996).
― The strategist hypothesis: Nouns with greater
syntactic flexibility will be produced slower.
The second possibility derives from what we refer to as
the strategist hypothesis. The strategist hypothesis states
that more options require more deliberation before a choice
can be made. Therefore, syntactically diverse nouns should
be produced slower than syntactically limited nouns.
Support for this possibility again comes from the sentence
production literature. Myachykov et al. (2013) had speakers
of Russian and English speakers describe scenes depicting
transitive events. They found that Russian speakers took
longer to initiate their descriptions than the English
speakers. The authors attribute the finding to the much
larger number of possible syntactic constructions available
to Russian speakers (12 in total, as opposed to 2 for
English). Hwang and Kaiser (2014), using a task similar to
Ferreira (1996), likewise found slower onset latencies for
syntactically flexible stimuli in Korean.
Neither hypothesis treated so far contrasts the effects of
head and dependent flexibility. This is because no study to
our knowledge has investigated whether different syntactic
functions may respond differently to changes in diversity.
This, coupled with the conflicted nature of the findings from
sentence production, leads us to eschew any specific
predictions with respect to our head and dependent
measures.

Methods
To evaluate these hypotheses, we reanalyze the mean speech
onset latencies from a large-scale picture-naming study
(Bates et al., 2003; since published as part of the
International Picture Naming Project). These data are ideal
for testing the role of syntactic distributions in lexical access

Bates and colleagues showed speakers of seven different
languages a series of black-and-white line drawings and
asked them to provide a bare-noun label (e.g., cat) for each
image. They were instructed to say the name as quickly and
fluently as possible. This instruction is critical: Ferreira and
Swets (2002) show that speeded production tasks can induce
more opportunistic processing strategies. Therefore, the data
may be biased towards confirming the opportunistic
hypothesis. Reaction times and errors were collected.
From the full data set, we extracted the mean onset RTs
for the dominant, or majority names offered for each image.
Of the 520 dominant responses, we took the subset of nonphrasal forms by omitting names that standard English
orthography would divide into multiple words (such as
fishing pole). We estimate the syntactic diversity of the
remaining words on the basis of their distributions within
the filtered Charniak-parsed treebank of the Open American
National Corpus (OANC). This treebank contains phrasestructure parses of approximately 363,000 sentences of
written American English from several genres, totaling
around 11M words. We retrieved all parse trees containing
the target words so long as the latter were tagged as
common singular nouns We observed 416 of the original
520 word types in this sample (frequency in OANC: mean =
137.2; median = 42).
To tease apart the effects of flexibility for nouns as heads
and nouns as dependents, we converted the phrase-structure
trees that we culled from the OANC into dependency
graphs using the Stanford dependency parser (de Marneffe,
MacCartney, & Manning, 2006). In the dependency graph
formalism, grammatical relationships are represented as
ternary units consisting of a head, a dependent, and a typed
relation (Tesnière, 1959). For example, the fat cat in the
sentence The fat cat ate the tuna contains two dependencies:
(1) a determiner relation det headed by cat and projected
onto the and (2) an adjectival-modification relation amod
headed by cat and projected onto fat. In the Stanford
notation, these relationships surface as det(cat-3, the-1) and
amod(cat-3, fat-2), respectively, where the numbers indicate
sequential positioning in the clause. This formalism allows
us to implement our measures in a simple, straightforward
way. Dependent flexibility is operationalized as the diversity
of relations for which the target noun is a dependent.
Examples include the nsubj relation, which links a noun to a
verb as its subject, or the pobj relation, which links a noun
to a preposition as its object. Head flexibility is
operationalized as the diversity of relations for which the
target noun serves as head. Examples include the amod
relation, which links an adjective to a noun, or det, which
links a determiner to a noun. Importantly, we only care

2587

about the target nouns and the relations; we ignore the
words that are linked to the targets via the relation.

Syntactic Measures
To measure the diversity of the relation types, we generated
three sparse matrices. Each matrix captures the frequency
distributions of the target nouns (rows) across the set of
relation types (columns). We constructed one such matrix
for dependent relations, one for head relations, and one for
all relations, regardless of whether the target was head or
dependent.
For each word vector in each matrix, we computed the
Shannon entropy (Shannon, 1948) of the distribution. This
measure is particularly good at capturing diversity as it
considers not only the number of types of relations, but also
the relative frequencies of those types. The measure thus
increases both with the number of types and with a more
even spread of the instances across those types. Shannon
entropy, denoted H, is defined as the mean of the weighted
negative log probabilities of event x taken across outcomes i
(Eq. 1).

H = −∑ p (xi ) log p( x i)

(1)

i =1

Eq. 1 reflects the maximum-likelihood estimate of
diversity within our vectors. As is, this measure will
necessarily underestimate the true diversity of the sample.
This is because we cannot be sure that the observed set of
relations actually exhausts the set of possible relations for
our targets. To counter this downward bias, we smooth our
entropy estimates using the Chao, Wang, & Jost (2013)
method (see Moscoso del Prado Martín, in press for a
demonstration of the reliability of this message for word
frequency distributions). We abbreviate our smoothed
measure of head flexibility H h and our smoothed measure of
dependent flexibility as Hd. We abbreviate our baseline total
flexibility measure as Ht.

the word preceding the sentential root dependency
(instantiated lexically by the main verb).
Semantic effects in the timed picture naming tasks are
split. Bormann (2011) found no difference in onset RTs for
words from large or small semantic neighborhoods.
However, Bates et al. (2003) report strong interference
effects for onset RTs when the picture being described
elicited more different names across participants. We
likewise include the number of other names provided as a
control. We also include a predictor of referent animacy, as
animates are well known to be more accessible than
inanimates (e.g., Ariel, 1991).
Finally, we include a number of other controls known to
affect picture naming latencies: (log) lemma word frequency
(CELEX), phonological complexity, visual complexity of
the stimulus image, and subjective ratings of conceptual
complexity.

Results
We computed several generalized additive models (GAMs)
predicting mean (non-transformed) picture-naming RTs as
dependent variable. As a first step, we added all control
predictors (with spline-based smooths for all numeric
predictors). After these, we added our total-flexibility
measure Ht (with and without smoothing). As expected, we
found a facilitatory linear effect of word frequency (β =
-33.81, p<.0001) and a facilitatory effect of Bates and
colleagues' measure of name agreement (p<.0001). Our
baseline flexibility measure Ht had no effect (with or
without smoothing; p>0.2).

Additional Controls
We also gathered information about the sentential
distributions and semantic properties of each noun attested
in our sample to avoid potential non-syntactic confounds. A
word's typical positioning within a sentence may reflect
aspects of its accessibility. Most models of sentence
production hold that word order is partially determined by
the relative speed with which the words are accessed (within
the syntactic constraints afforded by the grammar of the
language; Gletiman et al., 2007). Therefore, a word's
general likelihood of showing up earlier in clauses might
translate into faster bare-noun production in picture naming.
In particular, words that frequently occur prior to the verb
(e.g., as sentential subject or left-dislocated topic) might
simply be more discourse-salient for speakers (better
starting points; Konopka & Brown-Schmidt, 2014). Thus,
we calculate the average relative positioning (position over
sentence length) of each word, as well as the likelihood of

Figure 1: Facilitatory effect of Hh
In the next round, we repeated the model selection
process, but substituted our measures of head flexibility H h
and dependent flexibility Hd for the total measure Ht.
Collinearity between the head and dependent measures was

2588

within the acceptable range (c=10.37)2 as was the
collinearity between each and word frequency (c<10 for
both). The model returned significant effects of the same
two control variables at essentially identical strengths. It
also uncovered a facilitatory effect of H h (p<.05; Figure 1)
and an inhibitory effect of Hd (p<.05; Figure 2). Both effects
are of roughly equal size, with a difference in extremes of
~100 ms.

Figure 2: Inhibitory effect of Hd

Discussion
Our results provide first evidence that a noun's syntactic
distribution affects its accessibility in word production.
These findings support and expand prior work which has
demonstrated that speakers access syntactic features when
producing words in isolation (Cubelli et al., 2005; Gregory
et al., 2012). Moreover, these findings suggest that words
encode quite fine-grained information about their syntactic
potential. Finally, we show that the function of the noun
within syntactic relations plays a critical role in determining
its accessibility. We find facilitation for nouns that are heads
of a diverse array of relations and inhibition for those that
are dependents of a diverse array of relations.
The facilitatory effect of head diversity is compatible with
the opportunistic hypothesis, which states that production
proceeds best when we have more options for structural
encoding (V. S. Ferreira, 1996). Following this logic, nouns
that provide more possibilities for expanding their phrasal
2

Collinearity between our three flexibility measures exceeded
the acceptable range (c=24.5). To clean this collinearity, we
performed a principal components analysis (PCA) on the three
measures. The PCA yielded a component that distinguished Hh
(.64) from Hm (-.76) with near 0 loading for H t. When we entered
this component into the GAM frame described above, we found a
noisier but significant effect ultimately equivalent to the individual
effects of Hh and Hm (p < .05). However, to maximize the clarity of
results attributable to our decomposed measures, we report the
analysis that simply omits Ht.

nodes could be accessed more quickly because their
selection does not immediately commit the speaker to any
particular phrasal structure. Of course, the utterances
analyzed here consist of single words. However, the
opportunistic hypothesis makes reference only to possible
structures. In that sense, the speed of lexical access need not
depend on the intention to build a broader syntactic unit
around the word. Rather, it may depend on the array of
structures suggested by its activation. But this is only part of
the story. Recall that several studies have shown that other
forms of syntactic information, such as gender, can affect
production of single words (e.g., Cubelli et al., 2005). Taken
together, these facts suggest that the bare-noun naming
paradigm may not be effective at eliminating syntactic
processing, at least not entirely. This makes sense if we
consider that people rarely produce words apart from a
syntactic context. If when the system activates a word, it
expects strongly to produce that word in some syntactic
arrangement, then it may persist in activating syntaxrelevant information despite the constraints imposed by the
task.
Turning to dependent flexibility, we uncovered an
inhibition effect: nouns that showed a greater diversity of
embedding contexts were produced slower. This finding is
compatible with the strategist hypothesis (Myachykov et al.,
2013), which predicts that more options make it more
difficult to settle on the final outcome. This result may be
directly related to the task. The participants were required to
produce only a single word. The single-word utterance is
one of many syntactic templates in which a word could have
been experienced (e.g., in exchanges like A. What did you
say? B. Cat.). In dependency grammar, this would be
represented as the ROOT relation (a special 'headless'
dependency type that only takes a dependent). Thus,
selecting the ROOT relation from among the other possible
structures may have resulted in a traditional interference
effect. This point distinguishes head and dependent diversity
within the context of bare-noun picture naming. When
producing a noun in the ROOT relation, one has actually
committed to a syntactic structure – one of many available
to call the noun as dependent. However, when there is no
intention to elaborate the noun into a noun phrase, the
diversity of its possible head relations can facilitate access
without interference. The structures that would otherwise be
competing for selection now support access by feeding
activation back into the target lexeme. The more diverse the
feedback network, the faster the access.
This pattern of results underscores two critical points
regarding language processing: (1) words are finely
articulated syntactic entities whose history of use partially
determines how efficiently they are processed – even in
isolation! – and (2) flexibility is not a simple component of
syntactic entities, but one that interacts with different
functional domains to help or hinder processing. Perhaps
words and syntactic structures are much more tightly linked
than is typically acknowledged. If so, then the effects of
flexibility observed here might be attributed to the flow of

2589

activation within the network – top-down from the syntactic
tier or bottom-up from individual words. This type of
processing model would be more in line with current
linguistic models of representation, for which grammar and
lexicon form a continuum (e.g., Goldberg, 2006).
Architecturally, it wouldn't be a matter of representing
syntax in the noun so much as with the noun. At any rate,
continued exploration and refinement of these diversity
effects will no doubt sharpen our perspective on the
relationship between words and structure.

References
Ariel , M. (1991). The function of accessibility in a theory
of grammar. Journal of Pragmatics, 16, 443-463.
Baayen, R. H., Milin, P., Filipović-Đurđević, D., Hendrix, P.
& Marelli, M. (2011). An amorphous model for
morphological processing in visual comprehension based
on naive discriminative learning. Psychological Review,
118, 438-482.
Bates, E., D'Amico, S., Jacobsen, T., Székely, A., Andonova,
E., Devescovi, A., Herron, D., Lu, C. C., Pechmann, T.,
Pléh, C., Wicha, N., Federmeier, L. Gerdjikova, I.,
Gutierrez, G., Hung, D., Hsu, J., Iyer, G., Kohnert, K.,
Mehotcheva, T., Orozco-Figueroa, A., Tzeng, A., &
Tzeng, O. (2003). Timed picture naming in seven
languages. Pscyhonomic Bulletin and Review, 10, 344380.
Bock, J. K. & Ferreira, V. S. (2014). Syntactically speaking.
In M. Goldrick, V. S. Ferreira, & M. Miozzo (Eds), The
Oxford Handbook of Language Production (pp. 21-46).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Bormann, T. (2011). The role of lexical-semantic
neighborhood in object naming: Implications for models
of lexical access. Frontiers in Psychology, 2. 1-11.
Bullinaria, J. A. & Levy, J. P. (2007). Extracting Semantic
Representations from Word Co-occurrence Statistics: A
Computational Study. Behavior Research Methods, 39,
510-526.
Caramazza, A. (1997). How many levels of processing are
there in lexical access? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 14,
177–208.
Chao, A., Wang, Y. T., & Jost, L. (2013). Entropy and the
species accumulation curve: a novel estimator of entropy
via discovery rates of new species. Methods in Ecology
and Evolution, 4, 1091–1110
Cubelli, R., Lotto, L., Paolieri, D., Girelli, M., & Job, R.
(2005). Grammatical gender is selected in bare noun
production: Evidence from the picture-word interference
paradigm. Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 42–59.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval
in sentence production. Psychological Review, 93, 283321.
de Marneffe, M-C., MacCartney, B., & Manning, C. D.
(2006). Generating Typed Dependency Parses from
Phrase Structure Parses. In LREC 2006.

Ferreira, F., & Swets, B. (2002). How incremental is
language production? Evidence from the production of
utterances requiring the computation of arithmetic sums.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 57–84.
Ferreira, V. S. (1996). Is it better to give than to donate?
Syntactic flexibility in language production. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 724–755.
Gleitman, L., January, D., Nappa, R., & Trueswell, J.C.
(2007). On the give and take between event apprehension
and utterance formulation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 57, 544-569.
Goldberg, A. E. (2006). Constructions at work: The nature
of generalization in language. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gregory, E., Varley, R., Herbert, R. (2012). Determiner
primes as facilitators of lexical retrieval. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 41, 439-453.
Hwang, H., & Kaiser, E. (2014). Having a syntactic choice
is not always better: The effects of syntactic flexibility on
Korean production. Language, Cognition, and
Neuroscience, 29, 1115-1131.
Konopka, A. E., & Brown-Schmidt, S. (2014). Message
encoding. In M. Goldrick, V. S. Ferreira, & M. Miozzo
(Eds), The Oxford Handbook of Language Production (pp.
3-20). New York: Oxford University Press.
La Heij, W., Mark, P., Sander, J., & Willeboorsde, E. (1998).
The gender congruency effect in picture word task.
Psychological Research, 61, 209–219.
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar: Theoretical prerequisites. Stanford: CSLI.
Lester, N. A., & Moscoso del Prado Martín, F. (2015).
Constructional paradigms affect visual lexical decision
latencies in English. In Noelle, D. C., Dale, R.,
Warlaumont, A. S., Yoshimi, J., Matlock, T., Jennings, C.
D., & Maglio, P. P. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1320-1325).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1–75.
Moscoso del Prado Martín, F. (in press). Vocabulary,
grammar, sex, and aging. Cognitive Science.
Myachykov, A., Scheepers, C., Garrod, S., Thompson, D., &
Fedorova, O. (2013). Syntactic flexibility and competition
in sentence production: The case of English and Russian.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 66,
1601-1619.
Schriefers, H., & Teruel, E. (2000). Grammatical gender in
noun phrase production: The gender interference effect in
German. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
memory, and Cognition, 26, 1368-1377.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of
communication. The Bell System Technical Journal,
28(3), 379-423.
Tesnière, L. (1959). Éléments de syntaxe structurale. Paris:
Klincksieck.

2590

