Systematic feature variation underlies adults’ and children’s use of in and on
Kristen Johannes (kjohann@WestEd.org)

WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., 25th floor, Oakland, CA 94609, USA

Colin Wilson (wilson@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Krieger Hall
3400 N Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

Barbara Landau (landau@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Krieger Hall
3400 N Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
Abstract
The spatial prepositions in and on apply to a wide range of
containment and support relations, making exhaustive
definitions difficult. Theories differ in whether they endorse
geometric or functional properties and how these properties are
related to meaning and use. This study directly examines the
roles of geometric and functional information in adults’ and
children’s use of in and on by developing a large sample of
relations situated within a small gradable geometric and
functional feature space. We propose that variation in features
across items is systematically related to the use of in and on
and demonstrate that feature-language relationships change
across development: adults’ expression use is sensitive to both
geometric and functional features, while children’s use varies
only according to geometric features.
Keywords: Spatial language; spatial cognition; acquisition;
language use

Background
All natural languages have a limited system of terms
dedicated to the expression of spatial relationships between
objects (Talmy, 1985). In the current study, we focus on the
English prepositions in and on, considered the primary
vehicles for expressing containment and support relations,
respectively (Bowerman, 1996; Landau & Jackendoff, 1993;
Talmy, 1985; Gentner & Bowerman, 2009; Herskovits,
1986, inter alia). Within these broad relationships, terms in
and on cover a wide range of object configurations: from
apples in bowls and books on tables, to pieces in a puzzle
and fish on a line. The mapping between these expressions
and object configurations must abstract over many finegrained properties of individual objects, and capturing the
critical properties has been challenging, especially given the
early acquisition of these terms by children. Some theories
endorse coarse-grained geometric properties of object
representations, such as volumes, surfaces, and axes
(Landau & Jackendoff, 1993), while others propose various
functional properties of containment and support as
relations between any objects (e.g., Garrod et al., 2009).
In this paper, we directly examine the role of geometric
and functional information in English speakers’ spatial uses
of in and on and develop two hypotheses to address the

following two questions: 1) How are geometric and
functional information jointly engaged in the use of in and
on? And 2) How does the relationship between functional
and geometric knowledge and language develop over the
course of acquisition?
Although in and on are are among the earliest words
acquired by children (Johnston & Slobin, 1979), they have
broad and sometimes nuanced uses in adult language,
making the meanings of these terms notoriously resistant to
formal definition (Herskovits, 1986; Garrod et al., 1999,
i.a.) and their trajectory of acquisition poorly understood.

The Current Study
We selected a limited set of geometric and functional
properties (hereafter ‘features’) of spatial relations believed
to be relevant to language-independent notions of
containment and support and the spatial meanings of the
English terms in and on. Using a rating task, we situated a
sample of 128 natural scenes within this feature space. The
scenes featured object configurations that reflected a wide
range of containment and support relations that varied
parametrically across the geometric features and in an
uncontrolled way across a functional feature. We used this
feature space to test two hypotheses about the relationship
between feature variation across our items and speakers’ use
of in and on to describe those items:
Hypothesis 1: Variation in gradable geometric and
functional features is systematically related to differences in
adults’ probabilistic use of in and on.
Hypothesis 2: Children’s probabilistic use of in and on will
show early sensitivity to geometric features, evidenced prelinguistically, but not to functional features.
Three key elements differentiate our proposal from previous
accounts of in and on: 1) We developed a set of languageindependent geometric features, motivated by pre-linguistic
and cross-linguistic evidence, and a functional feature based
on psycholinguistic findings, discussed below; 2) We
selected a large and highly diverse sample of containment
and support relations; and 3) We focused on mappings
between our continuous feature space and probabilistic
language use.

2429

Why (not) geometry?
Geometric notions (see Landau & Jackendoff, 1993; Talmy,
1985) have served as a cornerstone for theories of the
meanings of individual spatial prepositions, and the earliest
accounts of prepositions are based solely on geometry. As
one example, Bennett (1975) defines the preposition in
using the highly geometric notion of an interior and a
general location function, so that the expression A is in B for
objects A and B in (1) simply means that A is located at the
interior of B. Similarly, Bennett defines the preposition on
via the location function applied to an object’s surface, in
(2) (Bennett, 1975, p. 71).
(1) A is in B: A [locative [interior of B]]
(2) A is on B: A [locative [surface of B]]
These strictly geometric definitions work for stereotypical
cases, such as the scenes in Figure 1-A. However, relying
solely on notions like interior and surface as constraints on
the meanings of in and on fail to account for many of the
regular (i.e., non-idiomatic) uses of the terms, such as for
Figure 1-B (Herskovits, 1986; Feist, 2000, Garrod et al.,
1999, Coventry et al., 1994, i.a.) and predicts unattested
uses, such as Figure 1-C.

Figure 1. Purely geometric accounts predict that “The
orange is in the bowl” and “The book is on the desk”
felicitously describe the respective top and bottom cases for
A, but not B (orange/books on top of other fruit/books), and
incorrectly predicts that the expressions describe the cases
in C (orange/book under bowl/desk).
These are just a few of many counterexamples that have
been levied against purely geometric accounts of in and on.
However, we propose that there are a number of connected
reasons why an account like Bennett's might fail to capture
the full range of meanings and typical uses of in and on.
First, these accounts may simply choose the wrong type of
geometric information by building a theory of meaning
based on narrow, conventional cases of containment and
support (oranges in bowls and books on tables) while
ignoring less central spatial cases for which in and on can be
used, such as arrows in targets or clothes on a line.
Second, previous geometric accounts may fail as a
consequence of the mapping between geometric information
and spatial term meaning and use. Many proposals,
including that of Bennett (1975), state or implicitly assume
a deterministic all-or-none relationship between the

presence of a feature, geometric or otherwise, and the use of
a spatial term: if the feature applies to the relation, then the
spatial term can be used to describe it, if the feature doesn’t
apply, then the term cannot be used. On these accounts,
features are assumed to be binary1 — either applying
perfectly to a particular object configuration or not at all —
and spatial language use is assumed to be uniform — all
configurations to which, for example, the term in applies are
"equally good” instances of the features specified in the
meaning of in.
In this paper, we argue against such a deterministic
mapping and propose a probabilistic relationship between
conceptual features and speaker's use of spatial language
(specifically, in and on). We suggest that the geometric
features relevant to containment and support relations are
not binary but are instead gradable so that different
configurations can instantiate features to varying degrees.
Following this, we observe that some object configurations
are intuitively “better” and more frequent instances of in or
on than others (e.g., example, on is used more frequently for
books on a table than fish on a line), and propose a
probabilistic mapping between spatial relations and terms.
Support for this proposal comes from previous work by
Johannes and colleagues (Johannes, Wilson, Landau, 2013,
under review; Johannes et al., 2015) who have uncovered
distinctions among hypothesized sub-types of containment
and support relations on the basis of differences in speakers'
rates of use of individual expressions. For example, across
multiple languages, speakers’ spatial term use reliably
distinguishes cases of loose-fitting containment (e.g., apples
in bowls) from interlocking cases (e.g., puzzle pieces in a
puzzle), and cases of support from below (e.g., books on a
table) from support by hanging (e.g., fish on a line).

Geometric features of containment and support
We consulted a history of work on pre-linguistic and crosslinguistic spatial categorization to identify pairs of candidate
features for containment and support relations. These
features are likely to be language-independent in the sense
of being salient pre-linguistically, suggesting that these
features should not be specific to the spatial meanings of
English alone (Gentner & Bowerman, 2009, Hespos &
Spelke, 2004), and should be attested in the lexicons of
culturally and typologically diverse languages.
Results from studies of pre-linguistic and cross-linguistic
spatial concepts converge on a small set of geometric
features — two for containment and two for support
relations — around which, we hypothesize, the spatial
meanings of in and on can be organized. These four
geometric features are outlined in Table 1, along with
supporting pre-linguistic and cross-linguistic evidence.

1

On some accounts, features are not binary by design, but feature
values are subject to thresholding to make binary distinctions.
2
Children completed the rating task on an iPad alongside an

2430

Table 1. Geometric features for containment and support items are listed with the pre-linguistic and cross-linguistic evidence
used to select each feature for use in the study.
Feature

Feature Description

Pre-linguistic Evidence

Containment
Enclosure

The extent to which one
(containing) object
encloses or surrounds
another (contained) object

When reasoning about containment, 3.5
month-olds are sensitive to both the
solidity of a container as well as
whether it has an open top (Hespos &
Baillargeon, 2001).

Containment
Volume
Match

The amount of empty space
between containing and
contained objects
(alternatively, the tightness
of fit between a containing
and contained object)

At 5 months, infants expect objects to
move separately when there is a lot of
empty space between them and to move
together when there is little empty
space (Hespos & Spelke, 2004).

Support
Vertical
Position

The vertical position of one
(supported) object relative
to the other (supporting)
object

At 5.5 months, infants expect an object
to remain supported after being placed
on the top surface of an object but not
after being placed against the side
surface (Hespos & Baillargeon, 2008).

Support
Surface
Contact

The proportion of one
(supported) object’s
surface that is in contact
with the surface of the
other (supporting) object

6.5 month-olds reach more for an object
placed with 100% of its surface in
contact with a supporting object,
compared to events with 15% surface
contact, reasoning that objects in the
latter case were permanently attached
(Hespos & Baillargeon, 2008).

Functional feature: Location control for in and on
A growing number of proposals based on psycholinguistic
data have considered functional information to be at the core
of prepositional meanings and usage, including abstract
means of in and on (Jamrozik & Gentner, 2015). Garrod
and colleagues (Garrod, Ferrier, & Campbell, 1999) propose
hybrid accounts of the meanings of in and on that combine
geometric and functional properties. Specifically, speakers’
use of in and on reflect different kinds of locational control
between figure and ground objects, in combination with
geometric properties. Successful use of in reflects regional
enclosure with locational control, so that one object (the
figure) is likely to be in another object (the ground) if the
ground encloses the figure, and the ground (and not some
other object) controls the location of the figure. Locational
control differentiates cases like Figure 2-a and 2-b (taken
from Garrod et al., 1999), where the pear (shaded grey
object) is judged to by in the bowl in case (a) but not (b),
despite having the same objective degree of enclosure in
both cases.

Figure 2. The pear in (a) is judged to be in the bowl, while
the pear in (b) is not, despite the same degree of enclosure in
both cases. (Figure adapted from Garrod et al., 1999)

Cross-linguistic Evidence
Speakers of Jaminjung (Australia) use enclosure-sensitive
coverbs walthub and walyag to encode the configurations
below (Levinson & Wilkins, 2006).

Korean speakers use contrastive verbs to encode fit:
A. kkita for interlocking
('tight-fit') cases;
B. nheta, used for 'loose-fit'
containment; C. nhota,
used objects put on
horizontal surfaces.
(Bowerman & Choi, 2001).
Dutch speakers use three prepositions to distinguish cases
of support: op is reserved for support from below/
permanent contact; aan is used for hanging and attachment;
om is used for encirclement (Gentner & Bowerman, 2007).

Speakers of Yêlí Dnye (Papua New Guinea), use the term
yedê (roughly glossed as on a surface) to express surface
contact independent of the (vertical) position of the figure
and ground objects (Levinson & Wilkins, 2006).

In experiments testing speakers’ confidence about in/on
descriptions across relations that varied in the geometric
properties and locational control, Garrod et al. (1999) found
that for cases where regional enclosure and regional contact
were high (i.e., prototypical in and prototypical on cases),
judgments of locational control did not predict or influence
speakers’ confidence about in and on, respectively.
Locational control is predicted to apply equally across cases
and is only “blocked” (or reduced in importance) when
geometric properties are very salient, suggesting a complex
interplay between the two types of information. We
examine the interplay of geometry and function in the
following experiments by adding a gradable functional
feature: locational control, operationalized as the likelihood
that the figure object of a configuration will move together
with the ground object.

Experiment
We developed two large item sets of internet-sourced
images of objects in containment and support relations,
respectively. We used a simple feature-rating task to situate
containment and support items in their own 3-dimensional
feature space (two geometric features and one functional
feature) and then elicited simple spatial descriptions from a
new group of adults to examine relationships between
containment and support feature variation and rate of in and
on use, respectively. Adults’ patterns of use of in and on are
well-captured by combinations of gradable geometric and
functional features.

2431

Methods
Design. One group of adult participants and one group of
child participants completed a feature-rating task for each
sets of items (containment or support). A separate group of
participants from each age group completed a spatial
description task with the same items.
Participants One hundred adults (mean age = 19.2 years)
participated in the experiment through a self-paced online
interface in return for course credit. Fifty participants
provided feature ratings for a set of containment (N=25, 14
males) or support items (N=25, 12 males). The other 50
participants provided descriptions for the same containment
(N=25, 13 males) or support items (N=25, 11 males). All
participants were native English speakers. Twenty 6-yearolds (mean age = 6;5, 11 males) participated in a modified
version of the rating task2, and 24 6-year-olds (mean age =
6;6, 14 males) provided spatial descriptions for containment
and support items.

Figure 4. The 64 support items organized by hypothesized
Vertical Position and Surface Contact feature values.
Table 2. Prompts and scale endpoints for the adult and child
versions of the feature-rating task.

Procedure. Participants in the feature-rating task were
familiarized with the set of geometric and functional
features then shown either containment or support items,
one at a time in random order. For each item, participants
were instructed to consider the two salient labeled objects
(e.g. “Object A: a sandwich”, “Object B: a plate”) and
provide ratings on a 4-point scale for each of the features.
Features, rating prompts, and the response scale endpoints
provided to subjects are given below in Table 2.

Containment feature rating task: Prompts and scale endpoints
Enclosure
Volume Match
Locational Control
How much
How much of
If object B is
empty space is
Adult
object A is
moved, how likely
present between
prompts
enclosed by
is it that object A
object A and
object B?
will move with it?
object B?
There is
A is
{All/hardly any}
{a lot/ hardly
Adult
{very likely/
of A is enclosed
any} empty
endpoints
unlikely} to move
by B
space between A
where B moves
and B
If I move [object
Child
Is [object B]...
Is there...
B] do you think
prompts
[object A] will...
{All around/ not
{Definitely/
Child
{Lots of/ no}
really around}
probably won’t}
endpoints
empty space
[object A]
move with it
Support feature rating task: Prompts and scale endpoints
Vertical position
Surface Contact
Locational Control
How much of
How much of
object A’s
Adult
object A is
surface is in
prompts
higher than
contact with
object B?
object B?
{All/ hardly any}
Adult
{All/ none} of A
of A is in contact
endpoints
is higher than B
with B
(same as above)
How much of
How much of
Child
[object A] is
[object A] is
prompts
higher than
touching [object
[object B]?
B]?
{All, almost no
Child
{All, no part} is
part} of A is
endpoints
higher
touching B

Figure 3. The 64 containment items organized hypothesized
Enclosure and Volume Match feature values.

Adult participants in the spatial description task typed in a
brief description into the space provided in the online
interface by answering the question “Where is [Object A] in
relation to [Object B]?” for the labeled objects in the
image. Child participants gave verbal descriptions that were
later transcribed.

Materials Stimuli consisted of 64 containment items
(Figure 3) and 64 support items (Figure 4). The items were
chosen, by hypothesis, to parametrically vary along two
geometric dimensions: Enclosure and Volume Match for
containment items, and Vertical Position and Surface
Contact for support items. Locational Control was not
manipulated in item selection but was hypothesized to vary
randomly across items.

2

Children completed the rating task on an iPad alongside an
experimenter, who labeled each object and read the prompts aloud.

2432

Results
Feature rating task Adults and children were both reliable
in their geometric feature ratings (Adults: r=0.92, p<.01;
Children: r=0.89, p<.01) and their mean ratings supported
our hypothesized item variation across the geometric
features in both containment and support item sets. Adults,
but not children, were also reliable in their ratings of
Locational Control. Adults' ratings of two geometric
features, Enclosure for containment and Vertical Position
for support, were correlated with their ratings of Locational
Control (Enclosure: r=0.485, p<.01; Vertical Position:
r=0.548, p<.01). Items rated highest in Enclosure or Vertical
Position were also rated highest in Locational Control,
suggesting that Enclosure and Vertical Position may be
geometry-based mechanisms by which one object can exert
control over another object.
Spatial description task Each participant provided a single
description for each scene in the form: “Object A [spatial
expression] Object B”, where the spatial expression
included one or more verbs, a preposition, and an optional
modifier. Descriptions were coded for the presence of the
copular verb BE combined with the prepositions in (for
containment items), or on (for support items) — for
example “The sandwich is in the bag” and “The pillow is
on the stool”. This coding was designed to exclude
descriptions with lexical verbs (e.g., “The sandwich is
sealed in the bag”, “The pillow is sitting on the stool”),
which encode additional spatial, configurational, or
mechanical information (see Johannes, Wilson, & Landau,
under review), as well as descriptions with prepositions
other than in or on, both of which were the focus of other
analyses, not reported here (54% of adult descriptions and
36% of child descriptions). This coding was used to assign a
binary value to each description: a description was coded as
1 if it included in (for containment) or on (for support), and
was coded as 0 otherwise.
Adults and children showed similar patterns of usage of
in and on across containment and support items and adult
and child uses of in and on were reliably correlated
(Pearson’s Rin= 0.67, p<.01; Ron= 0.77, p<.01). Some items
were described exclusively with in or on, while others were
rarely described this way.
We computed four mixed-effects logistic regression
models to examine the relationship between mean geometric
and functional feature ratings and the distribution of adult
and child speakers’ use of in and on across containment and
support scenes. Models included item and subject as random
effects and each of the features was coded as a fixed-effect
predictor3.
Adults’ use of both in and on was related to a
combination of geometric and functional features (as rated
by the separate group of adults). Table 3 gives examples of
3

Covariance between pairs of features was controlled by using the
residuals of preliminary linear models predicting one feature from
another.

the containment and support items that were predicted by
the models to have high and low rates of in and on use. For
containment, items rated high in Enclosure and in
Locational Control were most likely to be described with in
(see Table 3 for the standardized model coefficients, β, for
each feature predictor). This pattern suggests that, for
containment, the geometric property of Enclosure is a
means by which one object can contain another object and
by which it can control the location or movement of another
object. For support, items rated highly on Vertical Position
and Surface Contact features, but low in Locational Control
were most likely to be described using on (standardized
model coefficients in Table 3). This seemingly non-intuitive
pattern suggests that Locational Control is a salient means
of support only when the Vertical Position and Surface
Contact between objects are not. For both containment and
support, the model-fitted probabilities of in and on use for
each item were highly correlated with the adults’ observed
frequency and distribution of use.
Table 3. Results of feature-language models: items
predicted to elicit high and low in/on use for adults and
children; model standardized coefficents (β) for each
predictor; and correlations between model-fitted probability
of in/on use and observed relative frequency of in/on use.
Containment

Adult Results

Child Results

0.47, p<.01
-0.05, (ns)
0.48, p<.01

0.18, p<.01
0.07, (ns)
-0.08 (ns)

R= 0.67, p<.05

R= 0.61, p<.01

Adult Results

Child Results

0.33, p<.01
0.52, p<.01
-0.29, p<.05

0.26, p<.01
0.11, (ns)
-0.04 (ns)

R= 0.81, p<.01

R= 0.69, p<.01

Item with high
predicted in use

Item with low
predicted in use
Enclosure β
Volume Match β
Location Control β
Correlations:
predicted and
attested use

Support

Item with high
predicted on use

Item with low
predicted on use
Vertical Position β
Surface Contact β
Location Control β
Correlations:
predicted and
attested use

In contrast to adults, children’s use of in and on was related
to single geometric features of containment (Enclosure) and
support (Vertical Position) and not by children’s functional

2433

ratings, which were noisy and unreliable, or by adults’
functional ratings. Table 3 shows examples of items with
predicted high and low in and on use and the standardized
model coefficients for each feature predictor.
We
hypothesized that children’s reliance on geometric over
functional information stems from their robust geometric
knowledge, acquired before the onset of language, along
with still-developing knowledge of control relationships,
which may require extremely rich knowledge about object
functions and force-dynamic relationships between objects.

speakers’ expression use across a large and diverse sample
of containment and support relations. Our proposal that
gradable features are related to speakers’ probabilistic use of
in and on reconciles the fact that, while we can use the same
spatial term for a wide range of cases, some cases are better
instances of in and on than others. Put another way, while
relations with (any degree of) certain geometric or
functional properties license a given spatial term, having
those properties to a greater or lesser degree is related to
how “good” a relation is as the extension of a term.

Discussion

References

In the current study, we developed a large structured
sample of containment and support items to test the
relationship between geometric and functional feature
variation and spatial language use at two points in
development. Our feature rating results confirm that a wide
range of containment and support relations are organized
around several geometric features, while also varying on the
functional feature of location control.
Confirming our first hypothesis, geometric and functional
feature variation in our sample of containment and support
items was reliably related to adults’ probability of using in
and on to describe the items. Specifically, geometric and
functional features combined to predict differences in
adults’ use of in and on across items.
We further examined whether the relationships between
feature variation and language shown for adults also held for
children’s spatial language, specifically evaluating the
hypothesis that children’s early use of in and on is sensitive
to pre-linguistically available geometric information but is
not sensitive to functional feature variation among
containment and support relations. Our results demonstrate
that children’s probabilistic use of in and on shows early
adult-like sensitivity to geometric variation across relations
but not to functional feature variation, suggesting that robust
pre-linguistic geometric knowledge, but not functional
knowledge, constrains children’s early uses of in and on.
We designed our feature sets with features that were
relational: they encode information about both the figure
and the ground objects in each item. We tested our features
against an alternative set of plausible, non-relational
features: the degree of curvature of either the figure or
ground object, for containment items, and horizontal
orientation of either the figure or ground object, for support
items. Variation in these non-relational features failed to
reliably predict the use of in and on across the items in our
study and ratings for these features did not correlate with
ratings of the relational features in our study. Arguably,
speakers’ use of spatial terms like in and on is most
sensitive to relational information – and not merely to
properties of individual objects – in object configurations.

Bennett, D.C. (1975). Spatial and Temporal Uses of English
Prepositions. London: Longman.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1998). On plates, bowls, and
dishes: Factors in the use of English IN and ON.
Proceedings of the 20th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, 345-349.
Garrod, S., Ferrier, G., & Campbell, S. (1999). In and on:
investigating the functional geometry of spatial
prepositions. Cognition, 72, 167-189.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition: an
interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in English.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hespos, S.J., & Baillargeon, R. (2001). Reasoning about
containment events in very young infants. Cognition, 78,
207-245.
Hespos, S.J., & Baillargeon, R. (2008). Young infants’
action reveal their developing
knowledge of support
variables: Converging evidence for violation-ofexpectation
findings. Cognition, 107(1), 304-316.
Hespos, S.J. & Spelke, E.S. (2004). Conceptual precursors
to spatial language. Nature,
430, 453-456.
Johannes, K., Wang, J., Papafragou, A., & Landau, B.
(2015). Systematicity and variation in the distribution of
spatial expressions in three distinct languages.
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, 997-1002.
Jamrozik, A., & Gentner, D. (2015). Well-hidden
regularities: Abstract Uses of in and on retain an aspect of
their spatial meaning. Cognitive Science, 39, 1881-1911.
Johannes, K., Wilson, C., & Landau, B. (under review). The
importance of lexical verbs in the acquisition of spatial
language: The case of in and on.
Johnston, J.R., & Slobin, D.I. (1979). The development of
locative expressions in English, Italian, Serbo-Croatian
and Turkish. Journal of Child Language, 6(3), 529-545.
Landau, B. & Jackendoff, R. (1993). ‘What’ and ‘where’ in
spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioural and
Brain Sciences, 16(2), 217-265.
Levinson, S. C., & Wilkins, D. P. (Eds.). (2006). Grammars
of space: Explorations in cognitive diversity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. In Timothy Shopen (ed.),
Language typology and syntactic description (pp. 57149). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Conclusion
We have demonstrated that variation in combinations of
geometric and functional features is related to variation in

2434

