`

Temporal Horizons and Decision-Making: A Big Data Approach
Robert Thorstad (rthorst@emory.edu)
Phillip Wolff (pwolff@emory.edu)
Emory University Department of Psychology

Abstract
Human behavior is plagued by shortsightedness. When faced with
two options, smaller rewards are often chosen over larger rewards,
even when such choices are potentially costly. In three
experiments, we use big data techniques to examine how such
choices might be driven by people’s temporal horizons. In
Experiment 1, we determine the average distance into the future
people talk about in their tweets in order to determine the temporal
horizon of each U.S. state. States with further future horizons had
lower rates of risk taking behavior (smoking, binge drinking) and
higher rates of investment (e.g., education, infrastructure). In
Experiment 2, we used an individual’s tweets to establish their
temporal horizon and found that those with longer temporal
horizons were more willing to wait for larger rewards. In
Experiment 3, we were once again able to predict the choice
behaviors of individuals from their tweets, this time showing that
those with longer future horizons were less likely to take risks. The
findings help establish a powerful relationship between people’s
thoughts about the future and their decisions.
Keywords: prospection; future thinking; big data.

Introduction
People often act impulsively. They eat unhealthy foods,
gamble, overspend, and engage in behaviors that are likely
to have a negative impact on their wellbeing. Such
shortsighted behaviors demonstrate the phenomenon of
delay discounting, a type of reasoning in which long-term
benefits or risks are minimized in favor of smaller shortterm rewards. Delay discounting is seemingly nonnormative and maladaptive. Immediate and distant futures
are equal parts of one’s life as a whole, so it would appear to
be in people’s best interest to wait for larger rewards. And
yet, people continue to make poor decisions, despite the
long-term risks and in spite of the potential benefits of
waiting for larger rewards. In this paper, we use big data
techniques to address the question of why delay discounting
might occur.
We hypothesize that delay discounting may be due, in
part, to the way individuals think about the future.
Specifically, we hypothesize that individuals with a long
temporal horizon – who tend to think far into the future –
will be less likely to discount future rewards.
There is mixed evidence in the literature for the role of
future thinking in delay discounting. There is some evidence
that individuals who tend to think about the future more in
general (e.g. have a future time perspective) are less likely
to discount future rewards (Steinberg et al, 2009; Daugherty
& Brase, 2010), although effect sizes tend to be small.
Additionally, there are reports that encouraging individuals
to think about the future more vividly (e.g. episodic future

thinking) reduces delay discounting (Peters & Buchel, 2010;
but see also Kwan, Craver, Green, Myerson, & Rosenbaum,
2013).
Findings for temporal horizon, however, are more mixed.
Heerey, Matveeva, & Gold (2011) report that schizophrenic
patients with a longer time horizon are less likely to
discount future rewards. However, the authors find no
relationship between time horizon and discounting for
healthy adult controls. Additionally, Fellows & Farah
(2005) report that patients with lesions to ventromedial
prefrontal cortex have a shortened time horizon but show
normal delay discounting. These results provide mixed
evidence for the role of time horizon in delay discounting.
One reason for these mixed results may be the problem of
how to measure temporal horizon. Temporal horizon is
usually measured by asking participants to imagine future
events and then estimate their distance in the future.
However, such explicit tasks may not accurately reflect
participants’ time horizon. Additionally, time horizon may
be subject to state effects that are not captured in a single
laboratory measurement. The current research addresses
these limitation through an analysis of people’s naturally
occurring language on twitter about future events. By
measuring future horizon in this way, we can more
accurately assess its potential impact on people’s choices
about immediate and future rewards. Additionally, because
twitter data is longitudinal in nature, we can address
potential state effects by measuring a participant’s time
horizon over many different time points.

Experiment 1: Discounting in Populations
The hypothesis that delay discounting depends on future
horizon should extend beyond the choices of individuals to
the collective choices of an entire population. Because
various statistics of impulsive / long-range thinking are
already available for populations, we began our
investigation by analyzing the temporal horizon and
collective choices of entire states. To conduct this kind of
analysis we first collected a large number of tweets from
each state. The tweets were then automatically analyzed for
whether they referred to the future or past, as well as their
distance into the future or past. Using these analyses, we
could determine each state’s future orientation, that is, the
degree to which the tended to talk about the future or the
past, as well as each state’s temporal horizon, that is,
distance into the future and past. Once each state’s temporal
horizon was determined, we could examine the extent to
which each state’s future horizon correlated with various
kinds of collective choices. In particular, we examined the
association between future horizon and various kinds of

2003

`

Future Orientation

Temporal Horizon

Figure 1: Mean future orientation of each U.S. state.
Colors range from yellow (least future) to dark red
(most future). Note that the 4 states excluded from
analysis are dummy-coded with the mean value.

Figure 2: Mean temporal horizon of each U.S. state.
Colors range from yellow (shortest horizon) to dark red
(longest horizon). Note that the 4 states excluded from
analysis are dummy-coded with the mean value.

impulsive behaviors, such as binge drinking rates, cigarette
smoking rates, and drunk driving rates. We also examined
the association between future horizons and healthy choice
behaviors, such as seatbelt usage, education spending, and
highway spending. Because of the theoretical novelty of
temporal horizon, we also compared our measure of future
horizon with several demographic variables including
political orientation and economic activity.

Methods
Tweet Collection. We collected 8,550,131 tweets from
April to July 2015 using the Twitter Developer API. Tweets
were restricted to English language only. Tweets were
collected for equal durations from each U.S. state.
Future Orientation Classification. We defined the
future orientation of a state as the number of tweets about
the future, divided by the number of tweets that could be
classified as either past or future (future / (future+past)). We
classified tweets as about the past, future, or neither using a
custom-built classifier. For each tweet, we performed partof-speech parsing using the Stanford Parser (Chen &
Manning, 2014). The result is a sentence represented as a
combination of part-of-speech-tags (e.g. “NP” for noun
phrase) and words. We then developed a set of 112 lexical
and syntactic rules to classify the tweet as past, future, or
neither. For example, the tweet “Maybe ill stay home w
mom tomorrow” was classified as future because it contains
a singular noun “home” dominating the lexical item
“tomorrow” (the relevant rule is NN|RB > tomorrow). In
total, about 31% of tweets were classified as future and
about 23% of tweets were classified as past. The future
classifier was validated against human ratings of 1,000
sentences, showing 76.61% agreement with human raters
(precision=0.75, recall=0.90). This agreement with human
raters compares favorably to other attempts in the literature
(e.g. Nakajima et al, 2014), and approaches human accuracy
(human-to-human percent agreement = 86.44%). This

classifier is available for use on our website:
http://mindandlanguagelab.com/futureAnalysis.
Temporal Horizon Classification. For future tweets
only, we classified their temporal horizon using a keyword
approach. We created a list of 58 twitter-appropriate
keywords marking explicit periods of time: for example,
“tomorrow”, “tmrw,” etc. For each keyword, we estimated
the average number of minutes in the future it occurs. For
example, “tomorrow” occurs on average 1440 minutes (24
hours) in the future. For each future tweet, we used regular
expression matching to identify temporal keywords in the
tweet. For example, “maybe ill stay home with mom
tomorrow” matched the temporal noun “tomorrow.”
258,281 tweets had identifiable time horizons under this
criterion. For each tweet that matched one or more temporal
keywords, we averaged the resulting number of minutes to
estimate its time horizon. Because time horizon had a large
range (180-259,200 minutes) we took the natural logarithm
of the result. We then averaged temporal horizon at the state
level, creating a single score representing the average
temporal horizon of each U.S. state. To ensure accurate
estimation, we excluded states with fewer than 100 tweets
with identifiable time horizons (3 States excluded: AK, ME,
MT). We also excluded 1 state (HI) because its time horizon
was more than 5 SD above the mean; this may be due to a
large number of tweets from non-residents on vacation.
Demographic Measures. To explore the characteristics of
states with different time horizons and future orientation, we
collected state-level economic, political, religiosity & wellbeing indices from Gallup inc. We separately correlated
time horizon and future orientation at the state level with
each measure.
Risky Decision-Making. We hypothesized that time
horizon might relate to risk, such that states with longer
time horizon would take fewer risks. To evaluate this
hypothesis, we collected 6 state-level indices of risky
behavior from publicly available government data. We
collected 3 indices of risky behavior (binge drinking,

2004

`

Table 1: Results of a linear regression predicting risky
decision-making at the state level. Future time horizon
was still significantly negatively related to risk when
including demographic and computational controls.

cigarette smoking, and drunk driving) and 3 indices of
behavior we considered the opposite of risky (seatbelt
usage, education spending, and highway spending).
Education and highway spending data were collected from
the US Census; the other indices were collected from the
Center for Disease Control. We then created a risk
composite by separately normalizing the risk indices,
correcting sign such that positive numbers represent risk,
and averaging the resulting z-scores for each state.

Figure 3: Temporal horizon and risky decisions by state.
Labels represent state abbreviations. Note that the
horizontal axis is plotted in logarithmic scale.

Results
Temporal Horizon by State. We first present the
average temporal horizon for each U.S. state. The mean
temporal horizon was 1.27 days, see Figure 1. The U.S.
census region with the longest time horizon was the
Northeast; the Midwest had the shortest time horizon.
Future Orientation by State. We next present the
average future orientation for each state. The mean future
orientation was 31.55% (SD = 1.02%). Figure 2 displays the
mean future orientation for each U.S. state. To evaluate the
relationship between time horizon and future orientation, we
calculated the Pearson correlation between states’ temporal
horizon and future orientation. There was a negative
relationship between future orientation and temporal
horizon, r(46) = -0.411, p<0.01. One potential explanation
for this finding is that thoughts about the close future may
be more frequent than thoughts about the far future.
Demographic Measures. To begin to investigate the
characteristics of states with different time horizon and
future orientation, we conducted an exploratory correlation
analysis with 29 economic, political, religiosity, and wellbeing measures from Gallup, inc. States with a long time
horizon were more politically liberal than states with a short
time horizon, r(45) = 0.533, p < 0.001. By contrast, states
with greater future orientation, were less politically liberal
than less future-oriented states, r(45) = -0.398, p < 0.01.

Risky Decision-Making. The main hypothesis evaluated
was that states with long time horizon will take fewer risks
than states with short time horizon. To evaluate this
hypothesis, we created a composite of 6 risky decisionmaking indices at the state level, and separately correlated
the composite with time horizon and future orientation.
States with a long time horizon took significantly fewer
risks than states with a short time horizon, r(45) = -0.467, p
< 0.01 (Figure 3). Because New Jersey had a risk composite
score more than 3 SD less than the mean, we verified that
the relationship still holds excluding New Jersey, r(45) = 0.352, p < 0.05.
To verify that this relationship was not due to a simple
tendency to think more about the future, we correlated
states’ future orientation with risk composite score. There
was no relationship between future orientation and risk,
r(46) = 0.271, p = 0.069.
In order to rule out alternative explanations for the
relationship between time horizon and risk, we conducted a
linear regression analysis controlling for several additional
variables (Table 1). To control for demographic differences
between states, we controlled for gender (percent male),
population, median age, and GDP at the state level. To
validate our computational method, we included an
additional control by calculating a state’s past horizon. To
do this, we performed every computational step used to
calculate a state’s future horizon, except using tweets
classified as past, not future. To evaluate whether future
time horizon is negatively related to risk, we separately fit
linear regression models with all control variables, with and
without future time horizon. Adding future time horizon
significantly improved model fit: R2 = 0.401 (with time
horizon) versus 0.315 (without time horizon), F-test:
F(1,39) = 5.564, p < 0.05.

Discussion
In Experiment 1, we evaluated the hypothesis that having
a long temporal horizon increases sensitivity to potential
future costs. To do this we built a classifier to identify how
near or far U.S. states tend to think in the future, and
correlated the results with an index of risky decisionmaking.
The main result of Experiment 1 was that states with
longer time horizons took fewer risks than did states with
shorter time horizons. This result was specific to temporal

2005

`

horizon, rather than future orientation in general. This result
remained significant when including several demographic
and computational controls.
One limitation of Experiment 1 was that analysis was
conducted at the level of states, not individuals. As such, it
was impossible to obtain an experimental measure of risky
decision-making. The aim of Experiment 2 was to address
this limitation by linking individual participants’ temporal
horizon to an experimental measure of future decisionmaking. Additionally, we aimed to extend our results
beyond future costs to potential future benefits. If having a
long time horizon increases sensitivity to potential future
costs, does it also increase sensitivity to potential future
benefits?

discounting trials in random order. We excluded data from
13 participants who chose the future reward less than 5
times.
Temporal Horizon Classification. Participants were
asked to provide their valid twitter handle with at least 50
tweets. Temporal horizon was classified using the same
methods as in Experiment 1, with 2 additions. First, we
added an additional preprocessing step to remove URLs,
hashtags (#), and twitter user mentions (@) using regular
expression matching. Second, to investigate the stability of
temporal horizon over time, we separately classified
participants’ temporal horizon using only tweets from
within 7 days, 14 days, 30 days, 60 days, 180 days, and 360
days from the experiment, as well as data from all time
periods. To ensure accurate estimation of time horizon, we
excluded participants with fewer than 10 tweets (at any
date) for which time horizon could be calculated.

Figure 4: A sample delay discounting trial. In this trial,
the participant is asked to choose between $60 today and
$100 after a delay of 6 months.

Experiment 2: Discounting in Individuals
The aim of Experiment 2 was to test the hypothesis that
individuals with a long temporal horizon are less likely to
discount future rewards. Participants completed a delay
discounting task where they made a series of 60 choices
between smaller present and larger future rewards (Figure
4). Participants also provided their twitter handle, allowing
identification of their individual temporal horizon. If
temporal horizon affects delay discounting, participants
with a long temporal horizon should be more likely to
choose to wait for future rewards.
An additional aim of Experiment 2 was to investigate the
stability of temporal horizon over time. To do this, we
separately classified participants’ temporal horizon using
only recent tweets from the past 2 and 4 weeks, as well as
using tweets from all dates.

Methods
Participants. 198 participants were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and received $1 for participation. 29
participants were excluded for failing to provide a valid
twitter handle (N=7), providing a “protected” twitter
account that could not be processed (N=14), or failing to
complete the delay discounting task (N=8).
Delay Discounting. Delay discounting questions were
composed by fulling crossing 6 delay lengths (1 week, 6
months, 1 year, 5 years, 10 years, 20 years) with 10
immediate reward amounts ($1, $5, $10, $20, $40, $60, $80,
$90, $95, and $99). The delayed reward was always $100.
For example, on one trial, participants chose between $60
today and $100 in 5 years. Participants completed 60 delay

Figure 5: Participants with long time horizon were more
willing to wait for future rewards. The horizontal axis is
plotted in logarithmic scale.

Results
First, we evaluated whether participants’ temporal
horizon affected delay discounting. For each participant, we
calculated a reward index, e.g. the total money earned on
the delay discounting task, divided by the total possible
earnings. A large reward index indicates a willingness to
wait for future rewards. Participants with a long time
horizon were more likely to wait for future rewards, r(100)
= 0.204, p < 0.05 (Figure 5).
Second, we asked whether participants’ decisions were
better predicted by their recent time horizon, or by their
time horizon based on all tweets. We did not find that the
temporal horizon associated with more recent tweets was
more predictive of delay discounting than the temporal
horizon associated with all tweets (all ps > 0.2). This could
imply that temporal horizon is a trait-like characteristic that
is relatively stable in an individual. However, it is also the
case that the number of recent tweets was relatively low,
which could reduce the ability to find an effect for recent
tweets.

2006

`

Discussion

Methods

The main finding of Experiment 2 was that participants’
temporal horizon affected their delay discounting. Using all
tweets to classify temporal horizon, participants with a long
temporal horizon were more likely to wait for future
rewards. This result supports the hypothesis that one reason
participants discount future rewards is their cognitions about
the future.
Experiment 2 demonstrated that temporal horizon affects
decision-making in situations where a benefit occurs only in
the long future. In Experiment 3, we wondered whether the
same might be true for future costs.

Participants. 83 participants were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and received $1 for participation. There
were 3 exclusion criteria. Participants were excluded for
failing to provide a valid twitter handle (N=9), providing a
“protected” twitter account that could not be processed
(N=8), or failing to complete the BART task (N=1).
Temporal
Horizon
and
Future
Orientation
Classification. Participants were asked to provide their
valid twitter handle with at least 50 tweets. Temporal
horizon and future orientation classification were performed
for each individual twitter account using the methods from
Experiment 1, with 2 changes. First, we removed hashtags
(#) and user mentions (@) using the same methods as
Experiment 2. Second, to improve classification accuracy at
the individual level, we simplified the temporal horizons
classifier by restricting temporal keywords to those
referencing tonight (e.g. “tonight,” “2nite,” etc.) and
references to “tomorrow.” The total number of tweets
collected was 117,281. 14 participants were excluded
because their twitter account did not provide any tweets
with identifiable time horizon.
BART Task. Participants completed a 30-trial version of
the BART task, using a javascript implementation by Timo
Gnambs (2013). Balloon explosion points were drawn from
a uniform distribution from 1-128 clicks. There were 3
balloon colors (10 balloons each) with differing points
gained per click: 0.5, 1, or 5 points. We calculated two
measures of participants’ risk taking. (1) Adjusted pumps:
mean number of inflations per balloon, excluding trials
where the balloon exploded. (2) Number of explosions:
number of balloons inflated until explosion.

Figure 6: The BART task. Participants earned points for
inflating balloons, and at any point could bank points
earned and proceed to the next trial.

Experiment 3: Risk Taking in Individuals
The aim of Experiment 3 was to explore the relationship
between temporal horizon and decision-making where the
future outcome is a cost, not a benefit. In risky decisionmaking, participants must trade off between a potential gain
in the present, and a loss in the future. In Experiment 2, we
found that a long temporal horizon increased participants’
sensitivity to future gains. However, in Experiment 1, we
also found at the level of states that a long temporal horizon
increased states’ sensitivity to future costs, e.g. risks. The
aim of Experiment 3 was to test at the individual level
whether a long temporal horizon might increase
participants’ sensitivity to future costs.
In Experiment 3, participants completed the Balloon
Analogue Risk Task (BART; Lejuez et al, 2003). In this
task, participants are presented with a series of 30 balloons
(Figure 6). Participants earn points every time they inflate
the balloon, but they take a risk by doing so: the balloon
may pop, resulting in no points for the trial. Alternatively, at
any time participants may bank points currently earned and
proceed to the next trial.
To evaluate whether future horizon affects evaluation of
future costs, we also asked participants to provide their
twitter handle. For each individual, we identified their
temporal horizon and future orientation on the basis of their
tweets. If temporal horizon affects evaluation of future
costs, participants with a long temporal horizon should take
fewer risks in the BART task.

Figure 7: Participants with a long time horizon exploded
fewer balloons in the BART task. The horizontal axis is
plotted in logarithmic scale.

Results
The main hypothesis evaluated was that participants with
a long time horizon will take fewer risks. Supporting this
prediction, participants with a longer time horizon exploded

2007

`

fewer balloons, r(54) = -0.321, p < 0.05 (Figure 7) and
trended towards inflating balloons fewer times, adjusted
pumps: r(54) = -0.230, p = 0.094. This supports the claim
that participants with a long time horizon are more sensitive
not only to future benefits, but also to future costs.
We also verified that our results were driven by temporal
horizon, rather than a mere tendency to think about the
future. There was no relationship between future orientation
and BART performance, r(54)=0.027, p=0.846 (explosions);
r(54)=0.067, p=0.632 (adjusted pumps). This lack of result
supports the conclusion that temporal horizon, and not a
mere tendency to think about the future, increases
sensitivity to future costs.

Discussion
The main result of Experiment 3 was that having a long
temporal horizon increases sensitivity to potential future
costs, not just benefits. Individual participants’ temporal
horizon, but not their future orientation in general, predicted
risks taken in the BART risk task.

processes by changing temporal horizon. On the other hand,
it could be that the distance people look into the future is
largely independent of context, and as a consequence these
biases may be a relatively stable characteristic of
individuals. Regardless, by looking at people’s temporal
horizon we can see how decisions may depend on people’s
temporal biases.

Acknowledgments
This research was made possible through the support of a
grant from the John Templeton Foundation, “Prospective
Psychology Stage 2: A Research Competition” to Martin
Seligman. The opinions expressed in this publication are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the John Templeton Foundation. The authors wish
to thank Bridget Copley for assistance developing the future
orientation classifier.

References

General Discussion
The results provide support for the hypothesis that delay
discounting is determined, at least in part, by a person’s
future horizon. In Experiment 1, we showed that U.S. states
with longer time horizons, but not greater future orientation,
were more likely to engage in risky and impulsive decisions.
In Experiment 2, we found that people with longer future
horizons, as revealed by their tweets, were more likely to
wait for future rewards. In Experiment 3, we found that
people with longer horizons were more likely to avoid risks.
Although not directly examined in this paper, the
experiments provide some insight into the length of people’s
future horizon. For example, in Experiment 1 we observed
that the average temporal horizon was approximately 1.27
days. In contrast, in Experiment 2 we found a slightly longer
temporal horizon: 2.01 days. Given that the temporal
horizon in Experiment 2 was almost twice as long as in
Experiment 1, the difference between these experiments
may appear surprising. However, the difference between
these experiments can probably be explained by differences
in sampling. In Experiment 1, we randomly selected tweets
from the twitter stream, and as a consequence no doubt
sampled frequent twitter users more often than infrequent
twitter users. It could be that frequent twitter users tend to
have a shorter temporal horizon than infrequent users. The
way we sampled in Experiment 2 was less susceptible to
this potential bias because twitter users were selected based
on their participation in a separate experiment. Arguably,
then, the mean temporal horizon from Experiment 2 may be
more representative of a typical temporal horizon.
One question not resolved by the current findings is
whether temporal horizon is a relatively stable characteristic
of individuals, i.e. a trait, or whether temporal may vary as a
function of context and experience, making it more like a
state. To the extent that temporal horizon is a state, it may
be possible to have an impact on people’s decision-making

Chen, D. & Manning, C. (2014). A fast and accurate
dependency parser using neural networks. Proceedings of
EMNLP 2014.
Daugherty, J. & Brase, G. (2010). Taking time to be heathy:
predicting health behaviors with delay discounting and
time perspective. Personality and Individual Differences,
48(2), 202-207.
Fellows, L. & Farah, M. (2005). Dissociable elements of
human foresight: a role for the ventromedial frontal lobes
in framing the future, but not in discounting future
rewards. Neuropsychologia, 43(8), 1214-1221.
Gnambs, T. (2013). Balloon Analogue Risk Task [Computer
software]. Retrieved from timo.gnambs.at.
Heerey, E., Matveeva, T., & Gold, F. (2012). Imagining the
future: degraded representations of future rewards and
events in schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
120(2), 483-489.
Kwan, D., Craver, C., Green, L., Myerson, J., &
Rosenbaum, R. (2013). Dissociations in future thinking
following hippocampal damage: evidence from
discounting and time perspective in episodic amnesia.
JEP: General, 142(4), 1335-1369.
Lejuez, C. et al. (2003). The balloon analogue risk task
(BART) differentiates smokers and nonsmokers.
Experimental and clinical psychopharmacology, 11(1),
26.
Nakajima et al. (2014). Investigation of future reference
expressions in trend information. Proceedings of the AAII
Spring Symposium Series, 31-38.
Peters, J. & Buchel, C. (2010). Episodic future thinking
reduces reward delay discounting through an
enhancement of prefrontal-mediotemporal interactions.
Neuron, 66(1), 138-148.
Steinberg, L., Graham, S., O’Brein, L., Woolard, J.,
Cauffman, E., & Banich, M. (2009). Age differences in
future orientation and delay discounting. Child
Development, 80(1), 28-4.

2008

