The mismeasurement of mind:
How neuropsychological testing creates a false picture of cognitive aging
Michael Ramscar (michael.ramscar@uni-tuebingen.de)
Ching Chu Sun (ching-chu.sun@uni-tuebingen.de)
Peter Hendrix (petrus.hendrix@uni-tuebingen.de)
Harald Baayen (harald.baayen@uni-tuebingen.de)
Department of Linguistics, Wilhelmstrasse 19,
72074, Tübingen, Germany
Abstract
Age-related declines in scores on neuropsychological tests are
widely believed to reveal that human cognitive capacities
decline across the lifespan. In a computational simulation, we
show how the behavioral patterns observed in Paired
Associate Learning (PAL), a particularly sensitive measure of
age-related performance change (Rabbitt & Lowe, 2000), are
predicted by the models used to formalize associative learning
processes in other areas of behavioral and neuroscientific
research. The simulation further predicts that manipulating
language exposure will reproduce the experience-related
performance differences erroneously attributed to age-related
decline in age-matched adults. Consistent with this, older
bilinguals outperformed native speakers in a German PAL
test, an advantage that increased with age. These analyses and
results show that age-related PAL performance changes
reflect the predictable effects of learning on the associability
of test items, and indicate that failing to control for these
effects is distorting our understanding of cognitive and brain
development in adulthood.

Figure 1: Average by-item performance for 400 adults
aged 20-29 and 30-39 (50% females / group) on forms 1 &
2 of the WMS-PAL subtest (desRosiers & Ivison, 1988).

Keywords: aging, learning, cognitive modeling, bilingualism

The measurement of mind across the lifespan
When adults memorize arbitrary word pairs – e.g., jury–
eagle – during Paired Associate Learning (PAL) tests, their
ability to later recall eagle given jury declines
systematically with age. Together with convergent patterns
of change on other neuropsychological tests, this is taken to
show that cognitive ability declines across adulthood,
providing a functional characterization of the age-related
structural changes that occur in healthy brains (Deary et al,
2009; Salthouse, 2011; Singh-Manoux et al., 2012;
Lindenberger, 2014).
PAL tests are particularly sensitive to the detrimental
effects of age on cognition (Rabbitt & Lowe, 2000), which
as the data from two groups of adults completing the
PAL subtest of Wechsler’s Memory Scale, (desRosiers &
Ivison, 1988) plotted in Figure 1 shows, are evident
surprisingly early in life (Singh-Manoux et al., 2012): Mean
performance of 78% in 20-29 year-olds falls to 70% in 3039 year-olds (t(19)=5.286, p<0.01; Ramscar & Port, 2015),
the largest by-decade decline observed on this test across the
lifespan (desRosiers & Ivison, 1988).

In what follows, we show that these changes are not
evidence of cognitive decline, because raw PAL scores
cannot be used to compare performance between groups
whose experience varies. The reasons why begin with the
fact that PAL tests present items (typically word-pairs) at a
fixed rate: every word-pair is heard N times prior to testing.
This means that to use raw PAL scores to compare
performance in different age-groups, one must assume that
learning during the test is unaffected by differences in prior
experience of PAL items.
An enormous body of research has shown this assumption
to be false. Psychometricians have long-known that the
empirical properties of word-pairs make some easier to
learn than others (desRosiers & Ivison, 1988); And research
into associative learning has repeatedly shown that learning
to associate a behavioral cue (the word jury) with a
behavioral outcome (eagle) cannot be reliably predicted
from the association rate of a cue and a response alone
(Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Ramscar, Dye & McCauley,
2013a).
Two other important factors have shown to influence
associative learning: Cue background rates (Rescorla,
1968; Ramscar, Dye & Klein, 2013b), which, in PAL tests

2441

are the frequencies at which cue words have been
encountered absent response words, and blocking (Kamin,
1969; Arnon & Ramscar, 2012), the predictability of the
response given the cue (in context) prior to training. While
association rates tend to promote learning, blocking and
background rates inhibit it, and critically, the way these
factors interact to influence the learning of a specific
association is entirely a function of a given learner’s
experience (Ramscar et al., 2013a).
This last point is critical to understanding the patterns of
PAL performance across the lifespan. As can be seen in
Figure 1, aging makes “hard” PAL items proportionally
harder to learn than “easy” items. This non-linear pattern of
change is not predicted by simple declines in plasticity or
fluid-intelligence – the changes that theories of cognitive
aging posit to explain declining test scores – yet as the
following simulation shows, it falls naturally out of the
interaction between experience and the three factors shown
to influence associative learning that we just described.

Simulation Experiment
The development of word associations in a small lexicon of
PAL items was simulated using the Rescorla-Wagner (1972)
learning rule (computationally, this rule describes a
discrimination learning network, Ramscar et al, 2013a). The
lexicon comprised four “easy,” or meaningful PAL pairs
(baby-cries, baby-eagle, jury-duty and jury-summons) and
two meaningless, or “hard” pairs (baby-summons and juryeagle; see Figure 1).
To reflect the fact that the distributional properties of the
words that occur in natural languages differ, and to show
how the variations in word co-occurrences in a typical
English-speaker’s experience will affect learning over time,
the meaningless items were pre-trained with low association
rates (each was presented 10 times). Then to simulate the
effect that experience of the more frequent meaningful pairs
will have on the learnability of the meaningless items, we
presented the model with jury-duty 40 times, baby-cries and
baby-eagle 60 times, and jury-summons 80 times. The order
in which individual item exemplars were presented was
determined randomly, subject to the probability of their
occurrence in training.

Results
The development of the word associations in the model’s
lexicon (Figure 2) illustrates how increased experience of a
world containing jury-duty and baby-eagle serves to
discriminate against the learnability of jury-eagle. Increased
experience with the meaningful word-pairs increases the
background rate of jury in relation to eagle, while
simultaneously forcing jury into competition for associative
value with the more frequent cue baby. This ultimately
results in the model learning a negative association between
jury and eagle; this would have to be unlearned in order for
the model to positively associate jury with eagle.

Figure 2: The development of word pair associations in
the model’s lexicon after each training epoch. As the
model’s experience of jury and eagle in other contexts
increases, the strength of the jury-eagle association declines,
such that a single new exposure will exert an ever-weaker
influence of the learned strength of this pair. Eventually, the
model develops a negative expectation for eagle given jury.

What do declining PAL scores reveal?
Simulating PAL using a standard associative learning rule
predicts that hard items will get harder over time. Since
empirical studies reveal the same pattern of change (Figure
1), this raises a question: Does lifespan PAL performance
reveal cognitive declines, or the predictable outcome of
learning? To examine this, Ramscar & Port (2015) used
large text corpora to empirically derive parameters for the
background rates (w1 frequencies), blocking (frequency
w2 / frequency w1), and association rates (w1-w2 cooccurrence rates) for the PAL pairs plotted in Figure 1.
These parameters accounted for over 85% of the by-item
variance in the observed performance of both the 20-29 and
the 30-39 year-old age groups. As predicted by learning
theory, the parameters for background rates and blocking
were associated with lower scores, and the association-rate
parameter was associated with higher scores, and sensitivity
to each of the predictors was greater in the 30-39 than the
20-29 group (Ramscar & Port, 2015; see Ramscar, 2014 for
a replication using different corpora).
An analysis of all the WMS-PAL normative data showed
this pattern to be consistent across the lifespan (Ramscar et
al., 2013c): oldest adults’ (ages 60-69) performance showed
the greatest sensitivity to the three lexical factors that
learning theory predicts should influence the learnability of
word-pairs, whereas the factors that caused negative
associations to develop in the simulation did not
significantly influence the youngest participants’
performance (ages 20-29). In terms of learning the –
obviously far more complex – ser of word associations in
the English lexicon, 20-29 year-olds’ performance is thus

2442

consistent with learning at around epoch 50 in the
simulation, and 60-69 year-olds’ performance more akin to
epoch 250.
It is thus clear that long-established principles of learning
explain (1) why some PAL pairs are hard or easy (a fact
psychometricians acknowledge yet fail to explain), and (2)
why PAL performance ought to be expected to decline as
adults age: In both cases, because of how the processes of
“associative” learning have empirically been shown to work
(i.e., discriminatively), experience not only teaches Englishspeakers which words go together, it also teaches them
which words do not go together; and while this process
increasingly differentiates meaningful and meaningless
word-pairs (Figure 1), it simultaneously makes meaningless
pairs ever harder to learn (Figure 2).

Behavioral Experiment

test these hypotheses). The monolinguals completed a PAL
test in German only, whereas the bilinguals completed
Chinese and German PAL tests).
Table 1: By-group age and vocabulary scores for each of
the groups of participants (standard deviations in brackets).

ChineseGerman
Bilinguals
German
Monolinguals

Age

German
Vocabulary

Chinese
Vocabulary

young

24.55
(2.27)

31.75 (5.35)

67.65 (6.46)

old

43.60
(4.66)
23.45
(3.06)
44.90
(4.36)

40.25 (7.86)

64.65 (7.09)

81.95 (6.25)

- (-)

84.10 (4.38)

- (-)

young
old

Not only do well-established models of the associative
learning process predict that experience will increasingly
inhibit the learning of word-pairs like North-Dog, they also
provide a means for empirically deconfounding age and
experience in PAL performance. Because of the way people
are exposed to language throughout their lives, native (L1)
speakers of similar ages and educational backgrounds
inevitably have levels of first language experience that
significantly exceed that of age-matched adult secondlanguage (L2) speakers. Both the analysis and the
simulation presented above make two clear and somewhat
counterintuitive predictions about how these experiential
differences will affect PAL performance:
1. Older native speakers (OAL1) ought to perform
worse on lexical PAL tests than age-matched nonnative speakers of a language (OAL2).
2. The difference between native and bilingual PAL
performance can be expected to increase with
growing experience (see Figure 2).
If, on the other hand, PAL tests actually do measure
cognition independently of experience, as current practices
assume, then OAL2 speakers should not out-perform
OAL1s. Indeed, given that experience makes some PAL
pairs easier than others, a naïve account ought to predict that
OAL1’s greater experience of the German items should lead
them to outperform OAL2’s.

Method
We tested these hypotheses on 20 young (18-28 year old)
and 20 older (38-53 year old) monolingual speakers of
German (a non-tonal language deriving most of its lexicon
from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language
family) and two age-matched groups of 20 native speakers
of Mandarin (a tonal member of the Sino-Tibetan language
family), for whom German is a second language (Table 1;
given that PAL is a reliable measure that is particularly
sensitive to the effects of aging, Rabbitt & Lowe, 2000, and
Ns < 20 are typical in neuropsychological studies that
employ PAL tests, this sample was judged to be sufficient to

The harder items in the PAL task contained relatively
infrequent words. To ensure participants knew all the words
used in the test, vocabulary tests were conducted prior to the
PAL task in both languages. Performance on the vocabulary
test in German was highly variable, particularly for the
young Chinese-German bilinguals. Participants in this group
were typically graduate students at the University of
Tübingen. While some of these students were highly
competent in L2, others had considerably less experience. A
number of these less experienced L2 learners explicitly
stated that they did not know some of the words in the
German PAL test.
To minimize the risk of young Chinese-German bilingual
participants not knowing words in the PAL test, the 20
participants with the best performance on the vocabulary
pretest in German were selected from a larger group of 34
young Chinese-German bilinguals. Vocabulary test
performance was calculated as a weighted sum of the
number of correct answers, with item weights being the
proportion of correct answers for the items across the young
and old bilingual participants.
The items for the vocabulary and paired associate learning
tests in both languages were recorded from native female
speakers of Mandarin Chinese and German in a sound booth
using professional recording equipment.
In the vocabulary pre-test, participants were auditorally
presented with a word and the 4 possible answers and were
asked to select the answer that was most similar in meaning
to the test word by clicking one of four buttons labeled 1
through 4 on the screen. Participants were asked to guess if
they did not know the correct answer to a question.
In the paired associate learning task each block comprised
a training phase and a test phase of 10 pairs. Participants
were asked to memorize the pairs of words in the training
phase. For the test phase, participants were asked to produce
the word that formed a pair with the auditorily presented test
word. The test phase was self-paced: participants were

2443

asked to press the next button on the screen to move on to
the next test word after verbally responding to a test word.
The average time required to complete the vocabulary
pre-test for each language was about 30 minutes. The 3
blocks of paired associate learning took about 25 minutes
per participant in each language, including a short break
between each block.

L2 (Figure 6). However, for the very “hardest” PAL items –
i.e., those with the lowest association rates – this pattern
reversed, such that the older adults performed worse in L2.

Materials
The vocabulary tests for both German and Chinese
consisted of 100 multiple choice questions with 4 possible
answers. The 3 incorrect answers were chosen from the
same parts-of-speech category as the correct answer.
The word frequency distributions for the German and
Chinese vocabulary tests were matched, and items were
designed to ensure that Cue Frequency, Response
Frequency and Co-Occurrence Frequency (in Google
documents) for the pairs in each language were
approximately normal.
The PAL test in both languages consisted of three groups
of 10 pairs. Pairs ranged in diffculty from easy (e.g.;
(school-study)
or
“Nord”-“Süd”
(north-south)) to hard (e.g.; “Schiff” - “Puppe” (ship-doll)
or
(onion-finger)). Words occurred no
more than once in each of the paired associate learning tests.

Results
Analysis of our participants’ PAL performance of using
generalized additive models (Wood, 2006) revealed a
significant age by co-occurrence frequency interaction (χ² =
38.687; p < 0.01; co-occurrence frequency, which provides
a simple, objective estimate of the easiness of PAL pairs –
see Figure 2 – was measured here as the number of times
w1-w2 appear together in Google documents).
This
interaction differed depending on whether the PAL test was
administered in participants’ first (L1) or second language
(L2; χ² = 9.122; p < 0.05). For young adults (YAs), L1 and
L2 performance was similar, and the interaction between
age and frequency (χ² = 19.658; p < 0.01) did not differ
between L1 and L2 (χ² = 1.357; p > 0.9). This is consistent
with previous analyses which showed that YA PAL
performance is largely determined by association rates, and
insensitive to background rates and blocking (Ramscar,
Hendrix, Love & Baayen, 2013). By contrast, older
participants performed better when the PAL test was
administered in L2 (revealed by an age by co-occurrence
frequency interaction (χ² = 36.335; p < 0.01) that differed
significantly between L1 and L2 (χ² = 14.959; p < 0.01),
with a main effect of L1/L2 indicating that OA performance
was better in L2 than L1 (z = 2.113, p < 0.05).
The presence of a significant three-way interaction
between age, association rate and first/second language
reveals that the advantage for the older participants in their
second language was not uniformly distributed. For the
majority of the co-occurrence frequency range (19/25 of the
easiest PAL pairs), the older participants performed better in

Figure 3: Top Panel: Average by-item German PAL
performance for older and younger native German speakers
(OAL1 and YAL2). Bottom Panel: Performance of agematched older native German speakers (OAL1) and older
Chinese-German bilinguals (OAL2) tested in German.
This highlights an important difference between older
bilinguals and younger monolinguals: The former are not
restricted to thinking about tasks in one language. Since
there is little reason to suspect that items like banana-lake
are any more related in Chinese than they are in German, it
seems likely that when faced with learning the nonsensical
links between the hardest items, OAL2s may have sought
support from their native language. However, since welllearned native dissociations will hinder learning on this test
(and increase task complexity), this strategy will have had
the opposite effect to that desired (see also Ramscar, Dye &
Klein, 2013). Finally, the counterintuitive idea tested here –
that increased language experience actually impairs PAL
performance – gains further support from another finding
from this study: OAs with doctoral degrees (the attainment
of which likely involves a larger than normal amount of
reading) performed significantly worse than OAs without
them (z = -2.073; p < 0.05).

2444

Discussion
In other work, we have shown how age-related performance
changes on other neuropsychological tests are likely to
reflect the effects of cumulative learning rather than
cognitive decline (Ramscar et al, 2013c, Ramscar, Hendrix,
Shaoul, Milin & Baayen, 2014; Blanco, Love, Ramscar,
Otto, Smayda, & Maddox, 2016; Baayen, Tomaschek, Gahl,
and Ramscar, in press). The present study extends this,
showing how discriminative learning theories (Rescorla,
1988; Ramscar, Yarlett, Dye, Denny, & Thorpe, 2010;
Ramscar et al., 2013a) predict that PAL performance will
decline even when learning capacities are constant, simply
because cumulative linguistic experience will make
meaningless word-pairings ever harder to learn.
These predictions are supported by the results of our
empirical study – which show that when age is controlled
for, less linguistic experience predicts higher PAL scores –
and by other studies of aging and associative learning, e.g.,:
Naveh-Benjamin (2000) showed that older adults are worse
at learning associations between unrelated “units of
information” than when they are meaningfully related;
Castel (2005) showed that older adults are better at
associating realistic prices with grocery items than
unrealistic prices; and Old & Naveh-Benjamin (2008)
showed that adults encode less information about
background context in memory tests as they age.
While these findings are usually taken reveal age-related
“associative deficits” that are (somehow) lessened when
associative information is consistent with the environment,
it is notable that when the same pattern of learning the
informative and neglecting the uninformative is seen as
infants lose their sensitivity to non-native phonetic
distinctions in the course of learning a language (Werker &
Tees, 1984) it is not usually seen as decline. Our analyses
have shown how all these patterns of data are consistent
with what is known about the actual processes of associative
learning (see also Ramscar, Suh & Dye, 2011), and that far
from declining, associative processes appear to be stable and
consistent across the lifespan.
It is often claimed that surprising results are more likely
to be false (Lindsay, 2015), and since this last claim – and
indeed, our main finding – may surprise many readers, it
seems worth considering why. As we have sought to show,
the widely held assumptions about learning that underpin
current interpretations of lifespan PAL performance are
fundamentally incompatible with the detailed understanding
that has emerged out animal, behavioral and neuroscience
research into associative learning processes (see Ramscar et
al., 2013a, for a review). Some 30 years ago, Rescorla
(1988) critically described the outdated and misleading way
in which learning theory was taught in most areas of
cognitive science, and what current interpretations of
lifespan PAL data appear to reveal is that little has changed
since. Accordingly, it is worth emphasizing that our main
result is so well predicted by learning models that had we
obtained opposite results, this would have suggested our

entire understanding of learning (including Pavlovian
conditioning) is wrong. This really would be surprising.
By contrast, despite widespread beliefs about its
inevitability, the current behavioral evidence for “healthy
cognitive decline” amounts to little more than a series of
(mainly) negative correlations between neuropsychological
test scores and increased adult age, while the biological
evidence correlates the same declining test scores with
predictable physical changes in neural morphology (such
change in cortical grey matter, Sowell et al, 2003, AlemánGómez, 2013), response times (Deary & Ritchie, 2016), etc.
It thus follows that determining whether biological changes
in healthy adult brains are evidence of decline – or
something else, such as a progressive adaptation to the
metabolic cost of cognition (Attwell & Laughlin, 2001;
Wen & Chklovskii, 2008) – depends on establishing that
declining neuropsychological test scores actually do reflect
functional declines. We have shown how PAL scores,
thought to be particularly sensitive measures of age-related
decline (Rabbitt & Lowe, 2000), reflect no such thing.
Accordingly, it is important to note that all current
neuropsychological tests make use of learned information,
while assuming that cognitive performance can be measured
independently of experience (Deary et al, 2009; Salthouse,
2011; Singh-Manoux et al., 2012; Lindenberger, 2014). This
assumption is incompatible with behavioral, animal, and
neurobiological models of how information is actually
learned (McDannald, Jones, Takahashi, & Schoenbaum,
2014; Daw, Courville, & Dayan, 2008; Schultz, 2006;
Waelti, Dickinson, & Schultz, 2001; Sutton & Barto, 1981;
Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). Learning theory differs from
theories of cognitive decline in that its processes are clearly
specified, and formalized in models. These models have
proven adept at predicting behavior (such as that reported
here), as well as the responses of the neural structures that
appear to implement them in the brain, with surprising
accuracy (Ramscar et al, 2013a; Schultz, 2006). Since
learning theory contradicts many beliefs about cognitive
decline, one or the other must be substantively wrong. We
suggest it is the latter; and that it matters.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by an Alexander von Humboldt
award to R. Harald Baayen.

References
Alemán-Gómez, Y., Janssen, J., Schnack, H., Balaban, E.,
Pina-Camacho, L., Alfaro-Almagro, F., ... & Desco, M.
(2013). The Human Cerebral Cortex Flattens during
Adolescence. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(38), 1500415010
Arnon, I., & Ramscar, M. (2012). Granularity and the
acquisition of grammatical gender. Cognition, 122(3),
292-305.
Attwell D & Laughlin SB (2001) An energy budget for
signaling in the grey matter of the brain. Journal of
Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 21:1133–1145

2445

Baayen, R. H., Tomaschek, F., Gahl, S., and Ramscar, M.
(in press). The Ecclesiastes principle in language change.
In Hundt, Mollin & Pfenninger (Eds.), The Changing
English Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Blanco, N. J., Love, B. C., Ramscar, M., Otto, A. R.,
Smayda, K., & Maddox, W. T. (2016). Exploratory
Decision-Making as a Function of Lifelong Experience,
Not Cognitive Decline. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General.
Castel, A. D. (2005). Memory for grocery prices in younger
and older adults. Psychology and Aging, 20, 718–721
Daw, N. D., Courville, A. C., & Dayan, P. (2008). Semirational models of conditioning. The Probabilistic Mind,
431-452.
Deary, I. J., Corley, J., Gow, A J., Harris, S. E., Houlihan,
L. M., Marioni, R. E., Penke, L., Rafnsson, S. B. & Starr,
J. M. (2009). Age-associated cognitive decline. British
Medical Bulletin, 92, 135–152.
Deary, I. J., & Ritchie, S. J. (2016). Processing speed
differences between 70-and 83-year-olds matched on
childhood IQ. Intelligence, 55, 28-33.
des Rosiers G & Ivison D. (1986). Paired-associate learning:
normative data for differences between high and low
associate word-pairs. Journal of Clinical Experimental
Neuropsychology; 8: 637–42
Kamin, L. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention, and
conditioning. In B. A. Campbell & R. M. Church (Eds.),
Punishment and aversive behavior. (New York: Crofts.
Lindenberger, U. (2014). Human cognitive aging. Science,
346(6209), 572-578.
Lindsay, D. S. (2015). Replication in Psychological Science.
Psychological Science, 0956797615616374.
McDannald, M. A., Jones, J. L., Takahashi, Y. K., &
Schoenbaum, G. (2014). Learning theory: a driving force
in understanding orbitofrontal function. Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory, 108, 22-27.
Naveh-Benjamin, M. (2000). Adult age differences in
memory performance: tests of an associative deficit
hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(5), 1170.
Old, S. & Naveh-Benjamin, M. (2008). Differential effects
of age on item and associative measures of memory: A
meta-analysis. Psychology and Aging, 23, 104-118.
Rabbitt, P., & Lowe, C. (2000). Patterns of cognitive
ageing. Psychological Research, 63(3-4), 308-316.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K.
(2010). The effects of feature‐label‐order and their
implications for symbolic learning. Cognitive Science,
34(6), 909-957.
Ramscar, M., Suh E. & Dye, M. (2011) How pitch category
learning comes at a cost to absolute frequency
representations. Proceedings of the 33rd Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Boston, MA.
Ramscar, M., Dye, M., & McCauley, S. M. (2013a). Error
and expectation in language learning. Language, 89(4),
760-793.

Ramscar, M., Dye, M., & Klein, J. (2013b). Children value
informativity over logic in word learning. Psychological
Science, 24(6), 1017-1023.
Ramscar, M., Hendrix, P., Love, B., & Baayen, R. H.
(2013c). Learning is not decline. The Mental Lexicon,
8(3), 450-481.
Ramscar, M., Hendrix, P., Shaoul, C., Milin, P., & Baayen,
H. (2014). The myth of cognitive decline. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 6(1), 5-42.
Ramscar, M. (2014). [Web log post]. Retrieved 1/15/2016
from ramscar.wordpress.com/2014/08/07/technical-notebells-and-smells-and-replication/
Ramscar, M., & Port, R. F. (2015). Categorization (without
categories). In Dawbroska & Divjak (Eds.), Handbook of
Cognitive Linguistics. De Gruyter Mouton.
Ramscar, M., & Port, R. F. (2016). How spoken languages
work in the absence of an inventory of discrete units.
Language Sciences, 53, 58-74.
Rescorla, R. A. (1968). Probability of shock in the presence
and absence of CS in fear conditioning. Journal of
comparative and physiological psychology, 66(1), 1.
Rescorla, R.A. & Wagner, A.R. A theory of Pavlovian
conditioning. (1972) In Black & Prokasy (Eds.), Classical
Conditioning II: Current Research and Theory. (New
York: Crofts)
Rescorla, R. A. (1988). Pavlovian conditioning: It's not what
you think it is. American Psychologist, 43(3), 151.
Salthouse, T. (2012). Consequences of age-related cognitive
declines. Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 201.
Schultz, W. (2006). Behavioral theories and the
neurophysiology of reward. Annual Review of
Psychology, 57, 87-115.
Singh-Manoux, A., Kivimaki, M., Glymour, M. M., Elbaz,
A., Berr, C., Ebmeier, K. P., ... & Dugravot, A. (2012).
Timing of onset of cognitive decline: results from
Whitehall II prospective cohort study. BMJ, 344.
Sowell ER, Peterson BS, Thompson PM, Welcome SE,
Henkenius AL, Toga AW (March 2003). Mapping
cortical change across the human lifespan. Nature
Neuroscience, 6 (3): 309–15
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1981) Toward a modern
theory of adaptive networks. Psychological Review, 88,
135
Waelti, P., Dickinson, A. & Schultz, W. (2001) Dopamine
responses comply with basic
assumptions of formal learning theory. Nature, 412, 43-48.
Werker, J. & R. Tees. (1984). Cross-language speech
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization during
the first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development. 7,
49-63
Wen, Q. & Chklovskii, D. B. (2008). A cost-benefit analysis
of neuronal morphology. Journal of Neurophysiology 99,
2320–2328
Wood, S. N. Generalized additive models. (New York:
Chapman & Hall, 2006).

2446

