The Description-Experience
Gap in Risky Choice Framing
Gaëlle Vallée-Tourangeau (G.Vallee-Tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Management, Kingston University London
Kingston Hill, Kingston upon Thames, KT2 7LB, UK

Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau (F.Vallee-Tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University London
Penrhyn road, Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UK

Madhuri Ramasubramanian (madhuri.aiesec@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Madras
Chepauk, Chennai-600 005, India
Abstract

If Program B is adopted, there is a 1/3 probability that 600
people will be saved, and 2/3 probability that no people will be
saved.

We examined whether the classical framing effect observed
with the Asian Disease problem could be reversed when people
make decisions from experience. Ninety-five university
students were randomly allocated to one of three conditions:
Description, Sampling (where the participants were allowed to
sample through the outcomes presented as a pack of cards) and
Interactive (where the participants were invited to spread out
all possible outcomes in a sample) and made three gain-framed
choices and three loss-framed choices, with two filler tasks
after the first three choices. The results revealed a significant
interaction effect between framing and choice condition. In the
Description choice condition, participants were more riskseeking with loss-framed problems. This pattern was reversed
in the Sampling choice condition where participants were more
risk-seeking with gain frames. Finally, the Interactive choice
condition resulted in a classic pattern of framing effect,
whereby people were more risk averse in the domain of gains.

By contrast, the loss frame reads:
If Program A is adopted, 400 people will die.
If Program B is adopted, there is a 1/3 probability that nobody
will die, and 2/3 probability that 600 people will die.

Keywords: description-experience gap; risk-taking; framing
effect; Asian disease problem; interactivity; distributed
cognition.

Introduction
Choices are ubiquitous. They can be inconsequential
(deciding what to wear) or involve sizeable risks (investing
in a volatile stock). Decision-making often comes with a
strong feeling of agency: People’s preferences for choice
alternatives as well as their perceptions of the risks associated
may feel personal and unique yet, those preferences are
highly contextual (Lichtenstein & Slovic, 2006).
An illustrious example of the impact of context on people’s
choices under risk is the so-called framing effect, most often
illustrated with the Asian Disease choice task (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1981). In this task, where people are asked to
choose between two programmes for combatting “an unusual
Asian Disease” expected to kill 600 people, based on the
exact scientific estimates of the consequences of those
programmes. Those estimates are then either presented in
terms of lives saved (positive frame) or lives lost (negative
frame). Thus the gin frame reads:
If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.

In both frames, people are asked which of the two
programmes they would favor. Programme A results in a sure
outcome and is considered to be a risk-averse choice whereas
Programme B results in an uncertain outcome, a risk-seeking
choice. Typically, the gain-framed option elicits risk averse
preferences as most people select the sure option.
Conversely, the loss-framed option elicits risk-seeking
preferences as most people presented with this frame opt for
the uncertain alternative. This seminal finding has been
replicated in numerous studies and applied in various
domains (e.g., see Kühberger, 1998; Maule & Villejoubert,
2007 for reviews). Importantly, it illustrates how choice
preferences can arise from the design of information in a
decision-maker’s environment.
Recently, research has shown that people’s risk preferences
can, not only be influenced by information design, but also
by how this information is experienced. Hertwig, Barron,
Weber and Ever (2004) compared people’s preferences in a
series of lotteries offering certain or uncertain monetary
outcomes whose distributions were either described on a
computer screen (e.g., “Get $3 for sure”) or experienced
through sampling by pressing a computer button (e.g., $3, $3,
$3, ..., $3). When lotteries were described, people preferred
the sure option in gain-framed lotteries and the uncertain
option in the loss-framed lotteries. The key finding of their
study, however, was that this pattern of preference reversal
was itself flipped when people experienced the outcome
distribution through sampling instead of reading a summary
description: under sampling, people preferred the risky
option in gain-framed lotteries and the sure option in the lossframed lotteries. Although the preference reversal between
gain-framed lotteries and loss-framed lotteries under
description is similar to the framing effects observed with the
Asian disease problem, the lotteries used by Hertwig et al.

2627

(2004) were not designed to test for framing effects and thus
differed from the Asian problem on at least two noteworthy
features. First, whereas the Asian disease problem specifies a
reference point (an expected loss of 600 people), the
reference point was not specified in Hertwig et al.’s gambling
tasks. Second, expected values and framing were confounded
in the lotteries used by Hertwig et al. (2004) such that the
uncertain option had a higher expected value in the gain
frame whereas the sure option had a higher expected value in
the loss frame. By contrast, the alternatives in the Asian
disease task were designed to have equivalent expected
values. A first objective of the present research was therefore
to examine whether experiencing the outcomes in a classic
framing task rather than reading a description of these
outcome would also lead to a reversal of the classic framing
effect.
In both the instance where outcome information is
summarised in a short description and in the instance where
it is experienced through sampling, people play a relative
passive role in the acquisition stage. This, we have argued
elsewhere (Vallée-Tourangeau, Abadie, & ValléeTourangeau, 2015; Villejoubert & Vallée-Tourangeau,
2011), seems to be a consequence of how decision-making in
particular and cognitive processing in general has been
conceived by scholars: as a series of mental operations on a
mental representation of the outside world. An alternative,
systemic perspective, recasts cognition as involving the cooccurrence of the cognitive processing of mental
representations and the physical processing of material
presentations. From this perspective, to understand how
people reason or make decisions, one needs to understand
how knowledge and thoughts emerge from the co-ordination
of internal and external resources. For example, we
previously showed that allowing adults to interact with the
statistical information in Bayesian reasoning tasks through
the manipulation of playing cards enabled most to succeed at
solving these tasks without training (Vallée-Tourangeau et
al., 2015).
A second objective of the present research was to examine
whether (and how) increasing the affordances (i.e., the action
possibilities) offered by the information display would
impact framing effects. To achieve this, we allowed some of
our participants to spread and rearrange the possible
outcomes of the distribution payoff in any way they saw fit.
We anticipated this would transform the nature of the
experience. In experience through sampling, experienced
outcomes typically result from minimal actions (e.g., the
click of a button) and are best characterised a sequential
observation of outcomes. By contrast, allowing people to
interact with the payoff distribution by physically
manipulating tangible representations of the different
possible outcomes should augment people’s ability to
represent those payoffs and their probabilities. Whether this
will strengthen or weaken framing effects remains to be
established. On the one hand, a clearer representation may
enhance people’s computational abilities by reducing the
cognitive load of switching focus between a gain-framed and

a loss-framed representation, resulting in stable choices
across frames. On the other hand, clarifying the
representation of the distribution of outcomes in a given
frame may reinforce the framing effect by making it harder
to switch to the alternative frame.
A final objective for this experiment was to explore
whether individual differences could predict framing effects.
Previous research found some evidence that risk-averse
individuals are more likely to shift their preference towards
the sure option in gain frames (Huangfu, 2014; Mahoney,
Buboltz, Levin, Doverspike, & Svyantek, 2011) although
there was no evidence that risk propensity impacted choices
in loss frames. We sought to expand on these findings by
examining whether risk-taking and framing effects would be
better predicted by individual differences in domain-specific
risk taking. Moreover, interactive or experiential
environments sometimes involve qualitatively different
processes. For example, Weller, Villejoubert, and ValléeTourangeau (2011) found that insight performance in
matchstick algebra problems was predicted by numeracy
skills when the task was presented with a descriptive (static)
statement, whereas it was predicted by matrix reasoning, a
sub-component of the Beta III test (Kellog & Morton, 1999)
for measuring visuo-spatial reasoning abilities, when the task
was made interactive by through the use of physical and
manipulable artefacts. In the present study, we therefore also
sought to examine whether varying the level of interactivity
afforded by the task would also moderate the impact of
individual differences on risk-taking and framing effects.

Method
Participants
Ninety-five university students (54% Post-graduate, Mage =
23.8 years, SD = 4.5) took part in the experiment.

Materials, Design, and Procedure
Participants were randomly allocated to one of three
experimental conditions: a Description choice condition, a
Sampling choice condition and an Interactive choice
condition and were asked to complete three problems
presented in a gain frame (number of people who will be
saved) and three problems presented in a loss frame (number
of people who will die). Thus the experiment employed a
mixed 2-within (Frame: Gain vs. Loss) x 2-between (Choice
condition: Description, Sampling, Interactive) design. The
order of presentation of the gain and loss frames was
counterbalanced (half of the participants completed the three
gain-framed problems first; the remaining half started by
completing the loss-framed problems). The order of the three
problems was randomized within each frame condition. For
each problem solved, we recorded the time spent, the
alternative chosen (sure vs. risky), and the strength of their
preference (1= Extremely weak to 6 = Extremely strong).

2628

Description condition

Sampling condition

Interactive condition

Figure 1: Birdseye screenshots of the experimental setting in each experimental condition.

Participants completed two self-report scales after they had
completed the first set of three problems: The 30-item
Domain Specific Risk-Taking Scale (DOSPERT, Blais &
Weber, 2006) and the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale Version 11
(BIS-11, Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995)1. The DOSPERT
scale is composed of five subscales for measuring domainspecific risk-taking preferences: Ethical (e.g., “Revealing a
friend’s secret to someone else”), Financial (e.g., “Betting a
day’s income at the horse races”), Health & Safety (e.g.,
“Sunbathing without sunscreen”), Recreational (“Taking a
skydiving class”), and Social (e.g., “Starting a new career in
your mid- thirties”). Participants were asked to rate the
likelihood that they would engage in the described activity or
behavior on a 7-point labelled likert scale ranging from 1
(Extremely unlikely) to 7 (Extremely likely).
The task scenarios were adapted from Mahoney, Buboltz,
Levin, Doverspike, and Svyantek (2011) and all presented a
life-threatening disease. Each task was presented on a
laminated A4 sheet of paper. In the Description choice
condition, following the presentation of the possible
consequences of each alternative, participants were asked to
decide which program they would favor (A or B). In the
sampling choice condition, participants were presented with
two packs of 25 cards and asked to assume that the possible
consequences of the programs were represented by the two
packs of cards in front of them. They were informed that,
upon turning a card over, they would see a possible
consequence for the selected program in terms of the number
of people saved [killed]. They were also told that they were
not allowed to pick the packs of cards and may only look at
one card at a time, from either deck. Participants in the
interactive choice condition were also presented with two
packs of 25 cards but they were invited to pick up the decks
of cards and turn over and spread out all the cards in front of
them. Within each condition, some participants were filmed,
with their consent, from a camera attached to the ceiling and
offering a birdseye view of their actions on the cards. Figure
1 illustrates the setting for the three experimental conditions.
Figure 2 illustrates the cards used.

Figure 2: Schematic representation of the cards used in the
Sampling and Interactive conditions.

Results
Choice latencies
The average choice latencies for the three problems in the
gain and loss frames in the three experimental conditions are
reported in the left panel of Figure 3. Participants were
slowest to formulate a choice preference in the interactive
condition, and fastest in the descriptive condition, while the
sampling condition produced marginally slower latencies
relative to the descriptive condition; choice latencies
appeared unaffected by framing.

1

The BIS-11 scale was used as a filler task and results will not be
reported or discussed further in this report.

2629

3.0

GAIN
LOSS

120

GAIN
LOSS

Mean%Risk1Taking%Score

Mean%Choice%Latency (ms)

140

100
80
60
40
20
0

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Descriptive

Sampling

Interactive

Descriptive

Sampling

Interactive

Experimental%Condition

Figure 3: Mean choice latencies (left panel) and mean choice score (right panel) in the gain and loss frame in the
three experimental conditions. Error bars are standard errors. .
A 2-within (Frame: Loss vs. Gain) x 3-between (Choice
condition: Descriptive vs. Sampling vs. Interactive) mixed
analysis of variance (ANOVA) confirmed these impressions:
The main effect of condition was significant, F(2, 92) = 26.1,
p < .001, η2p = .362, but not the main effect of frame, F < 1
nor the interaction, F < 1. Post hoc tests revealed that
latencies in the interactive condition were significantly
different than those in the descriptive (p < .001) and in the
sampling (p < .001) condition, but that latencies in the
descriptive and sampling conditions did not differ
significantly (p = .26).

p = .021. However, they were significantly more likely to
choose the risky option in the gain frame in the Sampling
condition, t(31) = -2.08, two-tailed p = .046.

Individual Differences, Risk-Taking and Framing
Effects

Risky choices
We computed the number of risky choices across gainframed and loss-framed problems, respectively (from 0 to 3,
in each frame). The mean composite score was higher for
problems in the loss frame than in the gain frame in the
descriptive and in the interactive condition (see the right
panel of Fig. 3); however, in the sampling condition, the
pattern was reversed such that risky choices were more
frequent for problems in the gain frame than in the loss frame.
The 2-within (Frame: Loss vs. Gain) x 3-between (Choice
condition: Description vs. Sampling vs. Interactive) mixed
ANOVA revealed that neither the main effect of condition, F
< 1, or frame, F(1, 92) = 2.45, p = .121, η2p = .026, were
significant, but that the interaction between frame and
condition was significant, F(2, 92) = 6.48, p = .002, , η2p =
.123. To unpack this interaction effect, we compared risktaking scores in loss and gain frames within each
experimental condition. People were significantly more
likely to choose the risky option in the loss frame in the
Descriptive condition, t(29) = 2.25, two-tailed p = .032, as
well as in the Interactive condition, t(32) = 2.42, two-tailed

To examine whether framing effects depended on individual
differences in domain-specific risk-taking and impulsivity,
we computed a framing effect index by taking the difference
between the risk-taking score in loss frames and the risk
taking score in gain frames for each participant. A positive
score indicated a classic framing effect (higher risk-taking in
losses) whereas a negative score indicated a reversed classic
framing effect (higher risk-taking in gains). We then
examined the correlation matrix involving scores on the
Ethical, Financial, Health & Safety, Recreational, and Social
DOSPERT subscales and the framing effect index, within
each condition. We found no evidence that risk-taking in
framing tasks was related to individual differences in risktaking across domains. The largest correlation was with
financial and gambling risk-taking in the descriptive
condition, r(28) = -.30, p = .11, with health and safety risktaking in the sampling condition, r(30) = -.30, p = .10, and
with ethical risk-taking in the interactive condition, r(31) = .27, p = .13. By and large, risk-taking in framing tasks was
unrelated to individual differences in risk-taking across
domains in any of the three choice conditions. The only
exception was the sampling condition where risk-taking in
framing tasks was negatively correlated with risk-taking in
the recreational domain in both loss frames, r(30) = -.57, p =
.001 and gain frames, r(30) = -.51, p = .003. In other words,
the more likely people were to engage in recreational risktaking, the less likely they were to opt for the risky alternative
in the lotteries.

2630

Discussion
This research was informed by the distributed cognition
framework, which seeks to understand cognition as it unfolds
through time and space, taking into account the action
possibilities or affordances offered by the ecology within
which cognitive processes are taking place (see also
Villejoubert & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2011; ValléeTourangeau et al., 2015). We found little evidence to support
the hypothesis that the relation between people’s likelihood
to engage in risky behavior and their risk-taking preferences
in framing tasks could depend on the ecology within which
they made their decision (i.e., whether or not they could
search for information and the extent to which they could
interact with it). In the interactive condition, people could
spread all sample outcomes in front of them rather than
sample them one at a time. This did not reduce framing
effects, possibly because the artefacts used to support
cognition did not afford a representational switch between a
gain-framed and a loss-framed representation of the problem.
This suggests that there are boundary conditions on the
efficacy of an interactive ecology to support people’s
decision-making in a way that successfully reduces framing
effects. We conceived interactivity as a feature of the ecology
allowing for “sense-saturated coordination that contributes to
human action” (Steffensen, 2013, p. 196). There were many
possible actions in the interactive condition (picking up cards,
sampling through packs, spreading cards on the table, sorting
outcomes, and so on) and each action changed the manner in
which the distributions of outcomes could be perceived.
Stromer- Galley (2004) distinguished between interactivity
as a feature of a medium and interactivity as feature of
information processing in human communication. In this
study, interactivity resulted from the availability of playing
cards coupled with the absence of restrictions on what people
could do with them; it was a product of the experimental
design. Future research may examine how other forms of
interactivity could impact framing effects, by using different
artefacts to represent the distribution of outcomes, and by
increasing interactive processing through groups (e.g., Milch,
Weber, Appelt, Handgraaf, & Krantz, 2009) or game
theoretic settings (e.g., Chapman et al., 2012).
Building upon the description-experience gap, we
examined whether the classical framing effect observed with
the Asian Disease problem could be reversed when people
make decisions from experience. We also contrasted two
types of experience: an experience by sampling, where
participants sample single outcomes from two alternatives
before making a choice, and an experience by interacting,
where participants are allowed to spread all possible
outcomes in a sample in front of them before making a
choice.
To begin with, we replicated findings from Mahoney et al.
(2001) showing that people succumb to framing effects even
when they are presented with both a loss framed task and a
gain framed task in a within-subject design. More
importantly, we extended previous research documenting a
“decision-experience gap” in monetary gambles (e.g.,

Hertwig et al., 2004), as we demonstrated that the framing
effect could also be reversed when people sample outcomes
before making a choice between a risky alternative and a sure
outcome instead of reading a thumbnail description of the
choice situation. Not all experiences were created equal,
however, as when people were allowed to manipulate the
sample of outcomes and spread them in front of them, the
pattern of choices exhibited the standard framing effect, akin
to what is usually observed with thumbnail descriptions. An
inspection of response latencies showed that decision times
increased in decision by sampling and were longest in
decisions by manipulating in the interactive condition. The
fact that decision times were shortest in the description
condition but longest in the interactive condition suggests
that framing effects do not necessarily arise from fast, nondeliberative judgements.
The reason for the framing effect reversal under sampling
conditions remains to be accounted for. In the framing
literature, framing reversals were created by manipulating the
description of the outcomes. For example, Kühberger (1995)
found that using negative descriptions (e.g., “400 people will
not be saved” in the gain condition and “200 people will not
die” in the loss condition) led to a reversal of the framing
effects. This type of reversal is accounted for by the
Explicated Valence Account (Tombu & Mandel, 2015). EVA
stipulates that negative descriptions carry a negative
explicated valence because they describe negative events
(e.g., people who are not saved). Moreover, EVA proposes
that people will prefer the option which maximizes the
positive explicated valence, so when asked to choose between
the sure outcome with a negative explicated valence (“400
people will not be saved”) and a risky outcome including an
event with a positive explicated valence (a chance that “600
will be saved”), people opt for the risky outcome even though
the situation is framed in terms of gains (i.e., lives saved).
The EVA, however, cannot be applied to explain the reversal
observed in the sampling condition of the present study, since
the explicated valence was always positive in the gain frame:
outcomes were always described in terms of the number of
lives saved.
Camilleri and Newell (2013) proposed that patterns of
choices under sampling conditions result from the need to
search information within the environment, and the need to
integrate new information sequentially into a representation.
The description-experience gap could thus result from a
defective mental processing of probabilities informing the
final choice in decisions from experience. There is a debate
in recent literature on the description-experience gap as to
whether these representations are distorted due to the limited
sampling of rare events, overweighting of late observations,
or both (Hertwig, Barron, Weber, & Erev, 2004; Hertwig &
Erev, 2009). Our results provide some indirect evidence that
limited sampling of rare events may hold for risk-framing
tasks: in the interactive condition, participants did not need to
search for information, they could display it directly in front
of them. Consequently, they did not need to update their
representation, they simply needed to build it from the layout

2631

they had created. In other words, the interactive condition
eliminated the sequential and potentially biased nature of
information acquisition and representation that occurs in the
sampling paradigm. This has been found to reduce the
description – experience gap in research using monetory
gambles (Camilleri & Newell, 2013) and would explain why
risk-taking patterns in the interactive condition were similar
to those observed in the descriptive condition.
Finally, there was some indication that recreational risktaking could be negatively related to risk-taking in framing
tasks, albeit only in the sampling condition. This suggests,
somewhat counterintuitively, that risk-taking in the sampling
condition was a serious and considered decision as people
who took risks were those who were more likely to avoid
taking risks “for fun” when making choices outside the
laboratory. Future research could seek to unpack this finding
to better understand the link between motivational styles
(e.g., Apter, 1997) and behaviours in the sampling condition.

Acknowledgments
We thank Angelika Makri for her assistance in collecting part
of the data reported in this experiment and Egle Butt for
helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. Portions
of this research were included in M. Ramasubra-manian’s
Master’s thesis. Financial support from the Kingston
University Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences Research
Capability Fund is also gratefully acknowledged.

References
Apter, M. J. (1997). Reversal Theory: What is it? The
Psychologist, 10, 217-220.
Blais, A. R., & Weber, E. (2006). A domain-specific risktaking (DOSPERT) scale for adult populations. Judgment
and Decision Making, 1(1), 33–47.
Camilleri, A. R., & Newell, B. R. (2013). Mind the gap?
Description, experience and the continuum of uncertainty
in risky choice. Progress in Brain Research, 202, 55-71.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-62604-2.00004-6.
Chapman, G. B., Li, M., Vietri, J., Ibuka, Y., Thomas, D.,
Yoon, H., & Galvani, A. P. (2012). Using Game Theory to
Examine Incentives in Influenza Vaccination Behavior.
Psychological
Science,
23,
1008–1015.
DOI:
10.1177/0956797612437606
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events in
risky choice. Psychological Science, 15, 534-539. DOI:
10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00715.x.
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description–experience
gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 517–
523. DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.09.004
Huangfu, G. (2014). The influence of social cues on framing
effect. Social Behavoior and Personality, 42, 371-378.
DOI: 10.2224/sbp.2014.42.3.371
Kellogg, C. E., & Morton, N. W. (1999). Beta III manual.
New York: The Psychological Corporation, A Harcourt
Assessment Company.

Kühberger, A. (1995). The Framing of Decisions: A New
Look at Old Problems. Organizational Behavior and
Human
Decision
Processes,
62,
230–240.
http://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1995.1046
Kühberger, A. (1998). The influence of framing on risky
decisions: A meta analysis. Organizational Behaviour and
Human Decision Processes, 78, 23-55. DOI:
10.1006/obhd.1998.2781
Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. (2006). The Construction of
Preferences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511618031
Mahoney, K. T., Buboltz, W., Levin, I. P., Doverspike, D., &
Svyantek, D. J. (2011). Individual differences in a withinsubjects risky-choice framing study. Personality and
Individual
Differences,
51,
248-257.
DOI:
10.1016/j.paid.2010.03.035
Maule, J., &Villejoubert, G. (2007). What lies beneath:
Reframing framing effects. Thinking and Reasoning, 13,
25-44. DOI: 10.1080/13546780600872585
Milch, K. F., Weber, E. U., Appelt, K. C., Handgraaf, M. J.
J., & Krantz, D. H. (2009). From individual preference
construction to group decisions: Framing effects and group
processes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes,
108(2),
242–255.
DOI:
10.1016/j.obhdp.2008.11.003
Patton, J. H., Stanford, M. S., & others. (1995). Factor
structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 51(6), 768–774.
Stromer-Galley, J. (2004). Interactivity-as-Product and
Interactivity-as-Process. The Information Society, 20, 391–
394. DOI: 10.1080/01972240490508081
Tombu, M., & Mandel, D. R. (2015). When Does Framing
Influence Preferences, Risk Perceptions, and Risk
Attitudes? The Explicated Valence Account: Framing and
the Explicated Valence Account. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making. Advance online publication. DOI:
10.1002/bdm.1863
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453458. DOI: 10.1126/science.7455683
Villejoubert, G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2011).
Constructing preferences in the physical world: a
distritubed cognition perspective on preferences and risk
choices. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 1-2. DOI:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00302
Vallée-Tourangeau, G., Abadie, M., & Vallée-Tourangeau,
F. (2015). Interactivity fosters Bayesian reasoning without
instruction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
144, 581-603. DOI: 10.1037/a0039161
Weller, A., Villejoubert, G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2011).
Interactive insight problem solving. Thinking and
Reasoning, 17, 424-439.
DOI:10.1080/13546783.2011.629081.

2632

