The Effect of Emotion and Induced Arousal on Numerical Processing
Karina Hamamouche (hamamouc@bc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 USA

Michelle Hurst (hurstm@bc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 USA

Sara Cordes (cordess@bc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 USA

Abstract
Prominent theories suggest that time and number are
represented by a common magnitude system. However,
distinct patterns of temporal and numerical processing
occur in the presence of emotional stimuli, calling into
question theories of a common magnitude system, while
also unveiling questions regarding the mechanisms
underlying these temporal and numerical biases. We
tested whether numerical processing, like temporal
processing, may be impacted by increased arousal levels,
yet have a higher threshold level in order to impact
estimates. If so, then induced arousal may reverse the
typical pattern of numerical underestimation in the
presence of emotions. Adults (N = 85) participated in
either a stress-induction or a control version of the task.
Then, participants completed a numerical bisection task in
the presence and absence of emotional content. Increasing
arousal had no impact on numerical processing, except in
the presence of happy faces, providing further evidence
for distinct processing mechanisms.
Keywords: quantity processing; numerical cognition;
temporal processing; emotion; stress

Introduction
Temporal and numerical processing is vital for our
everyday interactions. How many seconds will it take to
cross the street? How many slices of pizza are needed to
serve a family dinner? These basic quantitative processes
are posited to form the foundations of mathematical thought
and have been shown to predict math achievement
(Halberda, Mazzocco, & Feigenson, 2008), highlighting the
importance of understanding basic quantitative processing.
Prominent theories suggest that the processing of time,
number, and space are a part of a common magnitude
system (Walsh, 2003; Cantlon, Platt, & Brannon, 2009).
Evidence in support of this theory demonstrates analogous
performance on timing and counting tasks in both rats and
humans (Meck & Church, 1983), and comparable parietal
cortex activity during temporal and numerical processing
(Walsh, 2003). Further, children suffering from genetic

disorders that are known to impact numerical processing
(e.g., Turner Syndrome) also experience spatial and
temporal deficits, suggesting an overlap among systems
involved in quantity processing (Silbert, Wolff, &
Lilienthal, 1977).
While many controlled laboratory studies have
investigated quantitative processing, this work has largely
ignored the fact that temporal and numerical processing in
the real world rarely occurs in an emotional vacuum. Some
work investigating how emotional stimuli impact numerical
and temporal processing has led to distinct theories
regarding how these quantities are processed (Droit-Volet &
Meck, 2007; Young & Cordes, 2013). The bulk of this work
has focused on performance during a bisection task in which
participants judge whether a target duration or a target
numerosity is more similar to a short/small standard or
long/large standard. For example, participants may be
presented an array of 7 dots and asked to judge whether it is
more similar to the learned standards of 4 dots (small) or 16
dots (large). Bisection task data have been used to assess
biases in estimates by measuring the value at which
participants are indifferent between the two standards (Point
of Subjective Equality or PSE; the point at which 50% of
responses are long/large).
Prior studies have revealed that both children and adults
exhibit patterns of temporal overestimation (i.e., lower
PSEs) in the presence of emotional stimuli (Droit-Volet,
2003; Droit-Volet & Meck, 2007), yet identical emotional
content leads to underestimation (i.e., higher PSEs) of
numerical values (Baker, Rodzon, & Jordan, 2013; Young
& Cordes, 2013). These distinct patterns of temporal and
numerical processing in the presence of emotion present a
challenge to a common magnitude theory while also posing
new questions about the specific mechanisms (i.e., attention,
arousal) underlying the processing of different quantities.
The current study seeks to explore these mechanisms,
specifically arousal, on numerical processing in the context
of emotional stimuli.
Temporal overestimation in the presence of emotion has
been linked to increased arousal (e.g., Angrilli, Cherubini,
Pavese, Manfredini, 1997; Droit-Volet & Meck, 2007;
Droit-Volet & Wearden, 2001; Gil & Droit-Volet, 2012;

1733

Ortega & Lopez, 2008). Evidence for this is derived from
the fact that temporal dilation under emotion tracks with
arousal ratings of emotional stimuli, with the most arousing
emotional stimuli resulting in the greatest degree of
overestimation (Young & Cordes, 2013). Moreover,
increased arousal in neutral tasks has been linked to
temporal overestimation. For example, the rapid
presentation of a stream of stimuli, thought to elicit
increased arousal, has been found to result in the
overestimation of the presentation of a simultaneous target
during timing tasks (e.g., Ortega & Lopez, 2008). Relatedly,
filled intervals (i.e., the consistent presentation of a stimulus
throughout the duration to be timed) are estimated to last
longer than empty intervals (i.e., intervals demarcated by
two distinct stimuli), likely due to increased arousal (see
Wearden, Norton, Martin, & Montford-Bebb, 2007). Thus,
because increased arousal has been linked to temporal
dilation and because temporal dilation under emotional
circumstances is greatest in response to the most
emotionally arousing stimuli, it is posited that arousal is the
source of the temporal overestimation observed under
emotional circumstances.
On the other hand, arousal is not thought to be the source
of the observed numerical underestimation. Instead, because
numerical underestimation is found in the context of any
emotional stimulus, Young & Cordes (2013) proposed that
heightened attentional focusing drives numerical
underestimation in the context of emotion. According to this
view, the social salience of emotional content serves to
heighten attention. Whether this heightened attention to the
social stimulus results in numerical underestimation via
simultaneous heightened attention to numerical stimuli (and
thus, improved numerical processing), or instead, via
distracted attention away from the numerical stimulus (and
thus impaired numerical processing), has yet to be
determined.
Emotional content results in some degree of arousal
during temporal and numerical processing; however, it is
unclear why the same emotional stimuli may lead to
temporal overestimation but numerical underestimation.
One possibility is that numerical processing has a higher
threshold than temporal processing in order for arousal to
impact estimates, such that a higher level of arousal is
necessary to influence numerical estimates. If so, an overall
heightened level of arousal, as created by a stress induction
task (e.g., Kirschbaum, Pirke, & Hellhammer, 1993), may
elicit a pattern of numerical overestimation mirroring that of
temporal tasks. Relatedly, arousal levels may be slower to
rise in response to arousing stimuli, such that it takes time
for emotional stimuli to result in threshold levels of arousal.
Given that temporal processing is sequential (occurs over a
period of time), whereas numerical processing of arrays (as
in previous studies) is simultaneous (requires the
simultaneous apprehension of several items within a brief
presentation period), arousing stimuli may only appear to
impact temporal processing because temporal stimuli
require more time to process, giving time for arousal levels

to rise. If so, then heightening arousal levels via stress
induction prior to the numerical task, thus providing time
for arousal levels to rise prior to the start of the numerical
task may allow for a true assessment of the impact of
arousal on numerical processing.
In the current study, we investigated the effects of
induced arousal on a numerical task in the presence and
absence of emotional stimuli. Arousal was manipulated
prior to the numerical task, therefore eliminating concerns
regarding the speed of rising arousal levels. Moreover, to
our knowledge, no work has investigated the impact of
induced arousal on basic numerical processing, making this
investigation worthwhile in its own right. While a plethora
of evidence suggests that stress in the form of math anxiety
can be detrimental for performance on symbolic math tasks
(e.g., Meece, Wigfield, Eccles, 1990), it is unclear what role
arousal plays in our most primitive sense of number. Lastly,
while studies have investigated the impact of emotion on
numerical processing, no work has explored factors
contributing to individual differences in these emotional
biases. That is, are emotions more likely to impact
individuals who already have a less precise representation of
number? Or, alternatively, is it that all adults, regardless of
numerical precision, are similarly vulnerable to the impact
of emotional content?

Methods
Participants
Eighty-five undergraduate students (range: 18-25, Mage =
19.17, males = 13) participated in this study for course
credit. Seven students completed the study, but were
excluded from analyses for not following the instructions
(n=3), below chance performance on the standard values of
the bisection task (n=2), producing PSEs that were more
than 3 standard deviations below the group average (n=1),
or computer error (n=1), leaving a final sample of seventyeight. Participants were randomly assigned to two
conditions with a final distribution of Stress Induction
(N=40, Mage=19.02, males = 7) and Control (N=38, Mage=
19.00, males = 5).

Stimuli
Stress task A modified version of the Trier Social Stress
Test (TSST) was used (Kirschbaum et al., 1993).
Bisection task A bisection task (similar to the task used by
Droit-Volet et al., 2004; Young & Cordes, 2013) was
implemented. Numerical stimuli were composed of arrays
of dots. The standard small value had a magnitude of 4; the
standard large value had a magnitude of 16. Intermediate
values corresponded to the magnitudes 5, 6, 8, 10, and 13.
The numerical arrays consisted of black dots displayed on a
white background. Surface area of each individual item was
identical in half of the trials (M = 1147.14). In the other half
of trials, cumulative surface area was held constant across
trials regardless of set size (M = 1385.86). The bisection
task was computerized; stimulus presentation was controlled
and responses were recorded by a REALBasic program.

1734

Emotional Faces The face stimuli were identical to those
used by Young & Cordes (2013). The face stimuli (happy,
neutral, and angry) were selected from the NimStim set
(Tottenham et al., 2009). The set of faces were standardized
on intensity, attractiveness, arousal, and valence so that
each image was a clear representation of a specific emotion.

compute the set size corresponding to a 0.5 proportion of
large responses. Moreover, each participant’s difference
limen (DL; the value half way between the set sizes
corresponding to a 75% probability of a large response and
a 25% probability of a large response) was also calculated
as a measure of precision in responding, with higher DLs
corresponding to lower precision in responding.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to the Stress or Control
condition. Those in the Stress condition sat next to an
experimenter who asked them to count backwards by 13
beginning with the number 10,099 (e.g., 10,099, 10,086,
10,073…). Participants were told their performance would
be assessed and if a mistake was made, the experimenter
would stop them and make them start over from 10,099.
Answers were given orally so that the experimenter could
keep track of performance. In the Control condition, the
experimenter gave similar instructions, except participants
were allowed to use a pencil and paper to write their
answers down, were told that their performance would not
be assessed, and the experimenter left the room while the
participant completed the task. After five minutes,
participants were stopped and began the bisection task.
Next, participants were seated in front of the computer
and familiarized with arrays of dots that were labeled as the
“Small” (4) and “Large” (16) standards. Participants were
given 12 practice trials in which, they were presented with
dot arrays representing either standard value and were asked
to indicate whether it was small or large. Dot arrays were
presented for 500 ms. Adults selected their response by
pressing either [a] for smaller or [‘] for larger on the
keyboard. Feedback was provided for practice trials only.
Following practice, adults participated in 42 baseline test
trials that were identical to practice except dot arrays of
representing the five intermediate sizes were intermixed
among standard trials (6 trials per 7 set sizes). Participants
were asked to indicate whether each array was “more
similar to the small or large standard”. Following baseline,
participants had emotion test trials that were identical to the
baseline trials expect that a face appeared for 750 ms prior
to each dot array presentation. Faces depicted either happy,
angry, or neutral emotions. During the emotion test trials, all
set sizes (2 standard values and 5 intermediate values) were
presented 18 times each, 6 times per emotion, for a total of
126 trials. Emotion trials were presented in a random order,
with trials involving the three emotions intermixed
throughout. Adults received feedback on the practice trials,
but did not receive feedback on any of the test trials.

Data Analyses
Following past work (Droit-Volet et al., 2004; Young &
Cordes, 2013), each participant’s PSE was calculated for the
baseline trials and each of the three emotions separately as a
measure of accuracy. PSEs were computed by determining
the equation of the line relating the proportion of trials the
participant indicated the array was more similar to the large
standard and the size of the dot array, and using that to

Results
Baseline Performance (no faces)
First, we analyzed performance on the baseline trials to
determine whether increased arousal (due to the stress
induction) altered numerical processing in the absence of
emotional stimuli. Analyses revealed no differences in the
PSE or DL of participants across conditions during the
baseline trials (PSE: t(76) = .610 p = .544; DL: t(76) = -.283
p = .778) revealing that heightened arousal did not result in
biases or altered precision in numerical judgments.

Emotion Test Trials - PSE
We conducted a 2 (Condition: Stress, No Stress) x 3
(Emotion: Neutral, Happy, Angry) repeated measures
ANOVA on PSEs obtained from the emotion test trials.
Analyses revealed a main effect of emotion, F(2, 152)
=9.767, p < .001 and a significant condition x emotion
interaction on PSE, F(2, 152) = 3.830, p < . 024. There was
no main effect of condition, F(1, 76) = .120, p = .730. In
order to investigate the interaction further, we looked at the
differences across emotions in each of the two conditions
separately.
Control Condition In line with prior findings (Young &
Cordes, 2013), there was a main effect of emotion on PSE
in the Control condition, F(2, 74) = 9.039, p < .001. The
PSEs corresponding to trials involving happy faces (M=
8.433, SD =0.94) and angry faces (M = 8.332, SD = 0.90)
were both significantly higher relative to neutral faces (M =
8.052, SD = 1.10, p’s < .01), consistent with a pattern of
underestimation
under
emotional
circumstances.
Performance did not differ between angry and happy faces
(p > .23). This finding replicates prior research revealing
numerical underestimation in the context of both angry and
happy faces relative to neutral faces (Young & Cordes,
2013).
Stress Condition There was also a main effect of emotion
on numerical judgments in the Stress condition, F(2, 78) =
4.542, p < .014, however a different pattern emerged. Angry
faces (M = 8.36, SD = 0.84) were significantly
underestimated relative to happy faces (M = 8.155, SD =
0.81) and neutral faces (M = 8.09, SD = .906; p’s < .03).
There was no significant difference between happy and
neutral faces (p > .5).

1735

analyses only pertain to participants in the Control
condition. This measure represents the degree to which
participants’ underestimated number following emotional
stimuli compared to neutral stimuli. Each participant’s
Baseline DL was used as a measure of numerical acuity in
the underlying representation. If those individuals with less
precise numerical representations were more prone to
numerical biases, we would expect a positive correlation
between the participant’s Baseline DL and this numerical
bias measure. A marginal correlation between DLBaseline and
this measure of numerical bias (r =.298, p = .074) was
obtained, suggesting that the magnitude of numerical bias
observed under emotional circumstances may be partially
predicted by the precision in an individual’s underlying
representation in number.

Figure 1. PSE as a function of emotion across conditions.

Emotion Test Trials – DL
We ran a 2 (Condition: Stress, Control) x 3 (Emotion:
Neutral, Happy, Angry) repeated measures ANOVA on the
DLs obtained on emotion test trials. Analyses revealed a
main effect of emotion on DL, F(2, 152) = 7.765, p < .001,
but no main effect of condition F(1, 76) = .117, p = .733,
nor a condition x emotion interaction, F(2, 152) = 1.722, p =
.182. Overall, results revealed increased precision in
numerical judgments following presentation of emotional
faces (MHappy = 2.679, SDHappy= .265; MAngry= 2.647, SDAngry
= .238) relative to neutral faces (M = 2.736, SD = .336, p’s
< .04). There was no significant difference between angry
and happy faces (p = .103).

Discussion

Figure 2. DL as a function of emotion for both conditions.

Individual Differences
Lastly, we explored whether individual differences in
precision in the underlying representation of number relates
to the magnitude of numerical bias observed in the presence
of emotional stimuli. Is it the case that individuals with
lower numerical acuity (as assessed via performance on
baseline trials) may be more vulnerable to numerical biases
in the presence of emotional stimuli? In order to test this
question, we computed a measure of numerical bias by
subtracting each participant’s average PSE across the
emotion trials (average of PSEHappy and PSEAngry) and
subtracting this from their PSENeutral. Importantly, these

Prominent theories posit a common magnitude system for
representing temporal and numerical magnitudes (Cantlon et
al., 2009; Meck & Church, 1983; Walsh, 2003). If this is the
case, then temporal and numerical processing should reveal
similar biases under identical circumstances. Yet, work
reveals that identical emotional stimuli impact temporal and
numerical processing in distinct fashions (Young & Cordes,
2013). Given that the pattern of temporal overestimation
tracks with the level of arousal of the emotional stimuli (i.e.,
angry, but not happy, emotional stimuli result in
overestimation of durations), it has been posited that
increased arousal underlies the observed temporal biases
(Droit-Volet & Meck, 2007; Gil & Droit-Volet, 2012).
Conversely, given that numerical underestimation is
observed in the presence of both arousing (angry) and less
arousing (happy) emotional stimuli, it has been
hypothesized that changes in attention modulate the
numerical underestimation observed (Young & Cordes,
2013). These distinct patterns, however, could potentially be
explained by different arousal thresholds for numerical and
temporal processing and/or by a delayed arousal response.
In the present study, we examined how induced stress
(i.e., increased arousal) impacted subsequent numerical
judgments, both in the presence and absence of emotional
stimuli. By heightening arousal prior to participation in the
numerical task, we were able to assure altered arousal levels
in participants at the time of numerical judgments.
Moreover, by presenting arousing emotional stimuli (angry
faces) following a stress induction task, we maximized
arousal in participants prior to engagement in the numerical
task to increase the likelihood that any arousal threshold
was met. As such, results of this study can speak to how
increased arousal impacts numerical processing, providing a
true test of the common magnitude system. That is, by
maximizing arousal in participants prior to participation in a
numerical task, we are able to explore whether numerical
biases mimic those found in temporal processing. Yet
results did not reveal this to be the case.
Results of our baseline trials revealed that heightened
arousal (as induced in our stress task) did not disrupt basic

1736

numerical processing as we had predicted. In fact, results
revealed no significant differences between the Stress and
Control conditions for baseline responding, suggesting that
induced stress did not alter numerical processing in the
absence of emotional stimuli.
Importantly, responding during emotional trials in the
Control condition mimicked that of previous studies, again
revealing a pattern of underestimation following the
presentation of either happy or angry emotional stimuli
relative to neutral stimuli. Thus, again, in the absence of
heightened arousal, participants underestimate number in
the presence of emotional stimuli.
However, a different pattern of underestimation following
emotional stimuli emerged among those in the Stress
condition. Those in the Stress condition only underestimated
angry faces compared to neutral faces, with responding on
happy trials mirroring that found on neutral trials. These
findings are significant for two reasons. First, despite no
differences in numerical processing in baseline, findings of
a distinct pattern of results across condition make it clear
that our stress induction task was effective. Results revealed
that induced stress led to a differential pattern of numerical
judgments in participants across conditions. Thus, a failure
to find baseline differences suggests that induced arousal
does not have a strong impact on numerical processing in
the absence of emotional stimuli. Second, despite
heightened arousal, participants in the Stress condition did
not respond with a pattern of overestimation of numerical
stimuli, as might have been predicted by a common
magnitude system. That is, induced arousal prior to
presentation of the numerical task failed to result in
numerical biases mimicking those found in temporal tasks,
providing strong support against a common magnitude
system. Instead, results in the Stress condition revealed a
similar (though not identical) pattern of underestimation in
the presence of emotional stimuli. However, importantly, in
contrast to the Control condition, underestimation was only
observed following the presentation of angry faces, not
happy ones.
What can explain this novel pattern of results? Findings
are likely accounted for by a difference in how participants
in the Stress condition may have perceived the emotions
presented. It is possible that induced stress may have
resulted in an overall negative interpretation of the face
stimuli, causing participants to perceive angry faces as
angrier, yet happy faces were perceived as more neutral,
thus resulting in underestimation of angry trials, yet similar
performance on happy and neutral trials. This finding is in
line with work demonstrating that highly anxious
individuals may be more likely to attend to threatening
content, which may be at the expense of attending to the
happy stimuli (Bar-Haim, Lamy, Pergamin, BakermansKranenburg, van IJzendoorn, 2007). Other work has shown
that stress increases one’s sensitivity to threats, but reduces
specificity (van Marle, Hermans, Qin, & Fernandez, 2009),
thus leading to a failure to differentiate happy from neutral
faces. Thus, participants in the Stress condition likely

perceived the happy faces as being more similar to the
neutral faces, thus minimizing any differences observed
between the happy and neutral face trials.
Results are also the first to suggest that numerical
underestimation biases in the presence of emotional stimuli
may reflect heightened numerical acuity. While it has been
hypothesized that the numerical biases observed under
emotional circumstances may be the results of impaired
numerical processing (Rodzon, Baker, & Jordan, 2011;
Young & Cordes, 2013), our findings provide evidence for
enhanced numerical performance following emotions. Our
data reveal significantly smaller DL (i.e., greater precision)
after emotional content is presented. This finding is
consistent with the literature investigating children’s and
adult’s numerical judgments in the presence of emotional
faces (Lewis, Zax, & Cordes, submitted). Prior work has
shown that children’s numerical judgments become more
precise following the presentation of emotional faces
(relative to following neutral faces). Prior work has also
shown positive impacts of emotions on subsequent tasks.
For example, Phelps, Ling, & Carrasco (2006) reported
increased contrast sensitivity, and thus enhanced
performance on neutral tasks following emotions.
Vuilleumier (2005) found similar effects of enhanced
performance when emotions preceded and were not
concurrent with the task demands. This study joins others
suggesting that emotional or threatening content may
benefit numerical processing if the emotional content is not
inherent in the stimuli to be enumerated (Hamamouche et
al., submitted). The adults in our study were also more
precise in their numerical judgments following the
presentation of emotional faces likely due to heightened
attention brought on by the socially salient stimuli,
providing further support for the attention model associated
with numerical processing.
While many studies have investigated the impact of
emotional faces on temporal and numerical processing (e.g.,
Baker et al., 2013; Droit-Volet, 2003; Droit-Volet & Meck,
2007; Young & Cordes, 2013), it has been unclear if
emotions impact an individual’s numerical judgments to the
same degree, regardless of one’s initial numerical
representations. We investigated whether those with less
precise numerical representations would be more likely to
adjust their numerical judgments in the presence of emotion
than those with more precise representations. Our data
hinted at a possible relationship between participant’s
baseline precision on the numerical task and the degree to
which they underestimated during the emotion trials,
indicating that the underestimation effect seen in the
presence of emotion may be related to individual differences
in numerical representation. However, this correlation was
only marginally significant and thus we cannot make strong
claims about the potential of this relationship. Future work
should explore whether the magnitude of these numerical
biases may also be predicted by individual sensitivities to
emotional stimuli and/or social stimuli, more generally.

1737

This study is the first of its kind to investigate the
interaction of stress and emotion on numerical processing.
Although arousal did not impact numerical processing as
predicted, this study joins a growing body of literature
providing evidence questioning the plausibility of a
common magnitude system (e.g., Agrillo, Ranpura, &
Butterworth, 2011; Baker, Rodzon, & Jordan, 2013; Young
& Cordes, 2013). Future work should investigate the
interaction between stress and emotion on temporal
processing, in order to further understand basic quantitative
processing in real-world situations.

Acknowledgments
Support for the preparation of the manuscript was provided
by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada to MH.

References
Agrillo, C., Ranpura, A., & Butterworth, B. (2011). Time
and numerosity estimations are independent: Behavioral
evidence for two different systems using a conflict
paradigm. Cognitive Neuroscience, 1(2), 96-101.
Angrilli, A., Cherubini, P., Pavese, A., & Manfredini, S.
(1997). The influence of affective factors on time
perception. Perception & Psychophysics, 59, 972-982.
Rodzon, K., Baker, J., & Jordan, K. (2011, July). The
impact of emotion numerical estimation. In L. Carlson, C.
Hoelscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(3552-3557). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Baker, J., Rodzon, K., & Jordan, K. (2013). The impact of
emotion on numerosity estimation. Frontiers in
Psychology, 4, 521.
Bar-Haim, Y., Lamy, D., Pergamin, L., BakermansKranenburg, M. J., & Van Ijzendoorn, M. H. (2007).
Threat-related attentional bias in anxious and nonanxious
individuals: a meta-analytic study. Psychological bulletin,
133(1), 1.
Cantlon, J. F., Platt, M. L., & Brannon, E. M. (2009).
Beyond the number domain. Trends in cognitive sciences,
13(2), 83-91.
Droit-Volet, S. (2003) Alerting attention and time
perception in children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 85(4), 372-394.
Droit-Volet, S., Brunot, S., & Niedenthal, P. (2004).
Perception of the duration of emotional events. Cognition
& Emotion, 18, 849-858.
Droit-Volet S., & Meck, W. (2007). How emotions colour
our time perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1(12),
504-513.
Droit-Volet, S. & Wearden, J. (2001). Temporal bisection in
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 55,
142-159.
Gil, S. & Droit-Volet, S. (2012). Emotion time distortions:
The fundamental role of arousal. Cognition & Emotion,
26(5), 847-862.

Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M., & Feigenson, L. (2008).
Individual differences in non-verbal number acuity
correlate with maths achievement. Nature, 455, 665-668.
Hamamouche, K., Niemi, L., Cordes, S., (submitted).
Quantifying a Threat: Evidence of a Numeric Processing
Bias.
Kirschbaum, C., Pirke, K., Hellhammer, D. (1993). The
‘Trier Social Stress Test’ – a tool for investigating
psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting.
Neuropsychobiology, 28(1-2), 76-81.
Lewis, E., Zax, A., & Cordes, S. (submitted). The Impact of
Emotion on Numerical Estimations: A Developmental
Perspective.
Meck, W. & Church, R. (1983). A mode control model of
counting and timing processes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology Animal Behavior Processes, 9(3), 320-34.
Meece, J., Wigfield, A., Eccles, J. (1990). Predictors of
math anxiety and its influence on young adolescents’
course enrollment and performance in mathematics.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(1), 60-70.
Ortega, L., & Lopez, F. (2008). Effects of visual flicker on
subjective time in a temporal bisection task. Behavioural
Processes, 78(3), 380-386.
Phelps, E. A., Ling, S., & Carrasco, M. (2006). Emotion
facilitates perception and potentiates the perceptual
benefits of attention. Psychological Science, 17(4), 292299.
Silbert, A., Wolff, P., Lilienthal, J. (1977). Spatial and
Temporal Processing in Patients with Turner’s Syndrome.
Behavior Genetics, 7(1), 11-21.
Tottenham, N., Tanaka, J. W., Leon, A. C., McCarry, T.,
Nurse, M., Hare, T. A., ... & Nelson, C. (2009). The
NimStim set of facial expressions: judgments from
untrained research participants. Psychiatry Research,
168(3), 242-249.
Treisman, M. (1963). Temporal discrimination and the
indifference interval: Implications for a model of the
“internal clock.” Psychological Monographs: General
and Applied, 77(13), 1-31.
van Marle, H. J., Hermans, E. J., Qin, S., & Fernández, G.
(2009). From specificity to sensitivity: how acute stress
affects amygdala processing of biologically salient
stimuli. Biological Psychiatry, 66(7), 649-655.
Vuilleumier, P. (2005). How brains beware: Neural
mechanisms of emotional attention. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 585-594.
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical
metrics of time, space, and quantity. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(11), 483-488.
Wearden, J. H., Norton, R., Martin, S. and Montford-Bebb,
O. 2007. Internal clock processes and the filled-duration
illusion. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33, 716–
729.
Young, L. & Cordes, S. (2013). Fewer Things, Lasting
Longer: The Effects of Emotion on Quantity Judgments.
Psychological Science, 24(6), 1057-1059.

1738

