The paradox of relational development: Could language learning be (temporarily)
harmful?
Christian Hoyos (choyos@u.northwestern.edu)
Ruxue Shao (ruxueshao2018@u.northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
Recent studies report a striking decline in children’s ability to
notice same-different relations around age 3 (Walker et al.,
2015). We propose that such a decline results from an object
focus related to children’s avid noun-learning. To test this, we
examine children’s performance on a classic relational task –
the relational match-to-sample task (RMTS). Prior work has
shown that 4-year-olds can pass this task (Christie & Gentner,
2014). However, if nominal language induces an object focus,
their performance should be disrupted by a noun-labeling
pretask. In two experiments, 4-year-olds either labeled objects
or actions in a naming pretask. Then they completed the
RMTS task. Consistent with the noun-focus explanation, the
object-naming group failed the RMTS task, whereas the
action-naming group and a control group both succeeded.
This suggests that nominal language can lead to an object
focus, and that this could explain the temporary decline in
children’s relational processing.
Keywords: cognitive development, relational processing,
learning, language

Introduction
Relational processing is the capstone of human reasoning.
Some have proposed that humans’ remarkable capacity for
relational processing may be the key difference between
humans and non-human primates (Gentner, 2003, 2010;
Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008). The focus of the current
work is to examine how language influences changes in
relational processing over development.
How well do children engage in relational processing?
Gentner’s (1988) relational shift account posits that early in
learning, children (and other novices) tend to focus on
objects and surface-level attributes, and that with learning,
they become able to focus on relational similarity (Gentner
& Rattermann, 1991; Honomichl & Chen, 2006; Paik &
Mix, 2006; Rattermann & Gentner, 1998). For instance,
Gentner (1988) found that 5-6 year olds interpreted the
metaphor “A tire is a shoe” based on their shared attributes
(“both are black”), whereas 9-10 year olds produced more
relational interpretations (“you can go places on both”).
Gentner and Rattermann (1991) provided further support
for the relational shift using a different paradigm. In their
relational matching task, the experimenter and child each
had their own set of three distinct objects. The experimenter
hid a sticker under an object in their set, and the child had to
find a sticker in the corresponding location in their set (i.e.,

if the sticker was in the center of the experimenter’s set,
then the child would find sticker in the center object of their
set). In one condition, the objects were cross-mapped—for
example, the center object in the experimenter’s set was
identical to the rightmost object in the child’s set. Under
these conditions, it was difficult for 3-year-olds to resist
matching by object identity. Instead of searching in the
corresponding relational location (center), they searched
under the identical object. In contrast, 5-year-olds were able
to resist the object matches and make relational matches.
Christie and Gentner (2014) measured children’s
performance on a different relational matching task used
widely with other species – the relational match-to-sample
task (RMTS; Premack, 1983). In this task, subjects are
given a standard (AA) and must select a match between two
options (BB or CD). The BB pair should be matched to the
AA pair on the basis of the common same relation between
them. Christie and Gentner (2014) found that 4-year-olds
were able to make relational matches at above chance levels
in the RMTS task, but 3- and 2½-year-olds were not.
Together, these studies reveal that younger children tend to
focus on individual objects rather than on relations. (These
studies compare younger versus older children because age
generally correlates with greater knowledge and thus better
relational processing. However, a relational shift occurs at
different times for different tasks. For example, college
students show a novice-expert shift from focusing on
concrete domain matches to focusing on common causal
systems [Rottman et al., 2012].)
What factors improve children’s relational processing?
Gentner and colleagues have proposed that the acquisition
of relational knowledge, via a combination of structuremapping processes and relational language, allows learners
to shift their focus towards relations (Christie & Gentner,
2014; Gentner, 2010; Gentner & Christie, 2008; Rattermann
& Gentner, 1998). Other accounts emphasize the maturation
of domain-general cognitive abilities. For instance, some
have argued that the development of working memory (e.g.,,
Halford, Wilson, & Phillips, 1998) and inhibitory control
(e.g., Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006; Thibaut,
French, & Vezneva, 2010) allow children to consider
multiple relations and resist object matches. Nonetheless,
there is widespread agreement that children’s relational
processing generally improves over time. This consensus
has been challenged by recent findings.

2507

Developmental Decline in Relational Processing

Language and Relational Processing

While Christie and Gentner (2014) found that 2½- and 3year-olds failed to make relational matches in the RMTS
task, the ability to generalize same-different relations has
been found to be present much earlier in development.
Ferry, Hespos and Gentner (2015) habituated 7- and 9month-old infants to either same or different pairs of
objects. At test, they were shown novel same and different
pairs. Infants looked longer at the novel relation (i.e., infants
in the same condition looked longer at the different pair, and
vice versa). Thus, infants appear capable of analogical
generalization across multiple examples (see also Marcus,
Vijayan, Bandi Rao & Vishton, 1999; Saffran, Pollak,
Seibel, & Shkolnik, 2007).
Toddlers have also been found to generalize samedifferent relations. Walker and Gopnik (2014; Walker,
Bridgers, & Gopnik, 2015) modified the classic blicket
detector paradigm and showed 18- to 30-month-olds a
machine that played music only when certain pairs of
objects were placed on it. During training, four unique pairs
of objects were placed on the machine (twice each). In the
same condition, the machine played music only when the
experimenter placed same pairs on the machine, and not
when different pairs were used. The reverse pattern held for
the different condition. After this training, the toddlers
successfully chose between a same and a different pair to
make the machine play music. Thus, very young humans
can generalize these relations from multiple examples.
In themselves these results may not be totally surprising.
Perhaps toddlers do well on the blicket-detector task
because it is an especially engaging task or because it
affords opportunities for comparison. But if so, then
performance should continue to improve with age and
experience. Surprisingly, Walker et al. (2015) found that
older children performed worse than younger children.
When older children (30 to 36 months) were tested in the
same task, they could select the correct pair only in the same
condition, and not the different condition. An older group
(36 to 47 months), failed in both the same or different
conditions. These results suggest that between the ages of
18 and 47 months, there is a decline in children’s ability to
notice these relations in the same task.
The overall picture that emerges is a puzzling one. Taken
together, the evidence suggests that the developmental
trajectory of relational processing is a U-shaped curve. At
an early age, at least some relations are available to children
(with the right scaffolding). Over time, relations become
temporarily less available.
What could account for this decline in relational ability?
As discussed above, failure to make relational matches can
result from a focus on objects. Thus if children focused
strongly on individual objects in the relational blicket
detector task, this could account for their failure to notice
that the objects form an abstract relation. But this line of
reasoning would call for an explanation of why the object
focus should become stronger during early childhood.

What could explain the apparent decline in relational ability
roughly between 2.5 and 3 years of age? One proposal,
advanced by Walker et al. (2015), is that children’s early
hypothesis space gives equal priority to objects and
relations, but with learning, children form “a different
overhypothesis namely, that individual kinds of objects,
rather than relations between them, have causal powers” (p.
2560). As children learn that individual objects are likely to
be causally potent, they prioritize object-focused hypotheses
over relational hypotheses. Thus, the older group fails to
attend to relations in the task.
Here we consider a different hypothesis—that patterns of
language learning are to blame for the object focus.
Specifically, we hypothesize that young children are
focused on learning names for objects and that this focus on
objects temporarily impedes their ability to notice relations.
We note that this proposal runs contrary to the abundant
evidence that language aids relational processing (Gentner
& Christie, 2008; Gentner & Rattermann, 1991;
Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005; Pruden, Levine, &
Huttenlocher, 2011; Pyers & Senghas, 2009). For example,
learning spatial relational terms such as left-right (HermerVazquez, Moffet, & Munkholm, 2001) and on (Casasola,
2005) have been shown to help children in relational and
categorization tasks. Even in same-different tasks like the
RMTS, 3-year-olds given training in the meanings of same
and different succeed in making relational matches (Christie
& Gentner, 2014). However, these studies all concern the
benefits of relational language. Our hypothesis concerns a
different aspect of language. We propose that the early
acquisition of nouns can have a temporarily negative
influence on relational reasoning.
The Nominal Explosion There is overwhelming evidence
that nouns are among the first words that children learn, and
they dominate over other word classes in early vocabulary
(Bates et al., 1994; Bornstein et al., 2004; Gentner, 1982;
Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001; Gleitman et al., 2005;
MacNamara, 1972). Bates and colleagues’ (1994) used the
MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory
(MCDI) with a large sample of parents and showed that
children’s early vocabulary was dominated by nouns. The
proportion of nouns relative to other words was found to
peak at a vocabulary size of 100 to 200 words (55.2% of
these words were found to be nouns). Peak “nouniness”
occurs roughly between 1 ½ to 2 ½ years of age. As
children’s vocabularies grow, the proportion of verbs and
other predicates increases, while the proportion of nouns
decreases. This pattern of early noun dominance appears
across languages, as evidenced by MCDI data collected
from thousands of children across 13 languages (Braginsky,
Yurovsky, Marchman, & Frank, 2015). We propose that the
dominance of nouns early in language learning can make
objects particularly salient.
According to the natural partitions hypothesis (Gentner,
1982), early noun dominance results from the fact that many

2508

nouns refer to concrete, perceptually individuated entities in
the environment (unlike verbs and prepositions, whose
meanings vary cross-linguistically). Nouns are thus a natural
entry point for referential language. Children are eager to
learn language, and acquiring names for objects is a highly
successful strategy for young children. This strategy can
lead young children to focus strongly on objects. Of course,
in the long run, a repertoire of noun meanings will aid
children in learning relational terms (Gentner 1982;
Gleitman, 1990). But in the short run, it may result in an
object focus that renders relations temporarily less available.
We tested this idea in a pilot study. We asked whether 2year-olds’ performance on the RMTS task was related to
their language development, as assessed by the MCDI. We
found that 2-year-olds who performed better than chance on
the RMTS (5/8 trials or more) had fewer words checked off
on the MCDI (M = 441.38, SD = 153.51) than children who
performed at or below chance (M = 562.23, SD = 124.82,
t(28) = 2.21, p = .04, d = 0.86). This provides some
encouragement for the idea that knowing more words could
in fact impede relational processing. Our goal for the current
research was to manipulate children’s noun focus and
examine its influence on relational processing.

Experiment 1
In the current work, we test the hypothesis that nominal
language induces an object focus and disrupts children’s
ability to make relational matches. We used Christie &
Gentner’s (2014) same-only RMTS task, and tested children
at an age at which they already pass the RMTS task – 4
years. We developed a naming task in which children are
asked to provide noun labels for common objects presented
on cards. By having children activate many noun labels, we
hypothesized it would lead to an object focus. The goal was
to bring children back into a “younger” mindset – to an
earlier age at which they were captivated by objects. If
nominal language induces an object focus, then children in
this condition should show impaired performance on a
subsequent RMTS task. We compared this group of children
to a separate group who also engaged in a naming task.
However, we asked this second group to produce verb labels
for images of scenes. Because the verb naming group was a
control, we chose transitive action verbs that could be easily
depicted. We did not predict that priming transitive verbs
would improve children’s performance on the RMTS task
relative to the baseline group. Instead, we predicted that the
noun labeling group would perform poorly because of the
induced object focus.

Materials & Procedure The RMTS task was presented on
cards. There were 8 trials. Each trial was made up of a triad
of three cards: the standard card, and two possible matches.
Each card depicted two shapes – either a same pair or
different pair. The standard always showed a same pair, and
children had to select between a same pair and a different
pair to match the standard (see Figure 1 for a sample triad).
Within each triad, each pair was made up of unique shapes
and colors. At the end of the 8 target trials, there were two
catch trials meant to determine whether the child understood
the task. These catch trials were literal similarity matches
that did not require the child to judge relational similarity.
Children who failed any of the catch trials were not included
in the analysis (n = 8).
For each trial of the RMTS task, the experimenter placed
the standard in front of the child and asked “Do you see this
one?” Then the experimenter placed the two possible
matches below the standard (as in Figure 1) and asked
“Which one of these two goes with this one?” No feedback
was given on the child’s response. The next trial was
presented until the task was complete.
Children were placed in one of three between-subjects
conditions: Object Naming, Action Naming, or Baseline.
Children in the Object Naming condition first completed the
object naming pretask. A set of 39 cards was created
depicting everyday objects (e.g., pencil, ball, turtle). The
experimenter presented each card in the object naming set
one at a time and asked the child “What is this called?” If
the child did not know one of the words, they were told the
label and were asked to repeat it. After the child named all
the objects, they completed the RMTS task.
A similar procedure was used in the Action Naming
condition. Children first completed the action naming
pretask. A set of 35 cards was created depicting scenes
involving actions that were familiar to children (e.g.,
kicking, throwing, jumping). For each card, children were
asked “What is (s)he doing?” They generally provided verb
phrases (“he’s throwing it”), or single word utterances
(“jumping”). If the child could not produce a label, it was
provided for them and they were asked to repeat it. After
naming the action cards, children completed the RMTS task.
In the Baseline condition, children simply completed the
RMTS task. This condition was created in order to test
children’s relational ability with no prior manipulations. We
expected to replicate the performance of 4-year-olds in
Christie and Gentner (2014).

Methods
Participants Fifty-nine 4-year-olds were recruited from the
Evanston/Chicago area (29 females, Mage = 53 months). The
racial and economic composition of the sample reflected
those of the local population. Children received a small gift
for their participation.

Figure 1. A sample triad from the RMTS task.

2509

Results & Discussion
We measured the mean proportion of relational matches
in the RMTS task. Two different analyses assessed
performance. First, we used a one-way ANOVA to calculate
differences between the conditions. We found a significant
effect of condition, F(2,48) = 4.43, p = .02, η2 = 0.15.
Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed that the Baseline group
(M = 0.76, SD = 0.22) made significantly more relational
matches than the Object Naming group (M = 0.51, SD =
0.28), p = .03. The Action Naming group (M = 0.73, SD =
0.30) was no different from the Baseline group, p = 1.00.
The difference between the Action Naming and Object
Naming groups approached significance, p = .06.
In the second analysis, we compared the means of each
group to chance (50%). We found that the Baseline group
selected relational matches significantly more than chance,
t(16) = 4.76, p < .001, d = 1.18, replicating the findings
from Christie and Gentner (2014). The Action Naming
group also performed above chance, t(16) = 3.16, p = .006,
d = 0.77. However, the Object Naming group performed no
differently from chance, t(16) = 0.11, p = .91, d = 0.04.
As we predicted, the children who labeled objects prior to
the RMTS task performed worse than those who did not (the
Baseline condition). Further, those who labeled actions did
not display impaired performance on the RMTS task,
suggesting that the impairment was specific to noun labels
and not due to fatigue. This pattern is consistent with the
idea that nominal language can impair relational matching.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 provided evidence that noun-naming can (at
least temporarily) impair relational reasoning. However,
before drawing conclusions we wanted to generalize the
findings and address some possible concerns. In Experiment
1, we used a mix of hand-drawn and printed images, and
different numbers of cards between conditions. For
Experiment 2, we developed new sets of cards, using words
that weren’t used in Experiment 1, and we used a more
uniform style across the images. The number of cards
shown in each condition was also equalized (a total of 40
cards each). We also changed the instructions given in the
RMTS task. In Experiment 1, the target question was
“Which one of these two goes with this one?” The meaning
of “goes with” may not be immediately clear to children, so
in order to make sure this did not influence the results, we
asked children “Which one of these two is more like this
one?” (following Christie & Gentner, 2014).

Methods
Participants Twenty-nine 4-year-olds were recruited from
the Evanston/Chicago area (14 females, Mage = 53 months).
The demographics were the same as in Experiment 1.
Materials and Procedure Two new sets of cards were
developed. Forty new objects and forty new actions were
depicted on cards for the Object Naming and Action

Naming conditions. The RMTS task was identical to
Experiment 1, with the exception that an additional catch
trial was added for a total of three literal similarity catch
trials. Children that failed any of these catch trials were
excluded from analysis (n = 4).
The overall procedure was the same as in Experiment 1.
Children were placed in either the Object Naming or Action
Naming condition. In the Object Naming condition, children
were shown a card with an image of an object and were
asked, “What is this called?” In the Action Naming
condition, children were shown a card with an image of a
scene and were asked: “What is (s)he doing?”
Following the naming pretask, children completed the
same 8 trials of the RMTS task as in Experiment 1.
However, the instructions were slightly different. After the
two possible matches were placed underneath the standard,
the target question was “Which one of these two is more
like this one?” No feedback was provided.

Results & Discussion
As in Experiment 1, we measured the proportion of
relational matches in the RMTS task. Although the Object
Naming group (M = 0.55, SD = 0.32) appeared to perform
worse than the Action Naming group (M = 0.69, SD = 0.21),
the difference did not reach significance, t(23) = -1.23, p =
.23, d = 0.54. However, whereas the Action Naming group
performed above-chance on the RMTS task, t(8) = 2.80, p =
.02, d = 0.90, the Object Naming group did not, t(15) =
0.58, p = .57, d = 0.16.
These results largely replicated Experiment 1. We found
that with a new set of stimuli, providing noun labels for
objects hindered children’s ability to make relational
matches in the RMTS task. This effect was not seen when
children were asked to provide verb labels for actions.

General Discussion
Research on relational processing in the first few years of
life has revealed a puzzling pattern. Infants and young
toddlers can generalize same-different relations when
presented with multiple examples (Ferry et al., 2015;
Walker et al., 2015). In contrast, slightly older toddlers,
from around 2.5 years of age, show a steadily decreasing
ability to notice these relations. Here we tested the
possibility that this decline results from an object focus that
is a side effect of children’s early focus on acquiring nouns.
We hypothesize that children’s interest in noun-learning can
make objects more salient, and interfere with children’s
ability to judge relational similarity across instances.
We tested this possibility by simulating these conditions
in preschoolers. We first verified that four-year-olds could
easily make relational matches in the RMTS task in the
absence of any manipulation via the Baseline condition. We
found that this was the case, replicating Christie and
Gentner (2014). We asked children in the Object Naming
condition to generate noun labels for familiar objects. We
predicted that this experience would lead them to focus on
objects and thus perform poorly on a subsequent RMTS

2510

task. Across two experiments, we showed that the use of
noun labels had a negative influence on children’s relational
matching. In both studies, children in the Object Naming
condition went on to perform at chance in the RMTS task—
far lower than the Baseline group. In contrast, children
asked to generate verbs in the Action Naming condition saw
no such impairments. This finding supports our hypothesis
that the relational decline is related to children’s early
tendency to focus on objects in the service of noun learning.
An interesting aspect of our findings is that we
successfully induced a general focus on objects, rather than
a focus on specific objects shown in the pretask. To
illustrate this difference, let us consider one of the studies
conducted by Ferry et al. (2015). Infants were exposed to
specific objects in the waiting room before the experiment
began. When these same objects appeared within a
relational pair in one of the test trials, this impaired infants’
ability to notice that the object was part of an abstract
relation. They focused on the individual object they had
seen earlier, and this impaired their ability to notice
relational similarity. However, the current experiments
differ; the objects that children labeled in the pretask never
appeared in the subsequent RMTS task. Thus, activating
multiple noun labels led to a general focus on objects that
influenced how the children processed unrelated objects in
the RMTS task. This supports our claim that language can
lead to a generalized object focus.
The current work shows that focusing on nouns can direct
attention to objects at the expense of relations. These
findings dovetail with other results showing that noun labels
lead both infants and children to focus on objects (Balaban
& Waxman, 1997; Smith, Jones, Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe,
& Samuelson, 2002; Xu & Carey, 1996). For instance, Xu
and Carey (1996) found that 10-month-olds who knew the
names of particular objects could keep track of the objects’
identities in an object individuation task better than the
infants who did not know the words.
Comparative work also provides some support for the
notion that language is related to the object focus. Christie,
Gentner, Call, and Haun (2016) compared the performance
of nonhuman apes and 3-year-old children on the same
relational mapping task. Children displayed greater
relational matching ability than chimpanzees and bonobos.
But when given a cross-mapping task, children were far
more distracted by object matches than were the apes. Thus
it does not appear that children’s early noun focus results
from a general phylogenetic bias. As none of the apes in this
study had been taught symbol systems, language learning is
at least a plausible candidate for the greater object focus
seen in children.
We note that there is a slight difference between the
generally assumed age of the nominal explosion and the age
at which Walker et al. (2015) found a relational decline. The
nominal explosion occurs between 18 and 30 months,
whereas the decline in relational reasoning occurs slightly
later, starting around 36 months. However, effects of
language often take time to become entrenched. Noun-

dominance in language learning may appear early, and
affect relational attention at a somewhat later time.
The current work has focused on a temporary decline. But
in the larger picture, children improve dramatically in their
relational ability over the preschool and early school years
(Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Paik & Mix, 2006;
Rattermann & Gentner, 1998). Although general experience
(Rattermann & Gentner, 1998) and increases in executive
ability (Richland et al., 2006; Thibaut et al., 2010) and
processing capacity (Halford et al., 1998) may all contribute
to this development, we suggest that a major factor is
relational language learning (Gentner, 2010; Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991). Children are acquiring relational
terms—including spatial terms and mathematical terms—
that support relational representation and reasoning
(Casasola, 2005; Christie & Gentner, 2014; Gentner &
Christie, 2008; Hermer-Vasquez et al., 2001; Loewenstein
& Gentner, 2005; Pruden et al., 2011; Pyers & Senghas,
2009). Over learning, language becomes a fine-tuned
instrument that can support selective attention to either
objects or relations.
Our goal here was to induce an object focus via our
object naming task as a microcosm of what occurs on a
macro scale with the noun explosion. In ongoing studies, we
aim to trace these effects at younger ages.

Acknowledgements
We thank Emma Bulzoni, Katie Cha, Tiana Hickey, and
Victoria Wee for their help with data collection. This work
was supported by NSF SLC Grant SBE-0541957 awarded to
the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC), and by
ONR Grant N00014-92-J-1098 to Dedre Gentner.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64(1), 3–26.
Bornstein, M. H., Cote, L. R., Maital, S., Painter, K., Park,
S.-Y., Pascual, L., … Vyt, A. (2004). Cross-linguistic
analysis of vocabulary in young children: Spanish, Dutch,
French, Hebrew, Italian, Korean, and American English.
Child Development, 75(4), 1115-1139.
Bates, E., Marchman, V., Thal, D., Fenson, L., Dale, P.,
Reznick, J. S., … Hartung, J. (1994). Developmental and
stylistic variation in the composition of early vocabulary.
Journal of Child Language, 21, 85 – 123.
Braginsky, M., Yurovsky, D., Marchman, V., & Frank, M.
C. (2015). Developmental trajectories of vocabulary
composition across languages. Poster presented at the 40 th
Annual Boston University Conference on Language
Development.
Casasola, M. (2005). Can language do the driving? The
effect of linguistic input on infants’ categorization of
support spatial relations. Developmental Psychology, 41,
183-192.

2511

Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2014). Language helps children
succeed on a classic analogy task. Cognitive Science, 38,
383-397.
Christie, S., Gentner, D., Call, J., & Haun, D. B. M. (2016).
Sensitivity to relational similarity and object similarity in
apes and children. Current Biology, 26(4), 531-535.
Ferry, A. L., Hespos, S. J., & Gentner, D. (2015).
Prelinguistic relational concepts: Investigating analogical
processing in infants. Child Development, 86, 1386-1405.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.
Kuczaj (Ed.) Language development, volume 2:
Language, thought, and culture (pp. 301-334). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we're so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought (pp. 195-235).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5),
752-775.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development (pp. 215-256). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Gentner, D., & Christie, S. (2008). Relational language
supports relational cognition in humans and apes.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31, 136-137.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1(1), 3-55.
Gleitman, L. R., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafragou, A., &
Trueswell, J. C. (2005). Hard words. Language Learning
and Development, 1(1), 23–64.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
Implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 21,
803-864.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P. (2001).
Language, space, and the development of cognitive
flexibility in humans: The case of two spatial memory
tasks. Cognition, 79(3), 263 – 299.
Honomichl, R. D., & Chen, Z. (2006). Learning to align
relations: The effects of feedback and self-explanation.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 7(4), 527–550.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-353.

MacNamara, J. (1972). Cognitive basis of language learning
in infants. Psychological Review, 79(1), 1 – 13.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton, P.M.
(1999). Rule-learning in seven-month-old infants.
Science, 283, 77-80.
Paik, J. H., & Mix, K. S. (2006). Preschoolers’ use of
surface similarity in object comparisons: Taking context
into account. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
95(3), 194-214.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Povinelli, D. J. (2008).
Darwin’s mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between
human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31(02), 109–130.
Premack, D. (1983). The codes of man and beasts.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 6, 125–167.
Pruden, S. M., Levine, S., & Huttenlocher, J. (2011).
Children’s spatial thinking: Does talk about the spatial
world matter? Developmental Science, 14, 1417-1430.
Pyers, J. E., & Senghas, A. (2009). Language promotes
false-belief understanding: Evidence from learners of a
new sign language. Psychological Science, 20, 805–812.
Rattermann, M. J., & Gentner, D. (1998b). More evidence
for a relational shift in the development of analogy:
Children's performance on a causal-mapping task.
Cognitive Development, 13, 453-478.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Rottman, B. M., Gentner, D., & Goldwater, M. B. (2012).
Causal systems categories: Differences in novice and
expert categorization of causal phenomena. Cognitive
Science, 36, 919 – 932.
Saffran, J. R., Pollak, S. D., Seibel, R. L., & Shkolnik, A.
(2007) Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule learning is not
specific to language. Cognition, 105(3), 669-680.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name learning provides
on-the-job training for attention. Psychological Science,
13(1), 13 – 19.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2010). The
development of analogy making in children: Cognitive
load and executive functions. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 106(1), 1-19.
Walker, C. M., & Gopnik, A. (2014). Toddlers infer higherorder relational principles in causal learning.
Psychological Science, 25, 161–169.
Walker, C., Bridgers, S. B., & Gopnik, A. (2015). The early
emergence and puzzling decline of relational reasoning:
Effects of knowledge and search on inferring “same” and
“different.” In D. C. Noelle, R. Dale, A. S. Warlaumont,
J. Yoshimi, T. Matlock, C. D. Jennings, & P. P. Maglio
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Xu, F., & Carey, S. (1996). Infants’ metaphysics: The case
of numerical identity. Cognitive Psychology, 30, 111-153.

2512

