The Influence of Group Interaction on Creativity in Engineering Design
Trina C. Kershaw1, Rebecca L. Peterson1, & Sankha Bhowmick2
tkershaw@umassd.edu, rpeterson@umassd.edu, sbhowmick@umassd.edu
Departments of 1Psychology and 2Mechanical Engineering, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
285 Old Westport Road, North Dartmouth, MA 02747 USA

Abstract
Group work is frequently part of idea generation, despite
evidence that group interaction may reduce productivity during
brainstorming sessions. Idea quantity is one aspect of
creativity, but the originality of ideas generated is also
important. In this paper, we examine how different aspects of
group interaction, such as who makes the most contributions to
an idea and the number of group members contribute to an idea,
impact the originality of concepts generated by engineering
students. We found that the most original concepts were
produced when the concept originator was the top contributor
to the design, and when the majority of group members
contributed to the concept, particularly among senior students.
These results are discussed in relation to previous work and
suggestions are made for future research that assesses the
interaction between design fixation and group processes.
Keywords: creativity; group processes; engineering

Brainstorming (Osborn, 1957) has long been a popular
method of idea generation, despite pervasive evidence that
individuals produce more ideas than groups (Diehl &
Stroebe, 1987, 1991; Mullen, Johnson, & Salas, 1991; Paulus
& Brown, 2003). Research about group dynamics during
group idea generation sessions suggests that fewer ideas are
developed due to production blocking (Diehl & Stroebe,
1987). While group members may be able to generate many
ideas, a delay between generating ideas and expressing them,
such as when waiting for someone else to finish speaking,
leads to fewer ideas being produced by groups compared to
individuals (Diehl & Stroebe, 1991).
While there is much research on the negative aspects of
brainstorming, there can also be benefits to the technique. For
example, Nijstad and Stroebe (2006) found that exposure to
group members’ ideas led to generation of related ideas, thus
suggesting that the other ideas were serving as retrieval cues
for related semantic information in long-term memory.
Brainstorming is also a popular technique because of higher
levels of satisfaction of working in a group rather than
working alone (Paulus, Dzindolet, Poletes, & Camacho,
1993). Nijstad, Diehl, and Stroebe (2003) suggest that the
experience of fellow group members generating similar ideas
reduces an individual’s performance anxiety.
Because traditional brainstorming has a mix of positive and
negative aspects, several alterations have been proposed to
improve the process. One method is brainwriting, in which
group members write out their ideas rather than speaking
them (VanGundy, 1983). Brainwriting can reduce production
blocking because group members do not have to wait to
express their ideas. Another suggestion is to have individuals
generate ideas alone, and then share them with the group

(Diehl & Strobe, 1987). Baruah and Paulus (2008) found that
participants who generated ideas alone, then in a group, had
a higher quantity of ideas than participants who followed the
opposite sequence.
Suggestions such as writing out ideas and working alone
before interacting in a group are part of an idea generation
technique that is frequently used in engineering research, the
6-3-5 method (Rohrbach, 1969). The 6-3-5 method involves
a group of 6 individuals who each write out 3 ideas. The ideas
are then circulated through the group so that each group
member can comment on and modify the ideas of the other 5
group members. We use a modified version of the 6-3-5
procedure, designed by Otto and Wood (2001), in which
group sizes can range from 4-6 participants, ideas are
expressed as annotated sketches instead of as words, and the
ideas only make three circulations through the group. The
modified version of the 6-3-5 method not only involves the
suggestions of written instead of oral production of ideas and
individual work prior to group interaction, but the groups are
together nominal groups, in which group members sit
together but do not speak to each other. In the modified 6-35 method, both the initial individual ideation and subsequent
idea circulation periods are performed in silence, rather than
with spoken interaction between group members. Mullen et
al. (1991) found that together nominal groups had less loss of
productivity than traditional brainstorming groups. Further,
idea generation techniques that use a combination of
annotated sketches plus rotational sharing of others’ ideas led
to a greater quantity of ideas than idea generation techniques
that used words only, sketches only, or gallery sharing of
others’ ideas, in which generated ideas are all viewed at once
(Linsey et al., 2011).
Thus far, our discussion has focused on the quantity of
ideas generated, which is only one aspect of creativity. The
quality of ideas is also important. In engineering, there is a
strong need for the creation of innovative products that can
compete in the global marketplace (Duderstadt, 2008). In
recent work, we have focused on the development of
creativity in undergraduate engineering students (Kershaw et
al., 2014, 2015). We have measured the originality of
concepts that students produce as solutions to engineering
problems that involve designing next-generation products
such as alarm clocks or litter collection systems. Thus far, our
work has shown that senior students produce more original
concepts than freshmen, in line with other similar studies
(e.g., Atman, Chimka, Bursic, & Nachtmann, 1999) and wellestablished theories of skill acquisition (e.g., Fitts & Posner,
1967), which suggest that higher levels of engineering skill

2135

and knowledge are associated with greater levels of creativity
(cf. Ericsson, 1999).
Our work thus far, however, has not examined the role of
group factors in creativity. While we have used the 6-3-5 idea
generation method, which involves together nominal groups,
we have only examined differences between groups, such as
curriculum level (freshman vs. senior), and have not
examined processes that are occurring within the groups that
may influence the originality of generated ideas. In the
following study, we examine two aspects of group
interaction: which group members have the most creative
inputs for a concept, and the number of group members that
contribute to the overall originality of a concept.
In the 6-3-5 method, multiple group members view each
concept and have an opportunity to modify it, but it is
possible that some group members may contribute more to
the final design than others. Blair and Hölttä-Otto (2012)
found that final designs, once they had been circulated
through the 6-3-5 group, received higher originality scores
than the initial versions of the same concepts. This suggests
that the contributions of the concept originator may not be as
influential on the originality of the design as the contributions
of other group members. Likewise, the cohesiveness of the
group may affect overall creativity. Groups that value high
standards for performance (Paulus & Brown, 2003) or have
experience working together (Milliken, Bartel, & Kurtzberg,
2003) tend to produce more creative ideas.
Based on previous literature, we predicted that groups in
which multiple individuals contributed to the originality of a
concept would produce the most creative solutions to
engineering problems. Based on our previous research, we
expected that group factors would interact with students’
curriculum level: freshman or senior. Participants who were
seniors were enrolled in a year-long capstone design course
that required extensive group work. As they were more
accustomed to working in groups, and were familiar with the
high technical standards expected in engineering, we
expected that interactive senior groups would produce the
most original concepts.

Method
Participants

Materials and Procedure
Participants were separated into groups of 4-6 students and
provided with a consent letter. They also received blank paper
and a colored marker for drawing their concepts. Each group
received a sample product for the redesign exercise. For this
experiment, the sample product was a simple litter collection
device (see Figure 1). After receiving the materials, the
experimenters explained the concept generation exercise to
the students.

Figure 1: Simple Litter Collection Device
All participants followed the modified 6-3-5 concept
generation method (Otto & Wood, 2001). Each participant
had 10 minutes to individually sketch 3 concepts of a next
generation litter collection system, annotating his/her designs
as necessary. After the individual ideation period, participants
circulated their concepts clockwise to the next student in the
group. Students were instructed that they had 5 minutes to
modify the concepts they received, make suggestions or other
comments, or sketch a new concept on the same page.
Concept sketches continued to be circulated until they
returned to the original owner, or at least were passed to 3
different participants within the group. This procedure is the
same as was reported in Kershaw et al. (2015).

Analysis
Originality Coding: Concept Level. The originality
metric (Table 1) was derived from the CEDA instrument
developed by Charyton, Jagacinski, and Merrill (2008).
Several modifications were made: first, we only used the
originality scale, and not the other items. Second, we
modified the 11-point originality scale to a standard 5-point
Likert scale, based on higher inter-rater agreement findings
by Genco, Johnson, Hölttä-Otto, and Seepersad (2011).
Third, we developed a decision tree to assess the originality
of the concept as a whole (c.f. Kershaw et al., 2015; Figure
2).

Participants were 180 undergraduate students enrolled in
freshman and senior undergraduate engineering courses at
the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (UMD). The
freshmen (n = 100) were enrolled in an introduction to
engineering course that included students in all engineering
majors, including mechanical, electrical and computer, and
bioengineering. The seniors (n = 80) were enrolled in a senior
mechanical engineering design course, which is the capstone
course of their curriculum. All students completed the
concept generation procedure as part of an in-class exercise
about creativity. No demographic data were collected about
the participants.

2136

Table 1: Originality Metric
0
2.5
5
7.5
10

Originality Metric
Common
Somewhat interesting
Interesting
Very Interesting
Exceptional

Does the idea achieve design goals
beyond the industry norm?
Yes

No

To what extent is the concept
integrated around its innovation?

0

Improvements are
minor or isolated
from the rest of
the concept. The
improvement is
peripheral to the
function.

2.5

Improvements are
moderately integrated;
design remains typical.
The improvement is
essential to the
function.

Improvements are
made at the
system level, and
the entire concept
is integrated
around those
innovations.

Is the concept so unique
it is unlikely to be seen
again?

No
5

7.5

Yes
10

Figure 2: Originality Coding Decision Tree
Of the 465 concepts produced by the participants, a subset
of 90 concepts was coded by the first and second authors and
a research assistant. The agreement between raters was
evaluated using Cohen’s (1968) weighted kappa. After the
training round of 90 concepts, inter-rater agreement between
the three raters exceeded 0.7. The raters discussed any
remaining differences and identified a mutually agreeable
final rating for the subset of concepts. After the training
round, the remaining concepts were coded by the second
author or a research assistant.
Originality Coding: Individual Contributions to
Concepts. In the following analysis, we assessed the
contribution of each individual to each concept produced by
the group using the decision tree shown in Figure 2. This
analysis was not the improvement that each group member
made to the overall concept beyond the originator, but
instead, the unique contribution of each individual. We were
able to track each individual’s contribution because each
group member was assigned a different color marker. As was
done for the concept-level coding, a subset of the individual
contributions were coded by the authors to determine interrater agreement. After review of the contributions of 35
individuals to 90 concepts, inter-rater agreement (kappa)
between the three authors was .85. The second author then
coded the remaining individual contributions to the concepts.
Top Contributor Analysis. Once individual contributions
were coded, we examined the weight of each group member’s
contribution to the originality of the concept. Did the
originator of a concept create its most creative aspect? Or was
the originality of a concept more due to the contributions of
other group members? Or were there equal contributions
among group members?
The top contributor scores were derived from examination
of the individual-level coding. The designation of the top
contributor was scored as follows: if the concept’s originator
had the highest originality score, a 0 was scored. If a different
group member had the highest score, a 1 was scored. If
multiple group members had the same top score (e.g., two
group members had individual-level originality scores of
2.5), then a 2 was scored. The authors scored a subset of the

concepts together but the majority of the scoring was
completed by the third author.
Group Contribution Coding. Each of the concepts was
coded for the degree to which group members contributed to
it. For each concept, the total number of group members,
number of group members who had an originality score for a
concept, and number of group members who contributed to
the concept were tracked. It is important to note the difference
between having a score for a concept and actually
contributing to it. For example, a group member could have
written “good idea” or drawn a smiley face on a concept. This
person would have a score, but would not have contributed to
the overall originality. Level of group contribution was coded
dichotomously: a concept either showed evidence of group
members working together (1) or was the product of one
group member (0), with the other members simply
commenting on the design. A group contribution score was
calculated by dividing the number of contributors to the
concept by the total number of group members. The second
author completed the group contribution coding under the
direction of the first author.
Coding Demonstration. A demonstration of the conceptlevel originality coding, individual-contribution originality
coding, top contributor analysis, and group contribution
coding is applied to the concepts shown in Figures 3 and 4.
The concept shown in Figure 3 received an overall originality
score of 5. It is an improvement to the function of a standard
litter picker. This design received an originality score of 5
because, according to the decision tree (Figure 2), it shows
moderate improvements over a standard litter picker, and
these improvements are somewhat integrated. For example,
the modified ends are expandable and include sensors that
detect particular types of materials. At the same time, much
of the design remains typical. It is clear from Figure 3 that the
originator of the design, green, has copied his/her drawing
from the design of the provided sample litter picker.
At the individual level, green is the originator of the
concept, and modifies the basic litter picker by suggesting
that different ends are needed to collect more litter. Purple
suggests that these different ends should be expandable.
Green and purple’s ideas were both minor, isolated
improvements to the basic litter picker and thus both were
given an individual originality score of 2.5. Teal suggests that
sensors could be incorporated into these larger, expandable
ends to detect particular types of material, such as gold. Teal’s
contribution suggests a more system-level than isolated
change, yet most of the design remains standard. Thus, teal
was given an individual originality score of 5, and is also the
top contributor to this design. Because red only commented
without making any modifications, he/she received an
originality score of 0.
In terms of degree of group contribution, this concept
showed a high level of interaction between most of the group
members, and thus received a group contribution value of 1.
Three of the four members of the group contributed to the
concept. Thus, it received a group contribution score of .75
(3 contributors/4 total group members).

2137

contributor to the concept. Brown, green, and red each
received individual scores of 0 because they did not
contribute to the design by drawing in improvements; they
only commented in agreement with the design blue made.
Because only one group member contributed to the
originality of the concept, it received a group contribution
value of 0, and a group contribution score of .25 (1
contributor/4 group members).

Results
Participants produced 465 litter collection system concepts.
Thirty-eight concepts were removed from final analysis, 11
generated by freshmen and 17 by seniors, because they were
not engineering solutions (ex. train a vulture to eat trash),
leaving 427 concepts for analysis.
Results regarding the effects of curriculum level on
concept-level and individual-level originality scores were
discussed in Kershaw et al. (2015). In summary, there was
not a significant difference in overall originality between
freshmen and seniors. As noted earlier in the paper, however,
the goal of the current set of analyses was to examine how
interactions between group members affected originality,
which was not examined in previous work.

Figure 3: Sample Concept

Top Contributors to Originality
For the following analyses, only concepts with originality
scores of 2.5 or above were used. If a concept received a score
of 0, meaning that it did not achieve design goals beyond
industry standards, then there could not be a top contributor.
We removed 137 concepts that received originality scores of
0, thus leaving 290 concepts in the analysis. Descriptive
statistics for the top contributor analyses are in Table 2.
Table 2: Summary of Top Contributor Originality Scores

Freshmen
 Concept Originator
 Other Group Member
 Multiple Group Members
Seniors
 Concept Originator
 Other Group Member
 Multiple Group Members

Figure 4: Sample Concept
As a second example, the concept shown in Figure 4
received an overall originality score of 2.5. This design is a
standard litter picker that is very similar to the sample that
was provided to students, but has a minor addition of
telescoping. According to the decision tree (Figure 2), minor
or isolated improvements such as telescoping features should
receive an overall originality score of 2.5. Because this
concept design has only one minor addition to a standard
litter picker it received an originality score of 2.5.
At the individual level, this design is an example of one
group member, in this case the originator, being responsible
for the overall originality while the other members are
supportive of the design choices. Blue is the originator and
contributed the telescoping feature to the standard picker
design and received the individual score of 2.5 for a basic and
minor addition to the litter picker. Blue is the top (and only)

M

SD

n
Concepts

3.78
2.86
3.08

1.78
1.20
1.50

111
21
13

3.71
3.10
3.15

1.75
1.09
1.55

101
21
23

First, we examined the distribution of top contributors
within each curriculum level. A chi square test of
independence indicated that there was no difference in the
distribution of top contributor types (original, other group
member, or multiple group members) between freshmen and
seniors, χ2 (2, N = 290) = 3.25, p = .20. A second chi square
test showed that having the design originator as the top
contributor to originality was more common than having
another group member or multiple group members, χ 2 (2, N
= 290) = 206.59, p = .0001.

2138

Second, we examined the relationship between curriculum
level (freshmen vs. seniors), contributor type (originator,
other group member, or multiple group members), and
concept-level originality. A two-way between-subjects
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted. There was no
main effect of curriculum level and no interaction between
curriculum level and contributor type, Fs < 1. There was a
significant main effect of contributor type, F (2, 284) = 5.12,
p = .01, η2p = .04. Post-hoc Tukey tests indicated that groups
in which the concept originator was the top contributor had
higher originality scores than groups in which a different
group member was the top contributor, p = .02, 95% CI = .111.44. There were no other significant differences between the
contributor types.

Level of Group Contribution
To test the effects of the level of group contribution on
originality, all 427 concepts were included. A one-way
ANOVA conducted to compare freshmen and seniors
indicated that freshmen had higher group contribution scores
(M = .87, SD = .24, 95% CI = .81-.88) than seniors (M = .78,
SD = .25, 95% CI = .74-.81), F (1, 425) = 8.89, p = .003, η2p
= .02, indicating a higher degree of group interaction on the
concepts produced by freshmen. A correlation analysis with
all students showed a non-significant relationship between
group contribution scores and originality, r (427) = .07, p =
.16. Because other analyses had shown cohort differences, we
also examined this relationship within the freshman and
senior groups. Within the freshmen, the level of group
contribution was not correlated with originality, r (220) = .01,
p = .89. In contrast, within the seniors, the level of group
contribution was significantly correlated with originality, r
(207) = .14, p = .05.

Discussion
The results indicate that it was most common for the
originator of a concept to be the top contributor to a concept
than a different member of the group or several group
members. This pattern was shown in both freshmen and
seniors. We also found that higher originality scores were
achieved in groups in which the concept originator was the
top contributor. The dominance of the originator as the top
contributor, and higher originality scores in concepts with
originators as top contributors, indicates that individuals may
generate the most original ideas, in contrast to groups. This
finding is in contrast with our predictions and with previous
data obtained at UMD using similar samples and design
problems, in which group members’ contributions were
found to raise the originality scores of concepts above what
was generated by the concept originators (Blair & HölttäOtto, 2012). This finding, however, is in line with previous
findings that show fewer ideas produced by groups rather
than individuals (e.g. Mullen et al., 1991).
One of the chief differences between the current research
and that reviewed by Mullen et al. (1991) is that our focus
was on originality, not quantity. Further, there are some key
differences between our work and that reported by Blair and

Hölttä-Otto (2012). First, Blair and Hölttä-Otto only
analyzed a set of 15 litter collection system concepts,
compared to the 427 concepts that were analyzed for this
paper. Second, Blair and Hölttä-Otto applied a feature-level
analysis of originality to the concepts instead of using the
decision tree we used. Thus, their determination of originality
was based on how a given design satisfied different features,
such as trash removal or storage, while our determination was
based on how well the ideas in a particular design were
integrated. One can make the argument that group design
may enhance feature-level improvement but not an overall
improvement in creativity. Clearly the metrics of the coding
were different and one needs to carefully compare the two to
ascertain whether there are actually fundamental differences
in our results versus those of Blair and Hölttä-Otto (2012).
Another explanation of the top contributor results is related
to design fixation. While results indicate that the originator
was the predominant contributor in design creativity, it is
important to point out that there may have been multiple
members in the group who contributed to originality points.
However, they were unable to contribute at a higher level of
creativity compared to the originator. It may have been
difficult for students to improve on an existing design and
earn creativity points as opposed to earning points by
designing from scratch. So, the lack of contribution could be
because students were led into a particular line of thinking
based on an existing design. This would be related to design
fixation, a common problem in engineering design that can
occur because of exposure to group members’ ideas. For
example, Kohn and Smith (2011) found that more exposure
to typical design solutions produced by group members led
to lower novelty, yet had no effect of quantity of ideas
produced. Further analysis is necessary to assess the role of
design fixation in group interactions within our current data
set.
In contrast to the findings regarding the top contributor in
each group, the level of group contribution was related to
originality, but only among the seniors. Senior groups who
had higher levels of interaction produced more original
concepts. This finding is in line with previous findings that
groups with high performance standards and experience
working together will produce more creative ideas (Milliken
et al., 2003; Paulus & Brown, 2003). Our previous research
had shown that seniors had higher originality scores
compared to freshmen (Kershaw et al., 2014). Although we
did not replicate that finding here, the group contribution
results suggest that something different is happening within
the senior groups than the freshman groups. Our seniors
completed the litter collection system exercise within the
project groups within their capstone course. Group dynamics
that were already established could have played a role, in that
some project groups could be more egalitarian in design
decisions while others may have had a clear leader who
dominated group decisions. Alternatively, individual ability
differences could affect group outcomes, with higher levels
of intelligence, need for cognition, or flexibility affecting the

2139

originality of designs that groups produced. Further research
is needed to explore these factors.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Molly McCarthy for assistance with the
originality coding, and Adam Young for assistance with
development of the decision tree. We also thank UMD
engineering instructors Don Foster, Marc Richman, Mehdi
Raessi, and Steve Warner for access to their classes.
The authors acknowledge support from NSF Grant DUE1140424. Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
sponsors.

References
Atman, C.J., Chimka, J.R., Bursic, K.M., & Nachtmann, H.L.
(1999). A comparison of freshman and senior engineering
design processes. Design Studies, 20, 131-152.
Baruah, J., & Paulus, P.B. (2008). Effects of training on
idea generation in groups. Small Group Research, 39,
523-541.
Blair, B.M., & Hölttä-Otto, K. (2012). Comparing the
contribution of the group to the initial idea in progressive
idea generation. Proceedings of the ASME 2012
International Design Engineering Technical Conferences
& Computers and Information in Engineering Conference.
Paper DETC2012-70309.
Charyton, C., Jagacinski, R.J., & Merrill, J. (2008). CEDA:
A research instrument for creative engineering design
assessment. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the
Arts, 2, 147-154.
Cohen, J. (1968). Weighted kappa: Nominal scale agreement
with provision for scaled disagreement or partial credit.
Psychological Bulletin, 70, 213-220.
Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in
brainstorming groups: Toward the solution of a riddle.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 497509.
Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1991). Productivity loss in ideagenerating groups: Tracking down the blocking effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 392403.
Duderstadt, J.J. (2008). Engineering for a changing world: A
roadmap to the future of engineering practice, research,
and education. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of
Michigan.
Ericsson, K.A. (1999). Creative expertise as superior
reproducible performance: Innovative and flexible aspects
of expert performance. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 329333.
Fitts, P.M., & Posner, M.I. (1967). Human performance.
Belmont, CA: Brooks Cole.
Genco, N., Johnson, D., Hölttä-Otto, K., & Seepersad, C.C.
(2011). A study of the effectiveness of the empathic
experience design creativity technique. Paper Number:
DETC2011-021711. ASME IDETC Design Theory and
Methodology Conference, Washington, DC.

Kershaw, T.C., Peterson, R.L., McCarthy, M.A., Young,
A.P., Seepersad, C.C., Williams, P.T., Hölttä-Otto, K., &
Bhowmick, S. (2015). A cross-sectional and longitudinal
examination of the development of innovation capability in
undergraduate engineering students. Proceedings of the
ASME 2015 International Design Engineering Technical
Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering
Conference. Paper DETC2015-47650.
Kershaw, T.C., Seepersad, C.C., Hölttä-Otto, K., Williams,
P.T., Young, A.P., Bhowmick, S., & McCarthy, M.A.
(2014). The effects of the undergraduate curriculum and
individual differences on student innovation capabilities.
Proceedings of the ASME 2014 International Design
Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and
Information in Engineering Conference. Paper
DETC2014-35540.
Kohn, N.W., & Smith, S.M. (2011). Collaborative fixation:
Effects of others’ ideas on brainstorming. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 25, 359-371.
Linsey, J.S., Clauss, E.F., Kurtoglu, K., Murphy, J.T.,
Wood, K.L., & Markman, A.B. (2011). An experimental
study of group idea generation techniques: Understanding
the roles of idea representation and viewing methods.
Journal of Mechanical Design, 133, 1-15.
Milliken, F.J., Bartel, C.A., & Kurtzberg, T.R. (2003).
Diversity and creativity in work groups: A dynamic
perspective on the affective and cognitive processes that
link diversity and performance. In P.B. Paulus & B.A.
Nijstad (Eds.), Group creativity: Innovation through
collaboration (pp. 32-62). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Mullen, B., Johnson, C., & Salas, E. (1991). Productivity
loss in brainstorming groups: A meta-analytic integration.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 12, 3-23.
Nijstad, B.A., Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (2003). Cognitive
stimulation and interference in idea-generating groups. In
P.B. Paulus & B.A. Nijstad (Eds.), Group creativity:
Innovation through collaboration (pp. 137-159). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Osborn, A.F. (1957). Applied imagination. New York:
Scribner.
Otto, K. N., & Wood, K. L. (2001). Product design:
Techniques in reverse engineering and new product
development. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Paulus, P.R., & Brown, V.R. (2003). Enhancing ideational
creativity in groups: Lessons from research on
brainstorming. In P.B. Paulus & B.A. Nijstad (Eds.),
Group creativity: Innovation through collaboration (pp.
110-136). New York: Oxford University Press.
Paulus, P.B., Dzindolet, M.T., Poletes, G., & Camacho, L.M.
(1993). Perceptions of performance in group
brainstorming: The illusion of group creativity.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 79-89.
VanGundy, A.B. (1983). Brainwriting for new product
ideas: An alternative to brainstorming. Journal of
Consumer Marketing, 1, 67-74.

2140

