The Illusion of Explanatory Depth in a Misunderstood Field:
The IOED in Mental Disorders
Andrew S. Zeveney (asz214@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Jessecae K. Marsh (jessecae.marsh@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA
Abstract
Humans fail to understand the world around them and also
fail to recognize this lack of understanding. The illusion of
explanatory depth (IOED) exemplifies these failures: people
believe they understand the world more deeply than they
actually do and only realize that this belief is an illusion when
they attempt to explain elements of the world. An unexplored
factor of the IOED is how people may become overconfident
by confusing their own understanding with others’
understanding. In two experiments, we examine the IOED in
mental disorders, a domain where society has a limited
understanding. In Experiment 1, we demonstrate that people
display an IOED for mental disorders as well as devices, but
that it is smaller for mental disorders. In Experiment 2, we
show that exposing the IOED is specifically linked to
generating an explanation, rather than more generally
thinking about a phenomenon.
Keywords: illusion of
differences; explanation

explanatory

depth;

domain

Introduction
Humans encounter a vast number of phenomena on a daily
basis but only possess a shallow level of knowledge about
most of these phenomena (Wilson & Keil, 1998). In
addition to lacking an understanding of many everyday
domains, people fail to recognize the limits of their own
understanding, as demonstrated by the illusion of
explanatory depth (IOED). First studied by Rozenblit and
Keil (2002), the illusion of explanatory depth is the
incorrectly held belief that one understands the world on a
deeper level than one actually does.
The procedure used by Rozenblit and Keil to elucidate the
IOED is simple. Participants were asked to rate their
understanding of how devices worked (e.g., how a cylinder
lock works). Next, for several of the items, they were asked
to generate a detailed explanation of how each worked and
to then rerate their understanding of that item. Consistently,
ratings were lower after generating an explanation,
suggesting that people do not understand the mechanisms of
many everyday devices as much as they believe they do and
only realize that they lack understanding after attempting to
explain. The IOED has been shown in the domains of
devices (Lawson, 2006; Mills & Keil, 2004; Rozenblit &
Keil, 2002), natural phenomena (Rozenblit & Keil, 2002),

and political policy (Alter, Oppenheimer, & Zemla, 2010;
Fernbach, Rogers, Fox, & Sloman, 2013).
Why do people demonstrate an IOED? Explanations have
typically centered on people’s tendencies to overestimate
the quality and depth of their mental representations and
their failures to accurately judge their ability to provide
good explanations (Mills & Keil, 2004; Rozenblit & Keil,
2002). Importantly though, people can and do rely on more
than just their own understanding when generating
explanations; they often seek out the understanding of
others. People recognize that their own understanding has
limits (even if they are inaccurate about where these limits
lie) and use their understanding of what others know when
choosing who to turn to fill in gaps in their own
understanding (Keil, 2012; Wegner, 1987; Wilson & Keil,
1998).
Recent work suggests that because people so commonly
rely on others for understanding, they may actually
overestimate the amount of understanding that they possess
when they cannot rely on others. For instance, Fisher,
Goddu, and Keil (2015) demonstrated that people had
greater confidence in their ability to explain various
phenomena when they had first used the Internet to search
for explanations for a different set of phenomena. They
postulated that people’s confidence in their own
understanding came from conflating an understanding in the
world with an understanding in their own mind. In another
line of work by Kominsky and Keil (2014), people’s
illusory beliefs about their ability to generate differences in
meaning between similar pairs of words were predicted by
their beliefs that experts would be able to generate more
differences. In general, this work suggests that the IOED
may in part be confusing what others understand with what
is understood in one’s own mind.
Linking the IOED to the extent to which others
understand a field has interesting implications for thinking
about where an IOED might occur. For some domains, we
as a collective society have a deep level of understanding of
how things in that domain work. For example, there are
people who understand devices like cylinder locks very
well, even if the average layperson has a limited
understanding of how a cylinder lock works. However, there
are fields where understanding is fairly limited for everyone.

1020

For instance, in the domain of mental health, there is limited
understanding of how disorders should be defined (Barch &
Keefe, 2009) or how treatments for mental health issues
work (Wampold & Imel, 2015; Zhang & Malhotra, 2013).
How would the IOED manifest in such domains where less
is collectively understood about how things in this domain
can be explained?
In the following set of experiments, we examine how our
perceptions of what others understand about a domain
influences the IOED for that domain. To explore this
question, we examined the domain of mental disorders.
Beyond the lack of scientific consensus on how symptoms
interrelate in mental disorders to explain the etiology or
presentation of a disorder (e.g., Matheson, Shepherd, &
Carr, 2014), we have found that laypeople also recognize
that understanding of mental disorders is limited. To
measure this, we ran a pilot study where we asked a group
of pretest participants (N = 50) to rate their beliefs about
what we know about mental health, as well as devices,
natural phenomena, and medical disorders. For each
domain, participants rated their agreement that “we fully
understand” the phenomenon (what we will call the society
rating) on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree). They also rated the difference between what an
expert would know about each topic and what the average
person knows about that topic (what we will call the gap
rating) on a scale of 1 (no difference) to 7 (very great
difference). We found that on average people reported
higher societal understanding for devices (M = 5.73) than
for mental disorders (M = 3.72; p < .001). People also
reported a larger gap between lay and expert understanding
for mental disorders (M = 5.64) than for devices (M = 3.73;
p < .001). These findings provide evidence that laypeople
recognize the difficulty we have in understanding mental
disorders on a deep level. With these findings in mind,
mental disorders serve as a prime domain in which to
examine several questions about the illusion of explanatory
depth.

Research Questions
Question 1 Do people demonstrate an IOED even in a field
where understanding is limited?
Since people recognize that others, particularly laypeople,
understand fairly little about mental health, one might
anticipate that people will be more accurate about their own
understanding. However, the IOED is a robust effect found
in multiple domains, so people may still hold an illusion
even when they recognize that there is limited
understanding overall. The size of this illusion may be
smaller in mental health than devices because people
endorse a lower level of understanding for mental health at
the outset.
Question 2 Do people’s individual beliefs about others’
understanding predict their own illusion?

If an individual’s own beliefs about what others
understand about a domain predicts the magnitude of his or
her IOED for that domain, it would lend support to the
hypothesis that the IOED occurs in part because people
believe that understanding exists in the world and
mistakenly believe that they have a greater portion of this
understanding than they actually do.
Question 3 Is explanation necessary to expose the
illusion?
Finally, mental health serves as a domain in which to
further test the theory that it is specifically explanation that
exposes the illusion (Rozenblit & Keil, 2002). Examining
this is particularly important in mental health, as there is
plenty of information about things like risk factors and
symptoms but limited ability to explain how the interplay of
these aspects leads to disorder. Is an attempt to explain
necessary to reveal the illusion or will thinking about one’s
knowledge of disorder be sufficient?

Overview of Experiments
In Experiment 1, we presented participants with a number of
phenomena including mental disorders and devices and
asked them to rate their understanding before and after
attempting to explain each phenomenon. Additionally, we
asked participants to rate their beliefs about what others
understand. In Experiment 2, we asked participants to rate
their understanding of mental disorders but varied whether
they were asked to explain the disorder or describe features
of each disorder.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we examined the IOED in mental health
items using the basic protocol established by Rozenblit and
Keil (2002). If people do have an illusion of their own
understanding for mental disorders, we would expect to see
a drop in ratings after attempting to explain these items. We
also tested the IOED in devices in order to have a baseline
to which to compare the potential magnitude of the illusion
in mental health.
We also examined the correlations between beliefs about
the general level of understanding and ratings of personal
understanding. If people confuse their own understanding
with what others understand, we anticipated that perceptions
of the amount of societal understanding would be correlated
with higher perceived personal understanding. Additionally,
we examined the correlations between beliefs about the gap
between lay and expert knowledge and ratings of personal
understanding. We anticipated that a perception of a smaller
gap between lay and expert knowledge would allow for
more confusion between personal understanding and others’
understanding, given that understanding is more widely
spread across individuals, rather than being concentrated in
experts. Thus, we expected that perceptions of a smaller gap
would be correlated with higher ratings of personal
understanding.

1021

Methods
Participants 150 participants recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk participated for payment.
Materials and Procedure Participants were assigned to one
of three conditions: devices (n = 50), mental disorders (n =
49), or mental health treatments (n = 51). The mental health
treatment condition was included for comparisons not
presented here and will not be discussed further. Participants
were presented with a five-item stimuli set consisting of
items from the given domain (see Table 1 for examples of
all stimuli).
Table 1
Example stimuli in each domain
Domain
Stimuli
Devices
How a zipper works
Mental disorders
How the different symptoms of
depression develop
Mental treatments
How an antipsychotic works
Participants were instructed on how to rate their
understanding using a 1 (low) to 7 (high) understanding
scale adapted from Rozenblit and Keil (2002). They were
given an example of a high, moderate, and low level of
understanding. They then rated the stimuli set on this scale
(Time 1 [T1] rating). Following, participants were again
presented with the five items, one by one, and prompted to
explain each item in as much detail as possible. After each
explanation, participants rated their understanding of that
phenomenon on the understanding scale (Time 2 [T2]
rating).
Participants then answered several follow-up questions
designed to assess beliefs about others’ understanding of
each domain. For each of the items in the original set,
participants rated their agreement that “we fully understand”
the phenomenon (“society rating”, rated from 1, strongly
disagree, to 7, strongly agree). They also rated the size of
the difference between what an expert would know about
each topic and what the average person knows about that
topic (“gap rating,” rated from 1, no difference to 7, very
great difference). Additionally, participants answered basic
demographic questions.

Results
We examined ratings for devices and mental disorders using
a 2 (time: T1 vs. T2; within) x 2 (domain: devices vs.
mental disorders; between) mixed ANOVA. We found a
significant effect of time, F(1, 97) = 40.96, p < .001, η!! =
.30, with ratings of understanding decreasing from T1 (M =
3.59, SD = 1.40) to T2 (M = 3.03, SD = 1.33). We also
found a significant effect of domain, F(2, 97) = 7.23, p =
.008, η!! = .07. Overall, participants rated their understanding
of devices (M = 3.65, SD = 1.24) as significantly higher
than their understanding of disorders (M = 2.98, SD = 1.25).

Finally, there was a significant interaction between time
and domain, F(2, 97) = 3.41, p = .036, η!! = .044. Sidakcorrected follow-up tests showed the expected illusion in
devices, as ratings significantly dropped from T1 to T2, p <
.001. Additionally, people also demonstrated an illusion in
mental disorders, p = .014, as ratings dropped significantly
from T1 to T2 in this domain as well (see Figure 1). In order
to compare the size of the illusion across domains, we
examined this interaction another way. At T1, ratings for
devices were significantly higher than those for mental
disorders, p = .001. However, at T2, ratings did not differ
between devices and mental disorders, p = .112. Given that
ratings for devices were greater than mental disorders at T1
but the same at T2, participants showed a greater drop (and
thus a larger illusion) for devices than for mental health
phenomena.

Figure 1: The IOED in devices and mental disorders

Next, we examined the society and gap ratings.
Participants rated society as understanding devices, M =
4.42, SD = 1.57, significantly more than mental disorders,
M = 3.55, SD = 1.41, t(97) = 2.92, p = .004. Participants
also rated the gap between expert and lay knowledge as
significantly larger for disorders, M = 5.71, SD = 1.15, than
for devices, M = 4.84, SD = 1.10, t(97) = 3.88, p < .001.
These findings replicated our pilot data.
We then examined the correlations between society/gap
ratings and ratings of personal understanding at T1 and T2
across domains. Society ratings were correlated with
personal understanding of disorders at T1 (r = .310, p =
.032) and T2 (r = .400, p = .005). For devices, society
ratings were also correlated with personal understanding at

1022

T1 (r = .290, p = .043) and T2 (r = .412, p = .003).
Perceptions of higher societal understanding were related to
higher individual understanding both before and after
generating an explanation.
For gap ratings, a slightly different pattern emerged. For
mental disorders, smaller perceived gaps were correlated
with higher personal understanding for mental disorders at
T1 (r = -.315, p = .029) and T2 (r = -.491, p < .001).
However, gap ratings were not correlated with personal
understanding ratings for devices (rs < .036, ps > .810).
Thus, the anticipated relationship between smaller gaps and
higher personal understanding was found only in mental
disorders.

Discussion
As in devices, people demonstrate an illusion of explanatory
depth in the domain of mental disorders, even though they
endorse less general understanding and in particular, less lay
understanding of disorders than devices. This finding serves
to validate the robustness of the IOED: even when people
admit that a field is not particularly well understood and that
understanding is more concentrated within experts, they still
overestimate their own understanding.
Importantly, the illusion was larger in devices than in
mental disorders, as personal understanding was higher at
T1 for devices than for mental disorders but not at T2.
Potentially, one explanation is that people confuse their own
understanding of a phenomenon with the understanding that
others have for that phenomenon. Given that people see
mental health as less understood by others, people may
initially experience less confusion between others’
understanding and their own in mental disorders than in
devices. As a result, ratings of personal understanding for
mental disorders at T1 are closer to actual levels of
understanding, leading to a smaller illusion in mental
disorders than devices.
Relatedly, the illusion in mental disorders may also be
smaller because people see understanding as more
concentrated within experts for disorders than for devices.
People may be less likely to confuse their understanding
with others’ understanding when others’ understanding is
seen as mostly possessed by experts on a domain, rather
than being distributed more evenly among all people. Future
research should explore perceptions of both the level of
understanding that others possess and the distribution of this
understanding across others.
Additionally, this experiment sheds light on the potential
relationships between individuals’ perceptions of others’
understanding and of their own understanding. For mental
disorders, perceptions of societal understanding and the
lay/expert gap were related to personal understanding at
both T1 and T2, and for devices, societal and personal
understanding showed the same relationships. Importantly,
the same relationships were found both before generating an
explanation and after, when ratings of personal

understanding are more accurate. Thus, it is not that
individuals’ beliefs about what society understands and
about the differences between expert and lay understanding
simply relate to their illusion of understanding: these beliefs
are correlated to perceptions of understanding even after the
illusion is shattered through explanation. One thing that is
important to note is that society and gap ratings were
completed only after participants had generated an
explanation. Potentially, generating this explanation altered
beliefs about what others understand and therefore,
obscured the true relationship between beliefs about others’
understanding and personal understanding.
Given that the IOED in mental disorders is smaller than in
devices, another possible question arises of whether this
illusion is similar in nature to the IOED shown in other
domains. Prior work on the IOED has suggested that it is
only through attempting to explain a phenomenon that one
is made aware of one’s own limits in understanding
(Rozenblit & Keil, 2002). But when considering many
phenomena, including mental disorders, people can easily
think about these phenomena in ways that do not entail
detailed explanations (e.g., thinking about all of the
symptoms of a disorder without thinking about how they are
interrelated to create an explanation of how the disease
came into existence). Is this type of deeper thinking
sufficient to expose the illusion or is it actually necessary to
generate an explanation? We tested this possibility to
determine if the IOED in mental health disorders is reliant
on explanations as it is in other domains.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we tested whether explanation is
specifically necessary to expose the IOED, or whether
simply thinking deeply about a phenomenon more generally
is enough. We also tested a wider range of mental disorders,
in order to further extend the finding that people do
demonstrate an IOED for mental health issues.

Methods
Participants 100 participants recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk participated for payment.
Materials and Procedure
Participants were assigned to either the explanation
condition (n = 50) or the description condition (n = 50). All
participants were presented with eight mental disorders:
depression,
OCD,
generalized
anxiety
disorder,
schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, bipolar
disorder, ADHD, and anorexia. For a given disorder,
participants were presented with the name of a disorder and
then were asked to rate their understanding with the same
question as in Experiment 1 (T1 rating). Participants in the
explanation condition then were asked to explain each
disorder as in Experiment 1. Participants in the description
condition were asked to list as many characteristics about

1023

the disorder as they could. After completing the explanation
or the description task, participants completed the T2 rating
from Experiment 1. Participants then completed the society
and gap ratings from Experiment 1. Finally, participants
rated each disorder in terms of how biologically,
psychologically and environmentally caused they were on a
scale of 0 (not at all) to 100 (completely). Causation
questions were not the focus of the work presented here, so
they will not be discussed further.

Results
We examined ratings using a 2 (time: T1 vs. T2) x 2
(condition: explanation vs. description) mixed ANOVA. We
found a significant effect of time, F(1, 98) = 6.79, p = .011,
= .065, and a marginally significant effect of condition, F(1,
98) = 2.82, p = .011, η!! = .065. These main effects should be
interpreted in light of a significant interaction between time
and condition, F(1, 98) = 4.12, p = .002, η!! = .097. Sidakcorrected follow-up tests showed that in the explanation
condition, there was a significant drop from T1 (M = 2.98,
SD = 1.33) to T2 (M = 2.31, SD = 1.27; p < .001).
However, for the description condition, there was not a
significant difference between T1 (M = 2.97, SD = 1.33) to
T2 (M = 3.02, SD = 1.30; p = .650; see Figure 2).

understanding but only those who explained their
understanding showed a drop at T2. The illusion was only
revealed when people attempted to explain mental disorders,
and not when they simply described their knowledge.
We also examined the correlations between society/gap
ratings and personal understanding. For the description
condition, society ratings were correlated with T1, r = .370,
p = .008, and T2 ratings, r = .408, p = .003, and gap ratings
were uncorrelated with T1 ratings, r = -.171, p = .234, and
marginally correlated with T2 ratings, r = -.269, p = .059. In
the explanation condition, participants showed a different
pattern. Society ratings were uncorrelated with T1 or T2
ratings, rs > .190, ps > .135, and gap ratings were correlated
with T1, r = -.294, p = .042, and T2 ratings, r = -.316, p =
.029. Higher ratings of societal understanding were related
to higher ratings of personal understanding but only in the
description condition. Likewise, ratings of a larger
lay/expert gap were negatively related to personal
understanding only in the explanation condition.

Discussion
As in Experiment 1, participants demonstrated an IOED for
mental disorders. However, this illusion was only exposed
when people attempted to explain disorders, not when they
were simply prompted to think about the aspects of the
disorder. This finding provides further evidence that
overconfidence in one’s understanding can be revealed by
attempting to explain that understanding, but by simply
reflecting on aspects of the phenomenon that might be
related to that understanding.
In this experiment, we also found that the relationships
between perceptions of others’ understanding and personal
understanding differed across conditions. Personal
understanding was correlated with gap ratings only in the
explanation condition and with social understanding only in
the description condition. This finding provides further
evidence that generating an explanation changes people’s
later beliefs about others’ understanding. The conditions
were only different from one another after T1 ratings were
made, so relationships for T1 ratings and others’
understanding should be the same if perceptions of others’
understanding are not changed by the experiment. Despite
the difficulty of interpreting these results, overall our results
suggest that ratings of societal understanding and the
lay/expert gap are related to individuals’ ratings of
understanding.

Figure 2: Experiment 2 mean understanding ratings.

General Discussion
Examining this interaction another way, ratings between
conditions did not differ at T1, p = .454, but are
significantly lower at T2 for the explanation condition than
the description condition, p = .002. Thus, participants in
both conditions endorsed the same initial level of

Across two studies we explored whether an illusion of
explanatory depth is demonstrated for a domain where
people acknowledge that we have limited understanding of
the domain. Our pretest study indicated that laypeople do in
fact believe that we as a society have less of an
understanding of mental disorders than devices and
understanding is more concentrated within experts in the

1024

mental health domain. In comparing the IOED across
mental health disorders and devices, we saw a smaller IOED
in disorders than devices (Experiment 1). This IOED
seemed to be based in the same mechanism as previous
research (Rozenblit & Keil, 2002) in that it only arose after
explanation and not after mere description (Experiment 2).
Despite the seeming link between mental disorders being
seen as less well understood and a smaller IOED in the
mental domain, ratings of others’ understanding were
correlated not only with initial illusory perception of
personal understanding but also with personal understanding
after generating an explanation.
Finding that people show a smaller IOED for mental
health than devices suggests that though people are
overconfident about their understanding in a number of
domains, the extent to which they are overconfident may
vary. In particular, mental health may be a domain in which
people are more accurate about their understanding, and this
accuracy may be driven by their perception that this domain
is less understood in general. At the same time, there is still
a gap between what people believe that they understand
before and after attempting to explain.
Our findings suggest avenues for future research related
to the IOED. For example, understanding what particular
domain differences lead to the difference in size of the
IOED across domains would be an important avenue to
explore to better understand the underlying mechanism of
the IOED. There may be certain domains in which
laypeople would be unwilling to endorse any understanding,
believing that only an expert can understand that particular
subject. How unfamiliar would a domain need to be to
laypeople for them to accurately assess their limited
understanding? These are questions for future research that
deserve exploring.
Furthermore, our research has interesting implications for
how people reason about the mental health domain. It is
interesting to think about how generating explanations as
participants did in this study may alter how people think
about their own diagnoses or treatments, and those of the
people around them. For example, even if people are aware
that they do not completely understand how the disorder of
depression comes to be, our results suggest that they would
still overestimate how much they understand about the
disorder in general. This overconfidence may give people a
false sense of understanding what treatment would best
address a disorder’s symptoms since they feel like they
understand how the disorder works at least in some part. It
is an interesting avenue for future research to explore how
these false senses of understanding influence decision
making in health.
Overall, our results are informative as to the extent of
people’s overconfidence in their own understanding. Even
in the domain of mental disorders, where causal links are
complex, multifaceted, and invisible, people still endorse a
greater understanding than they actually possess. While it

seems that in some ways, this illusion is supported by a
belief that others in the world understand the domain, the
relationship between our own understanding and others’
understanding is potentially more complicated and deserves
future research.

References
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., & Zemla, J. C. (2010).
Missing the trees for the forest: A construal level account
of the illusion of explanatory depth. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 436-451.
Fernbach, P. M., Rogers, T., Fox, C. R., & Sloman, S. A.
(2013). Political extremism is supported by an illusion of
understanding. Psychological Science, 24, 939-946.
Fisher, M., Goddu, M. K., & Keil, F. C. (2015). Searching
for explanations: How the Internet inflates estimates of
internal knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 144, 674-687.
Kominsky, J. F., & Keil, F. C. (2014). Overestimation of
knowledge about word meanings: The “misplaced
meaning” effect. Cognitive Science, 38, 1604-1633.
Lawson, R. (2006). The science of cycology: Failures to
understand how everyday objects work. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 1667-1675.
Matheson, S. L., Shepherd, A. M., & Carr, V. J. (2014).
How much do we know about schizophrenia and how
well do we know it? Evidence from the Schizophrenia
Library. Psychological Medicine, 44, 3387-3405.
Mills, C. M., & Keil, F. C. (2004). Knowing the limits of
one’s understanding: The development of an awareness of
an illusion of explanatory depth. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 87, 1-32.
Rozenblit, L., & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits
of folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth.
Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562.
Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. E. (2015). The great
psychotherapy debate: Research evidence for what works
in psychotherapy (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive memory: A
contemporary analysis of the group mind. In B. Mullen &
G. R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior (pp.
185–208). New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Wilson, R. A., & Keil, F. (1998). The shadows and shallows
of explanation. Minds and Machines, 8, 137-159.
Zhang, J. P., & Malhotra, A. K. (2013). Pharmacogenetics
of antipsychotics: Recent progress and methodological
issues. Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism &
Toxicology, 9, 183-191.

1025

