The Structure of Names in Memory:
Deviations from Uniform Entropy Impair Memory for Linguistic Sequences
Melody Dye (meldye@indiana.edu)1, Brendan Johns (btjohns@buffalo.edu)2, Michael N. Jones
(jonesmn@indiana.edu) 1, & Michael Ramscar (michael.ramscar@uni-tuebingen.de)3
1

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington
2
Department of Communicative Disorders and Sciences, University at Buffalo
3
Department of Linguistics, University of Tübingen
Abstract

However, in the recent past, social forces have conspired to
disrupt naming practices in the West, altering the shape of
these distributions and reducing their efficiency. This
presents an excellent opportunity to conduct an in vivo
experiment on an extant linguistic sub-system, and to
investigate how changes to its distributional structure have
impacted its representation in memory.
While this paper takes as its focus one highly specialized
linguistic subsystem – names – its broader aim is to examine
how the descriptive tools offered by information theory may
lend insight into how semantic categories are represented in
mind.

Human languages can be seen as socially evolved systems that
have been structured to optimize information flow in
communication. Communication appears to proceed both more
efficiently and more fluently when information is distributed
evenly across the linguistic signal. In previous work (Ramscar
et al., 2013), we used tools from information theory to examine
how naming systems evolved to meet this requirement
historically, and how, over the past several hundred years,
social legislation and rapid population growth have disrupted
naming practices in the West, making names ever harder to
process and remember. In support of these observations, we
present findings from three experiments investigating name
fluency, recognition, and recall. These results provide
converging empirical evidence for an optimal solution to name
design, and offer a more nuanced understanding of how social
engineering has impaired the structure of names in memory.

Principles of Information Theory

Keywords: sequence learning; information theory; artificial
grammar; associative memory; category fluency

Introduction
Names are central to identity, and the primary means by
which we individuate and discriminate ourselves from our
peers. However, while they are central to human life, names
are unusually difficult to learn and remember. English
speakers typically find a person’s name more difficult to
recall than any other piece of information about them, and
names form the majority of naturally occurring ‘tip of the
tongue’ (TOT) experiences (Burke et al., 1991). Moreover,
the recall of names is disproportionately impaired in old age,
with TOT rates for names increasing more with age than for
other words. Indeed, it has been reported that older English
speaking adults consider the deterioration in name
recollection to be the most disturbing age-related cognitive
problem they face, and the aspect of memory that they would
most like to improve (Cohen & Faulkner, 1986).
What makes names so challenging? While most nouns
are generic, picking out a class of objects, names are sui
generis, picking out an individual (Cohen, 1990). Given the
size of modern populations, the design of an efficient naming
system must balance the need to individuate each person
against the massive rise in linguistic complexity that unique
identifiers would create. Using government databases and
historical records, Ramscar et al. (2013) found that
historically, Mandarin Chinese and English have converged
on a similarly elegant solution to this problem, smoothing
identifying information over several name elements each of
which is distributed in a highly efficient, Zipfian manner.

In engineering efficient communication systems, the
fundamental problem concerns how to code a message
generated at point A (the source) into a physical signal that
can be transmitted to point B (the destination) as efficiently
and reliably as possible, such that the message can still be
recovered intact. The answer to this challenge can be found
in the set of mathematical principles and conceptual
definitions elaborated by Claude Shannon (1948) in his
theory of information.
Information theory specifies the theoretical bounds on
this project in terms of two measures: Channel capacity
defines the maximum rate at which information can be
reliably transmitted; Entropy defines the shortest description
length at which a random variable can be coded. These
principles can be used to assess the design of communication
systems of every stripe, including natural language systems.
In the simple case of a name grammar—our focus
here—the space of alternatives at the source consists in the
population of to-be-named individuals, and the code, in a set
of tokens that, in combination, efficiently discriminates
among those individuals, allowing for their successful
identification. An important question is how such a grammar
might be designed such that it minimizes the average length
of a name, yet still reliably discriminate the intended
individuals. In this, two principles are key: 1) that each
element of the grammar approximate a Zipfian distribution,
and 2) that the uncertainty over each element remain roughly
constant (Ramscar et al., 2013). We assess each precept in
turn.
Zipf’s Law. Zipf’s (1949) Law is a universal scaling law for
lexical frequencies and is one of the most striking and
empirically robust regularities known to language. For a
given sample of text, the frequency distribution of its lexical

1763

items approximates an inverse power law, in which a steep
decline in frequency over the highest ranked words eases off
as rank grows, producing a long tail with similarly low
frequencies. Stated formally: If r is rank, p(wr) is the
probability of a word of rank r, and α is the law’s exponent,
varying between 0 and 1, then:
This principle appears to hold not only for words, but for
linguistic units at every scale, such as letters, syllables, and
even word meanings.
The existence, and the import, of this peculiar
distributional feature has been the subject of some debate. In
his ‘principle of least effort’, Zipf (1949) proposed that
communicators seek to balance efficiency on the one hand,
and comprehensibility on the other, and that these opposing
forces minimize communicative effort over time, giving rise
to language’s characteristic distribution (an intuition
formalized by Ferrer-i-Cancho & Solé, 2003). Other
explanations have been given in terms of optimal coding
theory (Mandelbrot, 1953), preferential attachment (Simon,
1955), and principles of memory search and information
retrieval (Anderson & Milson, 1989). Amidst these diverse
accounts, what is shared is a notion that the nature of the
distribution is—in some sense—optimal, and accordingly,
that deviations from it represent departures from optimality.
Regardless of one’s theoretical commitments, it is
straightforward to empirically establish the cost of deviating
by quantifying the increase in entropy that results from
altering the shape of the distribution (c.f. Ramscar et al.,
2013). The broader question is how or why this might matter.
Entropy Rate Constancy Over the past decade, linguists
have interested themselves in an important corollary of
Shannon’s work on channel capacity: For a particular
linguistic sequence, comprised of a set of distinct elements,
information transfer is at its theoretical maximum when the
entropy over each element is constant (and continuously
approximating the channel capacity). A growing number of
studies have demonstrated that speakers ably conform to this
principle by smoothing information over discourse—
avoiding excess peaks or troughs in uncertainty through an
array of articulatory strategies and lexical and syntactic
choices (c.f. Genzel & Charniak, 2002; Keller, 2004; Aylett
& Turk, 2004; Bell et al., 2009; Qian & Jaeger, 2012).
Languages themselves also appear to be structurally
adapted for entropy management. Nouns provide a particular
challenge in this regard, as they are—in many languages—
the most diverse part of speech. Accordingly, lexical
uncertainty will tend to be at its highest in any given slot
where a noun occurs. The impact this has on processing is
well-attested: One of the most common sites of disfluencies
is at the determiner preceding a noun, and the less likely the
noun, the more likely a disfluency (Clark & Wasow, 1998).
Nouns are also the most common sites for incorrect lexical
retrieval, and an array of other processing difficulties
(Vigliocco et al., 1997). However, various linguistic
subsystems—such as grammatical gender—can help manage

nominal entropy by using preceding elements to subdivide
the space of possible upcoming nouns, thereby reducing
uncertainty in context (Dye et al., 2015).
Names may pose yet a greater challenge, as they draw from
a wider array of phonological sequences than other nouns
(Brennen, 1993) and may be less well discriminated by
semantic context. However, they appear to be governed by a
similar principle. One way to conceptualize a name grammar,
which consists in multiple, sequential elements, is as a
decision tree. In a classic tree structure, the root node
represents a space of mutually exclusive alternatives that are
systematically partitioned at various branching points, giving
way to specific outcomes at the terminals (Quinlan, 1986).
The outcomes can be understood as the to-be-identified
individuals; the branch points, as the requisite yes/no
questions asked by a clever guesser attempting to
discriminate the named individual. In a well-designed
system, the information contributed by each branch should be
identical, such that the (conditional) information required
from one branch to the next remains constant, while the total
(unconditional) information grows linearly as a function of
path length.
Ideally then, name elements should serve to iteratively
increase the degree to which an individual can be identified,
while minimizing the uncertainty over each element in
context. Experiment 1 tests this claim by varying entropy rate
in an artificial name grammar.

Experiment 1
This study examines whether naming systems are more easily
learned and remembered when there is a uniform entropy rate
across name elements, such that identifying information is
evenly distributed over the full name.

Participants
40 students (15 males and 25 females) at Indiana University
participated for course credit in an undergraduate psychology
course. All were native English speakers, who had completed
a prosopagnosia prescreen and simple face recognition task
to ensure they could recognize and discriminate faces similar
to the experimental stimuli.

Materials
The present study employs a pair of artificial name
grammars, comprised entirely of novel names. Each grammar
consists in a set of eight full names, drawn from a finite pool
of first, middle, and last name elements. The first grammar
has a highly efficient information structure, with a small pool
of first names followed by successively larger pools of
middle and last names. The second grammar, devised to be
inefficient, replicates this structure, but with the key
difference that the first and last name populations are
reversed. While names in both grammars convey the same
amount of total information, the peak entropy for the
suboptimal grammar is three times that of the optimal one.
Where the entropy of the first name element is computed
independently:

1764

and the entropy of the second and third name elements is
conditioned on the preceding string:

Figure 1: In an optimal name grammar (top), there is a small pool
of first names and successively larger pools of second and last name
elements. Identifying information is spread evenly over each name
element, with elements sharing identical (conditional) probabilities
across positions. However, if the grammar is reversed (bottom), then
only the first name element is informative; the subsequent elements
each have a conditional probability of 1, and thus add no
information.

Names Name elements are four-letter, one-syllable nonces
drawn from the English Lexicon Project (Balota et al. 2007),
with the number of phonological neighbors held constant,
and with accuracy and reaction time in pseudolexical
decision tasks within one standard deviation of the mean.
Faces Faces are drawn from a body of similarly posed and
cropped portraits taken at the Museum of Modern Art in New
York City, with faces occupying near-identical spatial
positions in each photograph. The set of faces were chosen to
be easily discriminable, and were evenly distributed across
ethnic groups. To ensure that, for the purposes of the naming
study, subjects could easily re-identify the faces in each set,
the stimuli were piloted in an old-new recognition task
(n=41), with similar looking distractors. Selected faces
averaged 91% accuracy.

appearing as it was articulated. The full name was repeated
twice in view of the image, followed by a brief mask. The
training sequence consisted in three repeated blocks. To
control for sequential dependencies at encoding, the order of
training was pseudo-randomized, such that faces from each
gender were spread evenly across trials, and the same name
element was never seen on adjacent trials.
Test At test, subjects completed a cued recall task, in which
they were presented with a face and asked to produce its
name. Subjects were instructed that partial responses would
be counted. Subjects were given 30 seconds in which to
complete typing. All pairs were tested exactly once, and
response latencies were recorded. Specific face-name
pairings were randomized between subjects. Test order was
randomized in the same way as training.
Scoring Name accuracy was scored by two raters blind to the
hypotheses tested. 1 point was awarded for every correct
name element in the correct position. ½ a point was awarded
if the element was correct, but in the wrong position, or if the
name element was incorrect, but highly similar
(phonologically) to the target. Any disagreements between
raters were resolved through discussion.

Results
There was substantial variability in subject performance on
the recall task in both conditions, with mean performance of
53.6% and a standard deviation of 26.7%. A by items analysis
revealed that names trained with the optimal grammar were
recalled significantly faster and more accurately than their
rearranged versions (Correct Log RT: t(15)=-3.36, p=.002;
Recall Score: t(15)= 3.91, p<.001; Figure 2). A parallel
analysis for faces yielded comparable results (Correct Log
RT: t(15)=-4.42, p<.001; Recall Score: t(15)=2.57, p=.01).
An independent-samples by subjects analysis conformed
with the general direction of results, but did not reach
significance (Correct Log RT: t(34)=-1.26, p=.108; Recall
Score: t(38)= 1.04, p=.15).

Discussion
This study revealed that names that complied with entropy
rate constancy were more quickly and accurately recalled
than those that did not.

The Price of Deviating

Procedure
Training At study, participants were asked to learn a series
of sixteen face-name pairs, eight of which were female and
eight male. The female faces were assigned one set of names,
the males another. Which set of name elements was assigned
(A or B), and to which face-gender, was counterbalanced
across participants. Name assignment within gender was
randomized. The choice of grammar (optimal or sub-optimal)
was varied across participants, with even assignment
according to participant gender.
On each trial, a face appeared on-screen and then a name
was read aloud, with the spelling of each name element

Over the past several hundred years, social legislation and
rapid population growth have disrupted naming practices in
the West. In particular, the rise of nation states has coincided
with the adoption of census policies that have made family
names hereditary, rendering them fixed, rather than mutable.
In English-speaking countries, where the family name has
traditionally been positioned last, this has created significant
pressure on the first name to provide the individuating
information, resulting in a greater diversity of higher entropy
first names. Curiously, the collapse of efficient naming has
not affected society equally: In the US, women and African
Americans are disproportionately burdened with the least
efficient names. Evidence from modeling simulations

1765

suggests that this flattening of the distribution should have
negative consequences for name memory (Ramscar et al.,
2014).

Experiment 2
This study examines the effect of the distributional structure
of male and female names on name fluency. Subjects were
asked either to recall 1) the names of as many famous living
people as they could, or 2) as many first names as they could.

Participants
146 students (73 males and 73 females) at Indiana University
participated for course credit in an undergraduate psychology
course. All were native English speakers. Subjects were
randomly assigned to one of the task versions. 15 subjects
were dropped from analysis for failing to follow instructions
(e.g., by mixing genders), leaving n=33 for first names
collected separately, 36 for first names collected together, 28
for famous names collected separately, and 34 for famous
names collected together.
Figure 2: The perplexity of male and female names with a count ≥
5 in US Social Security applications at 5 year intervals from 1880 to
2010 (Ramscar et al., 2013).

Are male names indeed easier to recollect than female
names in American English? One of the more commonly
used measures to assess semantic memory is category
fluency, in which participants produce as many items from a
specific category as possible within a specified time frame.
Fluency data are then analyzed by counting the number of
items produced, and assessing the factors that influence
transitions between category items.
In a fluency task, subjects tend to be superior at producing
items that they have more familiarity with, all things being
equal. For example, a doctor might more readily reel off a
string of diseases, and a chef, a list of cooking implements.
Domain-specific knowledge and experience are also reflected
in gender differences: Capitani et al. (1999) report that men
are advantaged in recalling man-made items, such as tools
and vehicles, whereas women show more facility at food
stuffs, like fruits and vegetables.
In Experiment 2, subjects of both genders were tested on
their ability to produce male and female names. Given sex
segregation in peer and social groups across development and
early adulthood (Mehta & Strough, 2009), there is good
reason to suspect that males and females will have varying
experience with names in accordance with their gender. If, on
average, male subjects have more experience of male names
and female subjects of female names, than a double
dissociation in subject performance should be observed,
wherein males produce more male names, and females more
female names.
An alternative possibility, assessed here, is that there may
be an interaction between both the frequency with which a
category is sampled and its distributional structure—a
structure which may be more or less optimal for retrieval
purposes (Anderson & Milson, 1989). If the organization of
female names makes them harder to access in memory, this
may diminish, or even eliminate, the predicted female
advantage for female names.

Design
The fluency tasks were administered in the online survey
program Qualtrics. Two versions of each task were
administered. In the first version of the task, no gender was
specified, and subjects simply recalled as many names as they
could within two minutes. In the second, subjects were asked
to produce the names for one gender, and then the other, with
ninety seconds for each task. Which gender was requested
first was counterbalanced according to the gender of the
participant.

Results
A 2 (subject gender) x 2 (name gender) repeated measures
ANOVA was run over each version of the task design,
revealing the same basic pattern of results across tasks: a
significant main effect of name gender – more male names
were produced overall – and a significant interaction of
subject gender and name gender. In each case, post hoc
analyses (Tukey HSD) indicated that while female subjects
produced similar numbers of male and female names, male
subjects produced significantly more male names than female
names (p<0.001).

Modeling Fluency
To model participants’ search through memory in the first
name fluency task, the Luce Choice Axiom was used to
quantify the contribution of different linguistic factors to first
name retrieval. Given a set of possible responses, the axiom
defines the probability of responding to stimulus Si with
response Rj as:

where βj is the response bias for item j, and S(i,j) is the
similarity between items i and j. In our application of the
decision rule, the response set is the full set of first names
produced in the task, and P(Rj |Si) is the probability of
producing a particular name given the last name that was

1766

produced. The response bias βj scales with name frequency,
and the item similarity S(i,j) with the semantic similarity
between one name and the next. Frequency estimates were
calculated from a 20 million sentence Wikipedia corpus, and
semantic similarity from the vector cosine of the names’
semantic representations, as computed by the distributional
semantic model BEAGLE (Jones & Mewhort, 2007) run over
that same corpus. The parameters λ0 and λ1 control the relative
contributions of frequency and semantic similarity in
producing the response. For each participant’s name
sequence, we determined the set of parameters that were most
likely to have generated the observed data, using a model
comparison technique (see Johns et al., 2013 for detailed
methodology).

There were also clear differences in the strategies deployed
in generating male and female names from memory. An
analysis of the factors contributing to name production
indicated that subjects relied more on semantics in generating
male names and more on frequency in generating female
names. This difference in strategy may be telling. In related
work on verbal fluency, Johns et al. (2013) found that
subjects who would go on to be diagnosed with mild
cognitive impairment showed increased reliance on
frequency cues in sampling the semantic space. Similarly,
Taler et al. (2013) report that when bilinguals are forced to
switch between languages, they reduce their use of semantic
cues, favoring frequency instead. This suggests that when the
task is made more difficult, or when the semantic space is
degraded, speakers switch more towards a baseline sampling
procedure that prioritizes frequency as the guiding cue.
Taken together, these findings lend support to the
hypothesis that the distributional properties of female names
make them harder to recall than male names. However, there
is another possibility: Female subjects may simply have more
equal experience with male and female names, given the
overrepresentation of males in the broader cultural canon
(e.g., educational materials and popular media). Experiment
3 was designed to assess and control for the effects of prior
familiarity.

Figure 3: Fluency model of first name production.

If female names are less memorable than male names in
American English, they should take longer to recognize in
association with an individual, even when familiarity and
name length are taken into account. In the first half of the
experiment, our subjects were tested on their ability to
recognize famous faces, which can be interpreted as a latent
name generation task. Subjects viewed images of famous
individuals intermixed with similarly posed and
photographed non-famous distractors, and were asked to
indicate whether they thought they recognized the individual
or not. In the second half of the experiment, subjects viewed
the same famous individuals, but this time, paired with either
their actual name (hit) or a same-gender lure (false alarm).
Subjects were asked to determine whether the names and
faces were accurately matched or not. Across both tests,
accuracy and response latency were recorded.

Experiment 3
Across subject genders, there was a significant effect of the
semantic parameter [F(1,65)=4.65, p<0.05], indicating that
overall, female subjects relied more on semantic information
in producing first names than their male counterparts. In
comparing the two tasks – producing male names vs.
producing female names – there were main effects of both
semantics [F(1,65)=8.716, p<0.01] and frequency
[F(1,65)=33.805, p<0.001], suggesting that the influence of
these parameters varied by name gender. In particular, male
naming relied more heavily on semantics, while female
naming relied more on frequency, overall. However, there
was also a significant interaction of semantics with subject
gender [F(1,65)=17.417, p<0.001]: female subjects made
significantly more use of semantics in generating female
names than did male subjects.

Discussion
Across four name fluency tasks, a robust interaction between
subject gender and name gender was observed: While female
subjects recalled similar numbers of male and female names,
male subjects recalled significantly more male names than
female names. The absence of a mirror effect across genders
is surprising: As a consequence of gender homophily in their
social networks, female subjects should have more
experience, on average, with female names, which should
support fluency. Yet in all but one condition, female subjects
actually produced more male names overall.

Participants
48 students (24 males and 24 females) at Indiana University
participated for course credit in an undergraduate psychology
course. All were native English speakers.

Materials
The famous names collected in Experiment 2, along with
search volume data from Google Trends and overall Google
hits, was used to create an inventory of a hundred famous
individuals that college-age subjects were likely to recognize.
Names The famous men and women whose names were
accurately paired with their pictures (hits) were matched for
name length and fame. This was also true for the men and

1767

women whose faces were mismatched with novel names
(lures). Novel names were generated using naming data from
the last fifty years of the Social Security Index, and were
matched on length, and first and last name popularity.
Notably, it was not possible to precisely match either set of
names for syllable length, although this was balanced to the
extent possible. Popular American female names are longer,
on average, and contain more syllables than male names.
Faces Photographs of each famous individual were
representative forward-facing poses taken from the first page
of Google Image search results, and were resized and
cropped, such that the face of the individual took up a similar
portion of the frame. Photographs of foils were taken from
similarly posed and cropped professional portraits taken at
the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.

Results
In the face recognition task, a 2 (subject gender) x 2 (face
gender) repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant
interaction of subject gender and face gender for both
accuracy [F(1,46) = 19.58, p < .001] and correct log RT
[F(1,46) = 6.59, p=.0135]. Post hoc analyses (Tukey HSD)
indicated that female subjects correctly identified more
women than men (p<.05), and that male subjects not only
identified more men than women (p<.02), but were also faster
in those correct identifications (p<.001).
In the name recognition portion, a similar analysis revealed
a significant interaction of subject gender and name gender
on accuracy [F(1,46) = 5.937, p=.019], and both a main effect
of name gender [F(1,46) = 18.09, p<.001] and a significant
interaction of subject gender and name gender [F(1,46) =
16.08, p<.001] on correct log RT. Post hoc analyses revealed
that female subjects correctly identified the names of more
women than men (p=.045), and that male subjects not only
correctly identified more men than women (p=.012), but
again, were significantly faster in their identifications of them
(p<.0001).
A more detailed analysis, in terms of hits and false alarms,
revealed a parallel pattern of results, with the additional
finding that in the name recognition task, both male and
female subjects were significantly faster at correctly rejecting
male lures.

General Discussion
Previous empirical work supports the notion that names are
uniquely difficult to learn and remember compared to other
semantic categories. For example, subjects find it harder to
learn to pair faces with names, than to pair faces with
occupations, even when the frequencies of names and
occupations are held constant, and even when the same
lexical items are used (e.g., ‘baker’ as both a surname and
occupation; Cohen & Faulkner, 1986; McWeeny, Young,
Hay, & Ellis, 1987). The experiments and analyses presented
here offer insight into how the distributional structure of
names—and other semantic categories, more broadly—can
affect memory for those items across an array of tasks. In
particular, selectively increasing entropy over a given
element appears to disrupt memory not only for that element,
but for the linguistic sequence it belongs to.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an NSF graduate fellowship to MD.
We thank Richard Shiffrin and lab for comments and discussion.

References

Discussion
In both recognition tasks, classification accuracy patterned by
gender, lending credence to the hypothesis that our male
subjects have, on average, more exposure to men and male
names, and our female subjects to women and female names.
However, while male subjects were consistently faster in
their identifications of males across both tasks; the inverse
trend did not hold for our female subjects. More tellingly,
female subjects actually proved faster at correctly rejecting
male lures in the name recognition task, suggesting that they
found these names easier to process.

Anderson, J. R., & Milson, R. (1989). Human memory: An adaptive perspective. Psychological
Review, 96(4), 703–719.
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy hypothesis. Language and Speech,
47(1), 31–56.
Balota, D.A. et al. (2007). The English Lexicon Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445-459.
Bell, A. et al. (2008). Predictability effects on durations of content and function words in
conversational English. Journal of Memory and Language, 60(1), 92–111.
Brennen, T. (1993). The difficulty with recalling people’s names: the plausible phonology hypothesis.
Memory, 1(4), 409–431.
Burke, D. M. et al. (1991). On the tip of the tongue: What causes word finding failures in young and
older adults? Journal of Memory and Language, 30(5), 542–579.
Capitani, E., Laiacona, M., & Barbarotto, R. (1999). Gender affects word retrieval of certain categories
in semantic fluency tasks. Cortex, 35(2), 273–278.
Clark, H. H., & Wasow, T. (1998). Repeating words in spontaneous speech. Cognitive Psychology,
37(3), 201–242.
Cohen, G. (1990). Why is it difficult to put names to faces? British Journal of Psychology, 81(3), 287–
297.
Cohen, G. & Burke, D.M. (1993). Memory for proper names: A review. Memory, 1, 249-263.
Dye, M., Milin, P., Futrell, R., & Ramscar, M. (2015). A functional theory of gender paradigms. In F.
Kiefer, J.P. Blevins, & H. Bartos (Eds.) Morphological Paradigms and Functions.
Ferrer i Cancho, R., & Sole, R. V. (2003). Least effort and the origins of scaling in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(3), 788–791.
Genzel, D., & Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy in text (pp. 199–206). In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics.
Griffin, Z.M. (2010). Retrieving personal names, referring expressions, and terms of address. The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 53, 345-387.
Johns, B.T. et al. (2013). Using cognitive models to investigate the temporal dynamics of semantic
memory impairments in the development of Alzheimer’s disease. In the Proceedings of the
12th ICCM.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing word meaning and order information in a
composite holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114(1), 1–37.
Mandelbrot, B. (1953). An informational theory of the statistical structure of language.
Communication Theory.
McWeeny, K. H. et al. (1987). Putting names to faces. British Journal of Psychology, 78(2), 143–149.
Mehta, C.M. & Strough, J. (2009). Sex segregation in friendships and normative contexts across the
life span. Developmental Review, 29, 201-220.
Qian, T., & Jaeger, T. F. (2012). Cue Effectiveness in Communicatively Efficient Discourse
Production. Cognitive Science, 36(7), 1312–1336.
Quinlan, J. R. (1986). Induction of decision trees. Machine Learning, 1(1), 81–106.
Ramscar et al. (2013) The ‘universal’ structure of name grammars and the impact of social engineering
on the evolution of natural information systems. Proceedings of the 35th Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Berlin, Germany.
Ramscar, M. et al. (2014). The myth of cognitive decline: Non-linear dynamics of lifelong learning.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 6(1), 5–42.
Shannon, C.E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27,
379–423, 623–656.
Simon, H. A. (1955). On a class of skew distribution functions. Biometrika, 42, 425–440.
Taler, V. et al. (2013). A computational analysis of semantic structure in bilingual fluency. Journal of
Memory and Language, 69, 607-618.
Vigliocco, G., Antonini, T., & Garrett, M. F. (1997). Grammatical Gender Is on the Tip of Italian
Tongues. Psychological Science, 8(4), 314–317.
Zipf, G.K. (1949). Human behavior and the principle of least effort: An introduction to human
ecology. Addison-Wesley: Cambridge, MA.

1768

