The Primary and Convergent Retrieval Model of Recall
William J. Hopper (whopper@psych.umass.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 135 Hicks Way
Amherst, MA 01003 USA

David E. Huber (dehuber@psych.umass.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 135 Hicks Way
Amherst, MA 01003 USA

Abstract

Restudy, Test Practice, and Forgetting Rates

Memory models typically assume that recall is a two-stage
process with learning affecting both processes to the same
degree. This equal learning assumption is difficult to reconcile
with studies of the 'testing effect', which reveal different
forgetting rates following learning from test practice versus
learning from restudy. Here we present a new memory model,
termed Primary and Convergent Retrieval (PCR) that assumes
successful recall leads to a selective enhancement for the
second stage of recall (Convergent Retrieval). We applied this
model to existing testing effect data. In two new experiments,
we confirmed novel predictions of the PCR model for transfer
between retrieval cues and for recall latencies. This is the first
formally specified model of the testing effect and it has broad
implications for the nature of learning and retrieval.
Keywords: Memory Modeling; The Testing Effect, Retrieval
Practice

Two-Stage Models of Recall
As briefly reviewed here, memory models typically assume
that recall is a two-stage process. For instance, the Search of
Associative Memory model (SAM, Raaijmakers & Shiffrin,
1981) contains a sampling stage that selects a specific
memory trace from a pool of active traces, followed by a
recovery stage that extracts the details of the sampled
memory. Similarly, the MINERVA 2 model (Hintzman,
1984) differentiates between an intensity response
(measuring overall activation) that is used to weight the
contribution of memories to the echo content, which is
subsequently 'cleaned up' through a recursive process to
produce the desired content. Norman and O’Reilly (2003)
assumed these separate processes reflect the operations of
different brain regions, with parahippocampal cortex
providing a familiarity response, such as used in recognition,
whereas recall requires pattern completion that depends on
the actions of the hippocampus.
These models, and others, include a stage that isolates
relevant memories based on a scalar value for retrieval
strength followed by a stage in which sufficient detail is
extracted to produce on overt recall response. However, these
models also assume that learning is passive and any
opportunity to encode a memory will affect both stages in a
similar manner. Additionally, the time course of this second
stage is not specified by extant memory models. Here, we
present a new memory model which specifies the learning
processes and time course of this second stage, motivated in
large part by studies of retrieval practice effects.

The assumption of passive learning appears at odds with
testing effect studies that indicate greater learning from
retrieval practice (see Roediger & Karpicke, 2006a for a
review). In these studies, participants learn some new
material, after which the material is practiced by restudying,
or by taking a practice test (either with or without feedback).
A retention interval follows this practice, after which
participants take a final test. The final test often reveals an
advantage for material practiced with a test relative to
material practiced by restudying, and this advantage grows
with retention interval. In other words, these two types of
practice produce different forgetting rates. A striking
example of different forgetting rates is found when test
practice occurs without feedback. In this case, if the retention
interval is short (e.g., 5 minutes), restudying produces higher
accuracy than a practice test. However, if the retention
interval is longer (e.g., 24 hours), this relationship is reversed
and test practice produces better accuracy than restudying
(Roediger & Karpicke, 2006b; Toppino & Cohen, 2009;
Wheeler, Ewers, & Buonanno, 2003).
This crossover interaction comparing restudy to test
practice without feedback is partially explained by realizing
that there is no opportunity for additional learning for the
items that fail to be retrieved during test practice. Thus, the
test practice reflects a bifurcated distribution (Kornell, Bjork,
& Garcia, 2011). However, this account still assumes greater
learning for the items that were recalled during test practice
as compared to the learning from restudy and yet no
explanation is provided as to why this is the case.
Furthermore, the crossover interaction occurs even when
considering recallable items, as determined by an initial test
prior to subsequent test practice or restudy (Jang, Wixted,
Pecher, Zeelenberg, & Huber, 2012). To explain why the act
of recall produces qualitatively different learning than
passive restudy, we developed the Primary and Convergent
Retrieval (PCR) model of recall.

The Primary and Convergent Retrieval Model
The PCR model retains the two-stage recall architecture of
previous memory models, with the first stage termed Primary
Retrieval (PR) while the second is termed Convergent
Retrieval (CR). Primary Retrieval describes the initial
process of activating all relevant memories based on their

1235

associations with the current retrieval cues (e.g., the current
temporal context and any item information such as a word or
picture provided as a cue). However, even the most active
memory in PR may be incomplete (e.g., some of the features
of the memory remain inactive). Convergent Retrieval
describes a second stage in which the memory system focuses
on the most active memory and attempts to activate any
inactive features through intra-item associations between the
features of that memory.

General Assumptions of PCR

Convergent Retrieval

PCR assumes that all memory traces and retrieval cues are
composed of a finite number of features. New unidirectional
associations between features are formed according to the
temporal sequence of events. For instance, if feature A
becomes active at time t, and feature B becomes active at time
t+1, an excitatory connection is formed from feature A to
feature B. This form of learning is consistent with spike time
dependent plasticity in which potentiation of a synapse only
occurs if the pre-synaptic cell fires before the post-synaptic
cell (for examples see Dan & Poo, 2006). We assume this
learning rule applies in all situations. Thus, context features
become associated with item features during study because
context is active prior to presentation of the item. More
importantly, in terms of explaining the testing effect, initially
active features of an item become associated with initially
inactive features of the same item, provided that those
features are subsequently retrieved. This intra-item learning
explains the extra benefit of retrieval practice.

features, two things occur: 1) the item can then be recalled;
and 2) new associations between the features activated by PR
and the features subsequently activated by CR can be formed
(note that this also holds true when the target item is provided
after CR failure, such as occurs in test practice with feedback;
this explains why the testing effect is more powerful with
feedback).
This second outcome, called intra-item learning, represents
a theoretical departure from most memory models, which do
not explicitly model the learning between features of an item.
This intra-item learning makes it easier to recall the item
regardless of the initial state of activation that occurs with
PR; because the associations between the individual features
that compose an item are a property of the item, rather than
the association between the item and retrieval cues, the intraitem learning that takes place following successful test
practice benefits recall in a cue-independent manner. This
intra-item learning reduces the numbers of steps required for
CR, resulting in faster recall. Thus, even in situations where
intra-item learning fails to increase the probability of recall,
it will decrease retrieval latency for the items that are
recalled.

Primary Retrieval
When a retrieval attempt is initiated, all currently active
features (e.g., the current temporal context and any retrieval
cues) serve as cues to activate features of memory traces.
Thus, PR is cue-dependent, meaning that the content and
magnitude of the memory system's response depends
completely on the features of the retrieval cues. During initial
study, the retrieval cues (context and an item presented as a
cue) are typically active first, followed by the target item,
allowing associations between these retrieval cues and the
features of the target item. However, encoding is likely to be
incomplete and error prone. Furthermore, the temporal
context will naturally change between study and test (e.g.,
Howard & Kahana, 2002). Thus, the activation of the target
features that occurs with PR will be incomplete. Because a
naming response requires full retrieval of the item, a pattern
completion process is needed for recall success. We term this
process ‘convergent retrieval’.

Convergent Retrieval
Convergent Retrieval is the process by which initially
dormant features that were missed by PR become active, via
intra-item excitatory connections between the individual
features that define the target item. Even for readily known
items (e.g., high frequency words), the retrieval cues may fail
to activate enough of the item, such as occurs with 'tip-of-thetongue'. If CR succeeds in activating all the remaining

Figure 1: An example of successful Convergent Retrieval.
The features initially activated by retrieval cues during
Primary Retrieval activate the remaining inactive features
according to the associative connections between each
feature. Following convergence, additional associations are
learned between the initially active features, and the
subsequently activated features.
Figure 1 shows an example of the CR process, beginning
where PR ends. In this example, retrieval cue features only
activate two of the five features of an item in memory
(features of an item are shown as circles inside an oval, with
currently active features represented by the filled circles; the
existing intra-tem associations are indicated by the solid
arrows). In this example, if a feature requires two excitatory
inputs to become active, all of the initially dormant features
will eventually become active across three time steps. New
intra-item associations are now formed according to this
progression of events (represented by the dashed arrows).
This discussion outlines the guiding principles behind the
PCR model. However, a full-scale neural network

1236

implementation would require many auxiliary assumptions
(e.g., the exact time function underlying learning, the exact
rule for feature activation during CR, the nature of temporal
context change, etc.). Next we present a simple abstract
mathematical model that approximates these guiding
principles, noting that a fully mechanistic instantiation of
these principles might deviate somewhat from this simple
model.

A Binomial Instantiation of PCR
We assume each item consists of a finite number of features
(set to 100 for convenience) and that each item requires a
specific number of active features for CR to be successful
(features are discretely active or inactive). This captures preexperimental item differences in which some items are more
easily recalled even if encoding is incomplete or context has
changed greatly (i.e., even with weak PR). The value of each
item's CR ‘threshold’, θi, is sampled from a binomial
distribution with probability t and 100 counts (one count for
each feature). We use the symbol 𝐵( ) to indicate a binomial
distribution.
𝜃𝑖 ~ 𝐵(𝑡, 100)
We assume that initial encoding is incomplete, or prone to
errors such that even an immediate final test (i.e., one for
which context has not changed) fails to activate all of the
target item's features. As with item differences in threshold,
we assume some items are better encoded than others, and the
number of features that are encoded for each item, 𝛼𝑖 , is also
sampled from a binomial distribution, but in this case the
probability parameter is e.
𝛼𝑖 ~ 𝐵(𝑒, 100)
The parameter e may be thought of as an encoding rate
parameter, and more time spent studying will result in higher
values of e.
Restudy and successful recall provide another opportunity
for encoding item features by associating them with retrieval
cues and both forms of practice increase the value of αi (there
is no learning for unsuccessful recall without feedback). This
learning during the practice phase of an experiment is again
captured with a binomial sample, but in this case the
probability parameter is l. However, unlike initial study, this
learning only applies to features that were not originally
encoded and so the number of counts for this binomial
distribution is 100 - αi, resulting in the following expression
for change in the number of encoded features.
∆𝛼𝑖 ~ 𝐵(𝑙, 100 − 𝛼𝑖 )
Forgetting is implemented in the model by reducing the
value of αi. Modeling forgetting by reducing the number of
features activated by retrieval cues corresponds to the
assumption that temporal context shifts during the retention
interval such that PR only activates a subset of the item
features that were previously encoded in relation to the
context at the time of initial study. The reduction in features
activated during PR is captured by a binomial sample with
probability f as follows.

∆𝛼𝑖 = −𝐵(𝑓, 𝛼𝑖 )
As outlined previously, CR success produces new intraitem learning, as the features of an item become associated
with each other because they were activated in a progressive
manner. We capture intra-item through a reduction in the CR
threshold θi. This change in threshold is again a binomial
sample, but with probability parameter r and the number of
counts equal to the current threshold.
∆𝜃𝑖 = −𝐵(𝑟, 𝜃𝑖 )
This reduction makes items more easily recalled regardless
of how they are cued (i.e., even when PR is weak). In
simulations with the model, recall success for each item is
discretely determined according to a comparison between 
and . If  > , then PR has activated more features than are
required for CR success, and thus the entire content of the
item is retrieved and available to be named in a recall
response. However, as described next, a key component of
the recall process is the order in which items are considered
for CR and the time that it takes to attempt CR.
In a cued recall test, it is likely that the target memory is
the only memory that has any appreciable activation
(although this is not true in cued recall experiments that pair
the same cue with multiple targets). In the case where the
target is the only active memory, the important question is
whether that memory is sufficiently active to support CR
success and whether CR can be achieved in the allowed time.
As outlined in Figure 1, we assume that CR takes time as
dormant features progressively activate. We implement this
by assuming that the time needed for CR relates to the
distance from threshold,  - . More specifically, the
Reaction Time (RT) to recall (or fail to recall) target item i is
a negative exponential function.
𝑅𝑇𝑖 = 𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 + (𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 )(𝑒 −𝜆|𝛼𝑖−𝜃𝑖| )
Here, 𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 are upper and lower bounds on possible
response times, respectively. Importantly, the term in the
exponent uses the absolute magnitude of the difference. This
captures the intuition that an item that is on the 'tip-of-thetongue' is one that will take a long time before it is recalled
or before the memory system admits defeat. In contrast, items
that are far above threshold are recalled very quickly.
Similarly, items that are far below threshold fail to progress
in the CR process, and the retrieval attempt is quickly
abandoned.
In a free recall test, the order in which memories are
considered for CR plays a crucial role. More specifically, a
considered item may fail to be recalled owing to CR failure
but another possibility is that the item was not recalled
because CR was never attempted. We assume that the
memory system does not directly know whether CR success
is possible for each memory; this knowledge requires the
actual engagement of the CR process. However, the amount
of feature activation (i.e., the amount of PR) is a good proxy
for CR success. In other words, it is more likely that  > 
when selecting for items with high . Thus, rather than
random sampling as in the SAM model, we assume that CR

1237

is attempted for each item in descending rank order of αi. In
this way, interference occurs in the construction of the rank
ordered list; strong memories will be near the top of the list,
making it more likely that a test taker runs out of time before
considering items farther down the list.
The predicted probability of recall in a free recall
experiment is determined as follows. Monte Carlo
simulations generate 1,000 hypothetical lists of items in
which each item has an initial threshold , and value
owing to initial study, followed by changes to these values
with restudy or test practice. Simulating final recall, CR is
attempted for each item in the rank ordered list of  values
for each list, while keeping track of the total time elapsed
during the recall session until the allowed time is exceeded or
the entire list has been considered for CR.

Applying PCR to Roediger & Karpicke 2006b
Experiment 1 from Roediger and Karpicke 2006b
manipulated practice method (test practice without feedback
vs. restudy) and retention interval (5 minutes, 2 days, and 1
week), using free recall for both test practice and the final
test. Participants were given two prose passages that each
contained 30 ‘idea units’. Participants then took a practice
test on one passage, and restudied the other. After one of the
3 retention intervals, participants took a final test on both
passages. Figure 2 shows recall accuracy in each condition,
as well as mean accuracy on the practice test.

Figure 2: Recall accuracy from Roediger and Karpicke
2006b shown with the accuracy predicted by PCR.

f = 0). The likelihood of the data was maximized using the
binomial likelihood ratio test, which provides a chi-square
goodness-of-fit statistic. The low value of this statistic
indicates that the model is not rejected (χ2(1) = .042, p = .83).
The predicted accuracy of the best fitting model is shown
along with the observed data in Figure 1.
One the one hand, the accuracy of this fit is not surprising
considering that 6 free parameters were used to fit 7
conditions. On the other hand, this crossover interaction
between type of practice and retention interval is theoretically
challenging and these results are problematic for any memory
model, regardless of the number of free parameters.
Ultimately, the fit to these data can be considered a “proof of
concept” that the PCR model is able to explain the pattern of
recall accuracy results observed in studies of the testing
effect. In the following sections, we test novel predictions of
the PCR model in a data set which imposes a much greater
amount of constraint.

Hidden Benefits of Retrieval
The PCR model includes the notion of a bifurcated
distribution (e.g., learning only applies to items that were
recalled during test practice). The notion of a bifurcated
distribution suggests that a great deal of learning has occurred
for the items that were recalled on the practice test, but does
not specify the nature of this extra learning for tested items.
The PCR model attributes this extra learning to increased
associations between the individual features of a target item.
The incremental nature of CR during test practice promotes
this type of learning whereas this does not occur with restudy
considering that all of the item features are presented
simultaneously with restudy. However, in the absence of
feedback during test practice, this extra learning is not
apparent when examining accuracy on an immediate final test
because it only occurs for the items that would have been
recalled even if they hadn't received test practice. Thus, the
effects of this additional intra-item learning are masked in the
short term and only emerge after a delay period, where this
extra learning serves as additional protection against
interference and forgetting.
However, it should be possible to reveal the benefit of
retrieval practice on an immediate final test by measuring
how long it takes for each item to be retrieved, instead of just
how many items are ultimately retrieved. The PCR model
predicts faster retrieval following test practice even if overall
accuracy does not improve on an immediate final tests.

Practice Tests Reduce Retrieval Latency

We fit the PCR model to the average free recall accuracies
reported by Roediger and Karpicke 2006b (shown in Figure
2). The e, l, r, Tmin, f2, and f7 parameters were allowed to freely
vary, while Tmax was fixed at 60 seconds. Each item's CR
threshold θi was drawn from a Binomial distribution with
probability parameter t fixed at .5. We assumed that no
forgetting occurred in the immediate final test condition (i.e.,

To see why intra-item learning reduces the latency of
subsequent retrievals of the same item, consider the example
of CR shown in Figure 1. Even if successful test practice
failed to strengthen associations between the retrieval cues
and the item features (i.e., even if PR still only activated 2 of
the 5 features), CR would be achieved in fewer time steps
during subsequent retrieval attempts. The newly formed
intra-item associations (shown by the dashed arrows), allow
CR to occur in 2 time steps rather than 4 time steps. This is

1238

because the 2 features initially activated during PR are now
associated with all 3 of the initially dormant features, instead
of just 1.
Restudy also reduces retrieval latency, but for a different
reason. Following restudy, the reduction in latency occurs
because more features are active in the first time step (i.e.,
after PR). In other words, learning from restudy increases the
number of features activated by the retrieval cues such that
fewer features need to be filled in during CR. It is important
to note that this type of learning also occurs with successful
test practice. In other words, both restudy and test practice
result in more features activated by the retrieval cues.
However, successful test practice also boosts intra-item
learning, and thus the CR process operates more efficiently
(i.e., fewer time steps) to fill in the remaining features. In
summary, for an immediate final test, accuracy is predicted
to be higher following restudy because restudy boosts PR for
all of the items. In contrast, retrieval latency is predicted to
be faster following test practice because recalled items will
have benefited both from better PR and from more efficient
CR.
We tested these predictions in a free recall experiment in
which 34 participants studied lists of 15 words, followed by
either restudy or a practice test, and then a final test (this
procedure was repeated 8 times). On the memory tests,
participants were given 90 seconds to recall the 15 words in
any order. Participants completed a 30 second math distractor
task between both the initial study and the practice phase, and
between the practice phase and the final test. This
experimental design yields 3 conditions to measure:
performance on the practice test itself (i.e., the baseline or
“no prior practice” condition), performance on the final test
following restudy practice, and performance on the final test
following a practice test. In addition to recall accuracy, we
analyzed the elapsed time between each item recalled (the
Inter-Response Time, or IRT). The accuracy and latency
results were in line with the PCR models predictions: restudy
produced the highest accuracy (average of 81% correct) and
faster IRTs than baseline, while IRTs were the fastest on a
final test following test practice, despite no substantial
change in accuracy (61% correct on the practice test and 59%
correct on the final test). The median IRTs for each possible
output position in this experiment are shown in Figure 3. Note
that the lack of a “testing effect” in terms of recall accuracy
is expected in this situation, as the learning benefits of test
practice only apply to items already able to be recalled, and
thus should only be expected to emerge with a longer
retention interval. Demonstrating the generality of these
latency effects, a similar speed-up has been found with a final
cued recall test following cued recall practice (Broek, Segers,
Takashima, & Verhoeven, 2014).

Applying PCR to Free Recall Latencies
The PCR model was simultaneously fit to the observed recall
accuracy and IRTs from each item on each list of the free
recall experiment, separately for each subject. More
specifically, the PCR model predicts the shape of the IRT

Figure 3: Predicted and observed inter-retrieval times in the
no practice, study practice, and test practice conditions.
Inter-retrieval times increased as function of output position
in the no practice and study practice conditions, but not in
the test practice condition.
distributions, and these were used to produce a maximum
likelihood fit of the joint probability of producing each
observed latency at the observed output order position within
the test list (e.g., taking 4.3 seconds after recall of a 4 th item
to then recall a 5th item). In this manner, the model explained
the shape of the separate IRT distributions as a function of
output position within the test list, and as a function of prior
restudy or prior test practice. The predicted IRTs using the
best fitting model parameters for the baseline, restudy, and
test practice conditions are shown along with the observed
data in Figure 3.
To allow the model to capture the data, the Tmin, Tmax, and λ
parameters were allowed to freely vary in addition to the e, l,
r, and t parameters. When using a binomial distribution, the
model generated IRT distributions are discrete because there
is a finite number of possible RTs representing a finite
number of possible values for the difference from threshold
(however, this finite number is large when considering that
an observed IRT may reflect some number failed CR attempts
before a successful CR). A continuous IRT distribution was
produced owing to two factors. First, rather than using the
discrete Binomial distribution, we used a continuous Beta
distribution that approximates the Binomial by having the
same mean and variance. Theoretically, this corresponds to
consideration of partial feature activation. Second, rather
than assuming that each CR attempt was initiated precisely at

1239

the offset of the last CR, we imposed a standard normal (0
mean and 1 second standard deviation) for the start time of
each CR. This was implemented with Gaussian kernel
estimation of the Monte Carlo data. This procedure produced
a family of IRT distributions across the 15 possible output
positions (i.e., these 15 distributions integrate to value 1.0),
and in this way the model simultaneously explained both the
accuracy data and trial-by-trial IRTs.

General Discussion
The PCR model has important theoretical implications for the
testing effect literature as well as the broader field of memory
research. To this date, there have been no well specified (i.e.,
mathematical) models of the cognitive processes that
underlie the testing effect. Beyond serving this need, the PCR
model provides a conceptually novel account of the benefits
from retrieval practice. In the testing effect literature, the
leading theories include overlearning (i.e., testing simply
produces more learning), transfer appropriate processing
(i.e., the best way to learn to recall at a later date is to practice
recall), and desirable difficulties (i.e., testing requires more
effort). Intra-item learning is conceptually different than any
of these accounts. It is closest to transfer appropriate
processing, but it supposes that the act of recall introduces a
king of learning that will benefit future recall attempts for that
item under a variety of circumstances (i.e., beyond situations
that are identical to those of test practice). This theory
provides an explanation of why test practice benefits are
largest following recall practice (Carpenter & DeLosh,
2006); because CR is not reliably engaged by tests that do not
require recall (e.g., a recognition or some forms of multiple
choice tests), these tests do not produce as much intra-item
learning.
While PCR incorporates many ideas from existing models
of memory, the assumption of different kinds of learning for
the two stages that underlie recall is an important departure
from prior models. These models concern the association
strength between retrieval cues and memories, and then use
these associations in different ways to explain the difference
between familiarity responses (the first stage) and recall
responses (the combination of two stages). By additionally
considering intra-item learning, PCR goes beyond passive
theories of memory formation to explain why the act of
recalling something from memory results in a qualitatively
different kind of learning; a kind of learning that is unique to
the item, allowing better/faster recall of the item even when
retrieval cues change. Nevertheless, in the PCR model, these
two types of learning follow from the same learning
mechanism that builds associations between features
according to the temporal order in which features become
active. Thus, the key distinction between passive study and
active recall is that passive study is an all-at-once event in
terms of items and their features, whereas recall is a gradual
unveiling of an item's features.

References
Broek, G. S. E. van den, Segers, E., Takashima, A., &
Verhoeven, L. (2014). Do testing effects change
over time? Insights from immediate and delayed
retrieval speed. Memory, 22(7), 803–812.
http://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2013.831455
Carpenter, S. K., & DeLosh, E. L. (2006). Impoverished cue
support enhances subsequent retention: Support for
the elaborative retrieval explanation of the testing
effect. Memory & Cognition, 34(2), 268 – 276.
Dan, Y., & Poo, M.-M. (2006). Spike Timing-Dependent
Plasticity: From Synapse to Perception.
Physiological
Reviews,
86(3),
1033–1048.
http://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00030.2005
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model
of human memory. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments & Computers, 16(2), 96–101.
http://doi.org/10.3758/BF03202365
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). A Distributed
Representation of Temporal Context. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 46(3), 269–299.
http://doi.org/10.1006/jmps.2001.1388
Jang, Y., Wixted, J. T., Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Huber,
D. E. (2012). Decomposing the interaction between
retention interval and study/test practice: The role of
retrievability.
The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65(5), 962–975.
http://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2011.638079
Kornell, N., Bjork, R. A., & Garcia, M. A. (2011). Why tests
appear to prevent forgetting: A distribution-based
bifurcation model. Journal of Memory and
Language,
65(2),
85–97.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2011.04.002
Norman, K. A., & O’Reilly, R. C. (2003). Modeling
hippocampal and neocortical contributions to
recognition memory: A complementary-learningsystems approach. Psychological Review, 110(4),
611–646.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88(2),
93–134. http://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.88.2.93
Roediger, H. L. I., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006b). Test-Enhanced
Learning: Taking Memory Tests Improves LongTerm Retention. Psychological Science, 17(3), 249
– 255.
Roediger, H. L. I., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006a). The power of
testing memory: Basic research and implications for
educational practice. Perspectives on Psychological
Science,
1(3),
181–210.
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6916.2006.00012.x
Toppino, T. C., & Cohen, M. S. (2009). The testing effect and
the retention interval: Questions and answers.
Experimental Psychology, 56(4), 252–257.
http://doi.org/10.1027/1618-3169.56.4.252
Wheeler, M. A., Ewers, M., & Buonanno, J. F. (2003).
Different rates of forgetting following study versus
test trials. Memory, 11(6), 571 – 580.

1240

