Thermodynamics and Cognition: Towards a Lawful Explanation of the Mind
Larry A. Moralez (Larrymoralez@knights.ucf.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of Central Florida
4000 Central Florida Blvd., Orlando, FL 32816-1352 USA

Luis H. Favela (Luis.Favela@ucf.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Cognitive Sciences Program, University of Central Florida
4000 Central Florida Blvd., Orlando, FL 32816-1352 USA
Abstract

claim that the SLT predisposes the organizational and
behavioral properties of all biological systems. Second, we
argue that cognition, being a biological phenomenon, is
likely to be invariably constrained by the SLT, which can be
fruitfully understood as the quest for free-energy
consumption in the least time. Third, we show that this
approach to understanding cognition is readily amenable to
the explication of two cognitive phenomena—memory and
action selection—that enjoy a unique complementarity in
nature in the context of the SLT by acting as an accelerating
entropy production system.

An argument is developed to show that explanations of
biological and physical systems can be unified via the second
law of thermodynamics (SLT). The SLT’s influence on the
evolutionary history of life at the scale of the global Earth
system justifies reunifying phenomena—i.e., mind and
matter—whose separation dates back to Modern Western
philosophy and still influences contemporary scientific
investigations. From this perspective it appears that the
necessity of ever-increasing entropy in nature may constrain
the organization and behavior of living organisms and
cognitive processes. Via an example of explaining memory at
the scale of the brain-body-environment system, we
recommend understanding cognition with respect to its role in
increasing entropy in nature. This framework may lead to a
fruitful understanding of cognition by appealing to the
necessity of physical laws.

The Biophysical Dichotomy
The dichotomy of biological and physical systems
(biophysical henceforth) is rooted in Modern Western
philosophy, particularly Descartes’ mind-body dualism and
Kant’s autonomy of biology from physics (Swenson &
Turvey, 1991). Since then, some researchers have attempted
to develop domain specific laws of human behavior
analogous to Newton’s laws governing the heavenly bodies
(cf. Stevens, 1957). However, psychology has experienced a
steady decline in attempts to establish psychophysical laws
that may provide explanations of cognitive phenomena. A
study on psychology paper abstracts containing ‘law’
citations shows a decline from 22 references per 10,000 for
entries occurring between 1900 to 1999, to 10 references per
10,000 for entries occurring in the decade to follow.
Moreover, the latter works presented fewer attempts to
formulate new laws, suggesting an increasing doubt
regarding the lawfulness of cognitive processes (Teigen,
2002). Adding to this trend, Davidson (1995) further argued
that explanations of the psychological—which understood
in terms of propositional attitudes such as intentions,
desires, and fears—is rational in nature, whereas the
physical domain is chaotic and irrational in nature. Thus, he
claims the two domains of description can develop rough
correlations
but
will
remain
fundamentally
incommensurable. It is important to note for present
purposes that his argument appeals to minimal anecdotal
empirical support, and is very much akin to the Hegelian
arguments Chemero (2009) claims plagues immature
sciences like cognitive science. An argument is “Hegelian”
when apparently empirical propositions are false as a matter
of logical necessity, such that certain frameworks for
understanding the natural world are ruled out in advance.
This is based on the notorious arguments Hegel made,

Keywords: action selection, cognition, entropy, memory,
thermodynamics

Introduction
The classic dualism disjoining scientific descriptions of
physical and biological systems rests on a perceived
incommensurability. The division is rooted in Modern
Western philosophy and has persisted contemporary
science. Despite the ubiquitous constraints imposed on
nature by the laws of physics, many domains of inquiry are
indifferent to the general principles of these laws when
investigating living organisms. In the cognitive sciences,
dynamic systems theorists have made strides in bridging the
two (e.g., Kelso, 1995; Thelen & Smith, 1994).
Nevertheless, much of their work stops short of uniting
accounts of cognition with a supreme law of physics like the
second law of thermodynamics (SLT) (Varpula et al., 2013).
If we instead approach cognizing organisms as physical
systems, whose laws regulate all physical interaction within
such systems, the constraints these laws impose on
cognitive processes should be present and observable in
organisms. Approaching the study of cognition from this
perspective opens the door to promising lines of inquiry that
may advance our understanding of the human mind.
The fecundity of bringing together the theoretical
frameworks of physics and biology into a common sphere
of theoretical and methodological practice is here explored
by approaching the study of cognition with respect to the
SLT. The case is made as follows: First, we reinforce the

948

following Plato, concerning the idea that the number of
planets in our solar system is necessarily seven (Craig &
Hoskin, 1992; Hegel, 1801/1987). Eventually, though,
theories must be justified via appeal to empirical facts.
What is clear is that the biophysical chasm Descartes and
Kant constructed is alive and well in the contemporary
scientific and philosophical literature. Rowlands (1999)
argues that the privilege researchers often grant to the
processes going on inside the brain by computational
models and neuroimaging are direct descendants of
Cartesian internalism, a position that explicitly posits two
differing substances—mind and matter. Additionally, some
have argued (e.g., Anderson, 2014) that the dichotomy of
mind and matter is responsible for subsequent attempts to
locate where the mind occurs in the head, resulting in the
development of phrenology and its continued influence in
cognitive neuroscience (cf. Uttal, 2011). If cognitive
scientists truly wish to achieve a scientifically virtuous
theory of the human mind, then they may want to alter their
trajectories away from the research paradigms established in
part by the biophysical dichotomy and instead aim for
commensuration. However, this line of thought is itself
contingent on empirical evidence that justifies rescinding
the biophysical dichotomy. If the empirical data serves to
confirm Davidson’s claims disjoining biology and physics,
then there may be little hope of grounding cognitive
processes in the laws of nature in physics. We argue here
that by exploring the ramifications of the SLT on biological
phenomena, the SLT can be established as a driving force
behind the ontogenesis of living organisms at the scale of
the global Earth system. This systems-based approach will
merit minimizing the historical divisions of biological and
physical systems and suggest that new explanations of
cognitive process can be developed in cognitive science if it
refocuses its inquiries towards the organism at various
scales within the context of the fundamental laws of
physics—namely, the SLT. If successful, this position will
open the door to a promising thermodynamically lawful
account of cognitive processes.

promise of this model works symmetrically with prediction
as it does explanation: We can combine knowledge of a
future set of initial conditions with natural laws to
accurately predict the conditions to follow. Explanations
and predictions of this kind are grounded in the nomological
necessity of laws of nature and not logical or metaphysical
necessity. Though attempts to ground cognitive processes in
physical laws have recently emerged with varying degrees
of success (e.g., Kelso, 1995; Thelen & Smith, 1994), none
have successfully appealed to nomic necessity for
explanation. If we wish to have a comprehensive
explanation of why specific cognitive phenomena exist and
how they function, pursuing nomic necessity may be a good
place to begin such a pursuit.
Note that we are not claiming that non-covering law
explanations will not be sufficient or even ideal for certain
phenomena. Rather, being placed within the context of laws
of nature can strengthen even non-covering law
explanations. We defend a general theoretical framework
whereby cognitive phenomena can be understood in a
manner similar to physical systems, namely, as continuous
with the SLT.

Figure 1: As the entropy of a system increases, it becomes
less ordered/increases in disorder. As the entropy of a
system decreases, it becomes more ordered/decreases in
disorder.
The SLT states that within a closed physical system
entropy can only increase over time (Boltzmann,
1886/1974; Brissaud, 2005). Entropy is the measure of
disorder in a physical system. It is important to understand
that when the total amount of order in the system is low, its
entropy is high, and vice versa (Figure 1). Physicists
generally agree that the only truly closed system known to
exist is the universe itself. Thus, the universe is in the
process of transitioning from a higher-ordered state to a
lower-ordered state. At first glance it would seem the SLT
supports the biophysical dichotomy, for it would entail that
complex, higher-ordered living systems could not emerge in
an open system that is lawfully trending towards disorder
without violating the SLT. Dennett’s (1995) interpretation
takes this line of thought a step further into the domain of
biology by defining living systems as those in nature that
defy the SLT. However, this approach fails by reemphasizing that the universe is the only closed system
known to exist: It entails that biological systems cannot be
closed systems and, consequently, accounts of their
description (like Dennett’s) cannot presume otherwise. Such
interpretations naively disengage the highly ordered
biological system from the environment by treating it as

The Second Law, Entropy, and the Global
Earth System
The SLT is distinct from many other laws of nature in that it
can be interpreted not only as a law about laws but also a
position on Aristotelian end-directed physics (Swenson &
Turvey, 1991). As we shall see, not only does the SLT
indicate that there is an end that all physical processes strive
towards, but also that living organisms proceed along the
same structured path. Understanding cognitive phenomena
with respect to this law may lead to promising lines of
inquiry and generate hypotheses. Such accounts could
provide grounds for revising covering law-like models of
explanations of cognitive phenomena (cf. Walmsley, 2008).
Knowledge of the prior conditions of a system is combined
with a law of nature (e.g., SLT) that, ceteris paribus, enables
us to derive an explanation of the corresponding event that
details what had to happen given the conditions. The

949

unique with respect to the SLT, only taking into account the
order produced explicitly within the system itself.
Contemporary treatments of living systems in isolation
from their environments seem to have supplemented beliefs
in the biophysical dichotomy that began long ago. However,
von Bertalanffy (1950) demonstrated that in open systems
such as living organisms, order must arise (decreasing
entropy) whenever the opportunity presents itself, and at the
same time the total net entropy in nature is increased via
some process whereby it is released into the local
environment. The SLT equation balances itself out once a
multi-scale system perspective is taken into account and
higher-ordered biological systems are understood as
physically open systems within the closed universe system.
If the net entropy produced in nature by the evolution of
complex organisms is positive, then the SLT suggests that
the proper construal of biological systems as physical
systems dynamically situated within their environment must
be taken. Evidence for this net increase in entropy at the
scale of the global Earth system is suggested by empirical
data with respect to the evolutionary history of life on Earth.
From this a nascent perspective for understanding biology,
and subsequently cognition, emerges.
Schrodinger (1945) argued that for a living thing to exist
it must never cease contributing to the total entropy of the
universe. Moreover, Swenson and Turvey (1991)
established that the global Earth system reveals an increase
in biospheric entropy during the development and growth of
living matter over geological time. Primal life on Earth was
likely to have been largely anaerobic, or without a supply of
oxygen and biological compounds to metabolize like
present day life. The emergence of the first photosynthetic
bacteria linked life directly to the sun. Through an
extraordinary development in the history of the planet, the
anaerobic organisms were unable to split electrons from
Earth’s vast water supply for energy. Proto-Cyanobacteria
were the first to do otherwise. This was accomplished by
making use of the virtually endless supply of photons from
the sun to split the electrons within the water molecules.
This process resulted in the release of O2 into the
atmosphere. Combined with a vast supply of water and
sunlight, this led to the rapid oxidation of the primal Earth
atmosphere, a process that equates to a rapid increase in
entropy. Since this process began, the global Earth system
has generated an exponential increase of entropy
production. The aforementioned Pre-Phanerozoic era, where
the first photosynthetic organisms employed sunlight to
release the O2 molecules from water, significantly increased
the terrestrial levels of entropy. The resulting high
concentration of atmospheric O2 provided a unique
opportunity for generating additional entropy. It was then
that nascent life forms metabolized the newly formed
organic matter and O2. This resulted in an even greater
increase of entropy production along with increasingly
higher ordered forms of life. This trend continues to this
day. Thus, from the moment life began on Earth the
production of entropy by progressively higher ordered

biological systems was largely responsible for an
exponential increase in net entropy in nature over time. The
vantage point that views biological systems as situated
thermodynamically within nature advances our claim that
the SLT demonstrates an intrinsically homogenous
biological and physical universe.

Entropy and the Free Energy Principle
, The SLT has multiple coherent interpretations. One
interpretation—the law of maximum entropy production—
suggests that entropy maximization and field potential
minimization are expressions of the same symmetry
(Swenson, 1997; Swenson & Turvey, 1991). When all
available energy is evenly distributed throughout a system
and there are no remaining local field potentials, then
entropy is maximized and the system is at equilibrium. The
system will remain at equilibrium (maximum entropy)
unless acted upon by an external non-equilibrium system
with free energy to consume. The SLT is also referred to as
the principle of least action (Annila, 2010, Kaila & Annila,
2015). If the system is at equilibrium and there are no local
free energy pools, no action can be taken. But when a nonequilibrium system is within proximity to affect a system at
equilibrium—which is always the case for any open
system—the equilibrium system reacts efficiently by
consuming any readily available free energy with the least
amount of action possible. Thus, according to several
mutually consistent interpretations of the SLT, a lowentropy system must consume free energy by reducing local
field potentials with the least amount of action if it is to
remain consistent with the SLT and contribute a net increase
of entropy in nature. As noted earlier, this increase occurs
somewhere along the system’s physical boundaries. This
interpretation of the SLT has been referred to as the free
energy principle (Friston, 2010) and it manifests in many
processes in nature.
Rainwater flowing down a dry mountain riverbed readily
illustrates the free energy principle (Figure 2A). Water does
not merely flow in a straight line down the main body of the
riverbed. Rather, the water flow branches off into any
available side streams as the water follows the path of least
resistance down the riverbed. Multiple paths minimize the
constraints otherwise imposed on the water flow if it had
been confined only to a straight line down the main body of
the riverbed, thereby ensuring field potential minimization
and maximum entropy increase in the fastest possible time.
The riverbed analogy serves as an easy to grasp instantiation
of the free energy principle in nature by demonstrating a
familiar physical system’s quest to maximize free energy
consumption in the least amount of time. Given the ubiquity
of the SLT throughout nature, it is unsurprising that the
instantiation of the free energy principle is evident in
cognitive processes as well (e.g., Friston, 2010; Friston &
Stephan, 2007).

950

A Multi-Scale Entropy Production System:
Affordance Selection and Memory
Neurophysiological data suggests that neural activity within
the brain is produced in a manner consistent with the free
energy principle (Friston & Stephan, 2007). More
specifically, any neuron or neuronal assembly that can
change will do so in an effort to consume free energy in the
least amount of time. Like rainwater flowing down a
mountainside, as an activation signal traverses a neural
pathway, it takes the path of least resistance and reduces
energy field potentials within the brain as fast as possible
(Figure 2). In the case of action selection,
neurophysiological data suggests that multiple simultaneous
opportunities for action are selected and specified in parallel
(Cisek, 2007). This “affordance competition hypothesis” is
different from the classical cognitivist perspective where
action was thought to be selected first and specified after.
Instead, neural activity in the brain produces bodily action
once a neurological signal is received from the motor
cortex, and the neurological signal that the motor cortex
transmits will be the signal that survives the action selection
competition carried out in the brain in accordance with the
free energy principle. But an organism’s free energy
consumption is not restricted to the intracranial processes.
Rather, in order to survive, the brain needs its free energy
consumption process to adapt in a way that can guide the
organism through dynamic environments. Unless an
organism is situated in a static and threat-less environment
with unlimited access to free energy, to survive it will need
a memory system that reorganizes the morphology of the
brain to enable adaptation to external circumstances. In
addition to action selection, memory can be explicated in
the context of the SLT.
New memories are made—at least in part—by the brain
establishing new or strengthening old neural connections.
The mechanism that enables this morphodynamic process in
the brain is Hebbian learning. Hebbian learning can be
summed up as “neurons that fire together, wire together”
(Keysers & Perrett, 2004). The pathways that activated
neural signals traverse throughout the nervous system are
strengthened, subsequently providing a means of increasing
the likelihood and efficiency that whatever environmental
stimulus generated the initial neural activation will follow a
similar path if reencountered in the future (Figure 2B).
Again, the mountain riverbed analogy is helpful here. The
more frequently water flow traverses a specific path down
the riverbed, the more likely it is to erode and deepen the
river. While river erosion and memory formation are wildly
different processes, the erosion will serve to increase the
likelihood that a similar path will be taken again during the
next rainfall, which is akin to how Hebbian learning in the
brain facilitates an increased likelihood that neural signals
will traverse similar paths in the future. The process of
memory formation via Hebbian learning enables an
organism to facilitate an increasingly efficient means of
dissipating field potentials from local free energy pools with
its actions. Thus, combined with a Hebbian learning

Figure 2: Increased energy flow results in increased speed of
flow. (A) River flow of California’s Sacramento-San
Joaquin River delta (modified from Trump, 2004). (B)
Expression of TRPV1, a receptor protein, in cultured
hippocampal neurons (Zemelman et al., 2003). The
hippocampus and receptor proteins such as TRPV1 are
associated with memory formation in the brain (e.g., Gibson
et al. 2008).
It may come as no surprise that animals have to move to
eat, and that they need to eat to move (Varpula et al., 2013).
A living organism’s need to consume free energy to move
and live entails that these cognitive perception-action cycles
at the scale of the organism-environment system (Favela &
Chemero, 2016) are constrained by the SLT. At the scale of
the brain, the cortical mechanisms for action selection can
be understood as a manifestation of this principle because it
facilitates what actions an organism selects to stay alive and
contributes to the net increase in biospheric entropy. Thus,
for the animal, an action may be considered advantageous if
it leads to maximized consumption of free energy in the
least amount of time. Moreover, action selection is
invariably constrained by an organism’s memory. Memory
is a cognitive phenomenon that can be understood as
participating in extending nature’s entropy increasing
efficacy into the future.

951

Concluding Remarks

process, the free energy that traverses an organism’s
nervous system simultaneously constructs a feedback
process that increases the likelihood that it will select
similar field potential minimizing actions in the future.
From this perspective, memory can be vaguely understood
as a physical feedback mechanism within an organism that
enables the past to influence the present. Both implicit and
explicit memory can be characterized by this description
and is therefore indifferent to the different types of memory
often instantiated in living organisms.
Memory is thus unique with respect to the SLT on the
grounds that it permits the exploitation of temporal
circumstances to increase nature’s entropic efficacy. The
SLT not only ensures all physical systems—including living
organisms—consume free energy pools the moment they
are within spatial proximity to be consumed, but if the
system is organized with an effective memory system it will
enable that system to forgo immediate free energy
consumption in order to consume greater amounts into the
future. The SLT ensures maximum entropy production in
real time with respect to local field potentials. This is
evident in cortical mechanisms for action selection. By
grounding memory in the SLT we have an exclusive
account of nature organizing itself in a way that removes
spatial constraints imposed on entropy production. Nonautonomous and memory-less systems are restricted to
entropy production only when they encounter free energy
within spatial proximity of the system’s boundaries. In the
case of living physical systems endowed with memory, they
are able to forgo immediate field potential minimization that
presents itself locally within spatial proximity and instead
extends nature’s entropy, thereby increasing efficacy
forward in time thanks to greater amounts of free energy
consumption in the future.
The consequence of this unique cognitive phenomenon is
that aspects of human culture—including education,
socializing, career and financial planning, and science, all of
which require memory to function—allow for sacrifices of
immediate field potential consumption for an increased net
consumption at a non-local point in time. This suggests that
not only are there likely to be additional cognitive processes
constrained by the SLT, but that additional phenomena from
the domain of the social sciences can potentially be
understood from this perspective.
Memory formation is necessary for virtually all living
organisms that rely on their personal autonomy to move
their bodies through their environment. It enables them to
select appropriate action—in the interest of avoiding risk
and seeking nourishment—so that they may continue to
survive in the wild. In the context of the global Earth system
detailed above, the combination of action selection and
memory in living organisms compliment one another in a
way that results in unique and increasingly viable entropy
production system in nature.

Having motivated a rejection of the assumption that
biological and physical systems are separate and
incommensurable within scientific explanation, we have
presented accounts of cognitive processes with respect to
the SLT and its symmetry with the free energy principle.
This suggests that cognitive, biological, and physical
phenomena can be examined and understood in some of the
same ways. Further investigations into this matter may
ultimately show that memory exists and is organized in a
manner that is necessary for nature to continue increasing its
entropy within the constraints of the global Earth system.
Additional researchers have begun to notice the connection
at additional scales and link it to other processes like sleep,
perceptual sensation, learning, notions of self, task
performance, single cell recordings, and neural information
flow in neuroimaging (e.g., Collell & Fauquet, 2015;
Dimitrov, Lazar, & Victor, 2011; Varpula, Annila, & Beck,
2013). This framework diminishes the risk of
epistemological shortcomings that result from the influence
of Modern Western philosophy in contemporary studies of
the mind (for discussions of such shortcomings see
Anderson, 2014; Assecondi, Bagshaw, & Ostwald, 2014;
Chemero, 2009; Clark, 2008; Sporns, 2012; Uttal, 2011).
For a comprehensive and fruitful understanding of the
mind, researchers will benefit from not only broadening the
scopes of their domains to take into account the brain-bodyenvironment system, but also by examining the constraints
imposed on living organisms by the SLT—and perhaps
other laws. Moreover, such an approach looks to be a
promising line of inquiry for building a bottom-up
understanding of the mind. “Bottom-up” is used here to
refer to a framework that is grounded in the laws of nature
that ascend into higher order processes. Motivating this
model is an appeal to the conditions for covering law
models of explanation, which derives hypotheses from sets
of premises that contain at minimum one law of nature. If
the premises turn out to be true (e.g., empirical evidence),
then there is strong assurance that the explanation will entail
nomological necessity, namely, whatever happened had to
happen.
This approach presupposes the commensurability of our
theories and explanations of both biological and physical
systems. We defended this presupposition by highlighting
the guiding role entropy production has played over the
history of the global Earth system. Rescinding the
biophysical dichotomy that has held much scientific practice
captive requires a non-dualistic approach to understanding
the mind. Cognitive systems ought to be examined as
biological systems, and biological systems as physical
systems that are thermodynamically situated within their
environments. From there, we can draw from the copious
amounts of knowledge that exists in the domains of
cognitive science, physics, biology, neuroscience, and
philosophy to continue developing a comprehensive, lawful
understanding of the mind.

952

References

Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The selforganization of brain and behavior. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Keysers, C., & Perrett, D. I. (2004). Demystifying social
cognition: A Hebbian perspective. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, 501-507.
Rowlands, M. (1999). The body in mind: Understanding
cognitive processes. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Schrodinger, E. (1945) What is life? New York: Macmillan
Sporns, O. (2012). Discovering the human connectome.
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Stevens, S. S. (1957). On the psychophysical law.
Psychological review, 64, 153-181.
Swenson, R. (1997). Autocatakinetics, evolution, and the
law of maximum entropy production: A principled
foundation towards the study of human ecology.
Advances in Human Ecology, 6, 1-48.
Swenson, R., & Turvey, M. T. (1991). Thermodynamic
reasons for perception action cycles. Ecological
Psychology, 3, 317-348.
Teigen, K. H. (2002). One hundred years of laws in
psychology. The American Journal of Psychology, 115,
103-118.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems
approach to the development of cognition and action.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Trump, M. (2004). Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta.
Wikipedia, photograph. Retrieved January 29, 2015 from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Wpdms_usgs_photo_s
acramento_delta_2.jpg. GNU Free Documentation
License.
Varpula, S., Annila, A., & Beck, C. (2013). Thoughts about
thinking: Cognition according to the second law of
thermodynamics. Advanced Studies in Biology, 5, 135149.
Uttal, W. R. (2011). Mind and brain: A critical appraisal of
cognitive neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1950). The theory of open systems in
physics and biology. Science, 111, 23-29.
Walmsley, J. (2008). Explanation in dynamical cognitive
science. Minds & Machines, 18, 331-348.
Zemelman, B. V., Nesnas, N., Lee, G. A., & Miesenböck,
G. (2003). Photochemical gating of heterologous ion
channels: Remote control over genetically designated
populations of neurons. PNAS, 100, 1352-1357. Image
retrieved
January
29,
2016
from
http://www.pnas.org/content/100/3/1352/F2.large.jpg

Annila, A. (2010). All in action. Entropy, 12, 2333-2358.
Anderson, M. L. (2014). After phrenology: Neural reuse
and the interactive brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Assecondi, S., Ostwald, D., & Bagshaw, A. P. (2014).
Reliability of information-based integration of EEG and
fMRI data: A simulation study. Neural computation, 27,
281-305.
Boltzmann, L. (1886/1974). The second law of
thermodynamics. In D. McGuinness (Ed.), Theoretical
Physics and Philosophical Problems: Selected Writings
(pp. 12-32). Boston, MA: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Brissaud, J. B. (2005). The meanings of entropy. Entropy, 7,
68-96.
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical embodied cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cisek, P. (2007). Cortical mechanisms of action selection:
The affordance competition hypothesis. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, 362, 1585-1599.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment,
action, and cognitive extension. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Collell, G., & Fauquet, J. (2015). Brain activity and
cognition: A connection from thermodynamics and
information theory. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1-11, doi:
10.3389fpsyg.2015.00818.
Craig, E., & Hoskin, M. (1992). Hegel and the seven
planets. Journal for the History of Astronomy, 23, 2082010.
Davidson, D. (1995). Could there be a science of
rationality? International Journal of Philosophical
Studies, 3, 1-16.
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution
and the meanings of life. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Dimitrov, A. G., Lazar, A. A., & Victor, J. D. (2011).
Information theory in neuroscience. Journal of
Computational Neuroscience, 30, 1-5.
Favela, L. H., & Chemero, A. (2016). The animalenvironment system. In Y. Coelllo & M. H. Fischer
(Eds.), Foundations of Embodied Cognition: Volume 1:
Perceptual and Emotional Embodiment (pp. 59-74). New
York, NY: Routledge.
Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the
brain. Synthese, 159, 417-458.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified
brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 127-138.
Gibson, H. E., Edwards, J. G., Page, R. S., Van Hook, M. J.,
&, Kauer, J. A. (2008). TRPV1 channels mediate longterm depression at synapses on hippocampal interneurons.
Neuron, 57, 746–59.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1801/1987). Philosophical dissertation on
the orbits of the planets (1801), preceded by the 12 theses
defended on August 27, 1801. P. Adler (trans.). Graduate
Faculty Philosophy Journal, 12, 269- 309.
Kaila, V. R. I., & Annila, A. (2015). Natural selection for
least action. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 464,
3055-3070. doi: 10.1098/rspa.2008.0178

953

