Tit-­‐‑for-­‐‑Tat:	  Effects	  of	  Feedback	  and	  Speaker	  Reliability	  on	  Listener	  
Comprehension	  Effort	  
	  

Nicole	  Craycraft*	  (ncraycraft@gmail.com)	  	  
Department	  of	  Psychology,	  University	  of	  Illinois,	  Urbana-­‐‑Champaign	  
	  

Zoe	  Kriegel*	  (zkriegel@kent.edu)	   	  
School	  of	  Health	  Sciences,	  Kent	  State	  University	  
	  

Michael	  K.	  Tanenhaus	  (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)	  	  	  
Brain	  &	  Cognitive	  Sciences,	  University	  of	  Rochester	  
	  

Jennifer	  Roche	  (jroche3@kent.edu)	  	  
School	  of	  Health	  Sciences,	  Kent	  State	  University	  
	  
speakers	   in	   a	   matching	   task	   are	   better	   able	   to	   tailor	  
Abstract	  
utterances	   to	   the	   past	   experience	   of	   a	   particular	  
Miscommunication	  is	  often	  seen	  as	  a	  detrimental	  aspect	  
listener	  when	  item	  category	  labels	  are	  distinct	  for	  each	  
of	   human	   communication.	   However,	   miscommunication	  
listener	  rather	  than	  overlapping,	  reducing	  the	  memory	  
can	  differ	  in	  cause	  as	  well	  as	  severity.	  What	  distinguishes	  
load	   of	   pairing	   a	   specific	   item	   to	   a	   specific	   listener	  
a	   miscommunication	   where	   conversation	   partners	  
(Horton	   &	   Gerrig,	   2005).	   In	   this	   view,	  
continue	  to	  put	  forth	  the	  effort	  from	  miscommunication	  
miscommunication	   is	   a	   necessary	   consequence	   of	  
where	  conversation	  partners	  simply	  give	  up?	  In	  this	  eye-­‐‑
egocentric	   thinking,	   and	   would	   often	   go	   undetected.	  
tracking	   study,	   participants	   heard	   globally	   ambiguous	  
Indeed,	   when	   task	   partners	   have	   different	   goals	   and	  
statements	   that	   were	   either	   a	   result	   of	   an	   experimental	  
were	   either	   uninformed	   or	   misinformed	   that	   their	  
error	   or	   speaker	   underspecification;	   participants	   either	  
goals	  were	  the	  same,	  statements	  by	  both	  parties	  were	  
received	   positive	   or	   negative	   feedback	   on	   these	  
routinely	   misinterpreted	   and	   only	   1	   pair	   out	   of	   31	  
ambiguous	   trials.	   We	   found	   that	   negative	   feedback,	  
discovered	   their	   goals	   were	   different	   (Russell	   &	  
paired	  with	  the	  reliability	  of	  the	  message,	  will	  impact	  the	  
Schober,	  1999)	  
amount	   of	   processing	   effort	   a	   comprehender	   puts	  
Contrasting	   this	   is	   an	   audience	   design	   account,	  
forth—specifically,	  listeners	  were	  less	  forgiving	  of	  errors	  
where	   the	   perspective	   of	   and	   previous	   experiences	  
when	   they	   were	   penalized	   and	   when	   speakers’	  
with	   a	   conversational	   partner	   constrain	   interpretation	  
instructions	   lacked	   effort.	   This	   suggests	   that	   language	  
or	   production.	   An	   assumption	   of	   this	   account	   is	   all	  
users	   weigh	   conversational	   contexts	   and	   outcomes	   as	  
parties	   in	   a	   conversation	   possess	   cooperative	   intent.	  
well	  as	  linguistic	  content	  during	  communication.	  	  
Grice	   (1975)	   presented	   a	   theory	   of	   general	   maxims	  
Keywords:	   ambiguity;	   intentions;	   communication;	  
that	   communication	   must	   follow	   to	   be	   successful,	  
comprehension;	  context	  
including	   “make	   your	   contribution	   as	   informative	   as	   is	  
required	   (for	   the	   purposes	   of	   the	   exchange)”	   as	   a	  
Introduction	  
maxim	  of	  Quantity	  and	  “do	  not	  say	  that	  for	  which	  you	  
Communication	   ideally	   ensures	   a	   successful	   exchange	  
lack	   adequate	   evidence”	   as	   a	   maxim	   of	   Quality.	   From	  
of	   information	   between	   speakers	   and	   listeners.	  
these	   maxims	   as	   well	   as	   others,	   we	   can	   derive	   that	  
Unfortunately,	   communication	   rarely	   functions	  
listeners	   assume	   speakers	   will	   provide	   true	  
ideally:	   a	   successful	   exchange	   will	   be	   riddled	   with	  
information	   with	   as	   much	   detail	   as	   a	   context	  
unsuccessful	  attempts.	  But	  are	  all	  miscommunications	  
necessitates.	   There	   is	   a	   body	   of	   literature	   suggesting	  
equally	   disruptive?	   The	   answer	   to	   this	   question	   has	  
that	   listeners	   can	   flexibly	   incorporate	   contextual	  
implications	   for	   the	   mechanisms	   used	   in	   language	  
information	   to	   intuit	   the	   intentions	   of	   speakers.	  
processing.	  
Listeners	   use	   an	   ambiguous	   utterance	   as	   a	   signal	   of	  
In	   an	   egocentric	   account,	   speakers	   and	   listeners	  
mismatching	   perspectives	   and	   readily	   adapt	   to	   the	  
automatically	   use	   their	   own	   perspective,	   often	   failing	  
speaker’s	   perspective	   to	   quickly	   identify	   a	   referent	  
to	   take	   the	   perspective	   of	   others	   in	   the	   conversation.	  
(Hanna,	   Tanenhaus,	   &	   Trueswell,	   2003).	   Shared	  
Evidence	   for	   this	   view	   includes	   the	   finding	   that	  
experiences	   may	   form	   a	   referential	   pact	   by	  
speakers	   are	   more	   likely	   to	   inadvertently	   reveal	   the	  
establishing	  a	  potentially	  ambiguous	  phrase	  as	  a	  term	  
identity	   of	   a	   hidden	   object	   when	   explicitly	   instructed	  
for	  a	  referent;	  when	  a	  speaker	  exerts	  more	  effort	  and	  
to	   keep	   it	   secret,	   presumably	   due	   to	   the	   increased	  
uses	   a	   new	   term	   for	   a	   previously	   mentioned	   referent,	  
attention	   paid	   to	   it	   (Lane	   &	   Ferreira,	   2008)	   and	   that	  
*	  Indicates	  shared	  first	  authorship	  

2783

it	   delays	   comprehension	   of	   the	   listener	   (Metzing	   &	  
Brennan,	  2003).	  	  
In	  
this	  
audience	  
design	  
framework,	  
miscommunication	   would	   be	   a	   mismatch	   between	  
perceived	   context	   and	   actual	   context.	   Roche,	   Paxton,	  
Ibarra,	   and	   Tanenhaus	   (under	   review)	   posit	   that	  
miscommunication	   can	   promote	   deeper	   processing	  
and	   more	   care	   to	   resolve	   misaligned	   representations	  
of	  the	  world.	  Broadly,	  most	  miscommunications	  can	  be	  
explained	   as	   either	   an	   accident	   by	   a	   still	   cooperative	  
party	   or	   as	   an	   indication	   of	   a	   partner	   who	   is	   an	  
unreliable	  communicator.	  	  
Listeners	   suspend	   their	   expectations	   of	   correct	  
usage	   when	   a	   demonstrably	   unreliable	   speaker	  
mislabels	   common	   objects	   and	   misuses	   modifiers	  
(Grodner	   &	   Sedivy,	   2011).	   Even	   young	   children	   are	  
sensitive	   to	   speaker	   reliability,	   as	   they	   usually	   rely	  
upon	   adults	   over	   their	   peers	   for	   accuracy	   of	   new	  
information.	   In	   fact,	   when	   preschoolers	   detected	  
inaccuracies	  from	  an	  adult,	  they	  quickly	  overrode	  this	  
tendency	   (Jaswal	   &	   Neely,	   2006).	   In	   addition,	   young	  
children	   also	   show	   capabilities	   to	   learn	   selectively	  
from	   more	   reliable	   sources	   without	   specifically	  
discussing	   prior	   reliability	   of	   relevant	   speakers	   (Birch,	  
Vauthier,	   &	   Bloom,	   2008).	   Speakers	   that	   continually	  
provide	  false	  or	  vague	  information	  may	  cause	  listeners	  
to	   disregard	   subsequent	   utterances	   by	   the	   same	  
speaker.	   Speakers	   also	   have	   assumptions	   about	  
listeners:	   namely,	   that	   they	   will	   pay	   attention.	   In	  
Kuhlen	   and	   Brennan	   (2010),	   speakers	   told	   jokes	   they	  
had	   previously	   learned.	   When	   speakers	   expected	  
attentive	   listeners	   and	   received	   distracted	   listeners,	  
they	  used	  fewer	  details.	  
In	   the	   following	   task,	   we	   tracked	   listeners’	   eye	  
movements	   while	   they	   heard	   unambiguous	   or	   globally	  
ambiguous	   (i.e.,	   unresolvable)	   descriptions	   from	   a	  
speaker	   during	   a	   matching	   task.	   Sometimes,	   the	  
globally	   ambiguous	   description	   is	   due	   to	   a	   perspective	  
mismatch;	   in	   other	   cases,	   the	   speaker	   simply	   did	   not	  
provide	   enough	   information.	   During	   the	   globally	  
ambiguous	   trials,	   half	   of	   the	   listeners	   received	  
negative	  feedback	  and	  half	  received	  positive	  feedback.	  
If	   miscommunication	   is	   processed	   purely	  
egocentrically,	   trials	   with	   negative	   feedback	   should	  
cause	   the	   participant	   to	   disengage	   from	   the	   task	  
regardless	   of	   the	   source	   of	   the	   error.	   However,	   if	  
listeners	   are	   sensitive	   not	   just	   to	   the	   presence	   of	   a	  
miscommunication	   but	   the	   cause	   of	   it,	   the	   accidental	  
errors	   should	   be	   more	   easily	   “forgiven”	   than	   lazy	  
speaker	   errors,	   especially	   in	   the	   negative	   feedback	  
cases.	   We	   expect	   listeners	   to	   process	   ambiguity	  
differentially	   depending	   on	   the	   reason	   for	   the	  
ambiguity	   and	   whether	   the	   ambiguity	   prevents	  
communicative	  success.	  
We	   hypothesize	   that	   listeners	   understand	  
communication	   as	   a	   shared	   experience	   and	   should	  

process	   errors	   differently	   depending	   on	   the	   intention	  
and	   outcome.	   We	   predict	   that	   listeners	   should	   exert	  
more	   effort	   in	   processing	   the	   speaker’s	   perspective	   if	  
the	  error	  was	  the	  fault	  of	  the	  experimenter	  compared	  
to	  errors	  due	  to	  speaker	  laziness.	  The	  consequence	  of	  
the	  error	  should	  also	  affect	  the	  listener.	  If	  the	  listener	  
is	   penalized	   for	   the	   speaker’s	   laziness,	   then	   the	  
listener	  should	  stop	  working	  hard	  too	  (tit-­‐‑for-­‐‑tat).	  

Methods	  
In	   the	   following	   study,	   we	   used	   a	   pseudo-­‐‑confederate	  
design	   (description	   below),	   which	   involved	   the	   ruse	   that	  
the	  listener	  was	  interacting	  with	  a	  live	  person	  (similar	  to	  
Roche,	  Dale,	  &	  Kreuz,	  2010).	  During	  the	  task,	  the	  listener	  
heard	   an	   instruction	   (pre-­‐‑recorded	   statement)	  
describing	   which	   object	   to	   click.	   The	   listener	   then	   saw	  
feedback	   about	   the	   correctness	   of	   the	   choice	   she	   made.	  
On	   some	   of	   the	   trials,	   the	   listener	   had	   difficulty	   making	  
the	   correct	   decision	   because	   the	   speaker	   produced	   a	  
globally	  ambiguous	  statement.	  The	  listener	  then	  learned	  
the	   source	   of	   the	   ambiguity,	   which	   we	   predict	   will	  
differentially	   affect	   processing	   effort	   on	   decoding	   the	  
error	  and	  future	  effort.	  	  	  

Participants	  
Sixteen	   undergraduates	   from	   Kent	   State	   University	   (15	  
females;	   mean	   age	   =	   21.5	   years)	   participated	   for	   extra	  
credit	   in	   a	   Speech	   Pathology	   &	   Audiology	   course,	  
resulting	   in	   a	   total	   of	   4,480	   data	   points	   across	   the	  
experimental	   trials.	   All	   participants	   were	   native	  
speakers	   of	   American	   English	   with	   normal	   to	   normal-­‐‑
corrected	   vision.	   None	   reported	   speech	   or	   hearing	  
impairments.	  

Materials	  &	  Stimuli	  
A	   21inch	   iMac	   (experiment	   computer),	   Eyelink	   1000	  
(eye-­‐‑tracking	   computer),	   noise	   cancelling	   headphones,	  
wireless	   mouse,	   and	   usb	   microphone	   (for	   pseudo-­‐‑
confederate	   recordings)	   were	   used.	   All	   materials	   were	  
set	   up	   in	   a	   sound	   attenuated	   booth,	   with	   two	   chairs	   –	  
one	   for	   the	   participant	   and	   one	   for	   the	   experimenter	   to	  
control	  the	  eye	  tracking	  computer.	  
Visual	   stimuli.	   Participants	   were	   presented	   4	   shapes	  
(square,	   circle,	   triangle,	   and	   star)	   x	   4	   colors	   (purple,	  
blue,	  green,	  and	  red)	  x	  2	  sizes	  (big	  and	  small),	  resulting	  
in	   a	   total	   of	   32	   possible	   shapes.	   On	   a	   given	   trial,	   two	  
shapes	   were	   paired	   with	   each	   other,	   resulting	   in	   visual	  
stimulus	   pairs	   that	   overlapped	   on	   zero,	   one,	   or	   two	  
features.	  
Auditory	  stimuli.	  Participants	  were	  presented	  with	  pre-­‐‑
recorded	   statements	   from	   a	   Caucasian	   female	   talker	   that	  
referenced	  one	  (e.g.,	  big	  shape),	  two	  (e.g.,	  big	  red	  shape),	  
or	   three	   (e.g.,	   big	   red	   triangle)	   possible	   features	   of	   the	  
visual	   stimulus.	   The	   recordings	   were	   equated	   for	   RMS	  

2784

amplitude	   to	   adjust	   stimulus	   sound	   level	   for	   more	  
comfortable	   listening.	   This	   process	   “turned	   up”	   the	  
volume	   on	   the	   sound	   files	   that	   were	   at	   lower	   amplitudes	  
to	   match	   the	   highest	   amplitude	   and	   did	   not	   affect	  
recording	  quality.	  

Design	  &	  Procedure	  
An	   individual	   listener	   interacted	   with	   a	   confederate	  
during	   the	   informed	   consent	   portion	   of	   the	   study,	   but	  
the	   listener	   and	   confederate	   were	   separated	   during	   the	  
experimental	   task.	   After	   consent	   was	   obtained,	   the	  
listener	   was	   seated	   in	   the	   sound	   booth	   with	   the	   door	  
open,	   and	   the	   confederate	   sat	   at	   a	   computer	   and	  
microphone	   around	   the	   corner.	   The	   listener	   and	  
confederate	   received	   separate	   instructions,	   but	   the	  
listener	   could	   hear	   the	   experimenter	   providing	   the	  
confederate’s	   instructions.	   The	   listener	   and	   confederate	  
were	   told	   they	   would	   interact	   with	   each	   other	   via	   a	  
computer	   network	   –	   much	   like	   a	   cell	   phone	  
conversation.	   In	   fact,	   the	   listener	   never	   interacted	   with	  
the	   confederate	   during	   trials	   but,	   instead,	   heard	   pre-­‐‑
recorded	  statements	  by	  a	  pseudo-­‐‑confederate.	  
Once	  the	  pseudo-­‐‑confederate	  ruse	  was	  established,	  the	  
listener	   was	   calibrated,	   validated,	   and	   drift	   corrected	  
using	   the	   prescribed	   procedure	   for	   the	   Eyelink	   1000.	  
During	   the	   task,	   the	   listener	   viewed	   two	   objects	   on	   the	  
computer	   screen	   in	   addition	   to	   a	   bullseye	   (see	   Fig.	   1,	   left	  
panel).	  By	  clicking	  the	  bullseye,	  the	  listener	  initiated	  the	  
trial	  and	  received	  a	  pseudo-­‐‑confederate	  instruction.	  
On	   any	   given	   trial,	   the	   instruction	   could	   have	   been	  
ambiguous	   or	   unambiguous.	   Sometimes,	   the	   global	  
ambiguity	   forced	   the	   listener	   to	   guess	   which	   object	   the	  
speaker	   intended	   (e.g.,	   “Click	   on	   the	   red	   shape,”	   when	  
paired	   with	   a	   visual	   display	   containing	   two	   red	   shapes;	  
see	   Fig.	   1,	   left	   panel).	   On	   the	   next	   screen,	   the	   listener	  
received	   feedback	   indicating	   whether	   the	   choice	   was	  
correct	  or	  incorrect.	  The	  content	  of	  the	  speaker’s	  screen	  
was	  also	  on	  this	  screen.	  
A	   2	   Feedback	   (Consequence	   vs.	   No	   Consequence;	  
between-­‐‑subjects)	   by	   3	   Error	   Type	   (No	   Error,	  
Experimenter	   Error,	   or	   Lazy	   Speaker	   Error;	   within-­‐‑
subjects)	   design	   was	   used.	   The	   Feedback	   conditions	  
determined	   the	   type	   of	   feedback	   listeners	   received	   on	  
globally	   ambiguous	   trials.	   Listeners	   in	   the	   Consequence	  
condition	   always	   received	   negative	   feedback	   on	   the	  
globally	   ambiguous	   trials	   –	   indicating	   they	   chose	   the	  
incorrect	  object	  (see	  Fig.	  1,	  right	  panel).	  Listeners	  in	  the	  
No	   Consequence	   condition	   always	   received	   positive	  
feedback	   on	   the	   globally	   ambiguous	   trials	   –	   indicating	  
they	   chose	   the	   correct	   object	   (green	   check	   mark,	   instead	  
of	  a	  red	  X,	  as	  indicated	  in	  Fig.	  1,	  right	  panel).	  
Feedback	   was	   crossed	   with	   Error	   Type.	   In	   the	  
Experimenter	   Error	   condition,	   the	   speaker	   did	   not	   see	  
the	  same	  objects	  as	  the	  listener	   –	  the	  source	  of	  the	  error	  
was	   due	   to	   mismatching	   visual	   referents	   (see	   Figure	   1,	  
right	   panel).	   In	   the	   Lazy	   Speaker	   Error	   condition,	   the	  

speaker	   accidentally	   described	   the	   overlapping	   feature	  
instead	  of	  the	  disambiguating	  feature	  –	  the	  speaker	  was	  
being	   lazy	   and	   not	   paying	   attention	   to	   detail.	   Trials	  
without	  errors	  comprised	  the	  No	  Error	  condition.	  
Over	   the	   course	   of	   the	   experiment,	   each	   listener	   was	  
presented	  with	  a	  total	  of	  280	  experimental	  trials:	  ~20%	  
of	   trials	   included	   a	   global	   ambiguity	   (60	   trials	   total).	   The	  
global	   ambiguity	   trials	   were	   pseudo-­‐‑randomly	  
distributed	   across	   the	   experiment	   with	   the	   first	   error	  
occurring	  at	  trial	  57	  (i.e.,	  912	  critical	  data	  trials	  across	  all	  
participants).	   As	   a	   reminder,	   these	   types	   of	   errors	  
required	   the	   listener	   to	   make	   a	   best	   guess.	   The	   other	  
80%	   of	   trials	   included	   a	   resolvable	   ambiguity	   or	  
unambiguous	  statement	  that	  did	  not	  affect	  the	  listener’s	  
ability	  to	  choose	  correctly.	  
	  

	  
Figure	  1.	  Sample	  experiment	  screen	  for	  an	  Experimenter	  
Error	   trial,	   with	   negative	   feedback,	   when	   the	   listener	  
heard:	  “Click	  on	  the	  red	  shape.”	  The	  left	  panel	  represents	  
the	   Response/Instruction	   screen;	   the	   right	   panel	  
represents	  the	  Feedback	  Screen.	  

Measures	  
Over	   the	   course	   of	   the	   experimental	   trial,	   dwell	   times	  
were	  evaluated	  (i.e.,	  how	  long	  the	  listener	  fixated	  within	  
an	  interest	  area).	  Dwell	  time	  has	  been	  suggested	  to	  be	  a	  
good	   measure	   of	   cognitive	   processing,	   and	   we	   use	   it	   to	  
determine	   processing	   effort	   (Ehrlich	   &	   Rayner,	   1981;	  
Rayner	   &	   Duffy,	   1986).	   It	   is	   expected	   that	   under	  
moments	   of	   ambiguity	   that	   the	   listener	   should	  
experience	  increased	  cognitive	  load	  while	  processing	  the	  
ambiguity.	  However,	  interest	  here	  laid	  in	  the	  amount	  of	  
time	   and	   effort	   the	   listener	   was	   willing	   to	   put	   forth	  
understand	   the	   locus	   of	   ambiguity.	   Therefore,	   we	   chose	  
to	   use	   dwell	   time	   measure,	   instead	   of	   pupil	   dilation	   –	  
which	   is	   also	   an	   established	   measure	   of	   cognitive	   load	  
(c.f.,	  Kahneman,	  1973).	  	  
The	  three	  areas	  of	  interest	  included	  the	  two	  objects	  on	  
the	  Instruction	  Screen	  (Fig.	  1,	  left	  panel)	  and	  the	  location	  
of	   the	   “Partner	   Screen”	   information	   on	   the	   Feedback	  
Screen	  (Fig.	  1,	  right	  panel).	  Dwell	  times	  were	  calculated	  
using	   the	   Eyelink	   Dataviewer	   software	   based	   on	   a	  
fixation	   that	   landed	   in	   the	   interest	   area	   for	   a	  
predetermined	   algorithm	   that	   calculates	   the	   	   amount	   of	  
time	  in	  milliseconds.	  

2785

Results	  
Experimenter	   and	   Lazy	   Speaker	   errors	   are	   both	  
miscommunications	   but	   imply	   very	   different	   intentions.	  
An	   Experimenter	   Error	   indicates	   the	   speaker	   did	   not	  
realize	   that	   the	   ambiguous	   statement	   could	   have	   been	  
harmful,	  unless	  she	  received	  feedback	  that	  what	  she	  said	  
was	   wrong	   or	   confusing.	   However,	   the	   Lazy	   Speaker	  
Error	   indicates	   that	   the	   speaker	   failed	   to	   put	   forth	   the	  
necessary	   effort	   to	   disambiguate	   and	   thus	   violated	   the	  
principle	  of	  collaborative	  effort.	  
The	  current	  study	  aims	  to	  answer	  three	  questions:	  1)	  
How	   does	   feedback	   affect	   the	   processing	   of	   ambiguous	  
statements	  over	  time?;	  2)	  How	  much	  effort	  will	  a	  listener	  
put	   forth	   to	   understand	   a	   miscommunication?;	   and	   3)	  
Does	   the	   amount	   of	   effort	   to	   understand	   a	   previous	  
misunderstanding	   affect	   the	   amount	   of	   effort	   put	   forth	  
on	   future	   language	   comprehension?	   We	   predict	   that	  
negative	   feedback	   should	   make	   the	   ambiguity	   more	  
salient—thus	   recruiting	   more	   cognitive	   resources	  
initially	   (questions	   1	   &	   2).	   However,	   as	   the	   listener	  
learns	   that	   the	   speaker’s	   ambiguity	   is	   often	   unreliable	  
(causing	   communication	   breakdown	   or	   failure)	   and	  
negatively	   impacts	   the	   listener,	   we	   should	   see	   cognitive	  
effort	  decline	  (question	  3).	  
The	   data	   was	   analyzed	   using	   growth	   curve	   models,	  
multivariate	  methods	  for	  analyzing	  time	  series	  data	  that	  
simultaneously	   allows	   for	   the	   measurement	   of	   group	  
and	  individual	  level	  effects	  (Mirman,	  Dixon,	  &	  Magnuson,	  
2008).	   The	   calculation	   of	   orthogonal	   polynomials	  
resolves	   the	   issues	   of	   dependence	   associated	   with	   the	  
time	   series.	   	   The	   first	   orthogonal	   indexes	   linear	   slope,	  
and	  the	  second	  orthogonal	  indexes	  line	  curvature.	  	  

slope)	   polynomial	   x	   Error	   Type	   shows	   a	   steeper	   linear	  
decline	   for	   the	   Experimenter	   and	   Lazy	   Speaker	   Errors	  
relative	   to	   No	   Error.	   It	   appears	   that	   globally	   ambiguous	  
statements	   were	   seriously	   considered	   initially,	   but	   over	  
time,	   the	   listeners	   gave	   up	   on	   exerting	   effort	   in	  
processing.	   Potentially,	   this	   effect	   is	   a	   result	   of	  
disengaging	   from	   the	   task.	   The	   significant	   second	  
orthogonal	  (line	  curvature)	  polynomial	  x	  Error	  type	  
interaction	  suggests	  that	  at	  least	  one	  of	  the	  Error	  Types	  
was	  marked	  by	  a	  more	  curvilinear	  line,	  which	  is	  possibly	  
reflective	  of	  adapting	  to	  the	  global	  ambiguity.	  Finally,	  the	  
Feedback	   x	   Error	   Type	   interaction	   suggests	   that	  
listeners’	   dwell	   times	   during	   global	   ambiguity	   trials	  
decrease	   as	   a	   function	   of	   negative	   feedback:	   listeners	  
that	   were	   penalized	   stopped	   considering	   the	   speaker’s	  
perspective	   faster	   on	   the	   global	   ambiguity	   trials	   than	  
listeners	   that	   were	   not	   penalized	   (at	   least	   p	   <	   .05;	   see	  
Fig.	  2).	  
Table	   1:	   Estimates,	   standard	   errors,	   t	   and	   p-­‐‑values	   for	  
the	   growth	   curve	   model	   evaluating	   dwell	   time	   to	   the	  
“Partner	  Screen”	  region	  of	  the	  Feedback	  screen.	  
Effect	  

b	  

se	  

t	  

1st	  orth.	  	  

-­‐‑250.39	  

45.79	  

-­‐‑5.468***	  

Error	  

2133.48	  

223.54	  

9.54***	  

-­‐‑1304.67	  

206.68	  

-­‐‑6.313***	  

2nd	  orth.	  x	  Error	  	  

568.33	  

172.12	  

3.30***	  

Feedback	  x	  Error	  	  

87.23	  

18.53	  

4.47***	  

1st	  orth.	  x	  Error	  

Note:	  ***p	  <	  .001	  	  

Understanding	  the	  Ambiguity	  

	  

A	  growth	  curve	  model	  evaluated	  the	  effects	  of	  Feedback	  
(Consequence	   vs	   No	   Consequence)	   and	   Error	   Type	   (No	  
Error,	   Experimenter	   Error,	   vs.	   Lazy	   Speaker	   Error)	   on	  
dwell	   time	   to	   the	   “Partner	   Screen”	   interest	   area	   of	   the	  
Feedback	   screen	   as	   an	   indirect	   measure	   of	   how	   hard	   the	  
listener	  tried	  to	  understand	  why	  the	  miscommunication	  
occurred	  (see	  Fig.	  1,	  right	  panel	  to	  reference	  the	  “Partner	  
Screen”	  region	  of	  the	  Feedback	  Screen).	  Based	  on	  visual	  
inspection	  of	  the	  group	  data,	  we	  decided	  to	  calculate	  up	  
to	   the	   second	   orthogonal	   polynomial	   to	   interact	  
Feedback	  and	  Error	  Type	  (see	  Table	  1	  for	  statistics	  and	  
p-­‐‑values).	  
The	   significant	   main	   effect	   of	   the	   first	   orthogonal	  
indicated	   that	   as	   the	   listeners	   progressed	   through	   the	  
experiment,	   dwell	   time	   significantly	   decreased—
essentially,	   task	   adaptation.	   The	   main	   effect	   of	   Error	  
Type	   indicated	   that	   Experimenter	   and	   Lazy	   Speaker	  
Errors	   had	   longer	   dwell	   times	   than	   No	   Error	   trials	   (p	   <	  
.001)	   –	   demonstrating	   that	   global	   ambiguity	   recruited	  
more	  cognitive	  effort.	  
More	   interesting	   is	   the	   effect	   of	   the	   global	   ambiguity	  
over	   time.	   The	   significant	   first	   orthogonal	   (linear	  

Figure	   2:	   Average	   dwell	   time	   (msec)	   on	   the	   Partner	  
Screen	   location	   of	   the	   Feedback	   screen	   as	   a	   function	   of	  
Feedback	  Condition	  by	  Error	  Type.	  

2786

Effect	  of	  Global	  Ambiguity	  on	  Future	  Success	  
Interestingly,	   the	   No	   Error	   trials	   had	   a	   near-­‐‑sinusoidal	  
pattern	   of	   dwell	   times	   (see	   Fig.	   2).	   The	   purpose	   of	   this	  
growth	   curve	   analysis	   was	   to	   determine	   if	   the	   global	  
ambiguity	   trials	   had	   an	   effect	   on	   No	   Error	   trials.	  
Specifically,	   we	   used	   a	   growth	   curve	   model	   to	   explore	  
changes	   in	   dwell	   time	   during	   language	   comprehension	  
(i.e.,	  object	  locations	  on	  the	  Response	  Screen,	  where	  the	  
listener	  has	  to	  select	  the	  target	  shape).	  We	  are	  especially	  
interested	   in	   how	   hard	   the	   listener	   tried	   to	   understand	  
the	   speaker’s	   perspective	   after	   the	   listener	   just	  
experienced	  global	  ambiguity	  on	  the	  previous	  trial.	  	  
A	   growth	   curve	   model	   evaluated	   the	   effects	   of	  
Feedback	   Condition	   (Consequence	   vs	   No	   Consequence)	  
and	   the	   Error	   type	   (No	   Error,	   Experimenter	   Error,	   vs.	  
Lazy	   Speaker	   Error)	   on	   the	   No	   Error	   trials,	   up	   to	   the	  
second	   orthogonal	   polynomial.	   Experimenter	   Error	   and	  
Lazy	   Speaker	   Error	   trials	   were	   excluded	   from	   this	  
analysis	   to	   reveal	   the	   effect	   of	   the	   speaker’s	   intent	   on	  
listener	   comprehension	   of	   the	   speaker’s	   future	  
instructions	  (see	  Table	  2	  for	  statistics	  and	  p-­‐‑values).	  	  
Table	   2:	   Estimates,	   standard	   errors,	   t	   and	   p-­‐‑values	   for	  
the	   growth	   curve	   model	   evaluating	   dwell	   time	   to	   the	  
object	  regions	  of	  the	  Instruction	  screen.	  
Effect	  
1st	  orth.	  	  
Error	  
2nd	  orth.	  x	  Error	  

b	  

se	  

t	  

-­‐‑2095.03	  

646.01	  

-­‐‑3.24**	  

207.37	  

77.28	  

-­‐‑2.68**	  

-­‐‑4648.72	  

1539.35	  

-­‐‑3.02**	  

Note:	  **p	  <	  .01	  
	  	  

Figure	   3:	   Average	   dwell	   time	   (msec)	   on	   the	   objects	   on	  
the	   response	   screen	   as	   a	   function	   of	   Error	   Type	  
experienced	  on	  the	  previous	  trial,	  for	  No	  Error	  Trials.	  

The	   main	   effect	   of	   the	   first	   orthogonal	   (linear	   slope)	  
polynomial	   demonstrates	   that	   dwell	   time	   to	   the	  
speaker’s	  objects	  on	  the	  response	  screen	  decreases	  over	  
time	   regardless	   of	   experimental	   conditions—i.e.,	   task	  
adaptation.	   Simple	   effects	   analysis	   of	   the	   Error	   main	  
effect	   found	   if	   a	   listener	   had	   just	   experienced	   a	   Lazy	  
Speaker	  Error,	  dwell	  times	  to	  the	  speaker’s	  objects	  were	  
significantly	   shorter	   on	   the	   next	   trial	   –	   indicating	   the	  
Lazy	   Speaker	   Error	   negatively	   affected	   future	   language	  
comprehension	   (p	   <	   .05).	   If	   the	   listener	   perceives	   the	  
speaker	   lacking	   in	   effort,	   the	   listener	   will	  
correspondingly	   not	   put	   in	   effort	   to	   comprehend	   the	  
speaker’s	  message.	  However,	  if	  the	  listener	  perceives	  the	  
error	   to	   not	   be	   the	   fault	   of	   the	   speaker,	   processing	   effort	  
increases	  on	  the	  next	  No	  Error	  trial	  (p	  <	  .05;	  see	  Fig.	  3).	  
Finally,	   the	   interaction	   between	   the	   second	   (line	  
curvature)	   orthogonal	   polynomial	   and	   Error	   type	  
showed	   that	   Lazy	   Speaker	   Errors	   produced	   a	   more	  
curvilinear	   line	   than	   the	   Experimenter	   Error	   and	   No	  
Error	  types	  (p	  <	  .05),	  indicating	  that	  a	  Lazy	  Speaker	  Error	  
disrupted	  processing	  more	  than	  the	  other	  trial	  types.	  

Discussion	  
In	   summary,	   our	   sample	   of	   listeners	   in	   typical	  
communication	   expended	   different	   amounts	   of	   effort	  
based	   on	   the	   available	   information.	   We	   first	   evaluated	  
how	   much	   effort	   listeners	   put	   forth	   in	   considering	   the	  
speaker’s	   perspective	   (i.e.,	   “Partner	   Screen”	   interest	  
area).	   Overall,	   it	   would	   seem	   that	   when	   a	   listener	   is	  
penalized	   (i.e.,	   receives	   negative	   feedback),	   the	   listener	  
more	  quickly	  stops	  considering	  or	  reduces	  consideration	  
for	  the	  speaker’s	  perspective.	  Past	  errors	  also	  modulate	  
future	   comprehension	   of	   the	   speaker’s	   statements.	  
When	   a	   listener	   experiences	   a	   Lazy	   Speaker	   Error	  
(relative	   to	   Experimenter	   Error	   trials),	   the	   listener	  
spends	  significantly	  less	  time	  considering	  the	  objects	  on	  
subsequent	   No	   Error	   trials.	   It	   would	   seem	   that	   if	   a	  
listener	   understands	   errors	   were	   not	   the	   speaker’s	   fault,	  
the	   listener	   would	   exhibit	   willingness	   to	   exert	   more	  
cognitive	   effort.	   However,	   if	   the	   speaker	   is	   perceived	   to	  
be	   lazy,	   listeners	   will	   reciprocate	   –	   by	   being	   lazy	  
themselves.	  
In	   addition,	   the	   very	   first	   error	   presented	   to	  
participants	   was	   an	   Experimenter	   Error.	   There	   were	  
marginally	   longer	   processing	   times	   on	   the	   “Partner	  
Screen”	   interest	   area	   in	   the	   Consequence	   condition	  
relative	   to	   the	   No	   Consequence	   condition	   (t	   =	   1.696,	   p	   =	  
.09),	  showing	  a	  trend	  in	  a	  direction	  of	  longer	  dwell	  times	  
when	   negative	   feedback	   is	   provided.	   The	   negative	  
feedback	   seems	   to	   make	   the	   listener	   consider	   the	  
speaker’s	  perspective,	  probably	  because	  the	  listener	  was	  
surprised	   and	   wanted	   to	   understand	   what	   happened.	  
Even	   more	   interesting	   was	   the	   drastic	   decrease	   in	  
processing	   time	   at	   the	   last	   instance	   of	   a	   Lazy	   Speaker	  
Error	   for	   the	   Consequence	   condition	   (t	   =	   3.636,	   p	   <	  
.001).	   This	   suggests	   that	   listeners	   might	   put	   forth	  

2787

significantly	   less	   effort	   in	   trying	   to	   understand	   their	  
partner’s	   perspective	   if	   they	   perceive	   their	   partner	   to	  
not	   care	   and	   were	   penalized	   for	   the	   error.	   Therefore,	   it	  
would	   seem	   that	   listeners	   and	   speakers	   may	   develop	   a	  
tit-­‐‑for-­‐‑tat	   relationship	   when	   negative	   consequences	  
affect	   the	   communicators	   over	   the	   course	   of	   an	  
interaction.	   This	   is	   consistent	   with	   previous	   work	   on	  
listeners	   handling	   ambiguous	   language	   in	   a	   rational	  
manner.	   For	   example,	   Degen,	   Franke,	   and	   Jäger	   (2013)	  
suggest	  that	  listeners	  interpret	  ambiguous	  referents	  in	  a	  
game	   theoretical	   manner	   -­‐‑	   assuming	   the	   ambiguous	  
word	   refers	   to	   only	   one	   target	   because	   if	   the	   speaker	  
meant	  to	  refer	  to	  the	  other	  target,	  they	  could	  have	  used	  
an	   unambiguous	   word	   instead.	   When	   messages	   had	  
different	  costs,	  as	  unambiguous	  costs	  increase,	  listeners	  
make	   more	   inferences	   based	   on	   the	   ambiguous	  
messages	   (Rohde	   et	   al.,	   2012).	   In	   this	   case,	   listeners	  
rationally	  respond	  to	  a	  speaker	  that	  is	  uncooperative	  by	  
disengaging	  from	  the	  task,	  and	  respond	  to	  a	  speaker	  that	  
was	  misinformed	  with	  more	  attention.	  

Conclusion	  
Ambiguity	   need	   not	   be	   problematic	   for	   conversations	  
because	   it	   can	   be	   quite	   helpful	   in	   reducing	   some	   of	   the	  
cognitive	   effort	   exerted	   by	   both	   listener	   and	   speaker	   in	  
typical	  communication.	  However,	  these	  benefits	  happen	  
only	   if	   the	   ambiguity	   is	   properly	   situated	   in	   context.	  
Ambiguity	   may	   also	   promote	   deeper	   processing	   by	  
requiring	  repair	  and	  attention	  to	  detail.	  
It	   would	   seem	   that,	   in	   the	   current	   study,	   the	  
interpretation	  of	  ambiguity	  can	  be	  ignored	  when	  a	  visual	  
referent	   helps	   disambiguate.	   However,	   when	   an	  
ambiguity	  becomes	  problematic,	  the	  listener	  weighs	  the	  
consequence	   and	   reason	   for	   the	   ambiguity	   –	  
subsequently	   affecting	   future	   processing	   effort.	   This	  
work	   provides	   evidence	   that	   listeners	   are	   able	   to	  
interpret	   miscommunications	   within	   the	   communication	  
context	   and	   respond	   differentially	   based	   on	   both	   intent	  
and	  direct	  consequences.	  	  

Acknowledgements	  
A	   special	   thanks	   goes	   to	   the	   research	   assistants	   in	   the	  
MADI	  lab	  at	  Kent	  State	  University.	  	  

References	  
Birch,	  S.	  A.	  J.,	  Vauthier,	  S.	  A.,	  &	  Bloom,	  P.	  (2008).	  Three-­‐‑	  
and	   four-­‐‑year-­‐‑olds	   spontaneously	   use	   others’	   past	  
performance	   to	   guide	   their	   learning.	   Cognition,	   107(3),	  
1018–1034.	  	  
Degen,	   J.,	   Franke,	   M.,	   &	   Jäger,	   G.	   (2013).	   Cost-­‐‑based	  
pragmatic	   inference	   about	   referential	   expressions.	  
Proceedings	   of	   the	   35th	   Annual	   Conference	   of	   the	  
Cognitive	  Science	  Society	  (CogSci’13),	  376–281.	  
Ehrlich,	   S.	   F.,	   &	   Rayner,	   K.	   (1981).	   Contextual	   effects	   on	  
word	   perception	   and	   eye	   movements	   during	   reading.	  
Journal	  of	  Verbal	  Learning	  and	  Verbal	  Behavior,	  20(6),	  

641–655.	  	  
Grice,	  P.	  (1975).	  Logic	  and	  conversation.	  In	  Cole,	  P.;	  
Morgan,	  J.	  (Eds).	  Syntax	  and	  semantics:	  Speech	  acts.	  
New	  York:	  Academic	  Press.	  
Grodner,	   D.,	   &	   Sedivy,	   J.	   (2011).	   The	   effect	   of	   speaker-­‐‑
specific	   information	   on	   pragmatic	   inferences.	   The	  
Processing	   and	   Acquisition	   of	   Reference,	   2327(8957),	  
239–272.	  	  
Hanna,	   J.	   E.,	   Tanenhaus,	   M.	   K.,	   &	   Trueswell,	   J.	   C.	   (2003).	  
The	   effects	   of	   common	   ground	   and	   perspective	   on	  
domains	   of	   referential	   interpretation.	   Journal	   of	  
Memory	  and	  Language,	  49(1),	  43–61.	  	  
Horton,	   W.	   S.,	   &	   Gerrig,	   R.	   J.	   (2005).	   The	   impact	   of	  
memory	  demands	  on	  audience	  design	  during	  language	  
production.	  Cognition,	  96(2),	  127–142.	  	  
Jaswal,	   V.	   K.,	   &	   Neely,	   L.	   a.	   (2006).	   Adults	   don’t	   always	  
know	  best.	  Psychological	  Science,	  17(9),	  757–758.	  	  
Kahneman,	   D.	   (1973).	   Attention	   and	   effort.	   Englewood	  
Cliffs,	  NJ:	  Prentice	  Hall.	  	  
Kuhlen,	   A.	   K.,	   &	   Brennan,	   S.	   E.	   (2010).	   Anticipating	  
distracted	   addressees:	   How	   speakers’	   expectations	  
and	   addressees'	   feedback	   influence	   storytelling.	  
Discourse	  Processes,	  47(7),	  567–587.	  	  
Lane,	   L.	   W.,	   &	   Ferreira,	   V.	   S.	   (2008).	   Speaker-­‐‑external	  
versus	   speaker-­‐‑internal	   forces	   on	   utterance	   form:	   Do	  
cognitive	   demands	   override	   threats	   to	   referential	  
success?	  Journal	  of	  Experimental	  Psychology:	  Learning,	  
Memory,	  and	  Cognition,	  34(6),	  1466–1481.	  	  
Metzing,	   C.,	   &	   Brennan,	   S.	   E.	   (2003).	   When	   conceptual	  
pacts	   are	   broken:	   Partner-­‐‑specific	   effects	   on	   the	  
comprehension	   of	   referring	   expressions.	   Journal	   of	  
Memory	  and	  Language,	  49(2),	  201–213.	  	  
Mirman,	   D.,	   Dixon,	   J.	   A.,	   &	   Magnuson,	   J.	   S.	   (2008).	  
Statistical	   and	   computational	   models	   of	   the	   visual	  
world	   paradigm:	   Growth	   curves	   and	   individual	  
differences.	   Journal	   of	   Memory	   and	   Language,	   59(4),	  
475–494.	  
Rayner,	   K.,	   &	   Duffy,	   S.	   (1986).	   Lexical	   complexity	   and	  
fixation	   times	   in	   reading:	   Effects	   of	   word	   frequency,	  
verb	   complexity,	   and	   lexical	   ambiguity.	   Memory	   &	  
Cognition,	  14(3),	  191–201.	  	  
Roche,	  J.	  M.,	  Dale,	  R.,	  &	  Kreuz,	  R.	  J.	  (2010).	  The	  resolution	  
of	   ambiguity	   during	   conversation:	   More	   than	   mere	  
mimicry?	   Proceedings	   of	   the	   32nd	   Annual	   Meeting	   of	  
the	  Cognitive	  Science	  Society,	  206–211.	  	  
Roche,	   J.	   M.,	   Paxton,	   A.,	   Ibarra,	   A.,	   &	   Tanenhaus,	   M.	   K.	  
(under	   review).	   Communication	   breakdown	   prompts	  
readjustment	  of	  informativeness.	  	  
Rohde,	  H.,	  Seyfarth,	  S.,	  Clark,	  B.,	  Jäger,	  G.,	  &	  Kaufmann,	  S.	  
(2012).	   Communicating	   with	   Cost-­‐‑based	   Implicature:	  
a	  Game-­‐‑Theoretic	  Approach	  to	  Ambiguity.	   Proceedings	  
of	  the	  16th	  Workshop	  on	  the	  Semantics	  and	  Pragmatics	  
of	  Dialogue,	  107	  –	  116.	  
Russell,	  A.	  W.,	  &	  Schober,	  M.	  F.	  (1999).	  How	  beliefs	  about	  
a	   partner’s	   goals	   affect	   referring	   in	   goal-­‐‑discrepant	  
conversations.	  Discourse	  Processes,	  27,	  1–33.	  	  

2788

