Training Prospective Abilities through Conversation about the Extended Self
Nadia Chernyak (chernyak@bu.edu)1 , Kathryn A. Leech (kleech@umd.edu)2,3, Meredith L. Rowe
(meredith_rowe@gse.harvard.edu)3
1

2

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
3
Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA 02138
Abstract

Prospection is an important cognitive achievement, and is
related to uniquely human abilities such as planning, delay of
gratification, and goal attainment. While prospection develops
rapidly during early childhood, little is known about the
mechanisms that support its development. Here we explored
whether encouraging children to talk about their extended
selves (self outside the present context) boosts their
prospective abilities. Preschoolers (N = 81) participated in a
5-minute interaction with an adult in which they were asked
to talk about events in the near future, distant future, near
past, or present. Compared with children discussing their
present and distant future, children asked to discuss events in
their near future or near past displayed better planning and
prospective memory. Additionally, those two conditions were
most effective in eliciting self-projection (use of personal
pronouns). Results suggest that experience communicating
about the close-in-time, extended self contributes to
children’s future-oriented thinking.
Keywords: prospection, future thinking,
conversation, social context, extended self

preschoolers,

Introduction
The ability to think about, plan for, and envision our
future selves is an important cognitive achievement of early
childhood. Prospection has been proposed to be a uniquely
human ability and is critical for a variety of positive
outcomes including goal-attainment and self-regulation
(Atance & O’Neill 2001). Recent work on prospection has
consistently found that prospective abilities develop rapidly
during the preschool age (see Atance 2008) and continue
developing through middle childhood (Lagattuta & Sayfan,
2011). While the structure and developmental timeline of
young children’s prospective abilities have received recent
attention, relatively less is known about the mechanisms
supporting their development. In our work, we explore the
extent to which talking about one’s extended-self improves
children’s prospective abilities.
Early precursors of prospection appear frequently in
young children’s verbal utterances and actions. Children
begin to use future-oriented terms (e.g., “might”, “may”,
“could”) around the age of 2 (e.g., Bowerman, 1986; Atance
& O’Neill, 2005) and are able to talk about the events of
“tomorrow” by age 3 (Hayne, Gross, McNamee, Fitzgibbon,
& Tammee, 2011). Yet it is not until later that children
begin to act in service of their future selves: by the late
preschool period, children show marked improvements in
action-based measures of prospection such as delay of
gratification (e.g., the ability to inhibit a desirable response
in favor of a future reward; Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez,

1989), decreased temporal discounting (i.e., valuing future
rewards over present rewards; Steinberg et al., 2009),
planning (e.g., Atance & Meltzoff, 2005), and prospective
memory (remembering to carry out intended plans at future
time points; Gaujardo & Best, 2000). Recent work has
investigated the extent to which such prospective abilities
are associated (Atance & Jackson, 2009; Nigro,
Brandimonte, Cicogna, & Cosenza, 2014; Neroni, Gamboz,
& Brandimonte, 2014), underpinned by other cognitive
competencies (e.g., language development, memory, or
theory of mind; Hanson, Atance, & Paluck, 2014), or are
linked to cognizing about the past (Coughlin, Lyons, &
Ghetti, 2014; Cuevas, Rajan, Morasch, & Bell, 2015;
Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2007).
One powerful predictor of children’s social, cognitive,
and linguistic abilities is their day-to-day social
communicative context. For example, the quantity and
quality of vocabulary input that parents provide to children
predicts children’s own vocabulary growth (see Hoff, 2006;
Rowe, 2012); encouraging children and parents to talk about
mental states predicts children’s understanding of the mind
(Lu, Su, & Wang, 2008; Reese, Sparks, & Leyva, 2010;
Taumoepeau & Reese, 2013), and making even small
changes in children’s linguistic input has powerful effects
on children’s conceptual understanding (Rhodes, Leslie, &
Tworek, 2012).
Such training studies are powerful in two respects: first,
they are able to provide a basis for creating more formalized
interventions targeting children’s conceptual development.
Second, they can help uncover the causal mechanisms
underlying conceptual development. For example, in an
important study, Rhodes and colleagues (2012) found that
exposing children to generic talk in a short storybook task
led to an increase in children’s essentialist thinking,
suggesting that generics and essentialism are causally
related.
Inspired by the previous narrative work, we were
interested in whether practice with projecting oneself into
the future scaffolds children’s prospective abilities. We
designed a short training study in which we asked children
to discuss and generate self-relevant future events. Prior
theoretical work suggests that practice with simulating and
anticipating future events helps motivate us to better prepare
for those events (e.g., Taylor, Pham, Rivkin, & Armor,
1998). We reasoned that young children, who are still
developing the ability to discuss their futures, and may
therefore be unlikely to do so spontaneously, would be
particularly likely to benefit from such intervention. On this
account, simulating oneself in the future may help better

2159

motivate young children to act in service of their future
selves.
Our training study also allowed us to test several
possibilities of how and why future-oriented talk might
scaffold children’s prospective abilities. One possibility is
that simulating oneself in any context outside of the present
helps children reason about themselves outside the here and
now and make decisions on behalf of their extended selves
(extended-self talk hypothesis). In support of this
possibility, decontextualized talk (talk outside the here and
now) in many forms (e.g., explanations, abstractions, future
and past events) is shown to be a very powerful predictor of
children’s language and cognitive development (e.g., Rowe,
2012; Demir, Rowe, Heller, Levine & Goldin-Meadow,
2015). Yet another possibility, however, is that extendedself talk has to be restricted in content in order to scaffold
prospective abilities (future-oriented talk hypothesis).
Projecting oneself in the future specifically (rather than the
past) might help anticipate future states, prepare for
upcoming future events, or simply bring to mind one’s
future self. The concept of one’s “future self” is taken out of
an abstract, hypothetical state and brought to mind
concretely through conversation and episodic mental
simulation. Work with adults has shown that even brief
reminders of one’s future self specifically improves delayof-gratification by helping adults feel closer to their future
selves (see Hesrschfield, 2011). On this account, we would
not expect any and all forms of extended-self talk to be
similarly motivating, since talk about the past does not
provide the benefit of anticipating upcoming future events.
Finally, hybrid accounts are also possible: Because
cognizing about the future and past are thought to rely on
the same cognitive competencies (e.g., Schachter et al.
2007) discussing the extended self (in the future or past)
might improve prospective abilities, but only in as much as
the extended self is perceived as being relevant and
concretely tied to one’s present self (self-relevant extendedself talk hypothesis).
In support of this possibility,
Herschfield (2011) reports a link between adults’ ability to
delay gratification and how closely they believed future
selves to be related to present selves. In the context of our
work, this hypothesis predicts that discussing extended self
events that are nearer in time to one’s present self are more
likely to feel self-relevant, would be particularly motivating
for young children, and thus serve as salient reminders to
act in service of one’s future selves.
To distinguish among these different hypotheses, we
designed a training study in which 3-5-year-old children
were exposed to one of four different types of conversation
about themselves. In one group (near future talk group),
children were asked to generate events in their near future
(within the next 24 hours) by being prompted to talk about
“things that will happen later today.” In a control group
(present talk group), children were asked to talk about
things in their present, contextualized context (e.g., “What
do you see around you right now?”). In addition, we were
interested in whether any future talk scaffolds children’s

abilities, or if future talk has to be temporally contiguous
and closely related with children’s present selves. We thus
included a distant future talk group in which children were
asked to discuss events that would occur after the next 24
hours (e.g., “things that will happen several weeks from
now”). Finally, because cognizing about the future has been
hypothesized to relate to the same cognitive processes as
cognizing about the past we included a near past talk
condition in which children generated events within the last
24 hours (e.g., “things that happened earlier today”).
Immediately following training, children were tested on a
broad range of prospective tasks.
Our primary question was whether the training groups
would differ from one another on our prospective measures.
In particular, we tested for three possible hypotheses using
linear contrasts (weights explained below):
1. Extended-Self Hypothesis: Any conversations about
the extended self, or self in the non-present (past, near
future, or distant future), should boost prospective
abilities. In this case, the near past, near future, and
distant future conditions (weighted -1 each) should
outperform children in the present condition (weighted
+3) on prospective abilities.
2. Future-Oriented Hypothesis: Any conversation
specifically about the future should boost prospective
abilities. In this case, children in the near future and
distant future conditions (weighted -1 each) should
outperform children in the present or near past
conditions (weighted +1 each).
3. Self-Relevant,
Extended-Self
Hypothesis:
Conversation about the extended self that are close in
time to the present self should boost prospective
abilities. In this case, children in the near future and
near past conditions (weighted -1 each) should
outperform children in the present and distant future
conditions (weighted +1 each).

Method
Participants
Participants were 81 three-to-five-year-olds (45 female; 36
male; Mean age = 4.40 years; Range = 3.0 – 5.71 years)
recruited from six separate preschool centers. Demographics
on individuals were not obtained, but two centers selfidentified as serving low/lower-middle class communities,
two served primarily upper-middle class communities, and
two served mixed (both types of) communities.

Procedure
All children were tested in a separate room or quiet corner at
their local preschool. One experimenter conducted the
introduction and training phase, and a second experimenter,
who remained blind to the training condition the children
had just participated in, conducted the assessment phase.
Sessions were videotaped for later coding and transcription.
Sessions were coded by NC; a condition-blind research
assistant then coded 25% of the data (reliability = 95%).

2160

Timeline Introduction All children began by being
introduced to the concept of linear time (e.g., Busby Grant
& Suddendorf, 2009). Children were shown a rectangle
divided into three colored squares signifying three distinct
time periods (“before now”, “now”, and “after now”). The
experimenter then placed the word “now” on the middle
square and said, “this is everything that’s happening right
now” and then proceeded to list three examples of events in
the present context (e.g., like us playing this game right here
or your class playing outside or my friend (referring to the
second experimenter) over there working”). Examples were
modified slightly to fit the present context. The
experimenter then asked the child to identify which square
should signify “before now”, and which square should
signify “after now”. Corrective feedback was provided until
each child correctly identified “before now” and “after
now”, and the experimenter affixed the words “before” and
“after” to their respective squares, such that the timeline
showed “before now” “now” and “after now” in succession.
Training Period At this point, children were randomly
assigned into one of four conditions (described below), in
which they participated in a brief conversation with the
experimenter about a specified time period.
1. Near Future Condition (n = 21): In the near future talk
condition, children were told that they would be talking
about events that are going to happen “after now”. The
experimenter then listed three examples of near future
events (next 24 hours) in increasing temporal order: (“After
now, are things like right after this game when you will go
back to class, later today when you will go home from
school, or even a really long time from now when will you
go to bed tonight”). To encourage future self-projection, the
experimenter then asked the child to draw a picture of
him/herself in the last exampled future time period: “Can
you draw a picture of yourself going to bed tonight?” After
the child completed the drawing, she placed it on the square
labeled “after now”, and reaffirmed that it belongs on that
square (“We’re going to put this right here because this is
going to happen after now!”).
The child was then cued to generate events in his/her near
future. The experimenter asked the child to list some events
that would happen in three distinct time periods all taking
place within the next 24 hours: (a) “right after” this game
when the child goes back to his/her class (e.g., “What are
some things you’ll do right after this game, like when you
go back to class?”), (b) “later today” when the child goes
home from school, and (c) “a long time from now” when the
child goes to bed tonight. The experimenter asked the
question pertaining to each temporal cue and then
encouraged the child to continually generate events (e.g.,
“and what are some other things you’ll do later today?”).
The experimenter proceeded to the next question/time
period once the child had either: (i) repeatedly stated s/he
could not generate further events; or (ii) generated five
events.

2. Near Past Condition (n = 20): The near past talk
condition proceeded exactly as the near future condition,
except that the experimenter referred to events that
happened in the preceding (rather than following) 24 hours.
The experimenter pointed to the square labeled “before
now” and stated she and the child would be discussing
things that happened “before now”. She then listed three
examples of near past events (past 24 hours), which were
matched to the near future events (“Before now, are things
like right before this game when you were back in your
class, earlier today when you first woke up, or even a really
long time ago when you went to bed last night”). As in the
near future condition, the experimenter then asked the child
to draw a picture of him/herself going to bed last night and
placed the drawing on the square titled “before now”. The
child was then asked to generate events during three time
periods that took place within the past 24 hours: (a) “right
before” this game when the child was in class, (b) “earlier
today” when the child first woke up, and (c) “a long time
ago” when the child went to bed last night.
3. Distant Future Condition (n = 20): The distant future
talk condition proceeded in the same form as the near future
talk condition, with the following modifications: First, the
experimenter listed examples taking place after the
proceeding 24 hours (“After now, are things like tomorrow
when you will wake up in the morning, a few weeks from
now when you will [celebrate Thanksgiving], or even a
really long time from now when you are all grown up”). For
the second example (“a few weeks from now”), we used a
well-known upcoming holiday (e.g., Thanksgiving,
Valentine’s Day, Fourth of July), which varied depending
on the day of the year that the child was tested. The
experimenter then asked the child to draw a picture of
him/herself when s/he is “all grown up” and placed the
picture on the square labeled “after now”. Finally, the
experimenter asked the child to generate events in three
distinct time periods: (a) “tomorrow” when the child first
wakes up, (b) “a few weeks from now” when the child
celebrates [an upcoming holiday], and (c) “a really long
time from now” when the child is all grown up.
4. Present Condition (n = 20): The present condition was
matched to the other three, except that children were told
they would be talking about the square labeled “now”. The
experimenter then listed three examples of things in the
child’s present context, including something that the child
could see around him/her (“things like what you see around
you – like this game”), hear around him/her (“things like
what you hear around you – like your class playing
outside”), and feel around him/her (“things like what you
feel around you – like this hard floor”). Examples were
modified slightly to fit the context (e.g., the experimenter
always used a prominent sound, such as children playing
outside or teachers talking that could be easily heard by both
herself and the child). The child was then asked to draw a
picture of him/herself as s/he is “right now”, and the picture
was placed on the “now” square. The experimenter then
asked the child to talk about the present context and

2161

generate things that s/he (a) sees around him/her right now,
(b) hears things around him/her, and (c) feels around
him/her. As with the all other conditions, the experimenter
gave the first prompt (“What are some things you see
around you right now?”), and encouraged the child to
generate examples. The experimenter proceeded to the next
prompt once the child generated five examples or repeatedly
stated s/he could not generate any further examples.

outside”). Children received a Planning Explanation Score
of 0-2.
3. Additional Tasks: We used three additional tasks
testing temporal discounting and children’s concept of
linear time. These tasks did not show condition differences
and are not discussed or further analyzed here.

Assessment Following the training period, a new
experimenter (blind to the child’s training condition)
assessed the child on a series of prospective tasks:
1. Prospective Memory Task: Following a procedure
adapted from Guajardo and Best (2000), children were
shown a wooden box and told there was a gift inside (“I
have a gift for you in this box when we are all done with
this game.”). The experimenter then mentioned that the
child had to remind her to open the box at the end of the
game. To increase motivation, the experimenter then told
the child that she often has trouble remembering things, and
provided a cue that the child could use (“when I say ‘we’re
all done’, you have to remind me to open the box and give
you your gift”). At the end of the game, the experimenter
made sure to explicitly state the promised cue “We’re all
done!”. If the child did not remind the experimenter within
10 seconds following the cue, she provided a second
reminder “Did you have to remind me of anything?” and
waited 10 more seconds. If the child still did not remember,
she opened the box and retrieved the gift for the child.
Each child received a Prospective Memory Score between
0 and 2. Children were given a full score of 2 if they
successfully remembered to tell the experimenter to open
the box during the proper cue (after the experimenter said
“we’re all done!”), a score of 1 if they remembered after the
second reminder (“Did you have to remind me of
anything?”), and a score of 0 if they did not remember.
2. Mental Time Travel Task: We used two items adapted
from Atance & Meltzoff’s (2001) mental time travel task, in
which children viewed a scene (e.g., a forest) and were told
to imagine themselves planning to walk through it (“Let’s
pretend that you are going to walk across this road through
the forest. Let’s get ready to go!”). They were then shown
three items – an item needed for a possible future state (e.g.,
water for drinking; correct response), an item that was
semantically associated with the scene (e.g., a plant), and a
distractor item (e.g., a present). The items were labeled and
children were asked to provide an item selection (“Which of
these things do you need to bring with you?”) and a
justification for their item selection (“And why do you need
to bring the [chosen item]?”).
Scoring. Children received a Mental Time Travel Correct
Item Selected Score between 0-2 corresponding to the
number of times children had selected the correct item
across the two trials. In addition, children’s explanations
were coded according to whether they appropriately referred
to a functional future use of that item (e.g., “I might get
thirsty so I need to drink”; “the jacket because it’s so cold

Talk Produced During Training

Results
We looked at the types of events that children generated
during the training session. Preliminary results revealed no
effects of gender, age, or school center. We therefore
collapsed across these variables in the following analyses.
The amount of utterances or the number of events that
children generated did not vary across conditions (both p’s
> .15), confirming that all four of our training sessions were
equated for the overall amount of talk children produced.
We then looked at the proportion of utterances employing
the future and past tense (Figure 1). Note that for all events,
children could use either the proper tense to which the time
period referred (e.g., “I will sleep”) or could answer without
using the proper tense (e.g., “sleeping”). An ANOVA on the
proportion of children’s utterances containing the future
tense revealed significant condition effects, F(3,75) = 3.63,
p = 0.02, ηpartial2 = 0.13. In particular, children in the two
future conditions (near future and distant future) produced a
greater proportion of future-tense utterances than the near
past and present: linear contrast t(75) = 3.26, p = 0.002.
Similarly, an ANOVA on the proportion of past tense
utterances revealed a significant effect of condition, F(3,75)
= 15.97, p < .0001, ηpartial2 = 0.39. In particular, the near past
condition differed significantly from the other three: linear
contrast t(75) = 6.90, p < .0001. Therefore, while overall use
of future tense was low (comprising less than 10% of the
utterances children produced), our training successfully
induced children to use it. Children produced future tense
utterances in the two future conditions (near future, distant
future), and past tense utterances in the one past condition
(near past).
We also looked at the amount of self-projection involved
when generating events. As a proxy for self-projection, we
looked at children’s use of personal pronouns (e.g., “I”,
“me”) during the training session. Note that children could
generate events either without the use of personal pronouns
(“sleep”) or with (“I’m gonna be sleeping”). In particular,
we were interested in whether the two conditions in which
children were asked to discuss their self-relevant (close-intime) extended self might produce greater self-projection in
comparison to their distally-temporal selves. An ANOVA
on the proportion of utterances containing personal
pronouns revealed significant differences across conditions,
F(3,75) = 2.79, p = 0.05, ηpartial2 = 0.10. Planned linear
contrasts showed that children in the near past and near
future conditions used a greater proportion of personal
pronouns in their utterances than those in the distant future
or present condition, t(75) = 2.75, p = 0.008. Therefore,

2162

talking about the close-in-time, extended self caused a
greater amount of self-projection.
Figure 1: Proportion of (Bars Represent Standard Error)
Future Tense, Past Tense, and Personal Pronouns Out of
Total Utterances Across Conditions

Effects of Training
We then looked at the effect of our training on children’s
prospective abilities. Preliminary analyses revealed no
effects of gender, so data was collapsed along this variable.
We did, however, find, significant effects across ages and
between preschool centers. We therefore control for age (as
a covariate) and preschool center in all of our analyses.
Figure 2 shows the analyses.

Figure 2: Estimated Marginal Means (Bars Represent
Standard Errors) of Prospective Tasks Across Conditions
For Prospective Memory, there was a significant effect of
Condition, F(3,58) = 3.40, p = 0.02, ηpartial2 = 0.15., School
Center, F(5,58) = 3.33, p = 0.01, ηpartial2 = 0.22., and Age,
F(1, 58) = 4.01, p = 0.05, ηpartial2 = 0.07. Planned linear
contrasts supported the self-relevant extended-self
hypothesis, F(1,58) = 6.38, p = 0.01.
Similarly, the Planning Explanation Score showed a
significant effect of Condition, F(3,59) = 2.91, p = 0.04,
ηpartial2 = 0.13, School Center, F(5,59) = 3.99, p = 0.003,
ηpartial2 = 0.25, and Age, F(1,59) = 4.61, p = 0.04, ηpartial2 =
0.07. Planned linear contrasts once again supported the selfrelevant, extended-self hypothesis, F(1,59) = 16.62, p =
0.001. There were no significant effects for the Mental Time
Travel Forced Choice Scores (all p’s > 0.05).

Discussion
Recent work in developmental psychology has taken an
interest in the mechanisms that drive the development of

young children’s prospective abilities. Here we find that a
short conversation about one’s “extended-self” improved
children’s prospective memories and planning abilities. Our
work suggests that experience communicating and thinking
about children’s extended selves may prime them to make
decisions on behalf of their extended selves.
Across several measures, we also find support for our
self-relevant, extended-self hypothesis: reminders of one’s
extended self are only useful when the extended self was
temporally contiguous to the present self. Conversation
about the temporally-contiguous extended self (near future
and near past) improved planning abilities relative to
conversation about the distally-related extended self (distant
future). Moreover, children engaged in higher selfprojection when discussing their close-in-time extended
selves. Our results mimic prior work showing that adults’
abilities to engage in saving for their future selves were
predicted by how closely-related they believed their future
selves were to their present selves (Herschfield, 2011).
Moreover, brief visual reminders of one’s extended self
(i.e., age progressed portraits of one’s future self) also
helped improve saving behavior (Herschfield et al., 2011).
Our work suggests that a similar mechanism may also
account for children’s prospective abilities – reminders of
one’s extended self may help activate concepts about the
future self, or may make the extended-self appear closelyrelated to one’s present self.
We note that our approach offers an important method for
studying individual differences in how frequently children
(and adults) conceive of their extended selves. We found
that even a few directives from an adult could prime
children to think about their future selves, but that the extent
to which children engaged in true future-oriented thinking
(i.e., used future tense) and engaged in self-projection varied
across children and conditions. In particular, talking about
close-in-time events caused greater use of personal
pronouns. Such events may have been more readily
recognizable to children as closely associated to their
present selves, whereas temporally distant events (e.g.,
“adulthood”) may have felt fundamentally distinct from and
incompatible with children’s present selves (Carey, 1985).
We provided several cues to help children understand,
discuss, and visualize their extended selves: a linear time
line, an adult’s label of future time points (e.g., “later
today”), the child’s own self-generated discussion, and a
pictoral label (that the child drew). The variety and number
of these cues may have been particularly helpful in drawing
children’s attention to their future (or past) selves. Future
work may also help to disambiguate the relative impact of
each of these cues on children’s prospective abilities.
Our work suggests that there is a strong role of social
context in activating children’s abilities to engage in futureoriented thinking and planning. Even brief conversations
with adults help scaffold, shape, and active concepts about
one’s extended self. Training young children to to cognize,
remember, and discuss their extended selves may ultimately

2163

help them make future-oriented decisions that benefit those
extended selves.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Julia Wang and So Yeon Shin for
assistance with data collection and coding, participating
preschools and directors for kindly lending space, and the
Harvard Graduate School of Education for start-up funds to
the third author to make the study possible.

References
Atance, C. M. (2008). Future thinking in young
children. Current
Directions
in
Psychological
Science, 17, 295-298.
Atance, C. M., & Jackson, L. K. (2009). The development
and coherence of future-oriented behaviors during the
preschool years. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 102, 379-391.
Atance, C. M., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2005). My future self:
Young children's ability to anticipate and explain future
states. Cognitive Development, 20, 341-361.
Atance, C. M., & O'Neill, D. K. (2001). Episodic future
thinking. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 533-539.
Atance, C. M., & O’Neill, D. K. (2005). Preschoolers’ talk
about future situations. First Language, 25, 5-18.
Bowerman, M. (1986). First steps in acquiring conditionals.
In E. C. Traugott, A. ter Meulen, J. S. Reilly & C. A.
Ferguson (Eds.), On Conditionals (pp. 285-307).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Busby Grant, J., & Suddendorf, T. (2009). Preschoolers
begin to differentiate the times of events from throughout
the lifespan. European Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 6, 746-762.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Adulthood. Boston,
MA: MIT Press.
Coughlin, C., Lyons, K. E., & Ghetti, S. (2014).
Remembering the past to envision the future in middle
childhood: Developmental linkages between prospection
and episodic memory. Cognitive Development, 30, 96110.
Cuevas, K., Rajan, V., Morasch, K. C., & Bell, M. A.
(2015). Episodic memory and future thinking during early
childhood: Linking the past and future. Developmental
Psychobiology, 57, 552-565.
Demir, Ö. E., Rowe, M. L., Heller, G., Goldin-Meadow, S.,
& Levine, S. C. (2015). Vocabulary, syntax, and narrative
development in typically developing children and children
with early unilateral brain injury: Early parental talk about
the “there-and-then” matters. Developmental Psychology,
51, 161-175.
Guajardo, N. R., & Best, D. L. (2000). Do preschoolers
remember what to do? Incentive and external cues in
prospective memory. Cognitive Development, 15, 75-97.
Hanson, L. K., Atance, C. M., & Paluck, S. W. (2014). Is
thinking about the future related to theory of mind and
executive function? Not in preschoolers. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 128, 120-137.

Hayne, H., Gross, J., McNamee, S., Fitzgibbon, O., &
Tustin, K. (2011). Episodic memory and episodic
foresight in 3-and 5-year-old children. Cognitive
Development, 26, 343-355.
Hershfield, H. E. (2011). Future self‐continuity: how
conceptions of the future self transform intertemporal
choice. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1235, 30-43.
Hershfield, H. E., Goldstein, D. G., Sharpe, W. F., Fox, J.,
Yeykelis, L., Carstensen, L. L., & Bailenson, J. N. (2011).
Increasing saving behavior through age-progressed
renderings of the future self. Journal of Marketing
Research, 48, S23-S37.
Hoff, E. (2006). How social contexts support and shape
language development. Developmental Review, 26, 55-88.
Lagattuta, K. H., & Sayfan, L. (2011). Developmental
changes in children's understanding of future likelihood
and uncertainty. Cognitive Development, 26, 315-330.
Lu, H., Su, Y., & Wang, Q. (2008). Talking about others
facilitates
theory
of
mind
in
Chinese
preschoolers. Developmental Psychology, 44, 1726-1736.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. I. (1989). Delay
of gratification in children. Science, 244, 933-938.
Neroni, M. A., Gamboz, N., & Brandimonte, M. A. (2014).
Does episodic future thinking improve prospective
remembering? Consciousness and Cognition, 23, 53-62.
Nigro, G., Brandimonte, M. A., Cicogna, P., & Cosenza, M.
(2014). Episodic future thinking as a predictor of
children’s prospective memory. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 127, 82-94.
Reese, E., Sparks, A., & Leyva, D. (2010). A review of
parent interventions for preschool children’s language and
emergent literacy. Journal of Early Childhood
Literacy, 10, 97-117.
Rhodes, M., Leslie, S. J., & Tworek, C. M. (2012). Cultural
transmission of social essentialism. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109, 13526-13531.
Rowe, M. L. (2012). A longitudinal investigation of the role
of quantity and quality of child‐directed speech in
vocabulary development. Child Development, 83, 17621774.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., & Buckner, R. L. (2007).
Remembering the past to imagine the future: the
prospective brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 657661.
Steinberg, L., Graham, S., O’Brien, L., Woolard, J.,
Cauffman, E., & Banich, M. (2009). Age differences in
future orientation and delay discounting. Child
Development, 80, 28-44.
Taylor, S. E., Pham, L. B., Rivkin, I. D., & Armor, D. A.
(1998). Harnessing the imagination: mental simulation,
self-regulation, and coping. American Psychologist, 53,
429-439.
Taumoepeau, M., & Reese, E. (2013). Maternal
reminiscing, elaborative talk, and children’s theory of
mind: An intervention study. First Language, 33, 388410.

2164

